DEATH'S SUMMONS, AND THE SAINTS DUTY.

Laid forth first summarily in a Sermon on 2. King. 20.1. in the Cathedral of
St. Peter in EXETER, Janu. 24. 1638. at the solemn Funeral of a
well-deserving CITIZEN.

Since somewhat enlarged for the Common good, by WILLIAM SCLATER, Master of
Arts, late Fellow of KINGS College in CAMBRIDGE, now a Preacher of Gods Word
in the City of EXETER.

LUKE 12.20. Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee.

PROVE. 27.1. and JAM. 4.13, 14. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth.

Quid cogitas te diu victurum, cum nullum diem habeas securum? Claudius
Viexmontius Parisiensis, Institut. ad Poenitent. part 1. cap. 1. LONDON:
Printed by Richard Hodgkinson, 1640.

TO The Right Worshipful, PETER SAINTHILL of Bradnynch, Esquire, one of the
Masters of His Majesty's Court of Chancery, Justice of Peace for the County of
Devon, etc. an eminent example of Piety, and worth; the happiness of Heaven
and Earth.
Much honored Sir,
AFter I had (though not without many modest reluctations, first, from within)
obtained leave of my self, to make those thoughts, which have already, in some
part, passed, in a transient sound, by the ears of some, legible, in a larger
Volume, by the eyes of many; I could not bethink me of a Nobler Patronage,
than from your self; a worthy, not more highly placed upon the [hill] of
deserved Eminence; then (as your Name proclaims you in your conspicuous, and
devout practices) a most accomplished, and exemplary [Saint.]

My engagements to that Mr. Peter Tailor.
good friend (whom I have have not lost, only seen to be sent before me to his
heaven) whose decease gave an hint unto these slender, yet (as my hope is)
useful meditations, were such; as that, methought, I could not suffer my
respects to yield up with him, on a sudden, their last Ghost; nor one grave to
swallow both his corpse, and memory: I took therefore this cue of opportunity,
as, to testify my respectivenesse to him, and to those surviving, who most
nearly related to him, so withal, to leave some public monument of all
gratitude (most worthy Sir) to you; not more endeared unto him dissolved, in
his life time, than rich in many favors to my self; which were therefore the
more Noble, and of higher value, for that, they utterly transcended all
deservingnesse in me: should I attempt on this occasion, to blazon the arms of
your eximious worth, resplendent in a Coat, (whose crest must needs be glory)
embellished by so various graces, (which, like the [ Can. 1.11.
golden] borders of the Spouse, [overlaid] with [silver,] having the [best]
sides [inwards,] in a close integrity; set you beyond the reach of flattery, or
the shocke of envy;) alas! the best Heraldry of mine eloquence would here be
posed; and in so copious, and full a theme my oratory quite languish under the
poverty of but-apt expressions: give me leave then to admire, what I am not
able by mine insufficient quill, to amplify enough in you: Let this suffice;
your very Name so well resembled in your Convenient rebus [nomina] saepesius.
actions has made you a perfect Mirror to the West: Lord! what a blessed
prospect is it? thus to view greatness, and goodness, as righteousness and
peace, to Psalm. 85.10.
claspe each other; or, like David's Palace, and Gods Tabernacle, to dwell Psalm.
132.13, 14.
together, upon one Sion! Go on, Noble Sir, to credit your Country, (the love
whereof is like the orient rays of the brightest Taper of the Firmament,
universally displayed upon you) by your worthy undertakings: persist
courageously to be, not more a promoter, than (as you have long been) a Matthew.
5.9.
maker of peace and amity; it shall win you Romans 15.13
peace of soul, and carry you upon the wings of honor, as another Noah's Dove,
to the Arc of that happiness, into which the Isa. 9.6.
Prince of peace himself shall Genesis 8.9.
receive you (out of a troublesome and stormy world) by the arms of his mercy:
Continue still to make your House a Temple, where the daily incense of Devotion
ascends up as a rich perfume (sweetened by the Rev. 8.3, 4.
Angel of Gods presence) unto Heaven; and where each tongue to me seemed as a
several Organ, to sound out Gods praises. Be not Gal. 6.9.
weary to daigne countenance and encouragement to the 1. Tim. 6.11.
men or God, who 1 Timothy 5.17.
labor in the Word and Doctrine: Lo! we need such Patrones to support us
under the unworthy affronts of carnal and besotted earthwormes, who slight
and under-value even the Matthew. 7.6.
Pearls of Heaven it self, because (which is their gross stupidity and 2.
Cor. 4 4.
blindness) brought to them by us but in 2. Cor. 4.7.
earthen vesells.

This poor piece of my Labors, (in the Lords great Matthew. 9.37.
Harvest) humbly prostrates it self, to be shrouded under the wings of your
favor; vouchsafe to cover it by them; it shall, under such a protection,
slight the meagre aspects of any, whether malecontented, or malevolent
dispositions.

The Sermon was, at first indeed, in Preaching, but as that 1. King. 18.44, 45.
little Cloud, like to a man's hand, seen by Elijahs servant from the top of
Mount Carmel; but it is now swollen, and womb'd-out into a bigger one; from
whence, if but some few drops distill, to refresh the Lords Psalm. 68.9.
inheritance, I shall rejoice in that good God of mine, who has thus far 1.
Tim. 1.12.
enabled me, after my Romans 12 3.
measure, for his weighty service.

Nothing remains, but that I earnestly implore the full blessings of Gods both
hands to be powered upon you; and, with you, upon your virtuous Consort and
Family; and that the Heb. 13.20, 21.
God of peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord JESUS, that great
Shepherd or the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you
perfect in every good work, to do his will; working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight; through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, for ever
and ever, Amen.

Your most true honourer, in my thankful observances, much devoted, William
Sclater.
Exon, 12. Febr. 1639.
DEATHS SUMMONS, AND THE SAINTS DUTY.
2 KINGS 20.1. In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death, and the Prophet
Isaiah, the son of Amoz, came to him, and said unto him, Thus says the Lord,
set thine house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live.


MY Text, ye see, is Verbum diei in die suo, much like to King Salomons apple
of gold in his picture of silver, a word spoken in due Prove. 25.21.
season: and as that golden apple artificially set within that hollow silver
globe, when placed against the orient brightness of the Sun, did through that
crystal glass fastened in the globe before it, attract beholders
delightsomely to view the beauty, and the splendour of it; so may this word, so
opportune and seasonable, raise up your serious thoughts unto its observation:
And for that I find this story of Hezekiahs sickness no less than thrice
reported, viz. in 2 Chronicles. 32.24. in Isa. 38.1. and here in this Text: and
ingeminations, or redoublings of the same things in the Scriptures, being no
vain tautologies, but the stronger arguments to persuade our notice, for this
it does promerit also, if not challenge your best attention.

The Division.
We have, in the words read, two general parts.

1 Hezekiahs sickness: and 2 Isaiahs visit: or,
The Kings evil; and the Prophets charge, or commission to him, under that
evil: each of these again are amplified by several circumstances: 1 Of the
person sick, Hezekiah, a King, and he not more great than good. 2 Of the
disease it self, aegrotavit, he was sick. 3 The extremity, or the danger of
that disease, it was mortal and deadly, aegrotavit (lethaliter) he was sick
unto death. 4 Of the time when, in diebus illis, in those days: In those days
was Hezekiah sick unto death. Thus for the first general.

In the second also we have many particulars to be noted; as, 1 The person
coming to visit the sick Prince; and he described to us a threefold way. 1 By
his name, Isaiah, 2 By his function, a Prophet. 3 By his pedigree, or birth,
the son of Amoz, who was descended, as some say, of the blood royal it self:
The Prophet, Isaiah, the son of Amoz. Here is the visit it self, He came to
him. 3 His employment, when come, a punctual deliverie of his message, or
commission from the Lord; which is described to us in a very Rhetorical way.
1 Formally, He said unto him, thus says the Lord. 2 Materially, and this three
ways. 1 (...), Positively, Morieris, Thou shall dye. 2 (...), Negatively, to
cut off all hopes of a further prorogation, ac non vives, and not live. Lastly,
(...), by a serious exhortation, what in this desperate condition he would
advise the King solemnly, and without delay, readily to resolve upon; and that
is to make his will, to set his house in order, e're a sudden stroke of death
should seize him: o Hezekiah, listen unto me thy Prophet, set thine house in
order, for thou shall dye, and not live.

These are the parts; the present measures of my Sermon, and your Christian
patience, which yet I shall be forced to pace over, as King David did before
the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16.
2 Samuel 6.16. in a manner without stay, leaping: and for that they be so many
in number, I shall do as your Lapidaries of rich jewels are wont, only show
them to you in a glance, or cursorie sight, and so put them up again. The same
hand that gave the opportunity, vouchsafe to give success to this business. In
those days was Hezekiah sick unto death, etc.

The person that leads me by the hand to my first discourse, is Hezekiah; The
first Part.
who was both a mighty, and withal, a godly Prince; his greatness and his
goodness, like David's palace, and Gods Tabernacle, dwelt both together on
mount See Psalm. 132.13, 14.
Sion; or like to Jonathan and David, they were lovely and pleasant in 2 Samuel
1.23.
their lives* and in their deaths they were not divided; or like to Ezechiels
Ezekiel. 1.21.
wheels, and the living creatures, which were both lifted up from the earth
(together): of his honor, opulencie, and exceeding riches, we have a large
record, 2 Chro. 32.27.
2 Chronicles. 32.27. and of his piety and goodness, 2 King. 18.3.5.
2 King. 18.3, 5. He did all that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
according to all that David his father did, he clave to the Lord, so that after
him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before
him: besides, we have a set commendation of him in Syracides, Ecclus. 48 17.
Ecclus. 48.17. Yet neither could the glittering of his Diadem, or the wealth
in all his storehouses, or all the honor he had before the people, exempt him
from the common fate of all men: as Death is said to be to Nature, which still
desires to preserve it self in being from destruction, (which appears in
creatures merely sensitive, as the Beaver, to preserve his life, bites off his
cods and leaves them as the prey to them that chase him) as Death, I say, is
unto Nature, (...), the King of fears, so is it also the fear of Kings: great
ones be indeed as Gods, Psalm. 82.6.
Psalm. 82.6. by See Dr. Sclater, my father, Sermon. at the Assizes at Tanton,
Edit. 1616. p. 8. upon that Text.
deputation and by authority delegated from on high, but it is all but tanquam
lumina illuminata, as S. Austin and Lyra interpret, so only by participation,
as the stars are lighted from the chief taper of the Sun; all earthly majesty
being but a ray of that which is omnipotent, and independent above in heaven;
even (there) all crowns are cast before the Throne of God, Rev. 4.10.
Apoc. 4.10. how much more must they be so here below? therefore it is added in
the Psalm, that they shall (die) like men: indeed it is true, as Agapetus in
Paroen. ad Justinian.
Agapetus told the great Justinian, that (...), in the right and eminency of
dignity they resemble God, being clad (to borrow Psalm. 93.1.
David's phrase) with majesty and honor, before the people, their loyal
subjects; yet (...), in the substance, and the composition of their bodies, of
the same materials with meanest men; so that it is certain, though they be gods
with men, yet are they men with God, and come all under that one common doom,
Cinis es, and in cinerem; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis
3.19.
Genesis 3.19.

Hear this then, o all ye gilded potsherds of the earth, ye great ones all, I
mean, that would feign nestle in the clouds, and in your soaring thoughts,
with that proud Persian Sapor, write brother to the Sun and Moon, and like
those twelve great Caesar's, divide the months between your selves, singing to
your beguiled souls, as that Atheist in the Gospel, Luc. 12.19.
Soul take thy rest for many years; lo! thy coffers are full crammed with
golden ingots, thy barns and territories grown wider, and be enlarged: vain
man! Truly says the Prophet, Psalm. 144.4.
Psalm. 144.4. Man is like to vanity, or, as My Lord the peerlesse Bishop of
Exeter, in his Character of man, p. 33, Edit. 1635.
one most divinely does invert the sentence, Vanity is better like to man, for
verily every man living is altogether vanity. Selah. Psalm. 39 5, 6.
Psalm. 39.5, 6. yea, and that too in his very best estate: Be ye in your vain
imagination as teeth, that dwell in the mouth of eminence, grinding the faces
of the poor thereby, thunder in your words, -- (...). Homer. (...). de oculis
Agamemnonis irati: and paulo post, (...) -- ib.
lightening in your looks; stay a while, and this bladder shall burst anon, and
as a wall that swells before it fall, so shall your pride bring you all down as
low as dust, and if impenitent, as Hell: what though ye dwell in Cedar,
stretch your selves, as Amos speaks, on beds of Amos 6.4.
ivorie, and carry your houses over your heads as snails, painting the earth
as you go, with your silver slime: alas! what is all this to purpose? if death
but spurn upon you, ye are all crushed instantly into worms meat, and must
shortly become provant for crawling Creatures to revell with in the grave: it is
not Belshazzar's greatness, that can keep him from, or rid him of a fit of
Dan. 5.6.
trembling, where once the handwriting on the wall had startled him amidst his
cups; nor the vaingloriousnesse of, an haughty Herod, that could exempt him
from the stroke of a destroying Act. 12.23.
Angel, or make him other, then a B^. Morton, c. 13. sect. 5. p. 252. grand
imposture edict. 1628. Rex Herodes Agrippa, sub claudio; Jacobum interfecit,
qui and ipse non multo post (phthiria si) periit Joh. Carrion, Chron in
claudio, l. 3. p. 234. and 228. edict. 1584. in 8o confer. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 10.
Histor. ecclesiast see placina in vita formosi, de Arnul^ho Imperatore.
lowzy god: no nor the bigmouth'd ostentation of that peerless prodige of
pride, great Nebuchadnezzar, keep him from the society of an Dan. 4.33.
ox that eats hay; so besotted was he in his intellectuals, that for
quality, and disposition, through the predominacy of his own melancholique
humor in him; that though he had perhaps the form, and figure, yet he had
altogether lost the reason of a man: In a word, as that little stone in Daniel,
cut out of the mountain Dan. 2.45.
without hands, brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the silver, and the gold,
in that great image of the same mighty Babylonian; by which is meant, in
mystery, (says Hierom ad Eustoch.
Hierom, Sulpit. Sever. l. 2. sac. Hist. p. 93. in 8o cum Drusio. and Barrad.
l. 3. c. 4. p. 95. and l. 6, c. 2. p. 282. concord: Evang.
Sulpitius severus, and other greatly learned,) our Lord and King Christ Jesus,
who, as that stone was cut out of the mountains without hands, was borne of a
pure virgin, without contamination, or deflowring; who shall, when installed
to his spiritual throne and Kingdom, crush and shiver into nothing all the
four great monarchies of the world, Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, Roman, and
make all Kings and nations of the earth, as the Matt. 2.11.
Magi of East did at his birth in Bethlem, bring Psalm. 72.10. and 68.29.
presents to him and to bow before him, that is, he shall make all scepters in
the world to stoop to his one Scepter of the Gospel, in token of submission,
homage and obedience, in like sort shall all potency and greatness under
heaven be forced at last to yield to those his instruments of subjugation,
either sickness, or death, or both: Lo here, and see, even Hezekiah, though a
mighty and a wealthy Prince, yet could not wave off sickness; no, nor much
time, Death; so says my text, Hezekiah, though a mighty King, was Sick.

Now as Hezekiah's greatness could not exempt him, so neither could his goodness,
for howbeit he were as eminent in grace, as rich in outward pomp and glory,
yet says my text even he was (sick:) It Is true indeed that Hezekiah's graces,
though sometimes they might seem sick, to be weak and languish, as the Angel of
the Church in Sardis had, in regard of use and exercise, his graces almost
ready for to Rev. 3.2.
dye within him; for which cause Saint John excites him to stengthen, by more
vigorous employment, that life which yet remained in him; yet his (body) that
was, as the Exodus 26.1. vide Granatens: to^ 3: concio: de Tenpore, conc: 1:
Dominica post ascens: p, 413, in 8o, Latin.
Tabernacle of testimony, with imbroyderies and works of diverse colors,
adorned with those eximious ornaments of grace (that) must stoop, not unto
sickness only, but to death: surely it is true even the best men, (for
castigation, or at least probation) are exposed to these outward miseryes, and
calamityes as well as others; and by what we can discern without, we can
descry no sure judgment of their mutual future bliss or woe Eccles. 9.1.
Eccles. 9.1. These outward things, says Solomon, come a like to all, though
it be true not to all a like; for either in the cause or in the end, or in the
use and carriage under them; in these (modifications) here is indeed a
difference, not in the things themselves: yea if we judge only after the
appearance; and not as we are commanded, John 7.24.
righteous judgment; then we shall soon subscribe to that etymology of
Christianus, to be quasi Crucianus, to come from Crux, as well as Christus the
Hebrew letter e (tau) in the figure of the Cross was that which Ezekiel with
his pen and inkhorn Ezekiel. 9.4.
(marked) the chosen pieces of election under the old law, with Ezekiel. 9.4. and
old Jacob when on his deathbed he blessed the sons of Joseph, Manasses and
Ephraim, Genesis 48.13.14. is noted by Gods spirit to have Ge. 48.13, 14.
(crossed) his hands of purpose, thereby to note, say some, that either all
blessings of this life have their mixture in them of sure see below, pa. 140.
crosses; as Christ is said to have had wine offered him, but such wine as was
mingled with Mar. 15.23.
myrrh, which is of an harsh and uncouth taste; or else that the whole virtue
of a parents benediction was alone and only from the (cross) of Christ; for it
is only the blood of his cross that made heaven at peace with man, Col. 1.20.
Col. 1.20. all the partriarchs of the first Testament had therefore their
share therein; the Jews reckon up ten several afflictions, that even Abraham
(the Romans 4.1.
Father of the faithful) met withal; in all the Psalms of David, ye have
nigh as many hearse-like airs, as carols; and for us Christians now, who sees
not the My Lord Veculam, Essay 5.
blessing of the new Testament to consist almost in crosses? which yet carries
the greater benediction and the clearer Revelation of Gods favor; for which
cause we see it is set before the Alphabet of our little ones, and we receive it
as the badge of of our enstalment into the Church of Christ at our Baptism, in
loco pudoris, in our foreheads, to denote our unashamednesse of the master we
fight for: the very newborn babe with his first noise expresses, ere yet he
is able to Infans a non fando.
speak, a Nondum loquitur tamen propheta.
prophecy of his succeding misery; to which a man, says Job is born as
naturally Job 5, 7.
sparks, by reason of their innate levity, fly upwards, every man living being
like to Rachel's younger son, born a Genesis 35, 18.
Ben-oni, a son of sorrow: in a word, our Lord and Master Christ has trodden
a full Isa. 63, 3.
winepresse of woe before us, if we be his 2 Timothy 2, 3.
soldiers (as if truly his members, we all are) then as Gideon said to his,
as we see him do, so must we do Judge 7, 17.
likewise; for that is his word, learn of Matt. 11, 29.
me; lo! he has taken off the full cup, there are left for us only the (...),
some few Col. 1, 24.
remainders, as a smack alone. Col. 1.24. And indeed what are we better then
monsters in Christianity; if we who pretend to be Christ's members, should be so
misshapen, as not to hold proportion with him our head? He is a monster in
nature; who has the head of a Serpent, and the body of a man; and he is a
monster in Christian ty who has the Rev. 12, 9.
old serpent the devil, as his head to guide him; and yet the body of a
Christian in show before men as Saint Bernard f, 25, k
Bernard tells us: Now we all know that as the Israelites, Gods old people
passed through a Eod: 14.
red sea ere they came to their Canaan, so Christ went by his cross, and by
his blood, unto his Crown and glory. Multivolunt Christum consequi, sed non
sequi, Bern.
Dastards that we are, thus to give out, and to be cowed in our following so
glorious, so victorious a Captain; who has indeed promised us a Kingdom, but
yet has tied the enjoying of it, to the unavoydable condition of our first 2 Timothy 2, 12.
suffering with him in this life; for which cause, we never read in all the
scriptures, that Christ in all his life time, ate any honey; but that he tasted
of vinegar and of gall, the Matt. 27, 34.
gospel mentions; with (this) his cruel foes would have drenched him on the
cross: indeed (after) his Resurrection, we find that he did eat of a broyled
fish, and of an Luc. 24, 42.
honicombe, to wit, by way of dispensation and indulgency, (condescending
herein to the weakness of his disciples faith) though not of indigency and
want, as the School distinguishes: but as Tertullian observes it was, post
fella favum, first the gall and then the honicombe; his sufferings went before
his comforts; which was also noted, in the broyling of the fish he ate of,
Pisces assus est Christus passus, say the Fathers; the broyling showed his
sufferings past, the honicombe, his instant, yea and his future joys to come.

It Is worth our notice, in what phrase of speech, our Savior puts the question
to the sons of Zebede, that were it seems, of somewhat a climbing Spirit, and
looked more for that time being, after their temporal advancement in Christ's
outward Kingdom, (which their weak mother fancied too much) then otherwise;
he puts the question to them thus, Matthew. 20.22.
Matthew. 20.22. are ye able to be (baptized with the baptism, that I am
baptized with? what Baptism is this, that our Savior here speaks off? Surely,
its neither fluminis nor flaminis, that of water, nor that of the Spirit; but
sanguinis, of blood, of affliction and persecution in this world, therefore
Christ's garments are said to be dyed from Bozra, that is, in Tribulatione, (as
Philo judaeus, de nominibus Hebraicis, page 378. in patrum (...).
Philo Judaeus interprets) and to be red, and stained with blood, Isa. 63.1, 2.
a direct prophecy of his after sufferings: Now therefore are these outward
calamities compared to a Baptism, says one, because they set Gods ( Mr
Goodwin p. 149. in his child of light walking in darkness c. 13. sect 2.
mark) upon his Church, as the first Baptism of water seals and marks her
for his own: wherefore, what Simon of Cyrene was ( Matt. 27.32.
compelled) to do, we must do (willingly,) carry Christ's cross; for no
cross, no disciple, Luke 9.23.
no suffering with him, no being glorified with him, Romans 8.17.
Romans 8.17. For this cause, all Church story shows us, that the blood of
persecution has always kept running in the veins of the Church of Christ,
from it is first Sanguine fundata est ecclesia, sanguine crevit, sanguine
succrevit, sanguine finis erit.
foundation; even from the blood of righteous Abel to this day; so that there
can hardly be a truer inscription, wherewith to incircle so despised a coin,
as the Church is, then that of Solomon, Cant. 2.2.
Cant. 2.2. as is a lilly among thorns, so is my love among the Daughters; a
lilly she is indeed, lovely and amiable to behold, but a lilly among thorns,
therefore sure to be scratched by adversity: for whom God Heb. 12.6.
loves he will certainly correct and chasten; art thou weary then of Gods
love tokens? art thou ashamed of Christ thy Captains badges? then long to want
afflictions: this is, says Saint Peter, no new thing that befalls you, 1 Pet.
4.12.
1 Peter 4.12. Lo! long since is it, that the Dragon drove the Church (our
Mother) into the wilderness, and not so contented, sends out after her water as
a flood to carry her away if possible, and to drown her in it, Rev. 12.6, and
15.
Apoc. 12.6 and 15. viz. in the flood of reproaches, slanders, disgraces, all
afflictions. To shut up this point, (for how easy were it to be infinite this
way?) St. Peter has resembled the Church of Christ unto living 1 Pet. 2.5.
stones, which lying here rough in the quarry of this lower world, must first
be hewn by affliction, squared by repentance, cemented by love, and so
polished and fitted for the Church Triumphant, the Jerusalem which is Gal.
4.26.
above and free, the Mother of us all: Wherefore, let it no way trouble us,
though our garments here, like those of the Kings daughter, in the Psalm, be
of Ps. 45.13.
needle work, that is, (prickly) by affliction, so we be, as she, all glorious
( ver. 14 (...). Macarius, homil: 5. p. 79. in 8o
within,) multi vident punctiones, sed non vident unctiones; many see our
punctions, none but God discernes our 1 John 2.27.
unctions; this made the standers by to be amazed, to hear Paul and Sylas
(singing) praises to their God, though in the midst of (fetters,) Act. 16.25.
Act. 16.25. All this laid together, makes me admire how so great a Scholar, as
the Roman Champion Bellarmine was, should in this particular point so play the
part of an ill Rhetorician (who is wont to place some of his strongest
arguments in the Praecepta sunt eorum qui dicendi rationem tradunt, ut ad
extremam orationis partem, quae potentissima atque optima in caussa sunt
reserventur quoniam extremum illud in auditorum animis infixum haeret. Ludov.
Granat^ns. qua supra conc. 2. p. 447. initio.
close of his speech) as to set this note (last) after a large catalogue
before, as a certain mark of the true Church, Bellar. ^ lib. 4. de notis
ecclesiae, cap. 18. initio nota 15.
Temporal prosperity: whereas that is no where less to be found then there;
for that precious vessel of 2 Timothy 2.20.
honor would gather rust, were it not scowred often by afflictions. Beloved
Christians, our good God deals with us, in this regard, as a refiner does with
his lump of oar of silver, or the richer metal; to purge it from the dross,
and fit it for his use, he casts it first into the furnace; so does Almighty
God his chosen ones, who (below,) are but as gold is in the oar, having the
dross of much corruption unmortified in them; from which the Lord by
sickness, or some such like affliction, would gladly purge them and refine
them, so fitting and preparing them for his own use and glory; by (this) says
Esaias, shall the iniquity of Jacob be [ Isa. 27.29, and Mal. 3.3.
purged:] And thus we read even of this very good King Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 32.31.
2 Chro. 32.31. that God left him, though a dear Saint, by a spiritual
desertion to himself, for some time, to (know) what was in his heart: that is,
says Austin, not that God meant hereby to inform himself (for all things lie
open and naked to the eyes of him, ( Heb. 4.13.
Heb. 4.13.) but to make Hezekiah know, that there was in his heart corruption
enough, which like a Jebusite in Canaan ('it is Saint Bernards comparison) was
not as yet wholly expelled from his inward coasts. And here again in this
text, whether for probation of his faith, as of Zech. 13.9. Aurum indiget
percussione, and puer verberatione, Ben Syra, moral. sentent. 4. est hoc
ingenium auri, ut quo magis illud malleo diducendo percusseris, eo magis
fulgeat; sic, etc. Paulus Fagius, in exposit. ibid: in 2. Tim. 2.20. electi
vocantur [aurum.]
gold, or for castigation of some special delinquency, he is permitted to be,
as St Paul was by his messenger, 2 Cor. 12.7.
buffeted with a disease of sickness; yea, though an Isa. 38.3.
upright man, and highly in Gods favor: for so we read, In those days was
Hezekiah, (a Prince not more great, then good) sick, and that unto Death.

Now, for application of this point, let me say to all Gods true Children, as
Saint Peter does of the 1 Pet. 4.12.
fiery trial; my dear brethren, think not this strange, as if some new
thing, when ye be afflicted, happened unto you; for lo! this is the surest
badge of Christianity, the unavoydable portion of all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus; yea, there is a necessity in it; we ( 2 Timothy 3.12.
must) suffer, says Saint Paul, Act. 9.16.
2 Timothy 3.12. This meditation made the primitive Saints to be ambitious of such
sufferings for the cause of Christ; the Apostles ( Act. 5.41.
rejoiced) in it, as in the greatest worth and honor, in the days of
persecution, when those ten bloody tyrants, whereof Nero was the first Tertull:
in Apologet. c. 5.
dedicator, as Tertullian calls him, the ringleader to the rest, when
Christianity was nicknamed a Act. 28.22.
sect, and that sect every where (spoken against,) Act. 28.22. when but to name
ones self a Christian, was crime enough to be sent unto the dungeon, or the
metal-mines, or the teeth of Lions, and such like other torments; in these
crimson-coloured days, your zealous Saints would so far strive, as 'twere to
suffer, that no voice was oftener heard then this, Sum and ego Christianus, And
I am also a Christian; so had they then (to borrow Jeremies expression) Jer.
30.21.
engaged their hearts to approach unto the Lord, that they would Heb. 12.4.
resist iniquity, even unto the shedding of their blood. The cross we read, in
following times, was that which was by Christian Princes displayed in their
banners, and the figure thereof much preferred to all other pompous shows what
ever; so I See sir Henry Spelman, tom: 1. council. Anglic. in anno, 712. ex
concilio Londinensi, p. 207, 208 edit. 1639.
find that Constantine the great commanded it, (instead of his wonted Labarum,
richly decked with precious Diamonds,) to be carried before his soldiers; as
if, with the blessed Paul, he had Gal. 6.14.
gloryed in naught else, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. All these
Saints well knew, that this was the way to glory: they were not ignorant, that
before God rested the seventh day, he did first work six days; so must we
have our Hexameron of labor and enduring, before we may expect our Sabbatisme
and eternal rest with Christ: But when we have thus suffered first, we may
assure our selves of no less Crown, then of a Kingdom in eternal glory, 2 Timothy 2.12.
2 Timothy 2.12. we see there is but a letters difference, nay but an aspiration,
between onerari, and honorari, and the same word in Hebrew signifies both a
burden and bliss; and the first Martyr under the gospel wore a Crown in his
name; for (...).
Stephen in the greek so signifies: and surely, that I may conclude this
point, the more we suffer for Mat. 5.11, 12.
righteousness sake (for it is the cause, not the smart that makes the Martyr)
the ampler will be our glory; Qui habet in hac vita multum crucis, habebit in
altera multum lucis: this meditation, as the burdens did the Israelites,
should make good Christians to increase the ( Exodus 1.12.
more) in number; and as those precious plants and sweet smelling trees, though
they be cut in pieces and dried, yet still do retain their sweet and pleasant
sent; yea, do keep within them more true peace of soul, then all the barren
and unsavory trees of wickedness, in their full flowers and blossoms can yield
out, being beaten and scourged with a cursed conscience: In a word, our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.
2 Cor. 4.17. yea, the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18.
Romans 8.18. Wherefore, silence all recoyling passions, and repinings under Gods
strokes, whatsoever they be, and whenever they do fall on thee; see, says
Saint Jam. 5.10.11.
James, thou have the Prophets, my brethren, who have spoken in the name of the
Lord, for an ensample of suffering affliction and of patience; and behold, we
count them happy which endure: so that truly says Saint Peter, as ye heard
but now, this is no 1 Pet. 4.12.
new thing happened unto you; for lo! Hezekiah, though a godly and a gracious
Prince, was yet afflicted, he was sick, and that unto Death.

And so I take my leave of Hezekiahs Person: and next I pass unto the
consideration of his disease, aegrotavit, he was sick: In those days, was
Hezekiah (sick.)

Aegrotavit, he was sick: The second part.
what disease this was, that now so heavily befell him, is a quaere made; and
the best learned do resolve, that it was the very Plague it self; which they
collect from verse the 7th of this Chapter and from Isa. 38.21. where the
prophet proves Physician also of the body, and bids them take a lump of
figs, and lay it on the boil, which done, he straight recovered.

Now for the quality of this disease, the Plague, (had I either time, or list
to expatiate thereon) I could tell you first what Physicians say of it; namely,
that it is an epidemicall fever joined with deadly contagion: how scripture
describes it in terms of greatest terror; comparing it sometimes to the Exodus
9.3.
murraine sent amongst beasts; else where, styling it the consuming evil,
Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22
Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22. that on a sudden, flying night and day, (as an Psalm. 91.5.
arrow of Gods own quiver) makes desolate houses, Cities, Countries, so that
thousands and ten thousands fall by it in a moment; as we read, Number. 16.49.
Number. 16.49. of fourteen thousand taken almost instantly away by it, in a
moment, for murmuring at the hand of God upon Corah, and in less then three
days seventy thousand destroyed in the days of King David, 2 Samuel 24. In
short, its reckoned by God himself, Ezekiel. 14.21.
Ezekiel. 14.21. not as a common judgment only, but as one of the four (sore)
judgments, that he has in store for stubborn, and rebellious sinners: in
which these things are eminent, and remarkable above other; viz. that it
(suddenly) surprizeth, in the midst of our jollity; alas! how many, think
you, in the very act of their sin? how many more, who think of nothing less
then death, nor at that time of making their peace with God? wherein, howsoever
I would have no man censorious, for what think you of 1 Samuel 4.18.
Eli and of 1 Chro. 13.10.
Vzzah, good men both, for ought we know, or find in the maine of their lives,
(and he that lives well, can never dye ill) at least, for ought we know, in
respect of their final, and eternal state to come; yet however, when God
seizes any by the pestilence, it must be acknowledged a judgment of the Lord,
more then ordinarily grievous; lo yet and see! even that good King Hezekiah is
sick thereof: our note from hence is this; which I can but name, and leave it:
in sum this; The heaviest of Gods outward judgments light sometimes on his
own dear children, as well as upon Aliens: I could prove it largely, but that
my mainely intended business is yet behind; see Amos 3.2.
Amos, 3.2. you (only) have I known of all the families of the earth, you only
in comparison (for here the Prophets expression is, if I mistake not, (...))
have I known, not scientia visionis alone, by my general knowledge, by which I
see, behold, and know Genesis 1.31.
all things, whatsoever I have created, yea, even the proud and wicked, though
Ps. 138.6.
afar off; but also scientia approbationis, by my knowledge of especial
approbation, having culled out, and as it were selected you from all the rest,
as the choicest of my chief Mal. 3.17.
Jewels, who are as tender to me, as the very Zech. 2.8.
apple of mine own eye; yet if you, so dear, so tender, do offend me, I will
surely visit upon and punish you for all your iniquities: the like instance we
have extant, t Deuteronomy. 28.59. where the Lord threatens his own people, that if
they fail in their obedience and observance of what was commanded, touching
the fear of Gods dreadful and glorious name, The Lord thy God, then would the
Lord make even their plagues wonderful, even great plagues, and for a farther
aggravation, such as are of long continuance; yea more yet, Lam. 4.6.
Lam. 4.6. the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is
greater then the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown, as in a
moment, and no hands stayed on her; compare Ezekiel. 5.9. etc. and this is done
mainely, when they are apt to be carried with the (...). Nazianz. in od.
stream of a general iniquity; then must they share in like (outward,) though
they do not always, in like (inward) epidemicall, and general judgments; if
Gods people will escape the Rev. 18.4.
plagues of Babylon, they must forsake her sins, else there can be no hope to
escape like punishments with her, though a monstrous strumpet: so St Austin
tells us, that the Christians therefore tasted like extremities from the Goths,
and Vandalls, with the rest; for that they did not zealously enough stand up,
in opposition to the lewd exorbitances of those godles times. It falls out often
too, when they grow too wanton with Gods favors and indulgence, flattering
themselves with this, that God will not destroy the Genesis 18.25.
righteous with the wicked; nor shall the Psa. 91.7.
plague come nigh their dwellings, whereas the Lord is pleased, as sometimes to
take the rose and leave the thorny stalk behind; so yet sometimes again, he
takes them both away together; though the one, when plucked off, to take
delight in, and the other to burn up in unquenchable and in endless torments:
The righteous may be smitten ( Good Jacob is pinched with the common [famine]
no piety can exempt us from the evils of neighborhood no man can tell, by
outward events, which is the Patriarch, and which the Canaanite. B Hall in his
contemplat. of Joseph, p. 56. edit. 1617.
with) the wicked; but not the righteous (as) the wicked, namely, for the
future final issue of them both: they be not all damned eternally, who are
smitten unto death by pestilence, who dye of the plague; Number 14.29.13.
their [carkeises] indeed did; but God forbid c the Souls of all that fell in
the wilderness, by the plague, should be judged to miscary, Heb. 3.17.
Heb. 3.17. so far as the (body) and the (outward) man, these temporal
calamities come alike to all, says Solomon, Eccles. 9.1.
Eccles. 9.1. and who art thou that Jam. 4.12.
judge? The better use hereof is this; let Gods own children fear to be
secure; and let all the rebellious children of disobedience tremble at the
expectation of their sure vengeance, even in the forest and the highest
measure; for if judgment pass not by, but as S. 1 Pet. 4.17.
Peter and Jer. 25.29.
Jeremy say, (begins) first at the house of God, and the City called by his
own name; oh, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?
and if the righteous themselves (scarcely) be saved, where shall the ungodly
and the sinner appear? And if God be thus Psalm. 89.7.
terrible in the assembly even of his own dear Saints, so severe to the Luc
23.31.
green tree; oh what shall then become of the dry tree, that bears no fruit
of grace at all? Luc 13.7.
Cut it down, says the Lord, cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? let it
be scorched for ever in flames unquenchable and full of torment: The righteous
shall indeed, says Solomon, be Pro. 11.31.
recompensed (with correction) on the Sea my Sermon lately published on John
6.54. p. 71.
earth, but it is no farther than here upon the (earth) below, their woe ends
with their temporal life; how much more the wicked and the sinner? And thus
much briefly, for Hezekiah's sickness, and his sore disease: In those days
was Hezekiah (sick).

The third Part.
A word next also of the great danger, and the extremity of the same, it was
mortal and deadly, aegrotavit (lethaliter) he was sick, and that unto
(death): S. John tells us of a twofold (sin), or, at least, degree thereof; the
one to be a sin (not) unto death, and the other to be a sin (unto) death, 1 John 5.16.
1 John 5.16. our Savior tells us of a (sickness) also, such was that of
Lazarus, (...), which was not unto death, Joh. 11.4.
Joh. 11.4. and S. Paul, of the sickness of Epaphroditus, his fellow-souldier
in Christ, that it was (...), nigh, and, as it were, next neighbor unto death,
Phil. 2.27.
Phil. 2.27. and here the Prophet, of a sickness unto death, that is so
desperate and dangerous, that without a special mercy and preservation from on
high, as once it fared with St. Paul in that black tempest on the Sea, when the
sight of Sun and Stars, and all apparent hope of safety was quite lost, Act.
27.20.
Act. 27.20. there was no comfort left. It seems then that the Saints be not
obnoxious only unto outward judgments, but also are permitted often unto most
deep (extremity) therein: our Prophet tells us, that Gods own redeemed ones are
emplunged into sorrow, and that sorrow seconded with deep (sighings), Isa.
35.10.
Isa. 35.10. David is full of such expressions as these, the sorrows of
(death) compassed me; yea more, the pains of (hell) gate hold upon me, Ps.
116.3.
t Psalm. 116.3. the word (Sheol) there rendered by Hell, is most times used for
the grave; and then his meaning is, that effective, his sorrows were so
exquisite, as that they threatened him with death, and with the grave; but it
is used also for that Hell of the damned too, as Psalm. 9.17.
Psalm. 9.17. and then the meaning is, that to his sense, his sorrows had a
correspondency with the very torments of the damned there; so again, Psalm.
118.18.
Psalm. 118.18. though he were not wholly given over unto actual death, yet the
Lord had chastened him so sore, that he was (...), Ver. 5.
Verse. 5. so penned up in a strait place, that as 2 Cor. 7.5.
S. Paul in Macedonia, his flesh it had no rest at all, but he was troubled on
every side; without were fightings, in regard of adversaries abroad, as Shimei,
Doeg, the jeering drunkards, and the rest of such sons of Belial; within were
fears, in regard of present sense of guilt, through want of evidence, and
assurance of Gods pardoning mercy, and sensible acceptance of him: in like
sort it fared also once with holy Job, (that peerlesse man for piety upon all
the earth, by Gods own testimonial of him, Job 1.8.) yet so far had the
venom of Gods arrows drank up his spirits within him, so did God seem, as the
Sun enveloped in a cloud, to knit his brows upon him (as) an enemy, so to
write bitter things against him, that in his own present apprehension, God
meant outright to Job 13.15.
(kill) him, Job 13.15. David again, Psalm. 39.10.
Psalm. 39.10. O Lord, remove thy stroke away from me, for I am (consumed) by
the blow of thine hand; compare Psalm. 102.3, 4, 5
Psalm. 102.3, 4, 5. Joseph was not only sold to be a bondslave, but his feet
they hurt with fetters, and the iron entered into his soul, Psalm. 105.18.
Psalm. 105.18. the like to which we read of Paul and Sylas, Act. 16.23, 24.
Act. 16.23, 24. and to what exigents were the Israelites then brought, think
we? when the Exodus 14.
red sea roared before them, and Pharaoh the cruel Tyrants wheels were
rattling behind them? naught but a quick destruction, as that whales chaps to
Jonah, stood gaping wide to Jon. 1.17.
swallow them. And wherefore is all this? but, as in the first place, to make
the Lords own power in their deliverance from such deep straights, more
glorious, according as the Hebrew proverb has it, Cum duplicantur lateres,
venit Moses, God sent a Moses to deliver Israel, when the bricks were doubled:
so withal, as the Prophet says of Joseph, Psalm. 105.19.
Psalm. 105.19. it was to ( Psalm. 105.19.
try) them, whether his children meant, as when Hur and Aaron Exodus 17.11, 12.
let go the hands of Moses praying, to give out, and languish in faith and
invocation under that cross, or not: God has promised to be a present help in
the Psalm. 59.16.
needful time of trouble, Psalm. 59.16. but this is on condition of our early
Psalm. 50.15.
calling on him, and timely, speedy Hos. 5.15.
seeking to him in that same day of trouble, Ps. 50.16. Hos. 5.15. This done,
the cloud is again withdrawn, and with it, their sins and guilt do all vanish
from Gods sight: Thus David praying, he was Psalm. 118.5.
enlarged from his straights, Psalm. 118.5. Jonah, from out of the very Jon.
2.1, 2.
belly of Hell, kept calling still on God, and so was vomited alive again: and
so did Hezekiah here, in the next verse to my text, under this sickness, this
plague sore, so unto death, and so extremely dangerous, he prayed, and so
fetched off a quick adjournment of the execution of the first sentence of it on
him, and was heard (to borrow Paul's expression) in that he Heb. 5.7.
feared: all I add more of this particular, is only that advise of our
Savior, or another occasion, to that young, man, in the Gospel, (...), every
one of you that in this great audience can hear my voice, this day, go every
one of you, and do Luke 10.37.
so likewise.

I have done with Hezekiahs sickness, The fourth part.
and the danger of it: there is yet one circumstance behind more, in this my
first general part, and that is the time, when all this fell out, in diebus
illis, In those days: of which shortly: what were [those dayes] here by Gods
spirit so precisely noted, as the set time of Hezekiahs sickness? If we
reflect a little on the former chapter, we shall find it to be then when God
had given him a rescue extraordinary, sending his Angel to smite the mighty
army of Sennacherib, that proud Assyrian, with a sudden overthrow and by
returning back those poisoned arrows, even the Psalm. 64.3.
bitter words of that railing and blasphemous Rhabshaketh upon himself with
shame and ruin, that as he clothed himself with cursing, like as with a
garment, so let it come into his bowels, as the Psalmist speaks, like water,
and like oil into his bones, Psalm. 109.18.
Psalm. 109.18. Now, [after] this deliverance, was this good King Hezekiah
sick, even [in those dayes]: our note from hence me thinks is fluent, viz.
That even after the latest experience of Gods rarest outward favors, his
servants sometimes taste of sore afflictions; Gods choicest left hand blessings
secure not wholly from adversity: besides variety of experience herein daily,
the point is clear (to seek no farther) from the example of Abraham, the
father, that is, the pattern of our faith, by doing of whose works, we may hope
to rest, one day, sweetly in his bosom; we read of him Genesis 22.1.
Genesis 22.1. that [after these things] God tempted Abraham; after what things?
namely, after that miraculous adding vigor to his Heb. 11.11.
past age, and fructification to Sarah his wives barren womb, so far as to
beget and bear a son, and (by) him to bless all nations of the earth, and
from him to have an issue like the stars, Heb. 11.12.
innumerable for multitude, Genesis 18. yet [after all these things]
notwithstanding, God tempted him to sacrifice this his only son upon an altar,
verse 2. surely it is true, in the midst of strongest confidence we may not
promise our selves an utter immunity, and exemption from Gods strokes upon us:
only this caution, by the way, remember for your comfort; that if such things
betide the Saints, without noting of a sin, as the special cause thereof, then
such afflictions is for trial, and probation, only; and such was Abraham's
temptation, only for his ( Heb. 11.17.
trial,) as Saint Paul interprets, Heb. 11.17. for God knew he Genesis 22.12.
feared him before sincerely; and withal, that he was able to encounter that
temptation well enough, for he was Romans 4.20.
strong in faith, says Paul, Romans 4.20. therefore God laid no more upon him,
then he was well able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13.
1 Cor. 10.13. but if some (sin) be noted, as the occasion, then it is for
castigation of some particular delinquency seen in them: Now the reason of such
trials is, partly to weane them from the overlove of outward blessings, and to
teach them not to measure Gods eternal favor, by what appears from without,
(that is no note Characteristicall of Gods love, Eccles. 9.1.
eccles. 9.1. but rather by what comforts, and what future hopes he Romans 5.5.
sheds into them by his spirit, from within; and so let all Gods true
Nathanaels make the application.

In diebus illis, in those days: I cannot yet thus leave this circumstance, as
Orpah did her mother-inlaw, in a kiss, but as Ruth to Naomi, Ruth. 1.14.
cleave yet to it, Ruth. 1.14. one thing more then; as God for trial sometimes
deals thus with his servants, so if upon some special favor received, there be
not returned See D Sclater in Psalm. 116. v. 12. page 123. set forth by me 1638.
special obedience, but there follows after it, either a Psalm. 106.13
forgetfulness, or a pride of heart, then must they surely look to meet a
special displeasure; this is clear from Hezekiah, in my text, who upon
recovery from this deadly sickness, is observed not to have rendered again,
according to the benefit done to him; for his heart was lifted up, ( 2 Chronicles.
32.25.
therefore) there was wrath again upon him and his people, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. See
also, Hos. 13.6, 7, etc. They were fitted, says God, and lo! instead of
thankful obedience, their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me;
( Hos. 13.6, 7, etc
therefore) I will be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard, by the Erat autem in
via illa vastum desertum in quo erant (immanes) bestiae. Ribera in locum, ex
Hieron:
way, will I observe them, etc. that is, I will more (l fiercely) then usual
proceed to punish them: surely, where ever in [such] a case, unthankfulness,
and sin do go before, as Esau, there punishment takes it shortly (unless there
be a Number. 16.56.
quick, and a more then ordinary speedy prevention by repentance) by the Genesis
25.26.
heel, as Jacob; or as Vulcan followed him, in the Poet, pede claudo, with a
slow, perhaps, yet with a sure, and with an Hec tene, nec Crimen quenqam in
pectore gesture, qui non idem Nemesin in tergo. Lipsius, l. 2. c. 13. de
Corstant.
overtaking foot: To apply.

Beloved Christians, well may I take up the speech of Moses to the Israelites,
and say to you, as he, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
Deuteronomy. 4.7. what See Dr Sclater. psalm. 116. p. 123, and p. 187.
nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God
is in all things that we call upon him for? did ever people, under Heaven, find
choicer blessings from the Lord, then we? who have long sat under our 1 King.
4.25.
vines, and figtrees, and are become as 'twere, the Jewel set in the Ring of
the whole world, enamelled with Halcyon peace, with more then Angelical
prerogatives in the Gospel, and the means of Grace; so that the Lord may say
to us, as of old to wanton Israel, Isa. 5.4.
Isa. 5.4. what could have been done more to my vineyard? but we are surely a
perverse and a crooked generation; and therefore I may well say as Moses, on
like meditation, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do we thus requite the Lord, o foolish people and unwise? [thus?]
how? or which way? surely this sacred aposiopesis involves more then can be
expressed; (thus?) thus inexpressibly with ingratitude and impious
disobedience? My dear brethren, what calamities the Lord has up in store for
us, we know not; but he that sees not some in brewing for us, is blind, and he
that sits not in secret ( Ezekiel. 9 4.
sighing) and as those that had Gods mark upon their foreheads, in Ezekiel,
Psalm. 119 136.
crying for all the abominations, which are, or may be the provocations of Gods
wrath, is stupid, and senseles: do we provoke the Lord to anger? are we
stronger then he? says the great Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.22.
1 Cor. 10.22. yea rather, as Jeremy expresses it, do they not provoke Jer.
7.19.
themselves to the confusion of their own faces? go to Ver. 12. ib.
Shilo, view Thessalonica, Rome, Churches of Asia, etc. places where the Lord
once set his name, yet for the unthankfulness, and impiety of the people, they
are now become the sties of Antichrist, as the Augaean stables, and receptacles
of cursed Mahomet; these their (...), should be our (...), their nocumenta, our
documenta, their afflictions, our See Hos. 4.15.
instructions: there was a people once as tender, and dear to him as the very
Zech. 2.8.
apple of his own eye, his chosen, his peculiar Psalm. 135.4.
treasure, and as Haggai says of Zerubbabel, as a Hag. 2.23.
signet on Gods own right hand, who yet, for their impenitent rebellion, are
become from an Hos. 2.11.
Ammi, and a Ruhamah, a lo-ammi, and a loruhamah, Hos. 1.6, 9.
that is, from being my people, and a people that had obtained mercy, a no
people of Gods favor, or of Gods mercy: take we heed, favors bestowed raise
Isa. 5.4. confer Joh. 15.22.
expectation of obedience, that disappointed, fetches off, as to the barren
figtree, a Luke 13.7.
succide, cut it down, why combreth it the ground? and if God spared not these
Romans 11.21.
natural branches, so dressed and pruned and Isa. 5.2.
fenced and watched, etc. be not so high-minded, but Romans 11.20.
fear; fear, what? even our own abscission also: take heed, says St. Paul,
lest he also spare not thee: my beloved, there is a thing called infidelity and
sin, that does not cause a mitigation only and an abatement of Gods love unto a
people, but even make an utter Isa. 59.2.
separation between them: we are much spoken of, or traduced by our
adversaries, and, as Eli told his sons, It is no good 1 Samuel 2.24.
report we have amongst them, for our dalliance with Gods mercies, and the
blemishing of the Gospel by our evil conversations; surely, though ^a^i^^t id
illi quidem suo vitio, nulla justa causa, fat^or; sed colorem tamen habet
calumnia. Jacob: Acontius, de Satanae stratagem l. 7 p. 223, in 8. edi^. 1565.
they, of all men else, have least cause thus to roll that loose and busy
filme of flesh, that they carry about with them in their black mouths, toward
us, who (though we will not wholly excuse our selves of our infirmities, and
our Gal. 6.1.
(...)) yet dare we make a challenge with them, upon that See Nicolaum de
Clemangis in speculo Roman: Pontific.
quarrel: yet there is, and may be much good use of slanders, they should be
to us, as Jonathan 1 Samuel 20.20.
arrows were to David, in the midst of danger, instead of watchwords to us,
to avoid the occasions of laying our selves justly open to so great a calumny,
or danger: I conclude this point with that of our Savior, in another case,
(...), behold I have told you Joh. 13.19. and Joh. 16.4.
before hand; remember then that there has been, if not a Prophet, yet a
seasonable monitor amongst you. Hezekiah, ye have heard, though a great
favorite of heaven, yet not 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
rendering again to the Lord, according to the benefit done unto him, finds Gods
displeasure in no low measure; for even (In those days) of favor, upon his not
special obedience, but unthankfulness rather, Hezekiah was sick, and that
too very dangerously, even unto death; In those days was Hezekiah sick, unto
death.

And thus I take my leave of Hezekiah sick, and now lying, as it was supposed,
on his deathbed: Next, I will salute the Prophet, that came to visit him thus
sorely sick; with whom yet I shall be forced, by the time, to exchange but only
a word or two at present, because there is yet an urgent business not to be
neglected in the Text, which I do reserve, as the master of the marriage feast
in Joh. 2.10.
Cana of Galile did his best wine, till my last discourse, that it may stay the
freshest in your longest memories.

The second general part.
Now this Person here visiting the sick Prince, is described to us a three fold
way.

1 By his Name, Isaiah. 2 By his Function, a Prophet. 3 By his Pedigree, the
son of Amos.
In those days was Hezekiah sick, unto death; and the Prophet, Isaiah, the
son of Amos, came to him:

From every of these words, as flowers, some sedulous and industrious Be would
suck out store of honey; see, I beseech you, a drop or two, 1 Isaiah, so by
Name: Sundry large encomiums have been bestowed on this Prophet; he carries in
his Name [Salvation of the Lord] for so (...) (Ischaiahu) from Pase^*
(...), Salus, and (...) Dominus, does signify; he is styled by Nazianzene,
(...) Nazianzene (...). p. 2. Eton excus.
(...), the Sea the eloquence of Isaiah set forth by Mr Wotton, in his Sermons
upon John, sermon. 2. pa. 62.
elegant and the lofty Prophet; our Savior was much taken with the reading of
him, Luke 4.17.
Luke 4.17. and the Eunuch of Aethiopia Act. 8.28,
converted by his writings, Act. 8.28. he is oftener cited then any Prophet else
in the new Testament, one and twenty times at least, for which cause he is
styled usually the Evangelicall prophet, because he does most graphically, as
foretell, so describe our Savior in his incarnation, birth, preaching,
passion, etc. with all the benefits from thence accruing to believers: and as
in short, Siracides says of him, Ecclus. 48.22. Esaias the Prophet was great,
and Ecclus. 48.22.
faithful in his vision, not great only, but faithful; I will only name the
note, and leave it, viz. None more fit to stand before a Prince then such as
Esaias was, so every way accomplished for that service; he was both great and
faithful, able for parts, and true to his service; so we read, Pro. 14.35.
Pro. 14.35. The kings Pro. 22.29.
favor is toward a wise servant; and again, Pro. 22, 29. See thou a man Pro.
22.29.
diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings, he shall not stand
before mean men, or, men of obscurity: the point is clear, but I meddle now
no farther; only let me say in the expression of the Scripture, in another
case, Luke 10.23.
(...), Blessed are the eyes which see the (men) which we see, in this regard,
both in Church and State; [such] as are second unto none in any ages past.

Secondly, by his function, he was a Prophet, one of Gods own Counsel, who had
the knowledge of secret things, before they came to pass, as Siracides has
expressed Ecclus. 48.25.
it, cap. 48.25. He, the (Prophet) came to Hezekiah, now sick unto death: Hence
I observe; that none so fit to visit sick men, as the Prophets, Priests and
Ministers of God: S. James directly presses it, Jam. 5.14. Is any sick among
you? let him call for the Jam. 5.14.
Elders of the Church, and let [them] pray over him; what were those Elders of
the Church? No See exactly clearing this point, B^. Bilson, in Epistle before
his excellent book of the perpetual government of the Church p 4.5. etc. and
c. 10. ibid. p 126, 127, etc. in 8^.
lay-presbytery I wis; (alas) for the So my Lords Grace p. 7. of his speech in
Star Chamber 1637.
newfangled Geneva-device!) but presbyters in sacris; the public Priests and
Ministers of the Gospel: whose lips as at all times else, they should preserve
most saving knowledge; so [then] especially may (they) have, for thy soul, a
word in Pro. 25.11.
season; For where, in such dangerous distresses, have the common people leave,
to be their (own) guides, and informers? and in [doubtfull matters] Mal. 2.7.
Isa. 50.4.
to be their own Private persons may not presume of the spirit of
[interpretation] as it came not from private motion at first, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
which is proved from example of the ^unuch, who referred the [exposition] of
the text, unto his guide, Act. 8.31
private interpreters? when such an one is one of a thousand, Job 33.29.
enabled and prepared for thee, by the Lord himself, according to his function:
I am sure the power, to bind and loose the conscience, is (clave non errante)
delegated only upon [Us,] Joh. 20.23. and [We,] not [You] have that word of 1
Cor. 5.19.
Reconciliation, put into [our] mouths, whom the Lord sees 1 Timothy 1.12.
faithful: which one meditation, well Psalm. 107.43.
pondered by the people, would (in their soule-disturbances) make our very Romans
10.15.
feet seem beautiful, upon the mountains; yea, our persons, for this work
sake of ours, more highly, (as Saint Paul's phrase is) to be 1 Thessalonians. 4.31.
esteemed by them; whereas the misconceite hereof occasions often much See the
last L. B of Ely p. 23. epist. before his treatise of the Sabbath.
discomfort, and distraction to their Souls.

Thirdly, as Isaiah by name, and the Prophet by function, so also by pedigree,
the son of Amos: This Prophet is said by learned men to have descended of the
royal blood it self, and therefore is this here set down to point us to his
pedigree and birth; which, me thinks, offers and presents unto us, a two fold
observation. First, how warrantable it is sometimes to own those honors that
worthy persons are truly borne to; to which purpose that of Solomon, it may be,
tends, Prove. 17.6.
Pro. 17.6. The glory of children are their fathers: but this full stream
would need some sluices to stop, or let it go, so as fit cautions may allow:
First, this must not savor of a vainglorious or a sinful ostentation; for to
curb such a temper, old Agapetus in paraen: ad Justinian, sect. 4.
Agapetus well told the Emperor Justinian, (...), that clay and dyrt was the
antientest progenitor of us all; we know S. Paul [in casu] stood much upon it,
that he was a Act. 16.37. and 22.25.
Roman, Act. 16, 37, and 22, 25. and therefore he sent so far as Troas for his
2 Timothy 4.13.
cloak, and gives a special charge concerning his parchments, 2 Timothy 4.13.
for that, as S. Ambrose ad 2 Timothy 4.13.
Ambrose says, these were left him by his progenitors as the badges and the
evidences of his Roman freedom: Secondly, we must still remember, this may be
done, not often, but when Gods honor may receive advantage thence; as S. Paul
got by those privileges more liberty to preach the gospel: confer 2 Cor.
11.22. etc. and 12.11.
2 Cor. 11.22, etc. and again 2 Cor. 12.11. though, when he reflected on
himself personally, all that he said of himself was but (...), I am nothing;
yet when he saw the reputation of the gospel to lie at stake, through the vile
disparagement both of person and parts, in his absence from the church of
Corinth, by the vaunting high-flown false Apostles, who being well-spoken men,
and such as were well able to gloze over an ill matter with fine 1 Cor. 2.4.
speech and very well worded language; had almost, as Absalom the peoples
hearts, 2 Samuel 15.6.^
stolen away the good affections of the Corinthians from the great Apostle; in
this case he forbeareth not to use an (...), in nothing am I behind the very
chiefest Apostles; he means the false Apostles: Accordingly may we Ministers
make the application.

The other note is this; how it did no way disparage, rather much advance the
honor of Isaiah, that though he were of royal blood, the son of Amos, yet
was he withal a (Prophet); so they say that Daniel was the son of Nobles,
Melchizedek king of Salem, the son of God, and yet withal the High Priest of
our profession; amongst us, some of generous and of noble parentage, that
highlier esteem the reproach of [ See my Father D Sclater, ad 2 These. c. 3. v.
2. p. 223.
Priest-hood] then all the treasures of Egypt; among carnal earthwormes only
holds the rule; dat census honores; not worth, but wealth wins honor; can it be
a dishonor to enjoy the Title of our Lord Christ himself? to be isntrumental
1 Timothy 4.16. Obad. ver. ult. confer Matt. 1.21.
Saviors of his people? see moreover, ye are 1 Cor. 4.1.
Stewards of Gods heavenly Mysteries; clavigeri coeli; yea God's own Psalm.
25.14.
Secret, if we fear him truly, shall be with us; yea more yet, in this we do
out go the very Angels themselves in honor; for, to which of the My Lord
primate of Armagh.
Angels said he at any time, Whose sins ye Joh. 20.23.
remit, they are remitted? but unto (us 2 Cor. 5.19.
) he has given that great and most mellifluous word of Reconciliation: Oh
dignity incomparable! how should this one meditation, my worthy Brethren,
solace our hearts, and cheer up our spirits, under those outward abasures and
undervaluings, that we sometimes meet with from your carnal and besotted
worldlings? who know no more then Mat. 7.6.
swine, to value the pearls of heaven; nor how to prize the inestimable 2 Cor.
4.7.
Treasure of the Gospel, though brought unto them by us but in earthen
vessels; Isaiah by name, the Prophet by function, the son of Amos by descent
and Pedigree, one of noble and of royal lineage: ye see how I may say as Paul
does of his letter written to his Galatians, cap. 6.11. this subject is very
Gal. 6.11.
large, and not only time, but copiousnesse of matter overwhelmes me.
Wherefore, as Tertullus told his noble Foelix, Act. 24.4.
Act. 24.4. That I be not farther tedious herein unto you; I pray you, that you
would hear me, of your clemency and patience, a few words more, of this
Prophets visit, and the matter of it; and then, as Foelix bad St. Paul, I
shall go my ways for this time, till a more convenient season may call me
again hither.

Ye have the visit it self in these words [He came to him:] A worthy act
indeed; a good lesson to us Ministers, that we speedily address us to our
people, in like case, and Jude 2.23.
save we them with fear, as Saint Jude advises, ver. 23. pulling them out of
the fire, of temptation, or of hell; to which the adversary would perchance in
death emplunge them; and surely there would be a very profitable use, of some
My Lord B^ of Ely qua supra p. 23. vide
private form of pastoral collation with their flock, for their direction and
information in particular spiritual duties; such as was private confession
(avoiding the gross, and intolerable abuse thereof, now among the Romish
Mass Priests, and the sillily deluded people led by them in the ancient Church.

But yet here is a lesson for our people too, to do as Saint James exhorts,
when they be sick, to send and [ Jam. 5.14.
call] for us, in season: so the good sister of sick Lazarus [ Joh. 11.3.
sent] to Christ, Joh. 11.3. yea, even Hezekiah here, when there was upon him a
day of trouble, he sent the chiefest of his servants to the Prophet, and that
betimes too, e're the evil spread too far, that he might lift up his 2 King
19.2, 3, 4.
Prayer for him, 2 King 19.2, 3, 4. a point this is, that merits your best
notice, and calls for your careful practice; who knows what disadvantage to
your selves? what discomfort to your selves, and others standing by you, this
delay may breed?

Well, the Prophet is come; and what now does he do there? not sooth, or fish
out for a legacy; but the text says, he falls instantly upon the discharge of
his Commission to the sick Prince, for so we read, he came to him, and being
come, [Hee said unto him, thus says the Lord.]

This part I called, in my division, the good Prophets employment; which stood
in the delivery of his message to the King; and therefore it is described,

1. Formally, in this expression, he said unto him, Thus says the Lord. 2.
Materially, and this three ways. 1. (...), Positively, Thou shall dye. 2.
(...), Negatively, and not live. 3. (...), by Exhortation, Set thine house in
order.



First, formally, in these words, He said unto him, thus says the Lord: He
[said,] it seems he was a Prophet, and therefore he would not be tongue-tide:
surely he that likened Idoll-shepheards, who had mouths and Psalm. 115.5.
spoke not, unto St Gregory compares good Preachers to watchful dogs, quia
faciunt magnos latratus praedicationis.
Dogs, yea, to Isa. 56.10, 11.
dumb dogs, (despicable creatures, the price whereof, and of an whore the Lord
professes to Deuteronomy. 23.18.
abhor alike) would not himself suffer his sick Patient, wanting comfort, to
miscarry by his wilful silence, or neglect: he knew the blood of souls was
precious in Gods sight, and as that of Abel, Genesis 4.10.
cried loud to Heaven for requital. My worthy brethren, let us remember that
when the Spirit did descend upon the Apostles, he came in the similitude of
Act. 2.3.
cloven tongues; first, of tongues, the best Psalm. 108.1.
member that David had, to [ Isa. 58.1.
tell] Israel of her sins, and Judah of her great transgressions; yea to [
Psalm. 66.16.
tell] the people that fear God also, what merciful things he will do for
their souls, if they would once but Psalm. 34.8.
taste, and see, and upon experience discover how 1. Pet. 2.3.
gracious the Lord is; and then of [cloven] tongues, that they might rightly 2.
Tim. 2.15.
divide, and as it were cleave out of the whole lump and precious mass of the
Word of God, to every one his Luke 12.42.
proper portion, 1. Pet. 2.2.
milk to whom milk, and Heb. 5.13, 14.
stronger meat unto whom stronger meat is due, rightly dividing the word of
truth; as our Savior, making known ( John 15.15.
all) things that he had heard of his Father unto his friends the Disciples;
and as St Paul, not shunning to declare unto the Church of Christ all the Acts
20.27.
whole counsel of God; so much of it he meant, as was 2. Cor. 12.4.
lawful, and fit to be imparted: surely, God will never thank a man for
keeping in of his counsel; rather, I think, where the counsel, and the secret
of the Lord is, there, as Jeremie professes, Gods word is in the heart of a
truly zealous Minister, (rightly called and well qualified) as a Jer. 20.9.
burning fire shut up in his bones, he is weary with forbearing, and cannot
stay, namely, from giving of it a door of Ephesians. 6.19.
utterance; when the heart is hot within, and in the midst of musing
thoughts, the fire of zeal burns, David cannot, without much pain, hold his
peace, but he must needs be speaking with his Psalm. 39.3.
tongue; thus doing, a faithful Pastor may in the day of reckoning, and
account with God, with comfort lift up his head, and say as my prophet here
has said before him, (though his words strictly were indeed a prophecy of
Christ) behold I and the Isa. 8.18.
children which by thy blessing, and giving of See Joh. 17.26.
increase unto my 1 Cor. 3.6.
endeavors in the Ministry, thou have given me.

But to say no more of this [saying] of my Prophet here, (lest I incur those
proverbiall scom's, sus Minervam; or else that, Cum nesciret loqui, nescivit
tacere.
(...)) let us next observe, how he (begins) his saying to the King; It is, ye
see, with a sic dicit Dominus, thus says the Lord; which directs us
Ministers, to beware how we presume to vent any thing unto our people, without
our first sure warrant for it from the Lord. If our Savior gave such great
caution to the (hearers,) that they should Luke 8.18. the Greek word is
((...)) which denotes a very earnest seeing, (...) Beza.
take heed how they (hear;) so must we likewise be as cautionate, how we ( 1
Pet. 4.11.
speak) otherwise, then as the very oracles of God: so our Savior says, Joh.
12.49. that I have not spoken of my Joh. 12.49.
self, and St Paul calls what he delivered to the Church for Doctrine, not
his own, but ( Act. 20.27.
Gods) counsel, Act. 20.27. the contrary vociferations made by ignorant and
wild Enthusiasmi id solum habent commodi, ut homines in immensum aliquod
pelagus abripiant, tandemque in Atheismi gurgitem praecipites demergant.
Duraeus Whitakero l. 1. sect. 30. p. 107. apud. Whitak. contra Duraeum.
Enthusiasts, spuing out their own froth, male contented, brainsick fancies,
with out Gods warrant and allowance; good lord! what noisome weeds of error,
Schism, Faction, and all mad irregularity do they most dangerously occasion,
(through the Rev. 12.9.
old cunning of the Matt. 13.25.
envious man, that delights in tares and hemlock) to grow up, and spread in the
precious field, and seedplot of wholesome and most proper grain? oh! for the
Matt. 3.12.
fan of Christ, thoroughly to purge the floor of his Church from the chafe of
all such Spiritus Anabaptisticus ametia quaedam fuit and furor praeceps atque
effraenatus, quo acti (scripturas omnes) abjiciunt, and toti exrepentinis
Enthusiasmis pendent, Whitak. contra Duraeum, l. sect. 32.
Anabaptisticall, Vitanda sunt deliria sectae Anabapsticae, quae sine dubio a
Diabolo est excitata, and monstrum est execrabile, ex variis haeresibus, and
blasphemiis conflatum. Vrsin: Catech: qu^ 74.
unscriptured mouthings before the people; who are seduced unto error and
beguiled, by this means mainly, in their 2 Pet. 2.14.
unstable Souls; for that their fanaticall conceits have been at last defended
(as a worthy instrument of much good, in this City, says well) with no
pretense, but the Mr. Paynter of Exeter. qua supra p. 27. See Goodwyn p. 118,
119, cap. 10. qua supra.
Motion of the holy Ghost; and yet, God knows, their motions oftimes differ as
wide from the sweet, unerring inspirations and motions of Gods good spirit, as
Heaven does from Hell: Pray we therefore for the spirit of (wisdom) and
Revelation in the knowledge of God, as St Paul speaks, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. and the
spirit of (truth,) as our Savior styles him, Joh. 16.13. that when we speak,
as in the name of God, we may speak the wisdom of God, and that not, as a
soothing, time-creature Preacher, with the intising words of man's wisdom, but
in demonstration of the same spirit and of power, 1 Cor. 2.4.7. then may we
safely assure our hearts of a sic dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord, as the
Prophet in my Text. But to whom does our Prophet here direct his [Thus says
the Lord]? unto the King himself: So 2 King 22.18, 19.
Michaiah to Ahab; Nathan to David, 2. Sam. 12 7.
Thou art the Man; John-Baptist to Herod Matt. 14 5.
non licet (see his plains) for thee to have thy brothers wife. But yet we
must remember prudence in this point; for who knows not that in these special
Prophets, there was something extraordinary? we ordinary Ministers may soon,
this way, be too bold with royalty, at least in public: Nathan spoke
downright to David, but it was in private: But notwithstanding, whilst we are
sure we bring, as Matt. 17.27.
Peter's fish did, silver in our Mouths, I mean, our sic dicit Dominus, Thus
says the Lord; why are we such dastards, as in the cause of Christ (when duly
called thereto) to fear the furrows of a rich or great man's brow? And thus
far of the formal part of my Prophets employment, in the delivery of his
message from the Lord unto the sick-King Hezekiah; He said unto him, Thus
says the Lord.

I come now to the material part of his speech, and this is set down. 1.
(...), positively, Thou shall Die: and what new thing is this? was not this the
doom of all mankind, immediately upon sin, Cinis es, and in Cinerem reverteris,
Genesis 3.19, and Eccles. 12.7.
Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return. The woman of Tecoah, long
before, set a necesse upon it, 2 Samuel 14.14.
we must needs die,; yea there is a statute, like those law of the Medes and
Persians, Heb. 9.27.
irrevocable, enacted for it and never to be repealed, even so it is Dan. 6.8.
appointed, says Saint Paul: And surely it is true, death is that common bag,
into which all the chessemen upon the table, whether they be King or Queen,
rich or poor, good or bad, must be all shuffled together, at the end of our
game: death is as an See Quarles his poems.
archer, now it hits our superiors, and so shoots over us; then our
inferiors, and so shoots under us; anon, our friend, roving on our right hand;
then, our enemy, flying on the left hand; at last, it hits the white, and
strikes our selves: could Genesis 5.27.969. years.
age have excused it, Methuselah had escaped it; could Judge. 14 6.
strength have declined it, then Sampson had missed it; could 1 Samuel 10.23.
stature have over-looked it, then Saul had avoided it; could 2 Samuel 14.25.
beauty have outfaced it, then Absalom had never met it: yea more, could Art
have shifted it, by any curiosities, or contrivals, then the Grammarian with a
Criticisme might judge it off; and yet he that can decline a noune in every
case, cannot decline death in any case: could the windings of wit, and the
Meanders of reason, divisions and distinctions wave it off, then surely the
Logician would dispute it away; and yet whilst he thinks fiercely to frame his
argument in Barbara, rudely to puzzle it, death retorts upon him with another
in Ferio, and at last ni celarent, and that sine modo and figura; Could the
natural Philosopher by his diving into Nature, and by his vanity of notions
stave it off, then that Patriarch of Philosophers, as Mr Hooker styles
Aristotle, had never been swallowed in that sea, neither ebbing nor flowing;
yet all his ens mobile was at last become, as Niobe (when metamorphosed) like
to a stone in it is center, a thing without motion; could the Mathematician by
his strong imaginations fancy it off, or by the harmony of the spheres charm
it away, that so he might still spin-out a thread of immortality on those
rolling wheels, and between his two celestial poles beat it from him; then
the shoulders of Atlas had never sunk under the weight of that globe, or
Archimedes with his (...), e're found out death; nor Thales, the Milesian
Astronomer, whiles he went gazing after the stars, been emplunged in a pond,
where that was a bathing; could the Physician Luke 4.23.
cure himself of it, then Aesculapius, nor Hippocrates had ever wanted potions
to keep it out; yea, if the Musician make a league with death, and meant to be
homo fidissimus, most true to his notes, most sweet in his tunes, most lawny in
his touches, yet would he be forced at last frangere fidem, to crack his
bargayne, and to break his stringes, and his finest aires, like some fair
colored silks, if too much ayred, they will lose their gloss; and all his
descants be exchanged, in the issue, into a sad (ground) by death; in a word,
nor can the Metaphysitian, by all his abstractions, so acutely contemplate it,
severed from all bodies, in his brains, but it will closely be shooting of a
forke into his sides, and, as Joab did Abner, 2 Samuel 3.27.
stab him at unawares; the Arithmetician by all his numbrings and rules, can
never make death to serve for a cipher; to conclude, nor can the Moralist, with
all his Ethics tutor this, (...), or rough hewn fellow so much as unto a
civil forbearance; no more regards (it) the Cardinal virtues, then the
Cardinals cap. Truly, says Solomon, Eccles. 1.2.
all is vanity, and again, one generation Eccles. 1.4.
passes and, another generation comes, but no generation [staieth;] there is
a time, says he, to be born, and a time to Eccles. 3.2.
die, but I find not there is any time to (live;) for orimur, morimur, and
nascimur morituri, as St Bernard tells us; and though in all things else there
be (a peradventure,) as St Austin tells us, yet in death there is none;
peradventure a child is conceived, peradventure it is an Embryo in the womb,
peradventure it is borne, peradventure he passes through all the degrees of
age, and in the issue, if ye make up an acrosticke, out of the four first
Feltham, Resolve cent. 2. resol. 57. in sine.
capital letters of Puer juvenis, vir, and senex, the four degrees of age,
ye shall find the word, and the man pius, peradventure; again, on the other
side, a man may like to the river Jordane, glide through his life in a silver
and pleasant stream, whilst he hems in himself within the banks and bounds of
Civility; and yet, in the end, empty himself out into the Magirus geograph. in
descript. Palaestinae, p. 241. edit. 1608. in 8^.
dead sea of impiety, and prophanenes; but now in death, there is no
peradventure at all, no, that is without all peradventure; for it is not said we
may, but we must Dye, though not perhaps statim, presently, yet surely ad
tempus Heb. 9.27.
statutum, at our set day by God; therefore the period, in the story of the
creation of the longest-living man is this, And he Genesis 5.27.
dyed. Moses, for that cause partly, it may be, immediately after his Genesis,
wrote an Exodus: In short, no age can balke it; for as death has an axe to hew
down a snowy headed Methuselah into the grave; so has it also a bow, to reach
the youngest man afar off, even whilst the marrow is in his bones, and the Job.
21.24.
milk is in his breasts, as Job speaks; even whilst he is going forth, as
the Giant like-Sun delighting to run his course, in his full Psalm. 19.5.
strength and might; yea, sanctity it self has not the privilege of
exemption here: for even of Abraham, the peerlesse and prime example of Faith,
we read that satur dierum, being full of days, he gave up the Ghost, and Gen
25.8.
dyed: wherefore, though Hezekiah, here, were a gracious and a great Saint, yet
he must at last too be Genesis 25.8.
gathered, as the Scripture phraseth it, unto his Fathers, at his death and
dissolution: so that when the Prophet here says unto him, from the Lord, that
he shall (dye) what new, or what strange thing is there in it? But if I mistake
not, his aim is now to tell him that he shall dye of this (particular)
disease, and plague sore (now) upon him; and so indeed the learned Junius
reads the Text, Tu ( Junius ad locum.
brevi) morieris, Thou shall dye [shortly;] thus much for the (...), or the
positive part of his speech, Thou shall Dye.

Now secondly, for the (...), or the Negative part; to cut off all hopes of any
farther prorogation, he says unto him, And not live, that is, Not live longer,
but speedily be dissolved, and die: But how was this Prophecy of Isaiah
accomplished? how fulfilled? since we find it in the Story, in the 5th and the
6th verses following of this Chapter, that he dyed not so speedily, no, nor of
(that) sickness then upon him; for he recovered, having used the remedy of the
Isa. 38.21.
bunch of Figs; and the execution of the sentence of Death was adjourned
longer off, even to fifteen years more. Like instance we have in the case of
Nineveh, when the Prophet told the City that there were yet but ( Jonah 3.4.10.
forty) days before it was to be destroyed; and yet we read the contrary, and
of a longer time, in point of execution: What was the reason? why, there was an
employed condition (according to Gods ordinary dispensation, in those
comminations of outward judgments) of repentance expected; which being
actually, from the Throne unto the Sheep-crooke, universally fulfilled, the
Execution was adjourned. Just thus it fared with Hezekiah in this place, the
Prophet told him, that he should dye, and very shortly too, of that disease he
now labored under; but the devout Prince well knowing the God he served so
Isa. 38.3.
uprightly (for the maine) in all his days, was such a God, as was a present
Psalm. 46.1.
help in the needful time of trouble, and that, if in the day of trouble he
did Psalm. 50.15.
call upon him (only,) and seek unto him Job 8.5.
betimes, and Hos. 15.5.
early, God would deliver him; and so his Saint delivered should glorify him:
wherefore Hezekiah, doing this, and performing this condition of humble,
penitent invocation, as David by his Confession, (when clearly, by the Prophet
Nathan, he was convinced of his sin) procured a speedy 2. Sam. 12.13.
absolution; so he obtained a quick adjournment of the present execution of
Death, to which (now,) under that instant sickness, he was sentenced by the
Prophet; for thus we read, verse the second, Then he turned his face to the
wall, and ( 2. King. 20.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
prayed) unto the Lord: and verse the third, He wept sore; upon which, verse 4,
5, 6. the Prophet is sent back again unto him from the Lord, with gladsome
tidings of his sure recovery of that (though mortal) sickness; and withal,
of the adjournment of his day of death, to fifteen years of longer time: And
thus much also of the (...), or the Negative part of the Prophets saying unto
the King, Thou shall not live. But now, before the Prophet had a warrant to
return him tidings of recovery, he first found him desperately diseased, and
sick unto death: and what then does he? he bestows his most useful and most
seasonable exhortation upon him, which is the third branch of his saying to the
King, the (...), the advice of the good Prophet to him in his dangerous
condition, in these words, (which concern us every one of us very nearely,
also even now most seriously to consider of:) Set thine house in order.

I might here take occcasion to mention, and discourse of the several sorts of
houses that the Scriptures do at large point us to: The first is the bodily
house, or the house of the Corpus nostr^, quaedam domus est, quod in ea anima
velut inhabitat. Gerardus Moringus, ad cap. 12. Eccles. 2.3.
body, which is also in an Analogicall resemblance, styled by Saint Paul, a
Temple, yea the 1. Cor. 6.19.
Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. in regard of the 1 Cor. 3.16.
inhabitation of Gods spirit there, 1 Cor. 3.16. in this house of the body, the
Eccles. 12.3, 4.
keepers are the hands; the grinders are the teeth; the strong men, are the
legs; those that look out of the windows, are the eyes; the Sea Mic. 7.5.
doors are the lips; all which are Solomon's expressions; the daughters of
Music, are the ears and lungs; the kitchen we have in the stomach, where is
the pot that Stomachus propior (coquendi) alimenti officina Antonius Coranus
Hispalensis, paraphras: ad 12nm eccles. v. 3.
boyles our meat, as Anatomists observe; and, after the Chylus, and the Chymus,
the first and second digestion, or concoction, the liver turns the good
nourishment into blood, and disperseth it, as the spirit of life, into the
several, and the proper veins; the excrementitious part is from the hepar by
the spleen, conveied unto the spermaticall vessels; or else, into the
ventricle; which holds what is, as by a channel, conveied unto it, till, at the
back door, it be voyded out again, to gratify nature, and to ease her of a
burden; for this house of the body, there is some good order to be set and
taken; My Son, says the wise man, in thy sickness be not negligent, but as
thou must, in the chiefest place, pray unto the Lord, that he will make thee
whole; so withal, thou must Ecclus. 38.1.9.
honor a Physician with the honor due unto him, for the uses which you may have
of him, for the Lord has created him; But this is not the house to be set in
order by Hezekiah, (now shortly, by the Prophets saying, to Dye) mainely
intended in this text.

Secondly, besides this bodily, there is also a spiritual house within; where
the mind, the spirit and the understanding is, as it were, the Matt. 6.22.
eye to see, and the (...), the guide to direct all the under and inferior
faculties, the servants; the will is, as the chief steward, in this rich
palace of the soul, that receives the immediate Lege eruditum Hemmingii librum
de lege Naturae.
dictates, and commands of the understanding, unconstraynedly, but but yet
(...) (as in Philosophy we use to speak) upon election and deliberation too,
yielding unto, consenting and obeying that as good, which the chief Master of
the house, the mind, first assented, in himself, unto, as true and fit to be
obeyed; next to this, the concupiscible, and the Irascible faculties, as
inferior servants, wait, to (desire) what the will propounds, as good; or
else to fume, and fret at what may seem to cross, either the Principal
masters, or their own propension; after these, the affections stand as the
Pesants, or in the lowest rank of service, as the lackquaes, or the Animae
affectiones (pedes) sunt dum in hoc pulvere gradimur, Bernard. f. 35. f.
foot-posts, ready to be dispatched away in speed and post to execute, and to
do that, which has, with allowance passed down along, from the chief Master,
to themselves by the rest of the superiors, and the servants of greater
authority in this house; these at length bring tidings to the waiters, at the
doors without, the senses, who were, as the ( Nihil est in intellectu, quin
prius fuerit in Sensu: Axioma philosophicum.
first) occasion to move the mind (the chief Master of the house) to bethink
it self of business, to employ his servants in, for the whole day following;
and when thus (as by the primum mobile,) through a strong circumgyration, the
inferior orbs are whirryed about) all the whole house is set a working; the
business by the hands and arms and shoulders, and the rest of the outward, and
field-servants abroad in the body, will be done, and brought to pass: Now as
for this house of the soul, in the way, as I have (though in much weakness) now
propounded it; this is carefully, and in the first place to be looked into, and
set in order, as at all times else, so principally when as Hezekiah, though by
no immediate Prophet, as he did, or by any extraordinary revelation (which God
now does not, in these days, multiply in vain) as Deuteronomy. 34.5.
Moses did; but by some sensible insinuation, we receive a summons or a warning
by any kind of sickness, or the like harbingers of common dissolutions, of our
Deaths; then principally must we look to set the houses of our souls in order;
and then must the mind (the Master of the whole) chiefly labor to be solidly
directed and informed in the perfect and right knowledge, and faith in God and
Christ: the reason that I mainly press this by, is only this (and it is a
weighty one) because the Devil is most busy at such times as these, to
disturb the heart, and to fill the whole soul, as the winds can raise the
billows in the sea, with a tumultuous hurry and violent perturbation; he is the
Ephesians. 2.2.
Prince of the ayery part of the little world in man, as well as of that See Mr
Goodwin, qua supra cap. 9. p. 111.
Elementary Region in the great world; and so can raise unnatural storms and
vapors, that shall darken reason; and cause such thunders and lightenings, as
shall hurl all into a black confusion; such, as if hell and the soul would
presently come together: wherefore, that the shaking of Satan's chains may no
way fright us, in that pale day of death, or sickness, let the houses of our
Souls be rightly set in order; our minds Ephesians. 1.17.
illightned with knowledge; our wills furnished with Heb. 5.9.
obedience; our affections cleansed by 1 John 3.3, and 2 Cor. 7.1.
purity; our passions allayed by Luke 21.19.
patience; our conscience Heb. 9.14.
sprinkled from dead works; the whole house so well fitted, dressed up, and
prepared, that when our Savior shall Rev. 3.20.
knock at the door of our hearts by the Jer. 23.29.
Hammer of his Word, or call to us by the Isa. 30.21.
voice of the Spirit, we may readily open unto him, and welcome him to supper
with us in the Romans 5.1.
peace of soul, and Romans 15.13.
joy in the Holy Ghost, and may walk in that way which he shall show us both
of Repentance and Faith, and that by the direction of himself who is only the
Essential John 14.6.
way, the truth, and the life, that in the issue we may not fail of the end of
our faith, even the 1. Pet. 1.9.
salvation of our souls.

Thirdly, there is yet another house besides these, and that is the house
mystical; and this house is the 1. Tim. 3.15.
Church of God, yea of the living God, as Saint Paul has fully taught us, 1.
Tim. 3.15. this house is builded upon a Matthew. 7.24.
Rock, and that Rock is 1. Cor. 10.4.
Christ; the members of this house are resembled unto, and called by the name
of a Ephesians. 3.15.
Family; in this family the great Matthew. 20.1. (...). 1
Householder is God himself, he has Matthew. 15.26.
Children in this family; and being an indulgent Father, he has a Son an
Matthew. 21.38.
heir; and not only so, but diverse other both 2. Cor. 6.18.
Sons and Daughters too; and as children, so Matthew. 21.34. and Luke 17.10.
Servants also: Of these servants some are chief, as Luke 12.42.
Stewards of the Household; others emphatically Servants of special notice and
favor, such an one was Job, whom the Lord (the great Householder) would have
to be observed above ordinary, and Job 1.8.
considered as a pattern to others; some again are remarkable for fidelity
and Heb. 3.5.
faithfulness in all the House, so was Moses the Number. 12.7.
Servant of the Lord, 1. Cor. 7.25.
and Paul: Others, as for faithfulness, so also for Luke 12.42.
Wisdom joined with it; some of these again are so endeared, that though in
themselves they be Servants, yet in their Masters high esteem they be his John
15.15.
Friends, and so he usually calls them: and of these servant-friends, some
walk Genesis 5.24.
with him, so did Enoch; some, as Abraham, whom St James calls the James 2.23.
Friend of God, do walk Genesis 17.1.
before him: in a word, some are so Psalm. 19.13. and Psalm. 119.76.
servants, that withal they are such men as are 1. Sam. 13.14. and Act. 13.22.
after the Lords own heart too, and such an one was David; out of all these,
and much more that might be added to this purpose, (concerning the several
offices and employments of these children and servants in this house of the
Church, according to their 1. Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, etc.
several degrees and orders, of which the Apostle has written at large, 1.
Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, etc.) there is made up one whole entire Heb. 3.6.
house of Christ, namely, if we, as Saint Paul admonishes us, hold fast the
confidence and rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end: how justly may I here
take up that saying of the blessed Egyptian Macarius, Homil. 49. page 535. in
80.
Macarius on this occasion, and cry out in wonder and admiration at Gods great
mercy in this regard to man, as he, (...)! Oh the unspeakable mercy of God, who
freely gives himself unto believers, to inherit him in a short time as a full
possession! and oh wonder, that God should inhabit in the body of man, and
that the Lord should have as it were a specious house to dwell in man! To
which, even of the Angels, (though by creation far more glorious creatures
than man is, (for he is made Heb. 2.7.
lower than the Angels) has God said this at any time, that he would either
come to Rev. 3.20.
sup, or else to Ephesians. 3.17. and 2.22.
dwell with them? but lo! thus has he said, and does do to (men;) and the
Church, built up of men, upon the Matthew. 7.24.
Rock Christ Jesus (as the chief Ephesians. 2.20.
cornerstone) of 1. Pet. 2.5.
living stones, unto a complete Ephesians. 2.21.
building in the Lord; nor does he only lodge with us, as the Angels did with
Lot, for a Genesis 19.3, 4, 15.
Night, and so away; but he John 14.23.
abides, and stays with his Church for ever, even unto the Matthew. 28.20.
end of the world. If then Lot was highly honored in entertaining and lodging
of Angels, what honor have we to lodge the (God) of Angels? and if the Babe
Luke 1.41.
sprang in the womb, (when yet there was a double partition wall, two wombs
between Saint John Baptist and his Lord and Master Christ) when he came but in
a Luke 1.40.
visit, oh how should we rejoice, who have him in us by a perpetual Ephesians: 2.22.
inhabitation? which meditation should, by the way, admonish us, how
religiously careful we should be of preserving these houses from -- Veniunt ad
candida tecta columbae.
pollution and all uncleanenesse, that we may not occasion our best guest, by
means of some ill order or entertainment within us, to be Ephesians. 4.30.
grieved, to divert and ( Hos. 5.15.
go away) to some other better and sweeter mansion: oh let us not make our
bodies and souls the 1. Cor. 6.15.
Brothel-houses of lust, as a Babylonish Rev. 18.2.
cage of all foul birds, of flying and of wandering thoughts of impurity; but
let us rather purge our selves from all 2. Cor. 7.1.
filthiness of the Domus Dei spiritualis est, qui non in carne ambulat, sed in
spiritu, Bern. f. 17.
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, purge we our
hearts from pride by Humility, for with the Isa. 57.15.
humble spirit God will dwell; yea, let us in all godliness and 1. Tim. 2.2.
honesty, glorify God both in our 1. Cor. 6.20.
bodies and in our souls, since both are Gods; and that not by Creation only,
but by Ibid.
purchase: This is the way to make both bodies and souls not styes, or stews
of filthiness, but, as Saint Paul says, the very 1. Cor. 6.19.
Temples of the Holy Ghost, in which as in and among the true Church of God he
will 1. Cor. 3.16, 17.
dwell and abide, even for ever and ever: And thus much also of the mystical
house, which is, as ye have seen, the Church of the living God: Now, whether
or no does the ordering of this House come within the compass of our Prophets
exhortation to Hezekiah in this Text, to set his House in order before his
Death? Saint Paul says, that the 2. Cor. 11.28.
care of all the Churches lay upon him; (those particular Churches of the
Gentiles, I think he means, which were the members of the whole body of the
Catholic and Universal Church at large) Surely so does the whole Church,
within the proper Territories of any pious Prince, appertain to him to order,
for the best advantage of Gods glory, and the Psalm. 122.6.7
peace and prosperity of the Church it self. Thus we find good Kings to stand
affected in all ages of the Church; a special example we have in that famous
King 2. Chro. 19.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 19. who took care not only to appoint Judges able,
and holy to end and order secular affairs; but also in Jerusalem did
Jehoshaphat, says the Scripture, verse the 8th ibidem, set of the Levites, and
of the Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel for the judgment of
the (Lord,) and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem; and he
charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord faithfully,
and with a perfect heart; and certainly when the Sword of a valiant Goliath,
and the Ephod, the Sword of the Magistrate, and the Sword of the Spirit are
brandished or drawn forth together; as David said to Ahimelech of the Sword of
Goliath, there is 1 Samuel 21.9.
none to that; so there is no union, no ordering of the house of the Church
like this; whilst the profane Sensualist and the hypocritical Atheist shall
be smitten to the ground together: Steddily and happily must the Ark of God
needs go, when it is drawn by peace and holiness tied together, as those two
milch kine keeping the high way, and turning not aside to either hand; says a
learned and most elegant Mr. John Bury, one of the Prebends of Exeter, in his
epist. dedicat. before his Visitation sermon. styled the Moderate Christian,
edit. 1630.
Preacher of our western parts: Now the way to obtain, or to settle both
these* is when, as David's Palace and Gods Tabernacle dwelt together upon Mount
Sion; both the spiritual first directs the temporal, and then the Temporal
sword does back the spiritual, to defend and aid; or like to Hippocrates
twins, they breathe and live and always go Inprom^venda justitia usque quaque
gladius gladium adjuvabat, and nihil, inconsulto sacerdote, (qui velut Saburra
in navi fuit) agebatur. D Hen. Spelman epist. dedicat. ad Regem Car. praefix.
Council. Aug.
together; for which cause, we find also that King David could not Psalm. 132.4.
sleep till he had provided for Gods house, and taken special order for the
establishing and observation of Gods statutes, and divine ordinances, not only
in the Tabernacle at Sion, but by the whole Church of God, under his dominions;
furnishing it with Priests and Levites, singers and the like; yea, cherishing,
and honoring the Prophets of the Lord of hosts; and therefore, he so earnestly
importunes the devotions of all good people, to Psalm. 122.6, 7.
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and the prosperity of her palaces; as being
the known type, and representation of the Jerusalem civitas sancta. est sancta
ecclesia Catholica, spiritualis Jerus^lem as Paulus Fagius, in libro
Precationum Hebr. prec. 8.
Church of God; for by that antonomafia St Paul expressly calls it; Gal.
4.26. Jerusalem, that is, the Church of God, which is (above) that is, either
as triumphant actually enthronized into her glory; as the woman in the
Revelation clothed with the sun, to wit, the Mal. 4 2.
Sun of righteousness Christ Jesus him self (who is her 1 Cor. 1.30.
righteousness) is above all in Rev. 12.1.
heaven already; being there safe, and set out of the gunshot of the Devil and
all his annoying temptations; or else [above,] because though militant as yet
below, notwithstanding, in Col. 3.2.
affection, she is still (above) and her Phil. 3.20.
conversation is in heaven always, howbeit she here, as Abraham in a strange
Country, Heb. 11.9.
sojourneth a while in these earthly Tabernacles; for this Jerusalem (the
Church of God) was King David so sollicitous and careful: Nor did this care
give up the ghost with those See D. Buckeridge his excellent sermon. upon Rom 13
5. preached at Hampton court before the Kings Man sept. 23. 1006. to this
purpose.
godly Princes; but, as if there had been a Pythagoricall (...), that zealous
disposition has passed by happy Transmigration, to the rest of those good
Kings that succeeded; and (save only, when the woman was driven into the Rev.
12.14.
wilderness sometimes, and persecuted with the Dragon, so that she has been
feign to seek for Heb. 11.38.
dens, and caves to shelter her) in all ages, by the providence of good
Princes, she has prospered, and (for that very cause too) the pious Kings
themselves, as See 2 King. 22.
Josiah, Asa, and the rest good Princes, the better also, we find in the
Ecclesiastical story of the Church, since the days of the Gospel, that the
like care of her welfare has not slumbered: for after that sore and long
lasting tempest, in the first three hundred years after Christ, of
persecution, raised by those ten Scarlet Tyrants of those times, there was a
dawning again of some ease and rest, peeping out Narrant hunc Philippum Arabem
(primum) ex imperatoribus Romany factum esse Christianum ^ ^quid intellexerit
ille Arabicus mi^^^^ and qua^is ejus pietas fue^it, n^scimus. J^. Carrion,
Chron. l. 3. p. 272. in 8 in Anno Christi, 248, (...) 252.
first, in the short reign of Philip an Arabian; but he being nipped in the
very bud, or blossom of his government, within five years space, or there
abouts, could not bring any thing this way, to any noted perfection; but his
pious intentions for the Church were interpretative, I doubt not, esteemed as
actions by the Lord: Immediately upon this, God raised up Constantine the
great, the honor of whose birth our Britain was enobled with; his care was not
purposed alone, but put in execution; for he spread the gospel of Christ, (in
the sign of whose cross he still gloried and prevailed) erected Churches,
countenanced the Clergy, and indeed was famous for the Churches cause. And when
that foul heresy of Arius, (about the (...) of Christ with his Father) arose
and as a gangrene festered so far, that, as Saint Hierome says, the whole world
even See Bp Morton c. 15. p. 368. sect. 5. grand imposture.
groaned to see it self become an Arian; so that the malady being now grown
Epidemicall and universal, was like to be incurable without a general remedy;
His vigilance therefore was, for the speedy redress thereof, to summon a
general Council; wherein according to the rules of Gods word, (which was
still in those days long before the monster of papal pride was a hatching,
the Sea Franc. Mason. de Minister A^^^^. l. 3. c 3. versus sine p. 273, 274.
etc, and my Lo. Grace ag^ A.C. sec. 26. nu. 1. p. 194, 195. and s. 26 nu. 3. p.
196, 197. and s. 93. p. 240, 241, etc. and p. 247, and s. 38. p. 330, 331, 332,
336, 338, 344, 359. and s. 39. p. 378, and p. 386. nu. 0. See my Lo. Usher ser.
on ephesians. 4. 13. p. 12, 13. and D Rainolds p. 322. c. 8. divis. 5. and Bp Lesly,
in ser: of the authority of the Church and multitudes else Mr Jo. Down ag^
Baxter p. 213, 214, and 256, 257.
supreme judge and umpire in all controversies of faith) by prayer, moderation,
and the like proceeding; God gave a blessing, choked the heresy, and the
Atheist himself, that vented it, voyded out his bowels (by the appointment of
Gods immediate justice) into a sink, whither his proud and blasphemous heresy
was also fit to be detruded for ever. And that which was remarkable in that
first general Council at Nice, was this above other; That when the Bishops,
in a great number, were assembled, and the Emperor in presence, he first
caused all such private jars, or occasions of strife, as were risen among the
Bishops themselves, to be drawn up into a compendium of Articles, before they
should meddle with the public cause of the Lord in hand; Ruffin eccles. Hist.
l. 1. c 13.
which being accordingly performed, and delivered to the Emperor, he received
them all, and sealed them up with his own royal signet; and reserving them
awhiles in his bosom; he then (not at all disclosing the secrets of those
several papers) made this speech to the Council and the Bishops; Deus vos
constituit sacerdotes, etc. God himself has made you Priests, and has given
you power to judge even of us; and we are rightly judged by you; wherefore
expect the judgment of God alone between you, that your mutual complaynings,
and jarrings, whatsoever they be, may be reserved to that divine examen, and
discussion; Vos enim nobis a Deo dati estis [ Ruffin Hist, ecclesiast. l. 1. c.
2.
Dii] for you are given by God unto us, as [Gods;] and therefore he alone shall
judge you, of whom it is written, He stands in the congregation of the
mighty; he Psalm. 82.1.
judges among the Gods; wherefore laying aside these matters of private
difference, without any more dissension of minds, set about the serious
discussion of those things that appertain to the cause of the Lord; which
said, he commanded all those libels of mutual particular complaynings to be
burnt in one flame together, Ne innotesceret ulli odium and sugillatio
sacerdotum, (as Carranza in Nicae^ Council apparatu, p. 45. in 16.
Caranza does relate it to me) that the private discontents of one Priest
toward another might not be made public: Ps. 112.6. constat Constantinum
[sanctum] Imperatorem fuisse; and in calendario Graecorum ejus nomen inter
[sanctoru^] nomina habetur. vide Bellarm lib 3. c. 6. de cultu sanctor: ex
Ambrose orat. de obitu Theodosii and Epiphan: haeres, 70. and Cyrill: Catech:
14.
Blessed Prince for this, thou shall be had in an everlasting remembrance, and
thy memorial shall endure throughout all generations: and I doubt much,
whether in those crazy, yea broken times, if thou had not thus [primarily]
respected the welfare of the Church, thou had ever had so happy a success! I
might go on to some other times after; even till the weeds of Romish
superstition began to root and grow, and flower in Christendom: I let pass
the mention of those blind days, when Pope Hildebrand, otherwise Otho
Frisingensis l. 9. c. 35. in anno 1073.
Gregory the seventh, first usurped (in a day of See my Lords Grace against A
C. p. 180. s. 25. nu. 12.
advantage) over the Emperor: I come down to the time of Charles the fifth; and
I might at large discourse of the zealous courage of Frederick History of the
Trent Council l. 1. p. 7, etc. confer Sl^idan: Commentary lib. 1. fol. 7.
Duke of Saxony, who supported Luther, and his cause, against that tenth Lion
of Rome; so, that neither by force of his roaring comminations, nor by the
fawning (as sometimes the Lions did upon Dan. 6.22.
Daniel) of his sly promises, and other cunning insinuations, was he able to
subvert his courage in, or divert his purpose from the cause of God: Come we to
our own times; what a blessed course did the devout Prince Edward enter on? How
was this seconded by that famous Isa 49.23.
nursing mother of the Church Queen Elizabeth for the virtues proper to her
sex, deserved to be the Queen of women; and for her masculine graces of
learning, valor, wisdom etc. the Queen of men. B. Hall holy panegyr. p. ^67.
edi. 1617
Queen Elizabeth? how victorious was she? (and for her constant love to
Religion) what wonders did she? our Chronicles have long since astonished all
the neighbor, and foreign Princes: How again was the honor of the same our
mother Church furthered, and advanced by the mirror, not more of Kings, then
learning, King James of blessed memory? what care and vigilance did he undergo
to settle first the public Liturgy, and Ceremonies of of most laudable
decency, and uniformity in this Church? How was he, as Christ was at
Jerusalem, still found disputing among the Luke 2.46.
Doctor and Bishops, asking them questions? yea, how gloriously did he himself
See my Lord Bishop Halls Sermon styled An holy Panegyricke, page 569. edit.
Anno 1617.
moderate in all professions even in the public University? But I shall but
darken so rich a Topaze by my rude polishing. And, to conclude this large and
copious point, should I here take (as I might) occasion, to blazon the
excellent graces of our own present Prince, seen in his matchless piety and
zeal for the Church of England, (one of the Religion, as it is professed in
the Church of England, is nearest of any Church now in being to the Primitive
Church. My Lords Grace, against A. C. page 376. Sect. 39. number. 3. in sine.
purest Churches in all Christendom since the days of the Apostles) mine
Oratory would faint under a thirst of such fit Metaphors as might serve to
amplify and express them: in short, we have this great happiness, that we
live under a gracious and religious King, that will ever give us leave to serve
[God] ( My Lords Grace, page 15. of his Speech in Star Chamber, 1637.
first,) and [him] next; than whom, it would pose the wisest and most
experienced Sagee in Christendom, to find a man more holy, more temperate,
more just, and universally accomplished: but some rare Apellos must be sought
to pourtray, and some Lysippus (without parallel) to caave those excellences,
which I am so far insufficient to express, that, methinks, my heart is still
too narrow to contain thoughts wide enough of admiration, and of wonder at
them. It Is enough for me to awaken up my heart, to magnify the King, and God
of Kings, for that rich fruit of the Gospel, which I (as the meanest son of
the Church) have reaped, and in my soul do enjoy, by the royal undertakings
and religious establishments of so great a Isa. 49.23.
nursing father to our Church: The [ Christus sustentat [columnas] hoc est,
[ministros,] and veram doctrinam: Conradus Heresbachius, in Scholiis, ad Psalm.
75.3.
pillars] of which Church, (by that resembling Christ, the Lords highest
anointed, himself) he bears up, as the Psalmist speaks; in supporting,
cherishing, countenancing, and rewarding the holy Priesthood. And surely, (my
Fellow-brethren of the Ministry) would we not make our selves too cheap, nor
under-value the dignity of our honorable Function, but know our stations
aright, considering that we are men of 1. Tim. 6.11.
God, and not men of the world; to busy us in those sordid employments
thereof, or entangle our selves in the over-familiarity with the men thereof,
which are below us; would we listen to the sweet advice of our own peerless
Diocesan, (to whom that Epitaph of Nazianzene on the great St Basil, is as due
as ever 'twas to any) (...). by whose meek, and yet impartial government,
through Gods great blessing, whether for Doctrine, Discipline, or Habit, there
is not to be found [one] refractary Minister in our whole spacious Diocese;
whose words are these; Be heard above, be seen beneath, outface sin,
out-preach it, outlive it: We are My Lord Bishop of Exceter, Holy Panegyric,
page 5^4. edit. 1617.
Stars in the right hand of God, let us be like any Stars, save (the Moon)
that has blots in her face; or the Star Wormwood, whose fall made Rev. 8.11.
bitter waters; or Saint Judes Planets, that Jud. ver. 13.
wander in irregularities; let the light of our lives shine in the faces of the
world, and dazzle them whom it shall not guide: we can never better testify our
thankful and loyal respects to so good a King, in whose favor is our life,
and by whose grace we are upheld against the unworthy affronts of this
sacrilegious age; then by crying down, by living-downe those sins which
threaten our happiness in him: Let us not only, as the daughters of
Zelophehad, Number. 27.7.
speak right, nor as Naphtali, give goodly Genesis 49.21.
words, nor as Jacob, pretend a smooth Genesis 27.22.
voice alone, whiles our [hands] like Esau, are rough and hairy; I mean, our
actions prove disproportionable and incongruous; for still louder is the
language of our lives than of our tongues, and of far stronger efficacy to 1.
Pet. 3.1.
win an aliene: For so I read, that very Pagan Kings of Britain, as
Arviragus, Marius, Coilus, etc. beholding the good [lives] of Joseph of
Arimathea, and his twelve devout Disciples, were inclined (as sometimes Pharaoh
granted Genesis 45.10. and 46.28.
Goshen to the Israelites) to permit them to inhabit in Insula Glasconia, in
the Island of Glastenbury, by which means the Christian Religion was published
in Britain about four years after Christ's resurrection, in the last year of
Tiberius Caesar; (and so Lege Franciscum Masonum nostrum, lib. 2. de Minist.
Auglic. cap. 2. p. 69.70. Confer my Lords Grace against A. C. sect. 35. number.
9. page 312. and my Lord Bishop now of Exon, in Apology against Brownists,
sect. 23. where he says and proves, that the Church of (Rome) was never our
Mothers mother; our Christian says came not from the seven Hills, neither was
derived, either from Augustine the Monk, or Pope Gregory. Britain had a
worthy Church before either of them looked into the world, etc.
before it came to Rome, which was not till the year of Claudius, say their
Baronius, ad annum 39. and 40. apud Masonum.
own Chronologers) as that excellent Antiquary, Sr Henry D. Henr. Spelman, in
Apparatu, ad Council. Anglic. edit. 1639. non multum ab initio.
Spelman, has most learnedly showed us: Thus surely if we shall not (say)
only, but (do) (for as Paulus Fagius, in prafat. ad sentent. morales Ben.
Syrae.
Paulus Fagius says truly, Among the Grecians of old, the Philosophers were
always preferred before the Orators, quod [vitam] hominum instituerent,
because their employment was the instruction of men's [lives] and manners, not
of their tongues) then, (not being wanting to our own honor) we may now (if
ever) hope, and expect to see our Tribe to flourish yet once See how heretofore
it did, in S Henr. Spelman Epist. Dedicat. to the King praefix. Council. Anglic.
more, and our Mother Church to be known by her more beautified and adorned
Palaces, no longer exposed to our view, and the eyes of strangers, as some
weather-beaten cottages, uncemented, unsieled, hung with no other ornament than
mere cob-web laune; but by a specious, yet ungawdy Portall, by a comely
contignation, and the like awing, reverentiall, decent beauty, it may make her
far more Psalm. 84.1.
amiable in the eyes of all men: Now also shall her sons also be discerned by
their Psalm. 132.9.
clothing, not more of outward Exodus 31.10.
habit than of inward righteousness, by their grave deportments, by their 2.
Tim. 4.2.
instancy in Preaching both in season, and out of season; by their godly 1.
Tim. 4.12.
conversations Tit. 2.10.
adorning the Phil. 1.27.
Gospel, and Psalm. 132.9.
rejoicing the Saints: let us go on cheerfully, by our doctrine to silence
Rome, by our lives the ignorance the 1. Pet. 2.15. and 3.16.
ignorance of the foolish, and lying slanderers: lo! thus shall God Psalm. 22.8.
delight in us to do us Deuteronomy. 28.63.
good: He shall be known in the Palaces of our Cities, the Bulwarks of our
Sion shall be Psalm. 48.13.
marked by the following generations, for their Ver. 2. ib.
beautiful situation, and as the joy of the earth; yea, (to borrow the
expression of the Prophet) the Psalm. 45.11.
King himself shall greatly desire even (our) beauty: which meditation should,
methinkes, glad and cheer us against all the affronts and abasures of carnal
men; whether roofed in Cedar, or 2. Pet. 2.22.
wallowing in Cotes; yea, or the fears of any Dionysian-like, whether Lege
Lactant. lib. 2. de orig. Erroris, cap. 4.
expilations, or mucterismes, or other Sacrilegia sua jocularibus etiam dictis
prosequebatur. Lactant. ibid.
subsannations whatsoever: And to whom, under the good God we serve, may we
next ascribe these great blessings, but unto that King of ours, whose heart (to
borrow the expression of the Scripture) the Psalm. 69.9.
zeal of the Lords house has even consumed.

And now, for the close of this point, which has thus far enlarged the house
mystical of the Church, and shown how pious Princes have in all times, (even
to our (own) now) set the same in order; Now I say, (were it not in some kind
an unkind Prayer) how willingly would we all here, as loyal and
faithfull-hearted subjects, importune of God, (oh blessed Sovereign) an
immortality for you even upon earth? however, this we will do; we will pray,
and never leave Genesis 32.25, 26 Lucta Jacobi est oration, brachia, desiderium,
nervi siccatio, carnis extinctio.
wrestling, till with Jacob we obtain the blessing; that, (to ripen him the
more for future glory) his years may be protracted to a long duration; he may
be blessed in his person with health and safety, in all his enterprises with
honor and good success; and that, after his own most happy Heb. 11.5.
translation hence, all these his Royal graces may, like a Pythagorean soul,
for ever transmigrate from one generation of his (own,) unto another, even
until time shall be no more: and in the mean time let us all yield him the
willing Romans 13.7.
Tribute of all due honor, of our true obedience, of our loyal subjection, of
our unstringed purses, of our sacrificed lives. To conclude, since no Votary can
be more true to his hours of Devotion, than he is unto God for [us,] let us
again be zealously earnest at the throne of Heaven for [him;] and not beseech
alone, but, as Tertullian phraseth it, even besiege that throne uncessantly
with a full army, as it were, of instant and most importunate prayers; that,
since his life is (now especially) worth ten 2 Samuel 18.3.
thousand of ours; the good Lord would be moved with compassion toward us, so,
that he will not quench this blessed 2 Samuel 21.17.
light of our Israel, but, even unto a long continuance yet, give him the glory
of a prosperous kingdom here; and in a late, and well Prove. 17.6.
crowned old age, advance him unto the Kingdom of eterall glory for ever and
ever and ever in the highest Heavens: Amen and Amen.

And thus I have endeavored to show you the several large rooms of this great
Mystical house the Church: Now the quere above propound about the ordering of
this house, as it has relation here to Hezekiah, in this text, comes to be
resolved; namely whether our Prophet Esaias in this exhortation to the King, to
set his house in order, did intend the ordering of the Church of God, under his
dominions? To this I resolve thus; that in a large sense it did; my reason is
grounded on the former care, and practice of this good King, this way, in the
story of his former life and actions: for Ecclus. 48.22.
Siracides says of him expressly this, viz. Hezekiah had done the thing that
pleased the Lord, and was strong in the ways of David, his father: now what
were the ways of David his father? ye heard partly above, that he could not
rest, or take his Psalm. 132.4.
sleep, till he had seen the Tabernacle, and the whole Church once well
settled, and in Psalm. 122.7.
peaceful prosperity; and now let me add again out of another place, partly
the mention of his grief, and Psalm. 137.1.
tears, for the affliction and distress of the Church; and partly also his
Ver. 6. ibid:
preferring of the happiness thereof, even above his very chief joy: The
particulars of his practice this way, the story of his life abundantly make
manifest; He 2 Chronicles: 29.3, 4, etc.
opened the doors of the house of the Lord, which had been polluted, and
repaired them; he sanctified the Priests and Levites; he restores all things,
which his predecessors had taken out of Temple, and establishes pure Religion
among his people, as we read, 2 Chronicles. 29.3, 4, etc. He, as he first ordained
Priests and Levits to serve in the Temple, so, withal, he appoints for their
2 Chronicles: 31.4.
maintenance, 2 Chro. 31.4. also, when he saw the Children of Israel burn
incense to the Number: 21.8.
brazen serpent that Moses had made, and that (which was at first intended for
a mystical See Joh: 3.14.
type and remedy, in a dangerous distress, as the story manifests, to be
abused to most profane Idolatry; he removed the high places, and brake the
Images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces 2 King 18 4.
the brazen Serpent, calling it in contempt, Nehushtan, a thing made of Copper
or brass, or, as some say, given of the Serpent; all this we read, 2 Kings
18.4. In such a godly My Lord B^ Montague, late of Chichester, now of Norwich
in Appello Caesarem part: 2. c. 23. p. 263, 264, 265.
zeal also, our Predecessors and Fathers coming late out of Popery, living
near unto Papists and Popish times, by whom, and wherein, Images used to be
crept unto, incensed, worshipped and adored amongst them; knowing, that if they
were suffered to stand, as they did, they might put the people (newly converted
from the worship of them) in mind of their former practice, at least in [heart]
to adore them; for this cause, they most vehemently and zealously cried them
down; and an homily to that purpose (as containing a godly and wholesome
doctrine, necessary for those times) Artic: Anglic: 35. speaking of the second
book of Homiles.
was specially made against Images, and the peril of Idolatry, by their
standing, or use: though now it is held by our greatest Gamaliels, that a
Picture for ornament, memory and history, may be had, and looked (abandoning,
mean while, all religious worship of them, as most vile To a false faith is
joined false worship, by Idolatry, in worshipping of Images. Bp Morton, grand
Impost: c. 15. sect. 24. p. 403. and my Lords grace against A C, sect. 24. p.
155 number. 5. we cannot but deny that Images are to be adored, for such adoration
is superstition, ibid. sect. 33. p. 278. and s 39. nu. 4. p. 377. See also my
Lord Archb Usher, sermon: on 1 Cor. 10.17. a p. 30, 31, 32, etc. ad finem etc. 4.
of the Irish Religion, and multitudes more.
Idolatry) upon: the like whereunto was performed also in several times, and
ages of the Christian Church; for nineteen Bishops together in the Council of
See Mr John Down, against Baxter, p. 237, 238.
Eliberis; and the Bishops of the whole Council of Frankford, under Charles
the great, condemned the having of Images in Churches, for [adoration:] again,
about the year of our Lord, 801. Leo the third, (being urged by the
clearenesse of the second Commandment) Emperor of Constantinople, took them
all away, ne populus statuarum amans, eas Mart B^^oaldus* Chron. l. 4 c 8 sect.
24. p. 20^
adoraret, says Matthaeus Beroaldus; for which by Pope Gregory the third of
Rome, to make him the more odious to the people, he was excommunicated and
styled Iconomachus, which signifies, a fighter against Images: the Christians
Primitive refused to adore them, says Tertull Apol. c. 12. (...)lio ibid. nu.
184.
Tertullian: Saint Cyprian de Idolorum vani^ate.
Cyprian wrote a set book of the vanity of such Idols; and Lactant. l. 2. de
orig. erroris, c. 2, 3, 4, etc.
Lactantius much to the same effect: and among our own See B Hall c. 10. old
Relig: and D (...) conclu^. 5. p. 653. against Heart.
worthyes, which of them has not cried down their abuse by adoration? in like
zeal, no doubt, that this good King Hezekiah was moved by, to remove the
brazen serpent, as being the stumbling block of Idolatry to all the people;
Saint Isidore in the Latin; and Saint Theodor. quaest. 6. in Exodus
Theodoret in the Greek think, that God appeared unto Moses, above other
things, in a Bush, because that, Exodus 3.2.
of all things else, is most incapable of the stamp of an Image; by that
means removing the occasion of Idolatryzing to it afterward: and again, when
he was about to give the Law upon mount Sinai, there was a mighty [ Heb. 12 19.
Deuteronomy. 4.12 vide Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 11. sect. 2.
voyce] heard, which being a sound, cannot be shaped into any form, or figure,
much less a picture: So then Hezekiah removing Idolatrous occasions, and
withal establishing the true worship and service of God, as ye have heard, it
appears that this In 2 Timothy 2.20. the Church is compared to a [great house] as
Adam Sasbont, Bez^, Estius, and most others, except St Chrysostom and Theop^^^.
public House of the Church, was, if not mainely intended, (because of the
short time he had now to set his own private house in order); yet, I believe,
not excluded, but involved in this same exhortation of the Prophet now under
this dangerous, mortal sickness, sent to him from the Lord, set thine house in
order.

But yet lastly, besides this bodily, this spiritual and this mystical house;
there is yet another; (which I also think to be the very purpose of Gods
spirit, most directly, in this Scripture) and that is the oeconomicall, or the
Secular house; the Prophet, under this expression, comprehending all his
affairs, that concerned the settling of his temporal estate, and the
business that concerned the well-ordering of his family, and disposing of his
either outward Kingdom, or worldly goods, for the benefit, and the quiet of
posterity; For the story tells us, 2 Chronicles. 32.27. that Hezekiah had exceeding
much riches and honor and he made himself treasures for silver and for gold,
etc. and I believe in this provident particular (avoiding all unlawful
affections, and entanglements) the (wisdom) of the world though not the
(carnality) of the world (for it is not the (...), but the (...)) may be
observed, as it is noted even of Ahitophel, that minding to die, (though God
keep all good people from that manner of dying!) he gate him home to his
house, and put his 2 Samuel 17.23.
household (though he for want of grace could not do so to himself) in order:
for howbeit, the Children of this world are (to wit in regard of the world and
worldly affairs) Luke 16.8. (...).
wiser in the comparative, as our Savior truly says; (because the Children
will in this be like the Devil, their Joh. 8.44.
Father, who is a Ephesians. 6.11.
wily, a Isa. 27.1.
crooked, and a 2 Cor. 11.3.
subtle serpent, they therefore must and will be full of Ephesians. 4.14.
sleights and cunning craftiness too, yet that his own sons, and children
should not also be, in the positive at least, wise, I see no cause to the
contrary: yea, Christ himself advises them, that if they will be Matt. 10.16.
the greek word is [(...)] which is compounded ex a privativa, and (...): and
denotes wisdom, but without all mixture of harm, or craft, or guile.
innocent as doves, and be sure principally Ps. 37, 35, 38. after the old
translation.
to keep that, they may be Matt. 10.16. (...).
wise even as serpents themselves: And that the word [house] is taken, in this
sense, is evident from many texts of Scripture; (which is ever the best
interpreter of it self) so we read for instance; first, for the house to be
taken for the family, Genesis 7.1. The Lord said unto Noah, come thou and all thy
Genesis 7.1.
house into the Arc; which in the seventh verse, is interpreted by his sons,
and his wife, and his sons wives, as the members of that house, or family; so
again, Josh. 24.15. As for me and my Josh. 24.15.
house we will serve the Lord, and, Act. 10.2. Cornelius, was a devout man, one
that feared God, with all his ( Act. 10.2.
house;) and 1. Cor. 1.16. I baptized also the ( 1 Cor. 1.16.
household) of Stephanas: Act. 16.15. Lydia was baptized, and her ( Act.
16.15.34.
household,) and ver. 34. ib. The converted Jaylour believed in God, with all
his (house;) in these, and many places more to this purpose, that might be
alleged, by House is understood a (Family,) wife, children, servants, etc. and
that this House was intended to be set in order by this Prophets exhortation,
is past all question; for the Scripture expressly tells us, in the Hebrew
Text, which is rendered more appositely in our margin, Give charge concerning
thine house; which Junius and Tremelius render by, Da praecepta familiae tuae,
that is, Give precepts and holy counsel to thy family: besides, in 2. King.
18.3. it is said, that Hezekiah did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, according to all that [ 2 King. 18.3.
David] his Father did: Now David his Father, says the Scripture, first took
special care for the Kingdom it self, and gave special 1 King 1.33, 34.
charge for Solomon to be anointed King in his stead for the next succession,
as we read, 1. King. 1.33, 34. and then for precepts to his 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
son himself, we have it clear, 1. Chr. 28.9. And thou Solomon, my son,
know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with
a willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but
if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. Hezekiah now doing
according to (all) that David his Father did, did doubtless [this] too,
endeavor to set his Family in order: in this, they both trod in the steps of
their Father Abraham, of whom the Lord himself gives this Testimonial, Genesis
18.19. I know that he will command his children, and his Genesis 18.19.
household to keep the way of the Lord: The like was professed by Joshua, as ye
heard but now, Josh. 24.15. and by David again at large, Psalm. 101.2, etc
Psalm. 101.2. etc. and of old Jacob we have a set form for the benediction of
his sons severally upon his Genesis 49.1, 2, etc.
deathbed, Genesis 49.1, 2, 3, etc. to this purpose we have likewise many
frequent exhortations in the Scriptures for the Father and Master, duly and in
good order to instruct and Pro. 22.6.
train your children up betimes in the way they should go; even in the Ephesians.
6.4
nurture, and in the fear of the Lord: Read at your leisure, and observe at
all times these places; Deuteronomy. 6.7. Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4. Col. 4.1. of the duty
of the Husband to the Wife, and so reciprocally, this way, see Ephesians. 5.22, 23.
etc. 1. Cor. 14.34, 35. I might show you this way, many excellent examples,
even under the New Testament; where the whole house prove believers for the
example of the Parents, and the Masters, the Husband, and the Wife, as 1. Cor.
7.14. Such an house was the Family of Cornelius; such that of Lydia; such that
of the Jaylour; such a good woman was Timothy's Grandmother 2 Timothy 1.5.
Lois, and his Mother Eunice; whose gracious instructions and example made
Timothy to know the holy Scriptures even from a 2 Timothy 3.15.
child; Priscilla and Aquila were so godly this way, that in their very house,
says Saint Paul, (though but a private Family,) there was a [ Romans 16.5.
Church,] Romans 16.3, 5. the Col. 4.15.
like whereunto is said of Nymphas, and the brethren which are in Laodicea,
Col. 4.15. See also how S John greeteth, not the elect Lady only, but her 2
Epist Joh. 1.
children also, 2. Epist. John 1. and surely thus it always is; when the voice
of joy and health is in the Psalm. 118.15.
dwelling of the righteous, then are the righteous, in their dwellings,
evermore in joy and health: And certainly through the want of this comes all
the mischief in the world; for if we knew well how to rule and govern our 1 Timothy 3.5, 15.
own houses, the Church of God at large must needs prosper the better for us.
Many very godly and useful directions, collected out of the Scriptures, and
the ancient Fathers, have been already printed in the Church of England, and
delivered over from the Mother to her Children; so that I should but cast my
drop into the Ocean, if I should here add any thing thereto more; rather let
me exhort you to the Joh. 13.17.
practice of what already is Luc. 10.28.
directed to us in this particular, and thus if we (do,) we shall live. Now,
besides the setting in order of this house, the family; there is also another
acception of the word house, when it is put to signify all the estate and
goods, or outward fortunes of a house; so, I think may that text be
understood, 2 Timothy 1.16. the Lord give mercy unto the 2 Timothy 1.16.
(house) of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, that is, not only to his
posterity; but a propitious and prosperous benediction even unto all that he
had; God grant, though (as it follows, ver. 18. ibid.) in many things he
ministered unto me, in my chains, yet that his store may never be exhausted;
but that his Prove. 11.25.
liberal soul may be made fat, and after all, ver. 18. the Lord grant him;
see that his own person seems here to be distinguished from the former house,
that he may find mercy of the Lord, in that day; and the original Greek word
there used is [ (...). Ammonius, lib. (...).
(...)] not (...), which two words, though happily, (as indeed they are) they
be confounded in common use; yet in the critical acception, says Ammonius,
the former denotes properly the whole substance of the house; the latter, the
house of habitation: and, to omit multitude of other Texts that might, to this
purpose, be alleged, take that one, Genesis 39.4, 5. where it is said, that
Pharaoh made Joseph overseer over his house, and presently adds (all that he
had) he put into his hand; and ver. 5. the blessing of the Lord was upon [all
that he had] Genesis 39.5.
in the house, and in the field: so that, without more ado, by setting of the
house in order, he means, the well disposing of his goods, and temporal
estate: This we find to have been practiced first, by Abraham, the pattern of
our Faith, who before his death, even (while he yet See Genesis 25.5, 6, 8.
lived) says the Scripture, he disposed by testament unto Isaac, his son and
heir, all that he had, that is, all the chiefest of his substance; and to his
other, sons he gave gifts; and [then,] or as Junius reads, postea, afterward
or after all this was done Abraham gave up the ghost, and dyed, in a good old
age, an old man, and full of years, and was gathered to his people; Genesis 25.5,
6, 8. and the like I read to have been practiced by the twelve Patriarks; I
have seen In Patrum (...). p. 589 etc.
a book intit'led, Testamentum duodecim Patriarcharum, filiorum Jacob, per
Robertum Lincolniensem Episcopum, e Graeco in Latinum versum: and surely, by
this very praedisposall, and well ordering of our houses (so far as God has
any way blessed us, even in outward blessings) before hand; and chiefly whilst
God affords us the good use of memory, or of our best intellectuals; by this, I
say, much good will accrue to our own souls in the first place; and in the
second, no mean benefit withal unto succession: First of all, to our own
souls; for by this voyding and emptying our hearts of these worldly things, in
the first order, they shall by this become the more open hearted unto God, and
heaven: like those swift flying birds, which, as the Aristot. lib. de animal.
Philosopher tells us, do close their eyes ever with the under lid shutting up
their ey-sight from the garbadge here below; whereas the Ludolphus de sax. pt.
1. c. 38 de vita Christi.
grosser sort of Creatures, close their eyes with the upper lid, always poring
downwards, as King David says of worldly, carnal men, they have set their
eyes bowing Psalm. 17.11.
down to the earth: thus when Elijah was about to be carried unto heaven in a
fiery chariote, its noted that he cast off, or let 2 King 2.13, Elias dimisit
pallium, id est, bona hujus mundi, quando in curru igneo Spiritus sancti in
coelum rapiebatur. Hugo de Prato florido, sermon. 60 Dominica infra octav. Ascens.
fall his mantle, that now perchance would have cumbred his shoulders; so
certainly its most true, when we wrap our selves too closely, and bemuffled us
in the warm weeds of these earthly businesses, we are too dull to mount nimbly
into Heaven: when Moses was to approach the bush of Gods presence, he must, ere
he shall come hither, (as David e're he durst to compass Gods Altar, Psalm.
26.6.
washed his hands in innocence) put off his Exodus 3.5.
shoes from his feet; that is, he must wash the feet of his Soul, his
affections from all the dirt and sweat, and [ Ber f. 43. L.
Sterquilian] soyled cogitations of the world, as Saint Bernard glosseth it: as
when Abraham was to go up to one of the mountains of Moriah, to offer a
Sacrifice to the Lord; its noted that he left his Genesis 22.5.
servants, and his Ass behind him at the foot of the hill; that is, as
Barradius moralizeth it, his servile and worldly affections: as the blessed
Virgin having been saluted by an Angel, and greeted with good tidings from
Heaven, immediately she left Nazareth, (of which the Proverb, it seems, went
among the Pharisees, that out of Nazareth no John 1.46.
good thing came) and went with haste into the [ Luke 1.39.
Hill] Country, and kept her self busied in things above: so that great
Mercurius Trismegistus professes, that when he fixed his mind to contemplate
things (...), etc. Mercur. Trismegist. in Paemandro, cap. 1. initio.
above, the senses of his body were affected even as a man oppressed by the
heaviness of sleep; whilst his soul kept up, like a Meteor above the earth,
still upwards toward Heaven, thus finding the speediest issue: much like the
disposition of the Spouse in the Canticles, who, whilst her [heart] was
(awaked) for her Husband Christ, she was in her sense of the body ( Cant. 5.2.
asleep) and drowzie to the world: wherefore, if we respect with old Simeon,
our quiet in death, and then, as Gods servants, to depart with him in Luke 2.29.
peace; let us, though not cast our Mundo carnem subtrahendam, non eo inficias;
non e mundo tollendam, quod ipsum in nostra potestate non sit Du Plessis page
61. in 8o de vitae mortisque consideratione.
selves out of the world, yet, as those Mariners, in Saint Paul's tempest, Acts
27.18, 19
lightened the Ship, by casting out the tackling; let us cast the world, with
the rubbish and appurtenances thereof, out of our selves; dealing herein as
Abraham did with his servant Hagar, when through too much cockering and
indulgence, she began to wax malapert and saucy, he cast her out, and Genesis
21.10, 14
sent her away to wander in the wilderness of Beer-sheba: so when the world
and flesh begin to Gal. 5.24.
lust too eagerly against the Spirit, it must be subdued, though not destroyed;
it must be in affection cast out, (...).] Chrsost. Hom. ad cap. 6. Romans ver. 12.
rectified, or crucified with the affections and lusts thereof: the reason
hereof is, for that the more empty the soul is of the world, the more full it
is of God; and so on the contrary; therefore we read in Scripture, that God
appeared mostly unto his Prophets, and great Saints in ecstasies, in visions,
and in Cognitio futurorum melius potest fieri in (dormientibus) quam in
vigilantibus; eo quod, quando anima abstrahitur a corporalibus, ut in somno,
aptior redditur ad percipiendum in fluxum Divinum. Raynerius de Pisis, tom. 2.
Pantheolog. cap. 12. de Prophetia, page 723. in quarto.
dreams by night, when the soul has been estranged, as it were, from usual
commerce with the body: God and Mammon be such Jam. 4.4.
enemies, that, like heat and cold (the first qualities in the Elements) in
intense degrees they cannot dwell together in one and the same heart: The
Aristot. lib. 3. de anima, cap. 5. text. 4. cum Jul. Pacio, in comment. ibid.
Philosopher gives a very rational argument to prove this; (...). That which
is within so intimately existent already, that it is, in a sort, the same with
what the mind is fastened upon; ((...), as the same Philosopher says) so the
Scripture it self plainly; He that is joined to the Lord, is [ 1. Cor. 6.17.
one] Spirit:) this, I say, thus fixed within already, expels and bolteth
out what is not of the same, but of another nature from without; and our
Savior is himself express, that no man can serve God and Matthew. 6.24.
Mammon at the same time, in intense degrees, and in that manner, as God
himself expects it from him; Matthew. 6.24. Hence we observe, that the
Israelites, after they had once eaten of the old corn of the land, they found
the Manna from Heaven on the next morrow to Josh. 5.12.
cease, nor had they any of that Psalm. 78.25.
food of Angels [more,] Josh. 5.12. Saint Austin gives the reason of it
clearly, Si animus habet, unde delectetur extrinsecus, sine delectatione manet
intrinsecus: that is, if the Egyptian fleshpots of fat and greazie delights
from without can content the mind enough, then it cannot find true inward
cheerfulness and delectation within; and yet from [ Psalm. 45.13.
within] all the glory of Gods Church is brought, yea, there principally it
[is,] and lies. Certainly what an honorable person of great parts said of
Riches, and other appurtenances of the world at large, is much more true in
death; they are the very [ Lord Verulam, Essay 34.
baggage] of virtue; the Roman word is better, impedimenta; for as the baggage
is to an Army, so are riches to virtue; it cannot well be spared, nor left
behind, but yet it hinders the march; yea, and the care of it disturbeth,
often loses the victory: and it is worth our notice, how Saint Paul has joined
those two together; set your affections on things above, and Col. 3.2.
not on things below, Col. 3.2. necessarily implying, that whilst men do keep
scraping with Aesops cock, and spurle for pearls of contentment in the
dunghill of the earth below; and, as our Apostle says, do (...) Phil. 3.19.
(...), mind earthly things; and, as the greek word signifyes, do place their
Luke 16.8.
wisdom in them; they cannot then seek those things, which be (...), above,
and Jam. 1 17.
from above; neither glory, the end; nor grace, the way to that end: and indeed
what is wealth but the mere carkase of happiness? many times the silver has
more guilt, and the world more Matt. 13.22.
thorns, then as true godliness 1 Timothy 6.6.
contentment, or great gain: and if wealth be a carkase, it is a prey fitter
for a vulture, and such ravenous creatures, then the repast of any clean
birds; and herein the comparison holds between the Vulture, and an envious
slanderer, and a worldly muckworm: For as a malicious Shimei, or Doeg, or an
hypocritical slanderer, looks like an hooting owl, or a blindish bat, upon
the virtuous (...).
rectitudes, and actions of the party envyed, with a neglective eye; but loves
to be like flies upon a rawgalled back, still sucking, and stinging, and
buzzing upon his infirmities; so does the carnal worldling, looking askue upon
heaven, (as the Vultures passing over, with speed, the pleasant gardens of
delight, to the dead carkase, that lies noisome to the senses) pitch his most
intended thoughts upon the spirit-grieving garbage of the world: (...) Isidor.
Pelusiota, l. 3. Epi. 237.
(...), as Isidore Pelusiota has it: St. Paul has expressly given that title
to all worldly things, (...) Phil. 3.8.
(...), Phil. 3.8. which signifies dung, or dirt, quasi (...), or that which
is cast out to dogs, and swine, quasi (...), (from (...), pleonasmo (...)) And
yet, in this, I must not be mistaken; as if either the things of this world, in
themselves, were simply thus or simply to be undervalued; but Ubi anima ipsa in
conte^platione, quae est dulcedo quaedam divina, supra se evehitur exultans,
cum cognoscat omnia haec mundana [in comparatione] boni^ illius incommutabilis
nullius valoris esse. Stella, ad c. 10. Luc. in fine.
comparatively: Pharaohs Genesis 41.18.19.
lean kine were (kine,) though not so [well-liking,] in comparison of the fat
ones; and riches, Gods left hand blessings, be blessings, though in comparison
of those of the right hand blessings, they be as none: as when the Queen of
Sheba saw Solomon in his glory, though she came to him in a visit from far
South, laden, and full of wonder, Pro. 3.16.
but only upon hearsay; yet when she beheld all her self, it is said there was
1 King 10.5.
no more Spirit in her: how no more? not simply none; but none in exercise,
none in comparison: besides, we must learn to distinguish (and indeed
Christianity has yet taught us nothing, if we have not learned this
distinction) between the Sea my Lord B^ of Exeter, Decad. 6. epist. 2. and
decad. 1. epist. 2.
(Love) and between the (Use) of the world; or in Saint Paul's terms, between
the (use) and the (abuse) 1 Cor. 7.31. the vanity of loving of it, at least too
much, appears from the next words, for the fashion of this world passes away;
acsi diceret, says St. Gregor. mag. cur. pastor. part. 3. admonit. 28.
Gregory, Nolite constanter mundum diligere, quando and ipse non potest, quem
diligitis, stare; incassum cor quasi manentes figitis, dum fugit ipse, quem
amatis; that is, why will you stand loving of, and setting your affections upon
that, which, while you love, does vanish, and as Jobs riches, that had wings,
fly away often before enjoyment: And indeed, says a devout Prelate, it is a
great weakness not to (see) but we must be inamoured; Elisha saw the secret
state of the Syrian court, yet as an enemy; the blessed Angels see our earthly
affairs, but as strangers; Moses his body was in the court of Pharaoh, amongst
the delicate Egyptians, his heart was suffering with the afflicted Israelites:
Lot took part of the fair medows of Sodom, not of their sins; our blessed
Savior saw the glory of all Kingdoms, and contemned them; and cannot the
world look upon us Christians, but we are bewitched? yea, let us but consider
how very heathens many have not only made orations, and declaimed against
riches, and vain pomp; but have even laughed at their loss: money is the
sinews of all outward negotiations, and though, as the Scripture says, the
love thereof be the 1 Timothy 6.10.
root of all evil; yet as King Philip said, all Asellus onustus auro; Cic: ad
Attic. l. 1. epist. 15.
Castles might be conquered by it; when all the brazen gates had shut in Danae,
yet in a shower of gold, Jupiter came in to her; it does wonders, Horat. l. 3.
carrod. 1 6.
Aurum per medios ire satellites,
Et perrumpere amat Saxa, potentius
Ictu fulmineo, etc.
says the Poet: and yet the Lacedaemonians counted it as a very Apud
Lacedaemonios pecunia fuit inutilis, nec expetenda. Phil. Beroald: comment. ad
Cic. Tusc. quaest. l. 5. p. 248.
improfitable and a vain thing: and to give themselves wholly, Divinae
delectationi, to divine delight in the study of Philosophy, etc. Anaxagoras,
Democritus, others, have even quite left their lands and patrimonies;
Anacharsis, the wisest Scythian of his time, slighted it; the application is
made ready to my hand by the mellifluous Cic. l. 5. Tuscul. quaest.
Tully, An Scythes Anacharsis potuit pro nihilo pecuniam ducere, nostrates
Philosophi facere non potuerunt? shall Anacharsis a Scythian, account of gold
as of nothing, and shall not our Contrymen the Philosophers do the like?
yea, shall not Christians shame to be outstripped by Heathens? How should we
Bishop Hall Decad. 2. Epist. 10.
scorn, to think that an Heathen-man should laugh either at our ignorance, or
impotence? ignorance, if we thought too highly of earthly things; impotence, if
we over-loved them. Let us rather imitate that woman above in Heaven, Rev.
12.1. which types the Sea Dr Rainolds, cap. 8. divis. 4. page 483. against Heart.
Church, clothed (as ye saw above) with Christ himself the Sun of
righteousness; and upon her head a crown of twelve Stars, which are the
twelve Apostles, who having borrowed light from the Sun, the fountain of all
light, Christ Jesus, converted many by that light from darkness, and for that
do now Dan. 12.3.
shine as Stars in the brightness of the Firmament; but under her feet was
the (Moon;) By the Moon, Bishop Hall, Cent. 3. meditat. 100.
earthly things are rightly resembled, which being nearest to the region of
mortality, is ever in Ecclesia militans dicitur Luna propter mutabilitatem. S.
August. epist. 119. cap. 6.
changes, and never looks upon us twice with the same face; and when it is at
the full, is blemished with some dark blots, not capable of any illumination;
and all those outward things are (under her feet) to show how she spurns at
and tramples them; even as we find the Primitive Christians, when they had, in
the Churches great necessity, sold their lands and possessions, they came and
laid the money at the Apostles ( Acts 4.37.
feet,) docentes calcandam esse pecuniam, showing how that price was to be
valued and dealt withal: and indeed, my Brethren, says Saint Bern. fol. 96.
K. L. confer. eund. fol. 3. D. Ser. 4. de Adventu Dom.
Bernard, quid (in) hoc mundo agimus? aut quid facimus (de) hoc mundo? as the
Lord said to Elijah on another occasion, What do thou here Elijah? so I, 1.
King. 19.9.
what have we to do here in this world? at least, what do we much make or
meddle with it? lo, says St Paul, we are men of ( 1. Tim. 6.11.
God,) should we then be 2. Tim. 2.4.
entangled with the affairs of that world, the love of which is Jam. 4 4.
enmity with God? besides, do we not know that we are here but as mere Heb.
11.13.
strangers and pilgrims? having here no continuing City, but seeking one to
Heb. 13.14.
come, whose Heb. 11.10.
builder and maker is God? seek we not another Heb. 11.14.
Country? and whilst we are at home in the 2. Cor. 5.6.
body, we are absent from the Lord? should our Phil. 3.20.
conversations then be here, or else in Heaven? where our God, Acts 27.23.
whose we are, and whom we serve, has his Matthew. 5.34.
Throne, and who esteems of the earth but as of a Verse 35. ibid.
footstool? yea, says holy Calvin, lib. 3. instit. cap. 9. Sect. 4.
Calvine, Si coelum patria est, quid aliud terra, quam exilium? etc. If Heaven
be our Country, what is the earth other then a very banishment? and who can
take pleasure in the richest soil under the Sun, persecuted, and in such a
condition? if we consider it simply, nay, if you should like children dally
with these fond knacks, and be taken with those toys of the world; that when
God sends us into the world, as he showed sometimes wonders unto Israel, Psalm.
105.45.
That they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws; lo! we, like those
that were sent to Ophir for gold, bring back home no traffic but 1. King.
10.22.
Peacocks feathers; or as those silly people in America, of whom Maginus,
C^^(...).
Maginus tells the story, that they part with gold, the choicest metalls and
jewels, merely for glass and bawbles: if we will, like those infatuated
Gentiles, needs become thus Romans 1.22. (...).
foolish; yet, what will be the issue? behold, says King David, this love, (or
dotage rather) is but to love Psalm. 4.2.
Vanity; yea, as his son King Solomon doubles and redoubles it, Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity Omnis genitivus reflexus supra suum (...) excellentiam, and emphasim;
Dominicus d. Flandria, q^. 1. Act. 4. in lib. 1. ^oster. page 4.
of vanities, all is vanity; and more than this too, Eccles. 1.14.
vexation of spirit; yea more still, is mere lying, and Psalm. 4.2.
leasing, says his Father David; and that we might be sure to notice it, he
has set to a (Selah) in the period of the sentence, Psalm. 4.2. (which (Selah)
was a note, no where used but in David's Psalms, and thrice in Habakkuk's third
Chapter; and in the use it served, say the learned, to point us to a business
of special observation; the Chaunter of the Quire being wont, at such stops,
to (...) verbo (...) exaltavit, vide Conr. Heresbachium, praefat. in Psalmos.
page 16. in quarto.
lift up his voice, and raise it to a higher note:) But why are earthly things
resembled unto See S Rich. Baker, meditat. on Psalm. 11. page 32.
leasing?) Ludolphus de Sax. in Psalm. 4. ver. 2.
Ludolphus makes the answer, quia amatores suos decipiunt, and non faciunt quod
promittunt: because they are never so good as their word, nor ever do they
make good their promises; yea, they are in this like Ephraimites, when you
think most to have them, like David's mercies [ Acts 13.34
sure,] yet then they start aside like a broken, or a Psalm. 78.57.
deceitful bow, and prove as Egypt was wont to do to Israel, only as
Ezekiel says, a Staff of ( Ezekiel. 29.6.
Reed;) the condition whereof is such, says the Scripture else where, that if
a man 2. King. 18.21.
lean on it, it will not only fail him as a supporter, and be as Jobs
friends, many of them, were, in his adversity, Job 16.2.
miserable comforters; but, says the Text, it will go into his hand, and
pierce it: for, says my Author, they promise liberty, but pay bondage; they
promise much like the Sea my Lords Grace against A. C. sect. 21. number. 7. p.
143, 144, etc.
Romanists, that invited over John Hus, and Hierome of Prague, the Venetian See
Bishop Morton, sect. 24. cap. 15. these. 2. page 405, 406. and sect. 16 ib. page
389. 390. in fine.
Fulgentius, the French Abbot of Boys, and after them the Dalmatian
Spalatensis, which like (silly sheep) were enticed by the fair pretenses of
safe conduct, and dismission again in security: but lo! here is nothing but
leasing; they pay fear, yea blood; for like the simple creatures in the Fable,
they went to visit the Lion in his den, but their blood was so sweet, that he
sucked it out all: it were a happy spiritual use of the Foxes craft, if we
perceiving no prints of Omnia te advorsum spectantia, nulla retrorsum. Horat.
lib. 1. epist. 1.
returning footsteps, would be wary of the paws of the old 1. Pet. 5.8.
Lion the Devil; or of the ginnes of his under-broakers, the flesh and the
world, for these must needs resemble their chief Master, and prove Rev. 12.9.
deceivers even of the whole world. Well then, weigh these things thoroughly, and
know thy self aright, oh man, and then love the world if thou can: lo! it is
for brutes to look downwards; and for none but a besotted Babylonian to eat
Dan. 4.33.
grass with Oxen; tanquam vos poeniteat, non Lactant. lib. 2. de orig. error.
cap. 2. and cap. 3. ibid. ver. fin. id ipsum vel maximi erroris est, vitam
pecudum sub figura hominis imitari -- Nec figura corporis, nec ratio excellens
ingenii humani significat, ad hanc unam rem natum hominem, ut frueretur
voluptatibus. Cic. lib. 2. de finibus.
quadrupedes esse natos, says Lactantius; What do you wish you had been
made? or else repent that you were not made foure-footed creatures? yea,
Minutius Faelix in Octavio.
Sacrilegii vel maximi instar est, humi quaerere, quod in sublimi debeas
invenire, says Minutius Faelix: It Is a kind of Sacrilege, oh Man, by which
thou robbest God of that honor he adorned thee withal in thy first creation,
to be always poaring for that felicity beneath, which is not but to be found
above; look then but upon thine own posture, and resemble in thy actions,
Ovid. Metamorph.
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus,
says the Poet; Seek then those things that are above; see, they be thy feet,
the most ignoble and the worst part of thee that are placed downwards; to teach
thee how to trample on those clods of earth below thee: O man, be not
embrutished so far, as to sink below thy Species; and like that Orator
Messala Corvinus, forget thine own name or condition: See, it is a very
unnatural thing for man to love what he was never intended for in his first
creation. What is wealth but dust? and what is dust but the condemned Genesis 3.14.
food of the Serpent, that crawls? yea, turn not Caniball, o man, and eat thy
self, for what art thou but Genesis 3.19.
dust? the Prophet Esaias, ca. 60.8. has resembled the Isles that wait for God,
the spiritual men that come with acceptance to Gods altar, and that glorify
the house of his glory by their devotion and obeience, unto Isa. 60 8.
clouds: who are these that fly as a cloud? now clouds, we know in Philosophy,
are vapors elevated and drawn up from the earth by the heat of the sunbeams;
so, Hugo. de prato florido, ser. 60. qua supra p. 252 in 8.
says Hugo de Prato Florido, are spiritual men elevated by the virtue of the
holy Ghost, (whose coming to the Apostles, on the day of Pentecost, was in the
likeness of Act. 2.13.
fire, which by reason of its innate levity always striveth to See Ludovic:
Granatens. tom* 3 concion: de Tempore conc: 3. in die Pentec: p. 470, 471. in
8. Latin.
ascend from the love of earthly things, unto heaven, and heavenly things; as
Ezekiel says that the spirit Ezekiel 3.12.
took him [up,] between Heaven and earth: To end this point; if you ask me
now, how indeed you would be directed for the use of outward things, thus take
the resolution, in sum; Not, as in an unallowed, heaven-tempting See Bp Hall
Decad: 6. epist. 2.
hermitage, to abandon it, as a thing to be [altogether] and universally
despised: for so doing, how do we but slight that wise, and great Creator, 1
Chro. 29.14.
of, and from whom are all things; and those all things are also good, and Genesis
1.31.
very good? But in comparison of spiritual things; to undervalue these worldy
things; and not to place our Phil. 3.19.
wisdom in them; or to set our principal Col. 3.2.
affection upon them; for this were not to use, but to 1 Cor. 7.31.
abuse: He that touches pitch, says the wiseman, shall be Ecclus. 13.1
defiled with pitch; but not, if ye touch it only with a cold hand, and do not
keep a chasing, and a See Bishop Hall, Sermon. at the consecrat: of a new Burial
place in Exon, anno 1637.
heating of it in your hand: for it is not the simple possessing of riches and
honor, (were not Genesis 13.2.
Abraham, and Lot, eminent this way?) but the being 2 Timothy 2.4.
entangled in these affairs, that breeds 1 Cor. 7.35.
distraction: when our Savior said to Martha, that Luc. 10.42.
one thing was needful, and that her sister Mary, (less troubled about the
house, then she) had chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from
her; (by which [one thing] was meant, says Idocus Clichtoveus l. 1. c. 18.
sect. 4. de constitut. Ecclesiast.
Idocus Clichtoveus, unitas me^tis in Deum collectae, per internam
contemplationem, and quietem, rejectis [dividuae] vitae, and in plurima
distractae, non sine ingenti turbatione, curis; the uniting of the mind
collected by inward contemplation, and rest toward God; the disturbing cares
of the soule-dividing world being cast away) I say, our Savior by [preferring]
Mary's choice of that chief one good thing, does not universally condemn, as
absolutely unlawful, the employment of Martha; for as Peraldus, tom. 2.
virtut. and vitior. p. 82. in 8*
Peraldus says well, necessaria est tamen Martha Mariae, Martha was necessary,
and useful unto Mary; as Jacobs Genesis 32.10.
staff was to him, in his passage over Jordane; of some stay and defense; but,
as it was said of those slings, in the old militiae, they were of good use, and
did some service in the battle; yet without other armor and weapon, they were
a weak munition; so say I of riches, without Gods other See Ec. 13.24
blessings added with them: and in short, we may use the world, as the
Israelites did the Egyptian Exodus 11.2.
Jewels (to which St. Austin also compares the use of humane Arts in popular
Sermons) for use or ornament; but if once we make an Idol of it (as Saint Paul
calls covetousness Col. 3.5.
Idolatry) it is time to cast them into the Exodus 32.20.
fire, and by that fire to consume them: surely otherwise they will prove to be
what St. Paul says of the love of money, the 1 Timothy 6 10. see Estius ad(...),
p. 280, 281. and quomodo utendum vita praesenti, ejusquae adjumentis; lege
Calvin instit. l. 3. c. 10. and Peter Martyrloc: commun: class. 3. c. 12. sect:
19. p. 643. and alios.
root, that feeds all evils with it is sap. If I were to make a determination
for the happiest condition, in this lower world, I should soon resolve with the
Poet for the mean; neither to be too high, set up as a flage, obnoxious to
every storm and tempest of envy and malevolence, the eyesore of of the
ambitious; in this advanced station, what are men, but as that golden cap'd
Apud Lucian:
Colossus, very specious without, and glorious to look upon; but pricked all
within with nails, and rust, and cares? like sickmen upon their beds, ever
turning, yet ever discontented; and whilst we spend our time in seeking
enviously what is other men's, we die, and then all our vain thoughts perish,
ere we can enjoy our own.

-- Horat. lib. 1. Sermon. Satyr 1.
Hunc atque hunc superare laboret?
Sic festinanti semper locupletior obstat.
On the other side, I would not be so low, as to become as one of Jeroboams
Priests, the 1. King. 13.33.
dregs of the people: I say as the Poet, (...),
(...).
which is the same what Agur desired, Pro. 30.8, 9. Give me neither poverty,
nor riches, feed me with food Pro. 30.8, 9.
convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or
lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain. Well then,
my Beloved, let not us with old Toby suffer our eyes to be blinded with the
Swallows dung of this world, nor dare to make a willing shipwreck of
conscience for the venture of a little ballast of gain; wherein at last there
is no more solid well-savouring taste than there is, as Job advises me, in the
white of an egg, Job 6.6.
or else true light in the Cimmerian, and the blackest darkness: But
especially let us be wary that we shake hands with these kind of affairs
before we come, as Hezekiah here, to be summoned to our dissolution, and forced
on our deathbeds to be rid of them, or of our souls; surely then these things
will be just as Saul's Armor was upon the shoulders of David, 1. Sam. 17.39.
too big, and cumbersome: Then, at that season a man, if ever, should be as
St Bernard once gave counsel to his Monk, that he should be as another Bern.
in speculo Monachor. in fine, fol. 340. M.
Melchizedech, without Father, without mother, without Genealogy; Nec patrem
sibi vocet [super terram] neither let him call any man father upon earth: imo
sic se existimet, quasi ipse sit solus, and Deus; yea, let him so esteem
himself, as if God alone and himself were only by themselves together: for
assuredly, in such special times of distress, Satan is much like to Pharaoh,
the Egyptian Tyrant to the Israelites in Goshen, when he thinks the soul is
going Exodus 5.7. Tunc Diabo^^s graviores tentationes homini ingerit, dum
[finem] ejus appropinquare prospicit: and quem viventem blandiendo decepit,
morientem saeviendo capit, Claudius.
off from his subjection and kingdom, he doubles the Bricks, and yet would not
have any Ephesians. 6.16.
straw allowed them; that is, doubles the force of his temptations, but yet
would have naught but stubble allowed the Sts. no solid matter, to make up a
firm wall, or bulwark of comfort to dead the gunshot of his Viexmontius,
Institut. ad Poenitent. part. 1. cap. 2.
fiery and most fierce temptations of despair: the cares of this world then,
and God, are apt as Paul and Barnabas to fall out and separate, yea to [divide]
betwixt the Soul and God; our Savior has therefore expressed the Matt. 13.22.
(...).
care of the world by such a word as does signify, as it were, a (parting) of
a thing in sunder, Matthew, 13.22. once more; The cares of this world then will
deal with the heart of man, as the Levite did with his Judge. 19.29.
Concubine, shread it into many parts; or as king David did with the people of
2 Samuel 12.31.
Rabbah, put it under sawes and harrowes, and axes of iron, grievously afflict
with difficulties and torments, even to make a tearing and a pulling of the
Soul in pieces: surely good thoughts, in death, are like to Jeremie's basket
of good figs, Jer. 24.2.
very good; and evil ones on the other side, as his bad figs, very bad and
naughty: before you Psalm. 62.10.
set your heart upon your Riches, when they were increased; now, be assured
they will set themselves upon your heart; old friends cannot well part on easy
terms: Wherefore, if with the Prodigal, you hope to feast it at home with your
Father in Heaven with joy; you must first resolve to return home to your
selves by thoughts of Repentance; and thoroughly resolve to forsake the Luke
15.16.
husks of all earthly contentments, with men of a swinish disposition here
below aforehand, else in vain shall we hope for a wel-come home, or a kiss
from our heavenly Father: In a word, the manner of old Jacob's Benediction of
Manasseh, and Ephraim, the two sons of Joseph, on his Deathbed, is a lively
platform of all our demeanor in our Deathbeds; Jacob first ( Genesis 48.13, 14.
crosses) his hands, in the giving of his blessing; and this was to show, that
either the whole virtue of his Benediction was to issue from the cross of
Christ, who was after to issue from his loins; or else that all blessings in
this life were mixed with their crosses; (as I showed before) and then he
purposly laid his right hand upon Ephraim, the youngers head, and his left hand
upon Manasseh, though the elder brother; all which Hugo de sancto victore thus
moralizeth; by Jacob is represented Christ; by Joseph, Man, by Ephraim,
affection, by Manasseh, oblivion; by the right hand, things eternal; by the
left hand, things temporal; now observe, Joseph, he puts his eldest son
Manasseh toward Isreal's right hand, that is, Man sets oblivion toward things
eternal; but Ephraim his younger son toward Isreal's left hand, that is, sets
his affection toward things temporal; but Jacob does quite otherwise, and
crosses this disposition; and so must a true, and a godly Christian set his
affection mainely upon things eternal, and heavenly; but oblivion and
forgetfulness to things temporal, and earthly; so St. Paul, as we read, when
he was about to press hard outward toward the mark of perfection, Phil.
3.13, 14.
forgot those things which were behind: Thus must we do likewise; we shall then
find these outward things, as he did, in comparison of the spiritual things
of the 1 Pet. 3.4.
hidden, and of the Ephesians. 3.16.
inner man, to be but even as Phil. 3.8.
dung and dirt; or, as St Austin styles it Res transitoria, quodammodo [
Augustine: l. 10. de Civitate Dei, c. 25. K.
lutea] faelicitas: and St. Hierom also (in epist: ad Nepotian.) Divitias
(lutum) putabimus: As therefore we would find peace, and comfort first in our
own particular souls, let us be early, and seriously exhorted, betimes, even
whilst it is called to Heb. 3.13.
day, even whilst we have time; and no time is ours, but the very instant,
that we breath in;) let us, I say, whilst we have time, and Gal. 6.10.
opportunity, herein prize our own peace, and happiness of Soul in death; to
order the affairs of the world, to dispose of our estates by will, and legacy,
or gift; we shall find much rest to our Souls hereby; and if ye shall happily
suspect, that your posterity (as two many graceless, and undutifull of-springs
are too often) will be fingring before hand, then let this satisfy that fear;
where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the ( Heb. 9.16, 17.
death) of the testator; for a testament is of force (after) men are dead;
otherwise, it is of no strength at all while the testator lives, Heb. 9.16,
17. if any son of Belial, that shakes off the yoke of awful obedience to his
parent, shall presume, before hand, to rob his Father, or his Mother, the Pro
30.17.
ravens of the valleys, says the Scripture, shall pluck out his eyes: and
besides, you may reverse at pleasure, as God lends farther term of years:
Be exhorted then, first of all, for the peace and quiet of your own Souls, in
this regard, as my Prophet here advises Hezekiah, to set your house in order,
even before Death,

Secondly, besides this good to the Soul of him that is deceasing; there may
hereby ensue much benefit even to our succession: good God! what Aceldamas are
often made? what Acts 2.19.
fields of blood by direful Duels between brethren, for an undisposed, and
unsettled Patrimony? as Esau and Jacob in the womb, how do they (other some)
all their lives long [ Genesis 25.22.
struggle] for elbow-roome upon that earth, which as it was at first communis
mensa, as Procopius Gazaeus, comm^^^t: in Genes c. 1. f. 9. Latin.
Procopius speaks, the common board that supplied them with all things
useful, and convenient; yea the common mother, that first teemed them, and the
nurse that cherished them; so e're long, it must be Commune Sepulchrum too, the
common Sepulcher, and the grave to bury them, and for ever to lodge them, till
a powerful resurrection: what envy is here? of Eteocles and Polynices (two
brothers) its said, that their hearts were not more at ods in life, then their
flames were in their death divided: To prevent therefore these future
divisions, (since wealth gave occasion even to great Saints to Genesis 13.9.
part, as (to Lot and Abraham) which often, as the Vultures upon Prometheus,
gnaw upon the body of an unordered estate, so long, till that is made good in
the Psalmist, these goods were gotten with much care by the progenitors, but
now they cannot tell who shall Psalm. 39.6.
enjoy them; whether the Lawyer, or the issue, or neither: To cut off, I say,
these following dangers, and to leave behind you, what may rather make to live,
and love, and not to Genesis 45.24.
fal-out as brethren, (for what Pro 18.19.
ods to that of brethren disjoynted in affection?) let us all be exhorted, as
in the first place to 2 Cor. 12.14.
lay up, as God shall 1 Cor. 16.2.
enable, for our children (for not so doing what are we else but 1 Timothy 5.8.
worse then Infidels? 1 Timothy 5.8.
yea,) how do your lavish, and profuse wantons, living in the world, as the
Leviathan in the Sea, only to take Psalm 104.26.
pastime, and sport themselves in Romans 13.13.
rioting and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, in a sinful
prodigality both of time, and estates; how do they, I say, by this (sinning
withal against, and Ephesians. 6.4.
provoking their children) even draw out almost all their substance to the
bottom? and so leave their issue after them not only as Adonibezek, without
Judge. 1.7.
thumbs, and toes, nor as Hanun used King David's servants, shaven by the one
(half,) and cut off in their garments to the ( 2 Samuel 10.4.
middle) but as Solomon says of the whore, and the drunkard, they are often
brought to a Pro. 6.26.
morsel of bread, and go clothed in Pro. 23.21.
rags; being not seldom more miserable in the want of Read Bp. Hall decad. 6.
epist. 6.
education, then of revenues; their Parents over-lavishnesse, as that land,
that did Number. 13.32.
eat up its own inhabitants, Genesis 41.20.
devouring with Pharaoh's lanke heifers, the fair and the fat kine; whose milk
should have nourished the children that survive them: good God! what a gross
mistake is here of the right liberality? There is a liberality of expending,
which makes a good man, like the fields in Egypt overflown by Nilus, the
richer soil; its called by divines, liberalitas charitativae largitatis; and
of this its true, what King Solomon long since experimented, saying, the
liberal soul shall be made Pro. 11.25.
(fat;) no one mite this way laid out, but its like that grain of mustard
seed, in the gospel, it grows up unto a great Matthew. 13.32.
tree of an after increase; but there is another kind, which is, (though
abusively) called Liberalitas prodigae effusionis; which is not indeed, in its
self simply considered, a liberality, save only (...), in the false opinion of
a loose Epicure; and is, intruth, naught else but a prodigal effusion; and so
it proves either, as that same water of the woman of Tekoah, which being spilt
on the ground, cannot be 2 Samuel 14.14.
gathered up again, or else it will, as that ill word in the primitive times of
Christ's Church, of that pair of erroneous Teachers Hymeneus and Philetus; it
will be as a 2 Timothy 2.17.
canker, or gangrene; fretting to the very consumption of posterity; thus do
these godless Atheists (whose names the Lord Psalm. 9.5.
puts out, even as a candle in the snuff, from under heaven for it, and makes
them taste of corruption even before they die) thus, I say, by this means do
they, as the evil spirit did the Matthew. 8.32
swine into the Sea, precipiate and hurry oftimes their un-bred posterity, into
an engulfing confusion; their fathers throat was the Psalm. 5.9.
open sepulcher of their just patrimonies: holy Abraham, though he was the
hospitablest man alive, insomuch, Genesis 18.2.
that standing in his tent door, his hospitality offered it self, after a
sort, to every obvious passenger; and by that means entertainned Heb. 13.2.
Angels unawares, in whose welcome, I believe, he spared no fit cost; yet would
he not forget, that he had an Isaac for his heir too, and many other children,
and favorites, to provide for, for after time; and as he was first careful to
provide a patrimony; so also, was he as provident, and Religious withal, to
dispose, (even Genesis 25.5, 8.
before his dissolution) of what he had provided; to which like practice let us
(that I may once more renew my exhortation, in this particular) be all
admonished; herein imitating him our Romans 4.1.
father, that is, the Pattern of our faith, and practice, and indeed, says our
Savior, if we were truly Abraham's sons, and children (as, if we believe
aright, we cannot Gal. 3.29.
but be) we would do the John 8.39.
works of Abraham; that at last we may not fail to share in the sweet
comforts of Abraham's Luke 16.23.
bosom; we read that after Abraham's death, there was a good issue of his
providence, for God Genesis 25.11.
blessed his son Isaac, etc. Thus, as our Prophet, in my text, advises his
good Prince, let us all be seasonably exhorted, to set our house in order: My
speech now like, Hezekiah on this his supposed deathbed, is ready to be
dissolved; suffer it to gasp a few minutes more, and it shall expire.

Ye have heard, what it is to set our house in order, and the benefit thereof:
our worthy Mr Peter Tailor.
Brother, and my dear friend here departed; a man not more respective of my
person, than a professed profitable Auditor of mine. He was not now to seek to
level his account with God, nor to set the spiritual house of his soul in
order; having had, (before this,) often sensible intimations within him of the
decay of Nature; the stroke indeed of death it self, and the summons thereof
was somewhat We of this City have very lately had diverse examples of sudden
death, of persons of no mean quality; and hear of more abroad.
sudden, (but a very few hours before his dissolution) yet not the
expectation; and surely death can never be too sudden, if it be not unlooked
for; from a sudden and (unlooked) for death, good Lord deliver us; but he
that, with Saint Paul, dies 1. Cor. 15.31.
daily to sin, and with King David, carries his soul always in his Psalm.
119.109.
hand, in expectation of a dissolution, can never be unhappy in the (speediest)
passage, from the body into Heaven; and he that lives Mors mala putanda non
est, quam bona vita prae^esserit. Augustine. de Civit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 11.
well, can never dye ill. The manner of his deceasing, I know not to what
better to resemble, than to St Peter's coming unto Christ upon the waters,
Matthew. 14.29, 30, 31.
Matthew. 14.29, 30, 31. when St Peter was bid to come, (for he would not
adventure on so high a business, without a warrantable command first from his
Lord Christ) he was come down out of the ship, and he walked on the water, to
go to Jesus; but when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and
beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord save me; and immediately Jesus
stretched forth his hand, and caught him: even so, he, Luke 24.1.
early on the Lords day, Januar. 20. 1638.
in conscience of Christ's command, to Psalm. 27.4.
visit his Temple, and not to forsake the Heb. 10.25.
assembly of the Saints; arising, and as St Peter from the ship, going down
from his bed, was about to fit himself to go to Jesus, though not on the Sea,
yet in the Temple; where he knew he might in his Word, as old Simeon did in his
Luke 2.28.
Arms, embrace him; and where he was no slack, but a frequent and diligent
visiter of him, and a sincere honourer (without saction, without ostentation)
of his worship: but as he assayed to go, lo, the wind was boisterous, Death
summons him; and beginning to sink, (not in despair,) but under bodily
weakness, he cried out, saying, as Saint Peter, Lord save me; so he, Lord be
merciful unto me; and speedily Jesus caught him; and (as I am persuaded)
commanded his good Angel to carry up his soul into the John 14.2.
mansion of bliss, Matthew. 25.34.
prepared for him from the beginning of the world. It is a notable both sign,
and effect of true faith, in [suddaine] ( My Lord, the Bishop now of Exon, in
his second (...). on the History of the New Testam page 135, (...) 1634.
extremities) to ejaculate holy desires, and with the wings of our first
thoughts to fly up instantly to the throne of grace for present succor: Upon
(deliberation) it is possible for a man that has been careless, and
profane, by good means to be drawn to holy dispositions; but on the
(sudden) a man will appear as he is; what ever is most rife in the heart,
will come forth at the mouth: it is good to observe how our [surprisalls] find
us; the rest is but forced, this is natural; out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks: And when the strings of speech are broken, and the outward
senses have lost quite their external prospects; who knows what things of joy
2. Cor. 12.4.
unspeakable, in that abstention of the soul from the body, as St Paul in his
rapture, a good man (though seized suddenly by death,) may hear? Should I
here next bestow my self in a copious Panegyric, I should find an hour more
too little to dispatch my laudatory Oration; as Elihu, in Job, said, on another
occasion, I am Job 32.18.
full of matter; I could tell you, how, as Onesiphorus did St Paul, he often 2.
Tim. 1.16.
refreshed the bowels of the poor and impotent; he was as Job 29.15.
eyes to the blind, as a staff and feet to the lame; and what a great and a
secret Romans 16.3.
helper of poor Tradesmen in the dead time of Trading; and how careful to see
the hirelings Levit. 19.13.
wages discharged; let them acknowledge, who, I believe, shall hereafter find
him wanting; and for fidelity to his friend, no -- Fidus Achates, saepe apud
Virgil.
faithful Achates ever out-went him; nor was Jonathan ever more true to David,
or David to Jonathan; of whom yet we read, that in their lives they were lovely
and pleasant, and in their deaths they were not 2. Sam. 1.23.
divided: were these virtues capable of bequeathment, I could wish that he had
left them as Legacies to all that yet live, and survive him. But I must
remember, that I am now in the Pulpit, not at the Deske; only let me add
this, as the conclusion of all, (which also my entire affection to his memory
urges from me) He was a true Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed, in whom was no
known, no approved, or allowed John 1.47.
guile: and such as these were they whom CHRIST commended, and he, says Paul,
is 2. Cor. 10.18.
approved, whom the (LORD) commends; and what is CHRIST'S approbation, but the
sure earnest of an eternal glorification?

My beloved Christians, we have much to answer to Almighty God for pious and
good examples; and who is there amongst us, but must be forced to cry out, Lord
be merciful unto me in this? Now at last yet, let us Jam. 4.8.
cleanse our hands, and purify our hearts, as St James advises us: let us
desire God to fit us for the worst of times, and the best of ends; let us Psalm.
119.109.
continually carry our souls as in our hands, ready to resign them unto the
hands of the God, that by infusing created them; and by creation infused them:
We have breath yet indeed, but it is but in our Isa. 2.22.
nostrills, ready each moment to give up. Wherefore let us, with King David,
Psalm. 16.8.
set the Lord always before us, and not only so, but as St Peter says, let
us 1. Pet. 3.15.
sanctify this Lord God in our hearts. Many know God, but yet they ( Psalm.
50.22.
forget) him, says the Prophet; that is, as Saint Paul interprets, they do
not like to Romans 1.28.
retain God in their knowledge, that is, to ( Haec est summa delicti, nolli
[agnoscore] quem ignorare non possis. S. Cyprian. de Idolor. vanitate. sect. 5.
acknowledge) him to be such a God as he has revealed himself to be, in all
his glorious attributes of Omnipotency, Omnisciency, Omnipresence,
Infiniteness, Eternity; did we not only know, but also (acknowledge) and [
Psalm. 45.10.
consider] these things aright; did we labor thoroughly to Isa. 42.25. and
44.19.
lay them to our hearts, to Psalm. 107.43.
ponder them by continual meditation, and as we ought, to be [affected] with
them; it could not be, but that we should often remember how Eternity depends
upon a moment; how great an Romans 14.12.
account every one of us, even from the Ephesians. 5.12.
secret and 1. Cor. 4.5.
hidden works of darkness, to an Matthew. 12.36.
idle word, must in particular make to this Psalm. 77.13.
great God, and 2. Tim. 4.8.
righteous Judge of Genesis 18.25.
all the earth; when, after death, we must all 2. Cor. ^.10.
appear before his dreadful Tribunal, and awful seat of Judgment: how
could we then, but, as Enoch, walk ( Genesis 5.24.
with) God, and with Abraham, ( Genesis 17.1.
before) God? as always in his presence; as to whose eyes all things lie open
and Heb. 4.13.
naked; yea, as one who knows all our thoughts, long Psalm. 139.1.
before they be, and when they are, finds them all to be but 1 Cor. 3.20.
vain: certainly, did we seriously [consider] this, we would in our several
places, speedily set our houses in order; whether it be the house spiritual,
Corporal, Mystical, Ecclesiastical, Secular, or oeconomicall; our
Conversation would be in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
even whilst we are alive here upon earth: And so being ready, as the good
Matthew. 25.4.
Virgins with oil in our lamps, how joyfully may we meet our Bridegroom, and
cry out, with those blessed Spirits, Rev. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesu, come quickly: This foregoing preparation made the ancient
Martyrs to embrace death, as the prooeme unto immortality; Isidor: Pelusiota l.
4. epist. 52.
(...), as Isidore Pelusiota told his good friend Theon: Labor we to get the
meditation of the Lord, thus to become, as David professed, Psalm. 104.34.
sweet unto us; we shall then, with St. Paul, groan under the Romans 7.24.
misery of this body of death; even Phil. 1.23.
long to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all: Lord open
thou our dim, yea our blind eyes, that we may see him; fasten our hearts upon
him by a lively Faith always; give us right apprehensions of thee, and
heavenly things, that living the life of thine 1 Pet. 1.14.
obedient children, Matthew. 25.23.
and faithful servants in a conversation Psalm. 50.23.
ordered aright; we may so honor thee our good God, here in this life of grace
below; that in the end of all, we may enjoy the fullness of thy promised, and
Matthew. 25.34.
prepared glory above in Heaven, even at thy right hand, at whose right hand
are Psalm. 16.11.
pleasures for evermore; even where there is health without sickness, life
without death, joy without sorrow, even joy Pet. 1.8.
unspeakeable, and full of glory; And that only and alone for his sake, who
has so dearly 1 Cor. 6 ^0.
bought us, Jesus Christ the 1 John. 2.1.
righteous, to whom with thee, o Father, and thy blessed spirit, three
all-glorious persons, one infiite, and all-(...)s God, (our God,) be given of
us, and of all thy Saints, all glory, praise, dominion, and Salvation, in the
Church, Ephesians. 3.21.
by CHRIST JESUS throughout all ages, World without end. Amen.

(...).

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

JOHANNES HANSLEY.
Novem. 7th 1639.

