GOD save HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms the KING
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of great Britain, France and Ireland:
Defender of the Faith etc.
To Our Loveds (...) Messingers Our shirreffs in that part conjunctly and
severally specially constitute greeting,
Forsamekle as in the general submissions made to Us concerning the few
fearmes and few mealles of Erections teyndes of other men's Lands, rate ease and
price of the same, and others mentioned therein It is specially provided that
such of the Lords of Erections and others having right from them, as have
laices lawfully set before the date of their erections, or absolute warrandice
of the same against their authors, shall receive full and plenarie satisfaction
for their said laices and warrandice. And seeing also the particular
satisfaction to be given to every one of the said Lords of Erections for their
few mealles and few fearmes cannot be determined without the knawledge and
trial of the just and true Rentall of the said few meals and few fearmes.

OUR WILL IS herefore, and We charge you straightly and commands that
incontinent these Our letters seen, Ye pass and in our name and authority
command and charge all the said Lords of Erections and others having right as
said is, by open Proclamation at the Market croces of the head Burrowes of thls
our Kingdom and other places needful. To com(...) before our Commissioners
nominate by (...) for the treaty anent the Erections surrendars and Teynds: at
Haly-rud-house or where it shall happen them to be for the time Upon the first
day of November nextocome with continuation of days, bringing and producing
with them all their Laices and Tackes of other men's Teynds set to them or
their Authors before their Erections: Together with all their rights and
securities of the foirsaid Teynds bearing absolute warrandice, or warrandice of
their own moneys incase of eviction, To the e^^ect the same may be seen and
considered by Our Advocate: And also bringing with them the said day and place
the just and true rentalls of their few fearmes few mealles and other constant
Rent of the superiorities of their said Erections. To the intent it may be
known what part thereof is presently brooked by the said Lords of Erections,
And what part by pensioners and liverentars, And that will remain free of the
same, Deducing the blenshe duty paid to Us. With certification to them that
failyies, that they shall not be heard to claim any satisfaction for the same
hereafter. The which to do we commit to you conjunctly and severally Our
full power by these Our Letters delivering the same by you duly execute and
sndorsed again to the bearer.

Given under our Signet at Haly-rude-house the eight day of August and of Our
reign the fourth year. 1628. Per actum D. Commissionis praedict*
EDINBVRGH Printed by Thomas Finlason his M* printer


