DAIPHANTVS, OR The Passions of Love. Comicall to Read, But Tragical to Act:
As full of Wit, as Experience.

By An. Sc. Gentleman.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cartum.

Whereunto is added, The passionate man's Pilgrimage.



LONDON Printed by T. C. for William Cotton: And are to be sold at his Shop
near Ludgate. 1604.

TO THE MIGHTY, LEARNED, and Ancient Potentate Quisquis; Emperor of King of
Great and Little A. Prince of B. C. and D. etc. Atiquis, wishes the much
increase of true Subjects, free from Passion Spleen, and Melancholy: and
endued with Virtue, Wisdom, and Magnamuntis. Or, to the Reader.
AN Epistle to the Reader; why? that must have his Forehead, or first Entrance
like a Courtier, Faire-spoken, and full of Expectation. His middle or Center
like your Citizens warehouse, beautified with enticing vanities, though the
true Riches consist of Bald Commodities. His Randeuow or conclusion like The
Lawyers Case, able to pocket or any matter: But let good word, be your best
Evidence. In the General, or Foundation he must be like Paules-Church,
resolved to let every Knight and Gull travel upon him, yet his Particulars, or
Lyneaments may be Royal at the Exchange, with ascending stepe, promising New
but costly devices and fashions: It must have Teeth like a Satyr, Eyes like a
Cryticke, and yet may your Tongue speak fal^e Latin, like your Panders and
Bawdes of Poetry. Your Genius and Species should march in battle array, with
our Politicians: yet your Genius ought to live with an honest soul indeed. It
should be like the Neuer-too-well read Arcadia, where the Prose and Verce,
(Matter and Words) are like his Mistresses eyes one still excelling another and
without Coriuall for to come home to the vulgars Element, like Friendly
Shake-speares Tragedies, where the Commedian rides, when the Tragedian stands
on Tip-toe: Faith it should please all, like Prince Hamlet. But in sadness,
then it were to be feared he would run made Insooth I will not be moonesicke,
to please: nor out of my wits though I displeased all What? ^oct, are you in
Passion, or out of Love? This is as Strange as True: Well, well, if I seem
mystical, or tyrannical, whether I be a Fool or a Lords-Ingle, all^ one: If
you be angry, you are not well advised. I will tell you, it is an Indian Humor,
I have snuft up from divine Tobacco: and it is most Gentleman-like to puff it
out at any place or person. I Will no Epistle, (it were worse then one of Hercules
Labors) But will conclude, honesty is a man's best virtue. And but for the Lord
Mayor, and the two Sherisses, the Innes of Court, and many Gallants elsewhere,
this last year might have been burned. As for Momus, Carpe and Bark who will:
if the Noble Ass bray not, I am as good a Knight Poet, as Etatis suae, Master
An. Dom. Son in Law. Let your Cryticke look to the Rowels of his spurs, the
pad of his Saddle, and the Ierke of his Wand: then let him ride me and my Rimes
as hotely an be would ride his Mistress, I care not: We shall meet and be
friends again, with the breaking of a Spear or two: And who would do less,
for a fair Lady. There I leave you, where you shall ever find me.

Passionate Daiphantus: Your loving Subject,

Gives you to understand, He is A man in Print, and it is enough he has
vnder-gone a Pressing (yet not like a Lady) though for your sakes and for
Ladies, protesting for this poor Infant of his Brain, as it was the price of
his Virginity borne into the world in tears; So (but for a many his dear
friends that took much pains for it) it had ayed, and never been laughed at:
And that if Truth have wrote less than Fixion, yet it is better to err in
Knowledge then in Judgment. Also if he have caught up half a Line of any
others, It was out of his Memory not of any ignorance. Why, he Dedicates it to
all, and not to any Particular, as his Mistress, or So. His answer is, he is
better Borne, than to creep into Women's Favors, and ask their leave
afterward. Also he desires you to help Correct such errors of the Printer;
which because the Author is dead (or was out of the City) has been
committed. And it was his folly, or the Stationers, You had not an Epistle to the
purpose.

Thus like a Lover, wooes he for your Favor,
Which if You grant then Omnia vincit Amor.
The Argument.
DAiphantus, a younger Brother, very honorably descended, brought up (but not
borne in Venice) naturally subject to Courting, but not to Love: reputed ^ man,
rather full of Complement then of true Courtesy: more desirous to be thought
honest, then so to be wordish beyond discretion: promising more to all the^
friend-ship could challenge: Mutable in all his Actions, but his affections
aiming indeed, to gain opinion, rather then good will, challinging Love from
greatness, not from Merit: studious to abuse his own wit by the common sale
of his infirmities: Lastly, under the color of his natural affection (which
indeed was very pleasant and delightful) coueted to disgrace every other to
his own discontent: a scourge to Beauty, a tray for to Women, and an Infidel
to Love. This He, th^s creatures at length falls in love with two at one
instant: yea, two of his nearest Allies, and so indifferently (yet
outragiously) as what was commenda^^le in the one, was admirable in the other:
By which means as not despised, not regarded; if not deceived not pitied;
they esteemed him as he was in Deed, not words: he protested, they iested: he
swore he lou'de in sadness; they in sooth beleeu'de but seemed to give no
crepence to him: thinking him so humorous as no resolution could long be good,
and holding this his attestation to them of affection in that kind, more then
his contesting against it before time. Thus overcome of that he seemed to
conquer, he became a slave to his own fortunes: Laden with much misery, utter
mischief seized upon him. He fell in love with another, A wedded Lady: Then
with a fourth, named Vitullia. And so far was he imparadized in her beauty
(she not recomforting him) that he fell from Love to passion, so to
distraction, then to admiration, and contemplation: lastly, to madness: thus did
he act ye tragical Scenes, who only pend the Comicall, Became, if not as
brutish as Acteon, as furious as Orlando, of whose humors, and Passions, I had
rather you should read them, then I Act them. In the end, by one (or rather by
all) he was recovered. A voice did mad him, and a Song did recure him* Four
in one sent him out of this world, and one with four redeemed him to the
world. To whose unusual streynes in Music, and emphaticall Emphasis of Love,
I will leave you to turn over a new Leaf: This only I will end with: Who of
Love should better write,
Than he that Love learnes to indita?


DAIPHANTVS Proem.
I Sing the old World in an Infant Story,
I sing the new World in an ancient Dittie:
I sing this World: yea, this worlds shame and glory,
I sing a Medley, of rigor, and of Pity:
I sing the Courts, Cities, and the Country fashions,
Yet sing I but of love, and her strange passions.
I sing that Antheme, Lovers sigh in sadness,
I sing sweet tunes of joys in wo-ven Verses:
I sing those Lines I once did act in madness,
I sing and weep, (tears follow Births and Herses.)
I sing a Dirge, a Fury did indight it,
I sing My Self, whilst I my Self do write it.
I invoke (to grace my Artlesse labor)
The faithful Goddess, men call Memory,
(True Poets treasure and their wits best favor)
To deck my Muse with truest Poesy.
Though Love write well, yet Passion blindes th'affecton,
"Man never rules right, that is in the least subjection.
Sweet Memory (souls life) new life increasing,
The eye of Justice, tongue of eloquence;
The lock of Larning, Fountain never ceasing,
The Cabinet of Secrets, Caske of Sense,
Which gouern'll Nature, teaches man his awe,
That art all Conscience, and yet rulst by Law.
Bless (thou) this Love song-ayre of my best wishes,
(Thou art the Parent nourishes desire)
Blow gentle winds, safeland me at my Blisses,
" Love still mouats high though Lovers not aspire.
My Poem's truth, ^ond Poets seigne at pleasure,
"A Loving Subject, is a Princes treasure.
THE PASSIONS OF LOVE.
IN Venice fair; the City most admired
There lived a Gallant, who Da^phantus hight,
Right Nobly borne, well Lettered, Loved, Desired,
Of every Courtyer in their most delight:
'So full of Pleasaunce, that he seemed to be,
'A man begot in Venus infancy.
His face was fair, full comely was his feature,
Lip't like the Cherrie, with a Wantons eye:
A Mars in anger, yet a Venus Creature,
Made part of Cynthia, most of Mercury:
A pitied soul, so made of Love and hate,
Though still beloved, in Love unfortunate.
Thus made by Nature, Fortune did conspire,
To balance him, with weight of Cupids Wings:
Passant in Love, yet often in great desire;
Sudden in Love, not stayed in any thing:
He courted all, not loved, and much did strive,
To die for Love, yet never meant to wiue.
As Nature made him fair, so likewise witty,
(She not content) his thoughts thus very fickle;
Fortune that gained him, plac'st him in this City
To wheel his head, which she had made most tickle
Fortune made him beloved and so distraught him,
His reins let forth, he fell, and Cupid caught him.
Not far from Venice, in an Abbie fair,
(Well wal'd about) two worthy Ladies dwelt,
Who Virgins were; so sweet and Debonayre
The ground they trod on, of their odor smelt:
Two Virgin-Sisters (matchless in a Pheare)
Had lived Virgins, wel-nigh eighteen year.
Eurialae the Elder Sister's named
The other was Urania, the wise:
Nature for making them was surely blamed
Venus her self, by them all did despise.
'Such beauties, with such virtue, So combind
'That al exceeds; yet naught exceeds their mind.
Eurialae, so shows as does the Sun,
When mounted on the continent of Heaven:
Yet often she is clowded, but when her glorie's come
Two Suns appear to make her glory even.
'Her smiles sends brightness, when the Sun's not bright.
'Her looks give beauty, when the sun lends light.
Modest and humble of Nature mild and sweet,
Unmatched beauty with her virtue meeting:
Proud that her lowly bezaunce does regreet
With her chaste silence ("Virtue ever keeping.)
'This is the Sun, that sets, before it rise,
'This is a Star. No less are both her eyes.
Her beauty pearlesse, pearlesse is her mind,
Her body matchless, matchless are her thoughts
Her self but one, but one like her we find,
Her wealth's her virtue: (such virtue is not bought
'This is a heaven on earth, makes her divine;
'This is the Sun, obscures where it does shi^^
Urania next (Oh that I had that Art
Could write her worth) her worth no eye may see:
Or that her tongue (oh heaven) were now my heart*
what silver Lines in showers should drop from me:
My heart she keeps, how can I then indite?
'No heart-lesse creature, can Loue-passions write.
As a black veil upon the wings of morn,
Brings forth a day as clear as Venus face,
Or, a fair Jewel by an Ethiope worn,
Inricheth much the eye, which it does grace,
Such is her beauty, if it well be told,
Plac'st in a Iettie Chariot set with gold.
Her hair, Nights Canopie in mourning weeds
Is still enthroned, when locked within is seen
A Deity, drawn by a pair of Steedes
Like Venus eyes, And if the like have been
Her eyes two radiant Stars, but yet divine;
Her face daies-sun, (heaven al) if once they shine.
Upon the left side of this heavenly feature,
(In Curious work) Nature has set a Seal,
Wherein is writ: This is a matchless Creature:
Where wit and beauty strives for the appeal.
The Judges chosde are Love and Fancy; They rise,
And looking on her, with her left their eyes.
Her Wit and Beauty, were at many fraies,
Whether the deep impressions did cause:
Nature, said Beauty; Art, her Wit did praise:
Love, thought her face; her tongue had Truths applause.
Whilst they contend, which was the better part;
I lent an Eye, She robbed me of my heart.
Sisters these two are, like the Day and Night,
Their glories by their virtues they do Merit:
One as the Day to see the others might,
The others Night, to shadow a high Spirit:
"If all were Day, how could a Lover rest?
"Or if all Night, Lovers were too much blessed.
Both fair. As eke their bodies tall and slender,
Both wise, yet Silence shows their modesty:
Both grave, although they both are young and tender:
Both humble hearted: Not in Policy
So fair, wise, grave, and humble are esteemed,
'Yet what men see, the worst of them is deemed.
' Nature, that made them fair, does love perfection;
'What youth counts wisdom, Age does bring to trial,
'Graue years in youth: in Age needs no direction:
'An humble heart deserves, finds no denial.
Faires ring their Knells, and yet Fame never dies,
"True Iudgeme^t's from the heart, not from the eyes.
These two, two Sisters, Cozens to this Lover;
He often courts, As was his wonted fashion:
Who swears alls fair * yet has no heart to prove her,
Seems still in Love, or in a Lovers passion,
Now learn's this Lesson, and Loue-scoffers find it,
" Cupid hits rightest when Lovers do least mind it.
Although his guise were fashioned to his mind,
And wording Love, As complement he used,
Seemed still to jest at Love, and Lovers kind,
Never obtainde, but where he was refusde:
Yet now, his words with wit so are rewarded,
He loves, loves two, loves all; of none regarded.
Now he that laughed to hear true Lovers sigh
Can bite his Lips until his heart does bleed:
Who Iyb'd at al, loves al; each days his night,
Who scorned, now weeps and howles, writes his own meed
'He that would bandy Love, is now the Ball,
'Who feared no hazard, himself has taken the fall.
'Beautie and Virtue, who did praise the fashion,
'VVho Love and Fancy thought a Comodie,
'Now is turned Poet, and writes Love in Passion,
'His Verses fits the bleeding Tragedy:
In Willow weeds right well he acts his part,
"His Scenes are tears, whose Embryon was his heart.
He loves, where love, to all does prove disaster,
'His eyes no sooner see, but he is straight blind;
His kindred, friends, or foes, he follows faster
Then his own good; he is now but too too kind:
He that spent all, would feign find out loves treasure,
Extremities are for extremes the measure.
Thus thinks he of the words he spent in vain;
And wishes now his tongue had Eloquence:
He Is dumb, all motion (that) a world could gain,
A Center now without circumference:
Cupid with words, who fought: would teach him Art,
Has lost his tongue, and with it left his heart.
'He swears he loves, (the heat does prove the fire)
'He weeps his Love, his tears show his affection,
'He writes his Love; his Lines plead his desire,
'He sings his Love, the Dittie mournes the action,
He sings, writs, weeps and swears, that he is in sadness
"It is believed, not cured, Love turns to madness.
'Loue once dissembled, Oaths are a grace most slender,
'Teares often are heard Ambassadors for beauty:
'Words writ in gold, an iron heart may render:
'A passion song shows much more hope the^ duty,
Oaths spoke in tears; words song, prove no true Ditty,
"A fained Love, must find a fained pity.
Thus is the good Daiphantus like the Fly
Who playing with the candle feels the flame,
"The smiles of scorn, are Lovers misery,
"That soul's most vexed, is grieved with his name.
Though kind Daiphantus, do most love protest,
'Yet is his cross, still to be thought in jest.
Poor torturde Lover, like a periurde soul,
Swears till he is hoarse, yet never is believed,
"(Whose once a Villain, still is counted foul)
"Oh woeful pity, when with wind releeu'de,
'Learns this by rote, Though Love unconstant be
'They must prove constant, will her comforts see.
Now to the humble heart of his dread Saint,
Eurialae, he kneels, but's not regarded:
Then to Urania, sighs till he grows faint,
Such is her wit, In silence he is rewarded:
'His humble voice, Eurialae accuses,
'His sighing Passion, Urania refuses.
'Then lifts he up his eyes, but Heaven frowneth,
'Bowes down his head* Earth is a Mass of sorrow:
'Runnes to the seas, the sea, it storms and howleth;
'Hies to the woods, the Birds sad tunes do borrow:
Heaven, Earth, sea, Woods and al things do conspire,
'He burn in Love, yet friese in his desire.
The Ladies Jest, command him to seigne still,
Tell him how one day, he may be in love,
That Lovers reason, has not Loves free will:
Smile in disdain, to think of that he proves.
'Oh, me Daiphantus, howart thou advised?
'When he is less pitied, then he is despised.
They hold this but his humor, seem so wise,
And many Lovers stories forth do bring,
Court him with Shadows, whilst he catches Flies,
Biting his fingers till the blood forth spring,
Then do they much commend his careless passion,
'Call him a Lover of our Courtiers Fashion.
All this do they in modesty; yet free
From thinking him so honest as in truth,
Much less so kind, as to love two or three,
Him near allied, and he himself a Youth:
'Till with the sweat which from his sufferings life,
'His face is pearled, like the lights his eyes.
Then with his looke-down-cast, and trembling hand,
A high Dutch color, and a Tongue like ye,
Apart with this Eurialae to stand
Endeavors He; This was his last diuice;
'Yet in so humble strains this Gallant courts her,
'The wind being hie^, his breath it never hurts her
Speechles thus stands he, till she feared him dead,
And rubbes his temples, calls and cries for aid:
Water is fetched and spung'd into his head,
Who then startes up: from dreaming as he said,
And craving absence of all but this Saint,
He began to court her, but with a heart right faint.
Bright star of Phoebus, Goddess of my thought,
Behold thy Vassal, humbled on his knee:
Behold for thee, what Gods and Art has wrought,
A man adoring, of Love, the lowest degree:
I love, I honor thee: (no more) There stayde,
As if forsworn: Even so was he affrayde.
Eurialae now spoke (yet seemed in wonder)
Her lips when parting, heaven did open his treasure,
Oh do not, do not love; I will not sunder
A heart in two, Love has nor height nor measure,
Live still a Virgin; Then I Will be thy lover,
Heaven here did close: no tongue could after move her.
As if in heaven he was ravished so,
Oh Love, oh Voice, oh Face, which is the glory:
Oh Day, oh Night, oh Age, oh worlds of Joy,
Of every part true love might write a story,
"Convert my sighs, oh to some angels tongue,
"To die for Love is life, death is best young.
She gone, Urania came; he on the flower,
But sight of her revived this noble sire;
And as if Mars did thunder: words did shower,
"(Love speaks in heat, when it is in most desire)
She made him mad, whose sight had him reuiu'de
Now speaks he plainly: storms past ye air is glide.
Why was I made? to bear such woe and grief?
Why was I borne? But in Love to be norisht?
Why then for Love; Love of all virtues chief,
And I not pitied, though I be not cherisht?
What? did my eyes offend in virtue seeing?
Oh no; true virtue is the Lovers being.
"Beauty and virtue, are the twins of life,
"Love is the mother which them forth does bring:
"Wit with discretion ends the Lovers strife,
"Patience with silence is a glorious thing.
"Love crowns a man, love gives to al due merit,
"Men without love, are bodies without spirit.
"Love to a mortal; is both life and treasure,
"Love changd to wedlock, doubleth in her glory,
"Love is the Iem, whose worth is without measure,
"Fame dies, if not in tomb within Loves story.
"Man that lives, lives not, if he wants content,
"Man that dies, dies not, if with Loves consent.
Thus spoke Daiphantus, and thus spoke he well,
Which wise Urania well did understand,
So well she like it, As it did excel:
Now graced she him, with her white slender hand.
With words most sweet, A color fresh and fair,
In heavenly speech, she began his woes declare.
My good Daiphantus: Love it is no toy,
Cupid though blind, yet strikes the heart at last,
His force you feel whose power must breed your joy,
This is the meede for scoffs you on him cast.
You love, who scorned: your love with scorn is quite,
You love yet want, your love with want is spite.
" Love plays the Wanton, where she means to kill,
" Love rides the Fool, and spurs without direction:
" Love weeps like you, yet laughs at your good will:
" Love is of all things, but the true confection;
" Love is of every thing: yet it self's but one thing:
" Love is any thing; yet indeed is nothing.
We Virgins know this; (though not the force of Love)
For we two Sisters live as in a Cell:
Nor do we scorn it, though we it not approve,
By Prayer we hope, her charms for to repel.
And thus adieu: But you in Progress go,
To find fit place to warble forth your woe.
"Who first seeks mercy, is the last for grief:
Thus did she part; whose Image stayed behind,
He in a trance stands mute, finds no relief,
(For she was absent, whose tongue pleased his mind)
But like a hartlesse, and a hurtlesse Creature,
In admiration of so sweet a Feature.
At length looked up; his shadow only seeing,
Sighs to himself and weeps* yet silent stands,
Kneels, rises, walks, all this without true being,
Sure he was there; though fettred in Loues-bands:
"His lips departed; Parted were his blisses,
"Yet for pure Love, each lip the other kisses.
Revived by this, or else Imagination,
Recalls things past, the time to come laments,
Records his Love, but with an acclamation,
Repents himself, and all these Accidents:
Now with the wings of Love he gins to raise,
His Love to gain, thus women he does praise.
'Women than Men are purer creatures far,
'The soul of souls, the blessed gift of Nature,
'To men a heaven, To men the brightest star,
'The pearl that is matchles; high without al stature,
'So full of goodness, that bounty waits still
'Vpon their trencher, feeds them with free will.
Where seek we virtue, learn true Art or glory?
Where find we joy that lasts, still is spending?
But in sweet women of man's life the Story,
" Alpha they are, Omega is their ending:
Their virtues shine with such a sun of brightness,
"Yet he is unwise that looks in them for Lightness.
Oh let my Pen relate mine own decay,
There are, which are not (or which should not be)
Some shaped like saints, whose steps are not the way:
Oh, let my Verse, not name their infamy,
"These hurt not all; but even the wandering eye,
"Which fondly gapes for his own misery.
These do not harm, the Honest or the Just,
The faithful Lover, or the virtuous Dame:
But those whose souls be only given to Lust,
Care more for pleasure, then for worthy Fame.
But peace my Muse, for now me thinks I hear,
An Angels voice come warbling in my ear.
Not distant far, within a Garden fair,
The sweet ^rtesia sang unto her Lute:
Her voice charmde Cupid, and perfumde the Air,
Made beasts stand still, and birds for to be mute.
"Her voice and beauty proved so sad a ditty,
Who saw was blind, who heard, soon sued for pity.
(This Lady was no Virgin, like the rest,
Yet near allied;) By Florence City dwelling
"Nature, and Art, within her both were blessed,
"Music in her, and Love had his excelling:
To visit her fair Cozens of she came,
'Perhaps more iocound, but no whit to blame.
Fortune had crossed her with a churlish Mate,
(Who Strymon hight) A Palmer was his Sire:
Full Nobly borne, And of a wealthy state,
His son a child, not borne to his desire.
'Thus was she crossed, which caused her thereby,
' Daiphantus grief to mourn by Simpathie.
Daiphantus hearing such a Swan-tun'd voice,
Was ravished, as with Angels Melody,
Though in this Laborinth blessed, could not rejoice,
Nor yet could see, what brought this Harmony.
At length this Goddess ceast; began draw near,
'Who when he saw, he saw not, it was her sphere.
Away then crept he, on his knees and hands,
To hide himself, thought Venus came to plauge him,
Which she espying "like the Sun she stands,
"As with her beams, she thought for to aswage him:
"But like the Sun, which gazed on, blinds the eye,
"So He by her, and so resou'ld to die.
At this in wonder, softly did she pace it,
Yet suddenly was stayed. His Verses ceaz'd her
Which he late writ, forgot, thus was he graced,
She read them over, and the writing pleased her:
'For Cupid framed two Mottoes in her heart,
'The one as Dian's, the other for his Dart.
"She read and pitied, reading pity taught:
"She Loved and hated, Hate to love did turn:
"She smilde and wep^, her weeping smiling brought:
"She hoped and feared; her hopes in fear did mourn:
She read, loved, smiled and hoped, but it was in vain;
'Her tears still dread; and pity, hate did gain.
'She could have loved him, such true verses making,
'She might have loved him, and yet love beguiling,
'She would have kissed him* but feared his awaking,
'She might have kissed him, and sleep sweetly smiling.
'She thus afear'd, did fear what she most wished;
'He thus in hope, still hoped for that he missed.
He lookte, They two, long each on other gazed,
Sweet silence pleaded, what each other thought,
Thus Love and Fancy both alike amazed,
As if their tongues and hearts had bin distraught.
Artesias voice, thus courted him at length,
The more she spoke the greater was his strength.
Good gentle Sir, your Fortunes I bemone,
And wish my state so happy as to ease you,
But she that grieude you, She it is alone,
Whose breath can cure, and whose kind words appease you,
Were I that She; heaven should my star extinguish,
If you but loved me, ere I would relinquish.
Yet noble Sir, I can no love protest,
For I am wedded, (oh word full fraught with woe)
But in such manner, as good love is blessed,
In honest kindness, I Will not prove your foe:
Mine own experience does my counsel prove,
"I know to pity, yet not care to love.
A Sister, yet nature has given me
A virgin true, right fair, and sweetly kind;
I^ for her good, Fortune has driven me
To be a comfort: your heart shall be her mind,
My woes yet tells me, she is best a maid:
And here she stopped her tears, her words thus staide.
Daiphantus then in number without measure
Began her praises which no Pen can end,
Oh Saint, oh Sun of heaven and earth the treasure:
Who lives if not thy honor to defend?
"Ah me, what mortal can be in love so strange,
"That wedding virtue will a whoring range?
She like the morning is still fresh and fair,
The Elements of her, they all do borrow:
The Earth, the Fire, the Waters, and the Air,
There strength, heat, moisture, liuelines: no sorrow
Can virtue change? beauty has but one place,
The hearts still perfect; though impald the face.
Oh eyes, no eyes, but Stars still clearly shining,
Oh face, no face, but shape of Angels fashion:
Oh lips, no lips, but bliss, by kiss refining,
Oh heart, no heart, but of true love right Passion,
Oh eyes, face, lips, and heart, if not too cruel,
To see, feel, taste, and love, earths rarest Jewel.
This said, he paused, new praises now devising,
Kneels to Apollo, for his skill and Art,
When came the Ladies, At which he arising,
Twixt lip, and lip, he had nor lips nor heart.
'His eyes, their eyes, so sweetly did incumber,
Although awak't, yet in a golden slumber.
Most like a Lion, raised from slumbring ease,
He cast his looks full grimly them among:
'At length, he firmly knit what might appease
'His Brow: lok't steadfastly and long
'At one: till all their eyes with his eyes met alike
'On fair Vitullia; who his heart did strike.
Vitullia fair, yet brown, So mixed together,
As Art and Nature strove, which was the purest:
So sweet her smilings were, a grace to either,
That heavens glory in that face seemed truest.
" Venus excepted; when the God her wooed,
"Was never so fair, so tempting yet so good.
'VVonder not Mortals, though all Poets saine,
The Muses Graces were in this She Is favor:
'Nor wonder, though he strove his tongue to gain,
For I leese mine, in thinking of his labor.
"Well may he love, I write, and all wits praise her,
"She Is so all humble; Learning cannot raise her.
' Daiphantus often sigh't Oh; often said fair,
'Then looks, and sighs: and the^ cries wonderful;
'Thus did he long: and truly it was not rare
'The object was, which made his mind so dull.
'Pray pardon him; for better to cry Oh,
'Then feel that passion which caused him sigh so.
Now, all were silent, not alone this Lover:
Till came Ismenio, Brother to this Saint,
Whose haste made sweat, his tongue he could not prove her,
For this aga'st him that his heart was saint:
Thus all amazed; none knowing any cause,
" Ismenio breathless, here had time to pause.
At length Ismenio, who had wit and skill,
Questioned the reason of this strange effect:
At last related (Haste out went his will)
He told them, he was sent them to direct
Where hunting sports their eyes should better please,
Who first went forth, Daiphantus most did ease.
They gone, Daiphantus to his Standish hies,
Thinks in his writs Vitullia's beauties wear,
But what he wrote, his Muse not iustifies,
Bids him take time. "Love badly writes in fear:
Her worthy praise if he would truly wite,
Her Kisses, Nector, must the same indite.
(Art and sweet nature, let your influence drop
From me like rain; Yes, yes, in golden showers:
"(Whose end is Virtue, let him never stop)
But fall on her like dew on sprinkling flowers:
That both together meeting, may beget
An Orpheus, Two Iems in a soil richly set.
Thus Ravished, then distracted as was deemed,
Not taught to write of Love in this extreme,
In Love, in fear, yea, trembling as it seemed,
If praising her, he should not keep the mean:
Thus vexed he wept, his tears entreated pity,
"(But Love unconstant, tunes a woeful Dittie.
Now kneels to Venus, Faithfulness protested,
To this, none else, this was his only Saint,
Vowed e're her service, Or to be arrested
To Venus Censure; Thus he left to faint:
His Love brought wit, and wit ingrendred Sprite,
True love and wit, thus learned him to indite.
As the mild lamb, runs forth from shepherds fold,
By ravenous Woolues is caught and made a pray:
So is my Sense, by which Love takes hold,
Tormented more then any tongue can say:
The difference is, they torturde so do die,
I feed the torment, breeds my misery.
'Consum'd by her I live, such is her glory,
'Despis'd of her I love, I more adore her,
I Will never write ought, but of her virtues story,
"Beauty vnblasted is the eyes rich storer.
If I should die; Oh who would ring loves knell?
"Faint not Daiphantus, wise me^ love not so well.
Like Heavens Artist the Astronomer,
Gazing on Stars often, to the Earth does fall,
So I Daiphantus, now Loves Harbinger,
Am quite condemned, to Loves Funeral:
"Who falls by women, by them often does rise,
"Ladies have lips to kiss as well as Eyes.
But tush, thou fool, thou love all thou see,
Who once thou love, thou should change her never
Constant in Love Daiphantus see thou be,
If thou hope comfort, Love but once, and ever.
Fortune, Oh, be so good to let me find
A Lady living, of this constant mind.
Oh, I would wear her, in my hearts heart-gore,
And place her on the continent of stars:
Think heaven and earth like her, had not one more,
Would fight for her, till all my face were skarres.
'But if that women be such fickle She Is,
"Men may be like them in infirmities.
Oh no; Daiphantus, women are not so,
It Is but their shadows (Pictures merely painted:
Then turn poor lover, (Oh heaven) not to my woe
Then to Vitullia: with that word he fainted,
Yet she that wounds, did heal, like her no heaven
"Ods in a man, a woman can make even.
Oh (My) Vitullia, let me write (That) down,
Oh sweet Vitullia; nature made thee sweet,
Oh kind Vitullia; (Truth has the surest ground:
I Will weep, or laugh, so that our hearts may meet:
"Love is not always merry, nor still weeping,
"A drop of each, Loves ioies are swets in sleeping
(Her name) in golden letters on my breast I Will grave,
Around my temples in a garland wear,
My art shall be, her favor for to have:
My learning still, her honor high to rear,
My lips shall cloze, but to her sacred name
My tongue be silent, but to spread her Fame.
In Woods, Groaues, Hills, Vitullias name shall ring
In Meadows, Orchiards, Gardens, sweetest and fair,
I Will learn the birds, her name alone to sing:
All Quires shall chaunt it in a heavenly Air,
'The Day shall be her Usher; Night her Page:
'Heauen her Palace, and this Earth her stage.
'Virgins pure chastnes in her eyes shall be,
'Women, true love from her true mind shall learn,
'Widdowes, their mourning in her face shall see,
'Children, their duty in her speech discern:
And all of them in love with each but I,
Who fear her love, will make me fear to die.
'My Orisons are still to please this creature,
'My valor sleeps, but when she is defended:
'My wits still Iaded, but when I praise her feature,
'My life is hers* In her begun, and ended.
Oh happy day, wherein I wear not willow:
Thrice blessed night; wherein her brest's my pillow.
'Ile serve her, as the Mistress of all pleasure,
'Ile love her, as the Goddess of my soul:
'Ile keep her, as the Jewel of all treasure,
'Ile live with her; yet out of loves control:
'That all may know; I will not from her part,
'Ile double lock her, in my lips and heart.
'If ere I sigh, It shall be for her pity,
'If ere I mourn, her Funeral draws near:
'If ere I sing: her virtue is the dittie,
'If ere I smile, her beauty is the sphere:
'All that I do, is that I may admire her,
'All that I wish, is that I still desire her.
But peace Daiphantus: Music is only sweet,
When without discord; A Consort makes a heaven,
The ear is ravished, when true voices meet,
"Odds, but in Music never makes things even.
In voices difference, breeds a pleasant Dittie;
In love, a difference brings a scornful pity.
Whose was the tongue, Eurialae defended?
Whose was the wit, Urania did praise?
Whose were the lips Artesias voice commended?
Whose was the heart, loved all, al crowned with baies:
Sure it was my self; what did I? O I tremble,
Yet I Will not weep, wise men may love dissemble.
Fie no; fond love has ever his reward,
A Sea of tears, A world of sighs and groans:
Ah me, Vitullia will have no regard
To ease my grief, and cure me of my mones:
If once her ear, should hearken to that voice
Relates my Fortunes in Loves fickle choice.
But now, I will their worth with here is declare,
That Truth by Error, may have her true being,
"Things good, are lessned by the thing that is rare,
"Beauty increases, by a blackness seeing.
'Wo so is fair and chaste, they sure are best,
'Such is Vitullia, such are all the rest.
'But she is fair, and chaste, and wise, what then?
'So are they all, without a difference:
'She's fair, chaste, wise, and kind, yes to all men,
The rest are so: Number makes Excellence.
'She's fair, chaste, wise, kind, rich, yet humble,
'They three her equal: "virtue ca^ never stumble.
' Vtiullia is the Sun, they stars of night,
'Yet night's the bosom wherein the Sun does rest:
'The Moon her self borrowes of the Suns light,
'All by the stars take counsel to be blessed,
"The day's the Sun: yet Cupid can it blind,
"The stars at night: sleep cures ye troubled mind.
'She is a Rose, the fairer, so the sweeter,
'She is a Lute, whose belly tunes the Music,
'She is my Prose, yet makes me speak all Meeter,
'She is my life, yet sickness me with Physic:
'She is a Virgin, that makes her a Jewel,
'She will not love me, therein she is cruel.
" Eurialae, is like sleep when one is weary;
" Urania is like a golden slumber,
" Artesias voice, like dreams that makes man merry,
" Vitullia, like a Bed, all these in comber.
1 Sleep, 2 Slumber, 3 Dreams, upon a 4 Bed is best,
First, Second, Third, but in the Fourth is blessed.
Oh, but Vitullia, what? She Is wonders prittie,
Oh I, and what? so is she very fair;
Oh yes, and what? she is like her self most witty:
And yet, what is she? She is all but Air.
What can Earth be, but Earth? so we are all,
'Peace then my Muse; Opinion often does fall.
; Eurialae, I honor for humility,
' Urania, I reverence for her wit,
' Artesia, I adore for true agillitie,
'Three Graces for the Goddesses most fit:
Each of these gifts are blessed in their faces,
Oh, what is Vitullia, who has all these Graces?
She Is but a Lady, So are all the rest,
As pure, as sweet, as modest, yea as loyal;
Yes, She Is the shadow (shadows are the lest)
Which tells the hour of virtue by her Dyall:
'By her, men see there is on earth a heaven,
'By the^, men know her virtues are matched even
In praising all, much time he vainly spent,
Yet thought none worthy but Vitullia;
Then called to mind, he could not well repent
The love he bare the wise Urania.
Eurialae, Artesia, all, such beauties had,
Which as they pleased him, made him well nigh mad.
' Eurialae, her beauty his eyesight harmed,
' Urania, her wit his tongue incensed,
' Artesia, her voice, his ears had charmed,
'Thus poor Daiphantus, was with love tormented.
Vitullius beauty as he did impart,
The others virtues vanquished his heart.
At length he grew, as in an ecstasy
Twixt love and love, whose beauty was the truer,
His thoughts thus diverse as in a Lunacie,
He starts and stares, to see whose was the purer:
Often treads a Maze, runs, suddenly then stays,
Thus with himself, himself makes many frayes.
Now with his fingers, like a Barber snaps,
Plays with the fire-pan, as it were a Lute,
Unties his shoe-strings, then his lips he laps,
Whistles awhile, and thinks it is a Flute:
At length, a glass presents it to his sight,
Where well he acts, fond love in passions right.
His chin he strokes, swears beardles men kiss best,
His lips anoynts, says Ladies use such fashions,
Spets on his Napkin; terms that the Bathing Jest,
Then on the dust, describes the Courtiers passion.
Then humble cal's: though they do still aspire,
"Ladies then fall, when Lords rise by Desire.
Then stradling goes, says Frenchmen fear no Bears
Vows he will travail, to the Siege of Breast,
Swears Captains, they do all against the hear:
Protests Tobacco, is A smoke-dride Jest,
Takes up his pen, for a Tabacco-pipe;
Thus all besmeard, each lip the other wipe.
His breath, he thinks the smoke; his tongue a cole,
Then calls for bottell-ale; to quench his thirst:
Runs to his Inke-pot, drinks, then stops the hole,
And thus grows madder, then he was at first.
Tasso, he finds, by that of Hamlet, thinks.
Terms him a madman; than of his Inkhorne drinks.
Calls Players fools, the fool he judges wisest,
Will learn them Action, out of Chaucers Pander:
Proves of their Poets bawdes even in the highest,
Then drinks a health; and swears it is no slander.
Puts off his clothes; his shirt he only wears,
Much like mad- Hamlet; thus as Passion tears.
Who calls me forth from my distracted thought?
Oh Serberus, if thou, I prethy speak?
Revenge if thou? I was thy Rival ought,
In purple gores I Will make the ghosts to reake:
Vitullia, oh Vitullia, be thou still,
I Will have revenge, or harrow up my will.
I Will fallow up the wrinkles of the earth,
Go down to Hell and knock at Plutoes gate,
I Will turn the hills to valleys: make a dearth
'Of virtuous honor to eternal Fate.
I Will beat the winds, and make the tides keep back,
Reign in the sea, That Lovers have no wrack.
Yes, tell the Earth, it is a Murderer,
Has slain Vitullia, oh, Vitullia's dead:
I Will count blind Cupid for a Conjurer,
And with wild horses will I rend his head.
I with a Pickax, will pluck out his brains,
Laugh at this Boy, ease Lovers of much pains.
Oh then, I Will fly, I Will swim, yet stay; and then
I Will ride the Moon, and make the clouds my Horse,
"Make me a Ladder of the heads of men,
Clime up to heaven: yes, my tongue will force
To Gods and Angels; Oh, I Will never end,
Till for Vituillia all my cries I spend.
Then like a spirit of pure Innocence,
I Will be all white, and yet behold I Will cry
Revenge, Oh Lovers this my sufferance,
Or else for Love, for Love, a soul must die.
Eurialae, Urania, Artesia, So:
Heart rent in sunder, with these words of woe.
But soft, here comes: who comes? and not calls out
Of Rape and Murder, Love and Villainy:
"Stay wretched man, (who runs (does never doubt
It is thy Soul, thy Saint, thy Deity:
Then call the Birds to ring a mourning Knell,
For mad Daiphantus, who does love so well.
Oh sing a Song, parted in parcels three,
I Will bear the burden still of all your grief,
"Who is all woe, can tune his misery
"To discontents, but not to his relief.
Oh kiss her, kiss her, And yet do not do so:
They bring some joy, but with short joys long woe.
Upon his knees; Oh Goddesses behold,
A Caitife wretch bemoning his mishappe,
If ever pity, were hired without gold,
Lament Daiphantus, once in Fortunes Lap:
Lament Daiphantus, whose good deeds now slu^ber,
Lament a lover, whose woe no tongue can nu^mber.
My woes: there did he stay, fell to the ground,
Rightly divided into blood and tears,
As if those words had given a mortal wound,
So lay he foming, with the weight of cares.
Who this had seen, and seeing had not wept,
Their hearts were sure from crosses ever kept.
The Ladies all, who late from hunting came,
Untimely came, to view this Map of sorrow,
Surely all wept, and sooth it was no shame,
For, from his grief, the world might truly borrow.
As he lay speechless, grou'ling, all undressed,
So they stood weeping, silence was their best.
Ismenio with these Ladies bare a part,
And much bemoan'de him, though he knew not why,
But kind compassion, struck him to the heart,
To see him mad: much better see one die.
Thus walks Ismenio* and yet often did pause:
At length, A writing made him know the cause.
He read, till words like thunder pierst his heart;
He sigh't, till sorrow seemed it self to mourn,
He wept, till tears like ysacles did part,
He pitied so, that pistle hare did scorn.
He read to sigh, and weep for pitties sake,
The less he read, the less his heart did quake.
At length resolved, he up the writing takes,
And to the Ladies trauells as with child,
The birth was Love, (such love (as discord makes;
The Midwife Patience, thus in words full mild^
He writ with tears, that which with blood was writ,
The more he read, the more they pitied it.
They look upon Daiphantus, he not seeing,
And wondered at him, but his sense was parted,
They loved him much; though little was his being,
And sought to cure him, though he was faint hearted:
Ismenio thus, with speed resolves to ease him,
By a sweet song, his Sister should appease him.
Ismenio was resolved, he would be eased,
And was resolved, of no means, but by Music,
Which is so heavenly that it has released
The danger often, not to be cured by Physic.
Her tongue and hand, thus married together
Could not but please him, who so loved either.
But first before his madness were alayd,
They offered Incence at Dianaes Shrine,
And much besought her, now to be apayd:
Which was soon granted to these Saints divine.
Yet so: that mad Daiphantus must agree,
Never to love, but live in Chastity.
Thus they adjur'd him, by the Gods on high,
Never hence forth to shoot with Cupids Quiver,
Nor love to feine; for there is no remedy,
If once relapst, then was he mad for ever:
Tortured Daiphantus, now a sign did make,
And kind Ismenio, this did undertake.
Then began Artesia play upon her Lute,
Whose voice sang sweetly, now a mourning Ditty,
"Love her admired, though he that loved were mute,
Cupid himself feared he should sue for pity.
Oh, wondrous virtue! words spoken are but wind,
But sung to prick-song, they are joys divine.
'I heard her sing, but still methought I dreamed,
'I heard her play, but I me thought did sleep,
'The Day and Night, till now were never weaned,
' Venus, and Dian ravished; both did weep.
'They which each hated, now agreed to say,
'This was the Goddess both of night and day.
My heart and ears, so ravished with her voice,
I still forgot, what still I heard her sing
The tune: Surely of Sonnets this was all the choice,
Poets do keep it as a charming thing.
'What think you of the joys that Daipha^tus had,
'When for such Music I would still be mad?
The Birds came chirping to the windows round,
And so stood still, as if they ravished wear,
Beasts forth the forest came, brought with the sound,
The Lion laid him down as if in fear.
The Fishes in fresh Rivers swam to shore,
'Yea, had not Nature stayed them, had done more.
This was a sight, whose eyes had ever seen?
This was a voice, such music nere was heard,
This paradise was it, where who had been
'Might well have thought of hell and not afeard.
Sure hell it self, was heaven in this sphere,
'Mad-men, wild beasts, and all, here tamed wear.
Like as a King his chair of state ascends,
(Being newly made a God upon the earth:
In stately amounts till step by step, be ends,
Thinks it to heaven A true assending birth:
So hies Daiphantus, on his legs and feet,
As if Daiphantus, now some God should meet.
He looks upon himself, not without wonder,
He wonders at himself, what he might be:
He laughes unto himself, thinks he is a slumber,
He weeps unto himself, himself to see:
And sure to hear and see what he had done,
Might make him swear, but now ye world begun.
Fully revived, at last Artesia ceast,
When Beasts and Birds, so hideous noise did make
That almost all turned fury, fear was the least,
Yea such a fear, as forced them cry and quake.
Till that Daiphantus, more of reason had,
Then they which mon'd him, lately being mad.
He with more joy, than words could well declare,
And with more words, than his new tongue could tell,
Did strive to speak, such was his love and care
Thus to be thankful: But yet knew not well,
'VVhether his tongue, not tuned unto his heart,
'Or modest silence, would best act his part.
But speak he will; then give attentive ear
To hear him tell a woeful Lovers story,
His hands and eyes to heaven up did he rear:
Grief taught him speech; though he to speak were sorry.
But whatsoever be a Lovers passion,
Daiphantus speaks his, in a mourning fashion.
As over the Mountains walks, the wandering soul
Seeking for rest in his vnresting spirit,
So good Daiphantus (thinking to inroule
Himself in grace, by telling of loves merit)
Was so distracted, how he should commend it,
Where he began, he wished still to end it.
Eurialae, my eyes are hers in right,
Urania, my tongue is as her dew*
Artesia, my ears, to her I dight,
My heart to each. And yet my heart to you:
To you Vitullia, to you, and all the rest:
Who once me cursed; now to make me blessed.
1 Beauty and 2, wit did 1 wound and 2 pearce my heart,
3 Music and 4 Favor 3 gained and 4 kept it sure:
Love lead by 3 Fancy to the 4 last I part,
Love lead by Reason to the first is truer.
3 Beauty and wit first conquered, made me yield
3 Musicque and 4 Favor, rescued, got the field.
To 1 Wit and 2 Beauty, my first love I give,
Music 3 and 4 Favors, my second love have gaind,
All made me mad: and all did me relieve:
Though one recur'd me, when I was sustaind:
Thus troth to say, to all I love did owe,
Therefore to all my love I ever vow.
Thus to the first 1 and 2 his right hand he did tender,
His left hand to the 3 and 4 last, most lovingly, 4:
His tongue kind thanks, first to the last did render,
The while his looks were bent indifferently:
Thus he salutes all, and to increase his Blisses,
From lip, to lip, each Lady now he kisses.
Ismenio (in humble wise salutes he)
With gracious language he returns his heart,
His words so sweetly to his tongue now suits he,
As what he spoke, showed learning with good Art.
Ismenio pleased Daiphantus, Daiphantus all,
"When love, gains love, for love; this love we call
Urania now, bethought what was protested
By young Ismenio at Dianas shrine;
Coniur'd Daiphantus, That no more he Iested,
With Love or Fancy, for they were Divine:
And if he did, that there they all would pray,
He still might live in love, both night and day.
This grieved him much, but folly it was to grieve,
His now obedience showed his own freewill:
He swore he would not love (in show) atchieue,
But live a virgin, chaste and spotless still.
Which said: such Music suddenly delighted,
As all were ravished, and yet all affrighted.
Here parted all, not without Joy and sadness,
Some wept, some smilde, a world it was to here them:
Both springs here met, woe here was clothed with gladness
Heaven was their comfort, it alone did cheer them.
Daiphantus from these springs, some fruit did gather,
"Experience is an Infant, though an ancient father.
Sweet Lady know "the soul looks through our eye-sights,
"Content lives not in shows, or beauty seeing,
"Peace not from number, nor strength in high spirits:
"Joy dies with virtue, yet lives in virtues being.
"Beauty is maskt, where virtue is not hidden,
"Man still desires that fruit he is most forbidden.
"Jewels for Virtue, not for beauty prizde,
"What Is sildome seen breeds wonder, we admir'de it:
"Kings Lines are rare* and therefore well aduiz'de,
"Wisemen not often talk, Fools still desire it.
"Women are books (kept close) they hold much treasure,
"Vnclaspt: sweet ills: most woe lies hid in pleasure.
"Who studies Arts alike, can he prove Doctor?
"Who surfets hardly lives? Drunkards recover:
"Whose wills his law, that conscience needs no Proctor;
"When men turn beasts look there for briutish Lovers.
"Those eyes are pore-blind, look equally on any,
"Thought be a virtue to hinder one by many.
"Who gains by travel, leese lordships for their Manors,
"Must Tarquin-rauish some; Hell on that glory,
"Whose life's in Healths, death soonest gains those Banors,
"Lust still is punished, though treason write the story.
"A rolling eye, A Globe, new worlds discover,
"Who still wheels round, is But a damned Lover.
"Does Faith and Troth lie Bathing? Is Lust pleasure?
"Can Commons be as sweet, as Land enclosed?
"Then virgin sin may well be counted pleasure,
"Where such Lords rule, who lives not ill disposed?
"True Love's a Phoenix, but One until it dies,
"Lust is a Cockatrice, in all, but in her eyes.
Here did he end, more blessed than his wishes.
"(Fame's at the high when Love indights the Story:)
"The private life brings with it heavenly blisses.
"Sweet Contemplation much increases glory:
I Will leave him to the learning of Loves Spell,
"Better part friends, than follow Feends to hell.
Ismenio, with Vitullia went together,
Perhaps both wounded with blind Cupids Dart,
Yet dust they not relate their Love to either,
"( Love if once pitied pearceth to the Heart:
But sure Vitullia, is so fair a Mark,
Cupid would court her, though but by the dark.
Artesia, she must go (the more she is grieved)
To churlish Strymon, her adopted Mate,
Cupid though blind, yet pitied and relieved,
This modest Lady with some happy Fate:
"For what but Virtue, which does all good nourish,
"Could brook her fortunes, much less love and cherish
Eurialae, with good Urania stayed*
'(Where Virtue dwells they only had their being)
"Beauty and wit still fear, are not dismayed,
"For where they dwell, Love ever will be prying.
These two, were one, All good, each could impart,
One was their Fortune, and one was their heart.
("Beauty and Virtue, was true Friend to either,
"Heaven is the sphere, where all men seek for glory:
"Earth is the Grave, where sinners join together,
"Hell keeps the book, inrowles each lustful story.
"Live as we will, death makes of all conclusion,
"Die then to live, or life is thy confusion.
'Beautie and wit in these, fed on affection,
'Labour and industry, were their Twins of life:
'Loue, and true Bounty, were in their subiction,
'Their Bodies with their spirits had no strife.
Such were these two, As grace did them defend,
Such are these two, As with these two I end.
FINIS.
Non Amori sed Virtuti.
The Passionate man's Pilgrimage, supposed to be written by one at the point of
death.
Give me my Scallop shell of quiet,
My staff of Faith to walk upon,
My Scrip of Joy, Immortal diet,
My bottle of salvation:
My Gown of Glory, hopes true gage,
And thus I Will take my pilgrimage.
Blood must be my bodies balmer,
No other balm will there be given
Whilst my soul like a white Palmer
Travels to the land of heaven,
Over the silver mountains,
Where spring the Nectar fountains:
And there I Will kiss
The Bowl of bliss,
And drink my eternal fill
On every milken hill.
My soul will be a dry before,
But after it, will nere thirst more.
And by the happy blisfull way
More peaceful Pilgrims I shall see,
That have shook off their gowns of clay,
And go appareld fresh like me.
I Will bring them first
To slake their thirst,
And then to taste those Nectar suckets
At the clear wells
Where sweetness dwells,
Drawn up by Saints in Crystal buckets.
And when our bottles and all we,
Are filled with immortality:
Then the holy paths we will travel
Strewde with Rubies thick as gravel,
Seelings of Diamonds, Sapphire floores,
High walls of Coral and Pearl Bowres.
From thence to heavens Bribeles hall
Where no corrupted voices brall,
No Conscience molten into gold,
Nor forged accusers bought and sold,
No cause deferd, nor vain spent Journey,
For there Christ is the Kings Attorney:
Who pleades for all without degrees,
And he has Angels, but no fees.
When the grand twelve million Jury,
Of our sins and sinful fury,
Against our souls black verdicts give,
Christ pleades his death, and then we live,
Be thou my speaker taintles pleader,
Vnblotted Lawyer, true proceeder,
Thou mouest salvation even for alms*
Not with a bribed Lawyers palms.
And this is my eternal plea,
To him that made Heaven, Earth and Sea,
Seeing my flesh must die so soon,
And want a head to dine next noone,
Just at the stroke when my veins start and spread
Set on my soul an everlasting head.
Then am I ready like a palmer fit,
To tread those blessed paths which before I writ.
FINIS.

