THE PROTESTATION OF THE NOBLEMEN, BARRONS, GENTLEMEN, BORROWES, MINI STERS,
AND COMMONS; Subscribers of the Confession of Faith and Covenant, lately
renewed within the Kingdom of Scotland, made at the Mercate Cross of
Edinburgh the 22. of September immediately after the reading of the
proclamation, dated September 9. 1638.



Printed in the year of God, 1638.

The Protestation of the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Borrowes, Ministers, and
Commons, etc.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons, His
Majesty's true and loyal Subjects, that whereas our continual supplications,
complaints, articles, and informations presented first to the Lords of His
Majesty's privy Counsel, Next, to His sacred Majesty; and last from time to
time to His Majesty's Commissionar, our long attendance and great patience this
twelve month bygone in waiting for satisfaction of our most just desires, Our
zeal to remove all rubs out of the way, which were either mentioned unto us,
or could be conceaved by us, as hindrances of our pious intentions, aiming at
nothing but the good of the Kingdom, and preservation of the Kirk, which by
consumption or combustion is liklie to expire; delighting to use no other
means but such as are legal, and have been ordinary in this Kirk, since the
reformation, and laboring according to our power and interesse, that all
things might be carried in a peaceable manner worthy of our Profession and
Covenant, Our Protestation containing a hearty thanksgiving for what his
Majesty in his proclamation from his justice had granted of our just desires;
and our Protests and hopes for so much as was not as yet granted. All these made
us confidentlie to expect from his Majesty's royal and compassioned
disposition toward this his native kingdom, that a free general assembly,
and parliament should have been indicted, as the ordinare and most proper
remedies of our greevances, and did constrain us to renew our petition,
earnestly entreating, that His Majesty's Commissionar, would be pleased to
represent unto His Majesty the condition of this Kirk and kingdom, crying in
an extreme exigencie for present help, with the lawfulness of the remedies
prescribed by his Majesty's laws, required by us, and presented to him in some
particular articles, which his Grace promised to recommend to his Majesty, and
to do his best endeavors for obtaining the same; especially the first
article, that there might be indicted a full and free general assembly,
without prelimitation, either in the constitution and members thereof, in the
order and manner of proceeding, or in the matters to be treated: and if there
should be any question or doubt about one of these, or such like particulars,
that the determination thereof might be remitted to the assembly it self, as
the only proper and competent judge. And now after so many suplications,
complaints, articles, and informations, after our necessary protestation,
expressing the humble thankfulness and continued desires of our hearts, after
so long expectation and so much dealing, having with open ears, and attentive
minds heard his Majesty's proclamation, it is our desire, purpose, and
endeavor so to proceed, that we may upon the one part still be thankful to
God, and the King, for the least blinke of His Majesty's countenance, and the
smallest crumbs of comfort that fall unto us from His Majesty's royal hands,
beseeching the Lord, yet further to enlarge his Majesty's heart, for our full
satisfaction, and rejoiceing to the honor of God, the good of this kirk and
kingdom, and his Majesty's never dying fame and glory, that his wife
government and zeal to the service of God, may be a measure and pattern of
desires to all generations hereafter, when they shall be wishing for a
religious and righteous King. And on the other part, that Christ our Lord, the
King of kings, through our neglect or lukewarmnesse, may want no part of his
Soveraignitie and Dominion; and that in our religion, which is more dear unto
us then our lives, we deceive not our selves, with that which can not satisfy,
and make up the breach of this kirk and kingdom, or remove our fears, doubts,
and suspicions, of the innovations of religion: This has made us to observe,
and perceave, that his Majesty's proclamation does ascribe all the late
distractions of this Kirk and Commonwealth, to our conceaved seares of the
innovation of religion and law, as the cause and occasion thereof, and not to
the innovations themselves, with which we have been for a long time, and
especially of late heavily pressed and grieved, as if the cause were rather in
apprehension and fancy, then in realitie and substance. That the service book
and book of Canons are not so far discharged by this proclamation, as they have
been urged by preceding proclamations; for this proclamation only
discharges the practice of them, and rescinds the acts made for establishing
their practice, but does not rescinde the former proclamations, namely that of
the 19. of Februar, at Stirling, and that of the fourth of Julie at Edinburgh,
which give an high approbation to these books, as fit means to maintain
religion, and to beat down all superstition, and withal, declares his
Majesty's purpose, to bring them into this kirk in a fair and legal way; and
thus both our fears, that they may be introduced hereafter, must still
remain, and the liberty of the general Assembly, by such a declaration of
his Majesty's judgment, is not a little prejudged, in the minds of so many as
wisely consider, and compare the preceding proclamations with this which we
now hear, although others who looking upon one step, and not upon the whole
progress, run on rashly, and neither considering what they are doing, nor with
whom they are dealing, may be easily deceived, Qui pauca videt, cito judicat,
a short sight makes a sudden judgment.

That it is declared in this proclamation, that His Majesty neither intends
to innovate any thing in religion or laws, or to admit of any change or
alteration in the true religion already established and professed in this
kingdom: and withal, this is interposed, that the articles of Pearth are
established by the acts of parliament, and general assembly, and dispensation
of the practice only granted, and discharge given, that no person be urged with
the practice thereof; and consequently, His Majesty's intention for the
standing of the acts of the Assembly and Parliament, appointing the articles
of Pearth, is manifest, which is no small prejudice to the freedom of the
general Assembly, That while the Proclamation ordains all his Majesty's
subjects to be liable to the trial and censure of the Judicatories competent,
and that none of them shall use any unlimited and unwarranted power; likewise
that no other oath be administered to Ministers at their entry, then that
which is contained in the Act of Parliament, in both these articles the bishops
are meaned, who are only thereby for the present curbed, against their
exorbitancie and enormities, in exercing their office; but the office of
bishops is thereby not only presupposed as it questionable, but also so
strongly established, that His Majesty declares for the present his
intention, to admit no innovation therein, which is more evident by the
indiction of the Parliament, warning all prelates to be present, as having
voice and place in Parliament: and by the indiction of the assembly, warning
all archbishops and bishops (for so are their diverse degrees and offices
Ecclesiastical here designed and supposed) to be present; as having place and
voice in the Assembly, contrare to the caveats, acts of the Kirk, and our
declinator; and thus a third and great limitation is put upon the general
Assembly. The Proclamation by reason of these many real limitations, and
preiudices of the liberty of the Assembly in the very points, which have
wrought so much woe and disturbance in this Kirk and Kingdom, and wherein the
liberty of the Assembly is most useful and necessary at this time, can
neither satisfy our grievances and complaints, nor remove our fears and
doubts, nor can not without protestation be admitted by us his Majesty's
subjects, who earnestly desire that Truth and Peace may be established, and
that for the reasons following,

1. TO keep silence in any thing, that may serve for the good of the Kirk,
whether it be in preaching, prayer, or in proposing, and voiceing in a lawful
Assembly of the Kirk, is against the word of God, Esai. 62. 6. Ye that are
the Lords remembranceers, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth: 1 King. 18. 21.
Like the halting of the people between two opinions, and their not answering a
word, when the LORD called them to give a testimony; Act. 20. 20. I have
kept back nothing that was profitable unto you: And again, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
Math. 15. 18. Romans 1. 18. Revel. 2. 14. 20. and 3. 15, and therefore to keep
silence, or not to meddle with corruptions, whether in doctrine, sacraments,
worship, or discipline, in a general Assembly of the Kirk, conveened for that
end, were the ready way to move the Lord to deny his Spirit unto us, and to
provoke him to wrath against our proceedings, and might be imputed unto us for
prejudice, for collusion, and for betraying our selves, and the posterity.

2. This predetermination is against our supplications, and protestations,
wherein we have shown our selves so earnest for a free general Assembly,
contrare to every limitation of this kind, so far preiudging the liberty
thereof, is against the Confession of Faith, registrated in the Parliament
1567. declaring, that one cause of the councels of the Kirk is for good policy
and order to be observed in the Kirk, and for to change such things as men
have devised, when they rather foster superstition then edify the Kirk, using
the same, and is against our late Confession, wherein we have promised to
forbear all novations till they be tried, which obliges us to forebeare now,
and to try them in an Assembly and by all lawful means to labor to recover
the former puriue and liberty of the Gospel to which this limitation is
directly repugnant, our liberty in agenerall assembly being the principal of
all lawful means serving to that end.

3, This were directly contrary to the nature and ends of a general assembly,
which having authority from GOD, being conveened according to the laws of the
Kingdom, and receiving power from the whole collective body of the Kirk, for
the good of Religion, and safety of the Kirk; What-so-ever may conduce for
these good ends in wisdom and modesty should be proponed, examined, and
determined without Prelimitation, either of the matters to be treated, or of
the liberty of the members thereof. It being manifest, that as far as the
assembly is limited in the matters to be treated, and in the members to be
used, the necessary ends of the Assembly, and the supreme Law, which is the
safety of the Kirk, are as far hindered, and prejudged.

This limitation is against the Discipline of the Kirk, which book 2. chap. 7.
declares this to be one of her liberties, That the Assembly has power to
abrogate and abolish all Statuts and ordinances concerning ecclesiastical
matters that are found noisome and unprofitable and agree not with the time, or
are abused by the people, and against the acts of the general assembly. Like
as the pretended Assembly 1610. declares for the common affairs of the Kirk
(without exception or limitation) it is necessare that there be yearly
general Assemblies, And what order can be hoped for heere-after if this
assembly indicted after so long intermission, and so many gross corruptions
be limited, and that more than ever any lawful Assembly of the Kirk was, when
it was yearly observed.

5. It is ordained in Parl. 11. act 40. K. James 6. anent the necessare and
lawful form of all Parliaments that nothing shall be done, or commanded to
be done, which may directly or indirectly prejudge the liberty of free
voycing or reasoning of the Estates, or any of them in time coming. It is also
appointed in Parl. 6: act 92. K. James 6. that the Lords of Counsel and
Session proceed in all civil causes intended or depending before them, or to
be intended, to cause execute their decrees notwithstanding any private
writing, charge, or command in the contrare, and generally by the acts of
Parliament appointing every matter for its own judicatorie, and to all
judicatories their own freedom. And therefore much more does this liberty
belong to the supreme judicatorie ecclesiastic in matters so important as
concerns GOD'S honor and worship immediately, the salvation of the peoples
Souls and right constitution of the Kirk whose liberties and priledges are
confirmed Parl. 12. K. James. 6. Parl. 1. K. Charles.* for if it be carefully
provided by diverse Acts of Parliament, especially Parl. 12. act 148. K. James
6. That there be no forstalling or regrating of things pertaining to this
natural life: What shall be thought of this spiritual forstalling and
regrating which tends to the famishing or poisoning of the souls of the
people both now and in the generations afterward.

6. It were contrare to our Protestations, proceedings and complaints against
the late innovations. And it might be accounted an innovation and usurpation
as gross and dangerous to us, and the posterity, and as prejudicial to
Religion as any complained upon by us, to admit limitations, and secret or
open determinations, which belongs to no person or judicatorie, but to an
Asembly, Or to consent to, and approve by our silence the same
praedeterminations It were to be guilty of that our selves, which we condemn
in others We may easilye judge how the Apostles before the Counsel of
Jerusalem, the Fathers be fore the Nicene Council, and our Predecessors
before the assembly* holden at the Reformation, and afterward would have taken
such dealing.

That this Proclamation commands all his Majesty's Subjects for maintenance
of the Religion already established to subscribe and renew the Confession of
Faith subscribed before in the year 1580 and afterward. And reqyreth the Lords
of privy Counsel to take such course anent the same, and the general Band of
Maintenance of the true Religion, and the Kings person, that it may be
subscribed, and renewed throughout the whole Kingdom with all possible
diligence, which cannot now be performed by us. For although of late we would
have been glad that our selves and other his Majesty's Subjects had been
commanded by authority to swear, and subscribe the general Confession of
Faith against Popish errous, and superstitions: and now would be glad that all
others should join with us in our late Covenant and Confession, descending
more specially to the novations and errors of the time, and obliging us to the
defense of Religion; and of the Kings Majesty's person, and authority, and for
these ends to the mutual defense every one of us of another, Yet can we not
now after so necessary. and so solemn a specification return to the
general for the reasons following.

1. No means have been left unassayed against our late Confession of Faith
and Covenant so solemnly sworn and subscribed. For first we were pressed with
the rendering and rescinding of our Covenant. Next an alteration in some
substantial points was urged, 3, a Declaration was motioned, which tended to
the enervation thereof, and now we find in the same strain, that we are put
to a new trial, and the last mean is used more subtle than the former: That
by this new subscription our late Covenant, and Confession may be quite
absorbed and buried in oblivion, that where it was intended and sworn to be
an everlasting Covenant never to be forgotten, it shall be never more
remembered, the one shall be cried up, and the other drowned in the noise
thereof, And thus the new subscription now urged (although in a different way)
shall prove equivalent to the rendering of the Covenant, or what of that kind
has before been assayed. Like as the reasons against the rendering of the
Covenant, do militate directly against this new motion.

3. If we should now enter upon this new Subscription, we would think our
selves guilty of mocking God, and taking his Name in vain, for the tears that
began to be poured forth at the solemnizing of the Covenant are not yet dried
up and wyped away, and the joyful noise which then began to sound has not yet
ceased* and there can be no new necessity from us, and upon our part
pretended for a ground of urging this new subscription, at first intended to be
an abjuration of Popery upon us who are known to hate popery with an unfeigned
hatred, and have all this year bygone given large testimony of our zeal
against it. As we are not to multiply miracles upon Gods part, so ought we
not to multiply solemn oaths and Covenants upon our part, and thus to play
with oaths, as children do with their toys, without necessity.

3. Neither would we in giving way to this new subscription think our selves
free of perjurie: for as we were driven by an undeclinable necessity to enter
into a mutual Covenant, so are we bound, not only by the law of GOD and
nature, but by our solemn oath and subscription, against all divisive motions
to promove and observe the same without violation: and it is most manifest,
that having already refused to render, alter, or destroy our Covenant, nothing
can be more contrary and adverse to our pious intentions and sincere
resolutions, than to consent to such a subscription and oath, as both in the
intention of the urgers, and in the nature and condition of the matter urged,
is the ready way to extinguish, and to drown in oblivion the Band of our
union and conjunction that they be no more remembered. In this case we are
called to lay seriously to our hearts. 1, That we have sworn that we shall
neither directly, nor iudirectly suffer our selves to be divided and
with-drawne from this blessed and loyal conjunction, which consists not only
in the general Confession but also in our explanation, and application
thereof, but on the contrary, shall by all lawful means, labor to further
and promove the same. 2. That our union and conjunction may be observed
without violation, (and so without mutilation of our application) we call the
living LORD to witness, as we shall answer to Christ in the great Day, etc.

4. This new subscription, in stead of performing our vows, would be a real
testimony and confession before the World, That we have been transgressors
in making rash vows, that we repent our selves of former zeal and
fordwardnesse against the particulars expressed first in our Supplications,
Complaints, and Protestations, and next abjured in our Covenant, that we in
our judgment prefer the general Confession unto this, which necessarly was now
made more special; and that we are now under the fair pretext and honest cover
of a new oath recanting and undoing that, which upon so mature deliberation we
have been doing before, This beside all other evils, were to make way and
open a door to the re-entry of the particulars abjured, and to repent our
selves of our chiefest consolations, and to lie both against God and our own
souls.

5. It has been often objected, that our Confession of faith, and Covenant
was unlawful, because it wanted the warrants of public authority, and it
has been answered by us, that we were not destitute of the warrant civil
and ecclesiastical which authorized the former Covenant. And although we
could have wished that his Majesty had added both his subscription and
authority unto it, yet the less constraint from authority and the more
liberty, the less hypocrisy, and more sincerity has appeared: But by this
new subscription urged by authority we both condemn our former subscription
as unlawful. because alleged to be done without authority, and precondemne
also the like laudable course in the like necessity to be taken by the
posterity,

6. What is the use of merch-stones upon borders of Lands, the like use has
Confessions of Faith in the Kirk, To disterminate and divide betwixt Truth
and error: and the renewing and applying of Confessions of Faith to the
present errors and corruptions, are not unlike ryding of merches And therefore
to content our selves with the general, and to return to it, from the
particulare application of the Confession necessarlye made upon the invasion or
creeping in of errors within the borders of the Kirk, if it be not a
removeing of the merch stone from the own place, It is at least the hyding of
the merch in the ground that it be not seen, which at this time were very
unseasonable for two causes. One is* because Popery is so pregnant, and
powerful in this land, as we have learned of late.

The other, because the Papists who upon the urging of the Service book, and
Canons, (...) of our return to Rome, will upon this our subscription arise
from their dispareing of us, unto their (...) presumption. None of us will
deny, but the (...) Confessionn of Faith registrated in the Acts of
Parliament, does by consequence contain this short confession and abjuration:
Yet were it not sufficient against Poperye to subscribe the one without the
other. how then shall we think that the more general Confession and
abjuration at this time, when the urging of such Popish books has extorted
from us so necessary an application, and does still call for a testimony, to
be compleet eneugh without it.

7. The Papists shall hereby be occasioned to renew their old objection
against us, Annuas and menstruas sides de Deo decernunt. That our Faith
changes with the Moon, or once in the year. Other reformed Kirkes might
justly wonder at our inconstancy in changing our Confession without any real
necessity, and that in one and the same year it comes forth larger, and more
particulare, then shorter, and more general: and our Adversaries will not
fail to traduce us as troublers of the peace of the Kirk and Kingdom without
any necessar cause.

8. It will likewise prove a confirmation of their error, who think they may
both subscribe the Confession of Faith, and receive the Service book, and
Canons, which is not only a direct scandaling of them, but also a ready way
to put a weapon in their hands against our selves, who maintain and profess
that these and such other evils are abjured in the Confession of Faith.

9. It we should now swear this Confession we should be obliged by our oath
to maintain Perth articles, which are the innovations already introduced in
the worship of God, and to maintain Episco pacie, with the civil places, and
power of Kirkmen. Because we are bound to swear this Confession by virtue of
and conform unto the Kings command signed by his sacred Majesty of the date
September 9. 1638. (These are the very words subjoined to the Confession and
Band, and prefixed to the Subscriptions) and it cannot be denied, but any oath
ministered unto us, must either be refused; or else taken according to the
known mind, professed intention, and express command of Authority urging the
same: And it is most manifest, that His Majesty's mind, intention, and
Commandment, is no other, but that the Confession be sworn, fot the
maintenance of religion, as it is already or presently professed, (these two
being coincident, altogether one and the same, not only in our common form of
speaking, but in all His Majesty's proclamations) and thus as it includes, and
contains within the compass thereof, the foresaids novations and
Episcopacie, which under that name were also ratified, in the first Parliament
holden by his Majesty. And where it may be objected, that the Counselors
have subscribed the Confession of Faith, as it was professed 1580. and will not
urge the Subscription in an other sense upon the Subjects. We answer, First,
the Act of Counsel containing that declaration, is not as yet published by
Proclamation. Secondly, if it were so published, it behooved of necessity
either be repugnant to His Majesty's declared Judgment and Command, which is
more not to swear without warrant from Authority (a fault although unjustly
often objected unto us) or else we must affirm the Religion in the year
1580. and at this time to be altogether one and the same* and thus must
acknowledge, that there is no novation of Religion, which were a formal
contradiction to that we have sworn. 3. By approving the Proclamation anent the
Oath to be administered to Ministers, according to the Act of Parliament, which
is to swear simple obedience to the Diocesan Bishop, and by warning all
Archbishops and Bishops to be present; as having voice and place in the
Assembly: They seem to determine, that in their Judgment the Confession of
Faith, as it was professed 1580. does consist with Episcopacie, whereas We by
our oath have referred the trial of this or any other question of that kind
to the general Assembly and Parliament.

10. This Subscription and oath in the mind and intention of authority, and
consequently in our swearing thereof, may consist with the corruptions of the
Service book and Canons, which we have abjured as other heads of Popery: For
both this present proclamation, and his Majesty's former proclamations at
Linlithgow, Striveling, Edinburgh; The Lords of privy Counsel in their
approbation of the same; and the prelates and doctors who stand for the Service
book and Canons, Do all speak plainly, or import so much, That these books
are not repugnant to the Confession of Faith, and that the introduceing of them
is no novation of religion or law: And therefore we must either refuse to
subscribe now, or we must confess contrary to our late Oath, and to a clear
Truth, that the Service book and Canons are no innovations in Religion. And,
although the present books be discharged by proclamation, yet if we shall by
any deed of our own testify, that they may consist with our Confession of
Faith, within a very short time, either the same books, or some other like unto
them, with some small change, may be obtruded upon us, who by Our abjuration
(if we adhere unto it) have fred both our selves, and the posterity of all
such corruptions, and have laid a fair foundation for the pure worship of God
in all time coming.

11. Although there be indeed no substantial difference between that which
We have subscribed, and the Confession subscribed 1580. more then there is
between that which is hid, and that which is revealed. A march stone hid in
the ground, and uncovered, betwixt the hand closed and open, betwixt a sword
scheathed and drawn, or betwixt the large Confession, registrat in the Acts of
Parliament, and the short Confession, or (if we may with reverence ascend yet
higher) between the Old Testament and the New, yet as to scheath our sword
when it should be drawn, were imprudencie; or at the commandment of Princes,
professedly popish in their dominions, after the Subjects had subscribed both
Confessions, to subscribe the first without the second* or at the will of a
Jewish Magistrate, openly denying the New Testament, to subscribe the Old
alone, after that they have subscribed both, were horrible impiety against
God, and treachery against the Truth: Right so, for Us to subscribe the
former apart, as it is now urged and framed, without the explanation and
application thereof at this time, when ours is rejected; and the subscribers of
the former refuse to subscribe ours, as containing something substantially
different, and urge the former upon us, as different from ours, and not
expressing the special abjuration of the evils, supplicated against by us,
were nothing else, but to deny and part from our former subscription, if not
formally, yet interpretatively. Old Eleazar, who would not seem to eat
forbidden meat, and the Confessors and Martyrs of old, who would not seem by
delivering some of their papers, to render the Bible, or to deny the Truth,
may teach us our duty in this case, although our lives were in hazard for
refusing this Subscription: And who knows, but the LORD* may be calling His
people now, who have proceeded so far in professing His Truth at this time,
to such Trials and Confessions, as His faithful Witnesses have given of old;
that in this point also our doing may be a document both to the succeeding
ages, and to other Kirks to whom for the present we are made a spectacle.

12. If any be so forgetful of his oath (which God forbid) as to subscribe
this Confession, as it is now urged, he does according to the proclamation
acquiesce in this declaration of his Majesty's will, and does accept of such a
pardon as has need to be ratified in parliament, And thus does turn our
glory unto shame, by confessing our guiltiness, where God from Heaven has
made us guiltless, and by the fire of His Spirit from Heaven has accepted of
our service, And does depart from the commandment of God, the practice of the
Godly in former times, and the worthy and laudable example of our worthy and
religious progenitors, in obedience whereof, and conform to which We made
profession to subscribe: for there is no particular Act required of us, to whom
the pardon is presented in this proclamation, but this new Subscription
allanerlie.

13, The general band now urged to be subscribed, as it contains many
clauses not so fitting the present time as that wherein it was subscribed, so
is it deficient in a point, at this time most necessary, Of the reformation of
our lives, that we shall answerablie to our profession, be examples to others,
of all Godliness, soberness and righteousness and of every duty we ow to
GOD and man; without which we can not now subscribe this Confession, least we
loose the bands to wickedness, seem to repent of our former resolutions and
promises, and chose to have our portion with hypocrites, professing and
sweareing that we know GOD, but in our works denying him, being abominable,
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.

14. Since the narrative of the general hand is now changed, and some lines,
expressing at length the Papists, and their adherents to be the party from
whom the danger to religion, and the Kings Majesty was threatened, are left
out, and no designation made of the party from whom the danger is now
threatred, We are made either to think, that our subscription at this time is
unnecessarie; or to suspect that we who have supplicated and entered in
Covenant, are understood to be the party; especially since the Lords of
Counsel have in the act September 22. ratifiing the Proclamation, found
themselves bound to use their best endeavors, that all his Majesty's good
Subjects may rest satisfied with his Majesty's declaration, since also we have
been (although undeservedly challenged of disorders, distractions, and dangers
to religion, and his Majesty's authority, and since in the forsaid act and in
the missive directed to his Majesty, the Lords of Council offer their lives,
and fortunes to his Majesty, in repressing all such, as shall hereafter prease
to disturb the peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, which being expressed in a
generality is by many applied to us and interpreted of our adhereing to our
Covenant; We should therefore, by our subscription of the Covenant, as it is
now conceaved, both do directly against our own minds, in condemning our
selves, wherein we are innocent, and should consent to our own hurt to the
suppressing of the cause which we maintain, and to the repressing mutually one
of us of another, directly contrare, to our former solemn oath and
subscription.

15. The Subscribing of this Confession by the Lords of his Majesty's privy
Counsel, who by their place and high employment are public Peacemakers, and
by others who have not subscribed the late Confession will make the breach
wider, and the lamentable division of this Kirk more desperate then ever
before; some having sworn to labor by all lawful means to recover the
former liberty, and purity of religion* and others maintaining that for
purity, which is already established, some believing and professing that the
evils supplicated against, are abjured in that Confession of Faith; and others
maintaining the Confession of Faith, and these corruptions (although for the
present discharged by authority) not to be inconsistent: and beside this many
divisions and subdivisions will ensue to the dulefull renting of the Kirk and
Kingdom, making way for the wrath and many judgments of God often threatened
by his faithful servants, which all the Godly ought to labor by all means to
prevent.

16. We represent also to the honorable Lords of privy counsel to be
considered, That the Doctrine, Discipline, and Use of Sacraments are sworn, and
the contrare abjured, according to the Word of God, and the meaning of the Kirk
of Scotland, in the books of Discipline, and Acts of Assemblies, And that in
the Oath there is no place left to the generality of any man's conception of the
true Faith and Religion, nor to any private interpretation, or mental
reservation.

For these and the like considerations, In our own name, and in name of all who
will adhere to the late Covenant, subscribed by us, and sealed from Heaven, We
from our duty to God, our King, our native country, our selves, and the
posterity, least our silence import a satisfaction of our desires, and a
stopping of our mouth, from necessary supplication for things yet to be
obtained from His Majesty's just and gracious disposition, are constrained to
declare and protest, First, That the cause and occasion of the distractions of
the kirk and commonwealth, are no ways to be imputed unto us, or our needless
fears, but to the innovations and corruptions of Religion, which against the
acts and order of this kirk, and the laws of the kingdom have been pressed
upon us the people of GOD, and his Majesty's loyal Subjects; who, although
under great thraldom, were living in peace and quietness, laboring in all
godliness and honesty to do our duty to God and man. Secondly, We protest,
that all questions and doubts that arise, concerning the freedom of the
Assembly whether in the constitution, and members thereof, or in the matters
to be treated, or in the manner and order of proceeding, be remitted to the
determination of the assembly it self, as the only proper and competent
judge; And that it shall be lawful for us, being authorized with lawful
commissions, as at other times when the urgent necessity of the Kirk shall
require, so in this exigence to assemble our selves at the diet appointed,
notwithstanding any impediment or prorogation to the contrare. And being
assembled, against all qualifications and predeterminations, or presupposals,
to propone, treat, reason, vote, and conclude, according to the Word of God,
Confession of Faith, and acts of lawful Assemblies, in all Ecclesiastical
matters; perteining to the assembly, and tending to the advancement of the
Kingdom of Christ and good of Religion.

Thirdly, since Archbishops and Bishops have no warrant for their office in
this Kirk, since it is contrare both to reason and to the Acts of the Kirk,
that any have place and voice in the Assembly, who are not authorized with
lawful commissions: And seeing both in commoun equity, and by the tenor of
this Proclamation they are made liable to the trial and censure of the
Assembly, We protest, that they be not present, as having place or voice in
the Assembly, but as rci to compeere, for underlying trial and censure upon
the general complaints already made; and the partiular accusations to be
given in against them; And that the warning given by His Majesty's
Proclamation, and this our Protestation, be a sufficient citation to them, to
compeer before the Assembly, for their trial, and censure in life, office,
and benefice.

Fourthly, We solemnly protest, that We do constantly adhere to our Oath and
Subscription of the Confession of Faith and Covenant, lately renewed and
approven, with rare and undeniable evidences from heaven; of the wonderful
workeings of his Spirit, in the hearts both of Pastors and people, through all
the parts of the kingdom, And that we stand to all parts and clauses thereof,
and particularly to the explanation and application, containing both our
abjuration of, and our union against the particular evils and corruptions of
the time, a duty which the Lord at this time especially craveth at our hands.

Fifthly, We also Protest, that none of us who have Subscribed, and do adhere
to our Subscription of the late Covenant, be charged, or urged, either to
procure the subscriptions of others or to subscribe our selves unto any other
Confession or Covenant, containing any derogation there unto, especially that
mentioned in the Proclamation, without the necessary explanation and the
application thereof already sworn by us for the reasons above expressed: And
because, as we did in our former Protestation appeal from the Lords of His
Majesty's Counsel, so do we now by these renew our solemn appeal, with all
solemnities requisite unto the next free general Assembly and Parliament, as
the only supreme national Judicatories competent, to judge of national
causes and proceedings.

Sixthly, We Protest, That no subscription, whether by the Lords of Counsel
or others, of the Confession, mentioned in the Proclamation, and enjoined for
the maintenance of religion, as it is now already* or at this present time
established, and professed within this Kingdom, without any innovation of
religion or Law, be any manner of way prejudicial to our Covenant, wherein we
have sworn to forbear the practice of Novations already introduced, etc.
Till they be tried in a free Assembly, And to labor by all lawful means, to
recover the purity and liberty of the Gospel as it was established and
professed before the foresaid innovations: And in like manner that no
subscription forsaid be any derogation to the true and sound meaning of our
worthy predecessors at the time of their Subscription in the year 1581. and
afterward. Withal warneing and exhorting all men who lay to heart the cause of
religion against the coruptions of the time and the present estate of things,
both to subscribe the Covenant as it has been explained, and necessarely
applied, and as they love the purity and liberty of the Gospel to hold back
their hands from all other Covenants, till the Assembly now indicted be
conveined, and determine the present differences and divisions, and preserve
this country from contrary oaths.

Seventhly, As his Majesty's royal clemency appears, In forgiving and
forgetting what his Majesty conceaveth to be a disorder or done amiss, In the
proceeding of any; So are we very confident of his Majesty's approbation to the
integrity of our hearts, and peaceablenesse of our ways, and actions all this
time past: And therefore, We Protest, that we still adhere to our former
complaints, Protestations, lawful meetings, proceedings, mutual defenses,
etc. All which as they have been in themselves lawful, so were they to us,
pressed with so many grievances in his Majesty's absence from this native
Kingdom most necessary, and ought to be regarded as good offices, and
pertinent duties of faithful Christians, loyal Subjects, and sensible members
of this Kirk and Commonwealth, As we trust at all occasions to make manifest
to all good men, especially to his sacred Majesty for whose long and
prosperous government, that we may live a peacable and quiet life in all
Godliness and Honesty, We earnestly pray.

WHereupon a Noble Earl, James Earl of Montrose, etc. in name of the Noble
men, Master Alexander Gibson, younger, of Durie, in name of the Barons; George
Porterfield Merchant Burges of Glasgow, in name of the Borrowes, Master Harie
Rollogue Minister, at Edinburgh, in name of the Ministers, and Master Archbald
Iohnston, reader hereof, in name of all who adhere to the Confession of Faith
and Covenant, lately renewed within this Kingdom, took instruments in the
hands of three Notars present, at the said market cross of Edinburgh, being
environed with great numbers of the forsaid Noblemen* Barons, Gentlemen,
Borrowes, Ministers and Commons, before many hundred witnesses, and craved the
extract thereof: And in token of their duetifull respect to his Majesty,
confidence of the equity of their cause, and innocence of their carriage and
hope of his Majesty's gracious acceptance, they offered in all humility with
submisse reverence a copy thereof to the Herald.

FINIS.

