VOX VERA: OR, OBSERVATIONS FROM AMSTERDAM. Examining The late Insolences of
some PSEVDO-PVRITANS, Separatists from the Church of GREAT BRITAIN. And
Closed up with a serious threefold Advertisement for the general use of every
good Subject within his Majesty's Dominions, but more especially of those in
the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

By PATRICKE SCOT, North-Brittaine.

STOB. SERMON. 44. Quae nascentia mala sunt, ea crescentia peiora.

LONDON, Printed by BERNARD ALSOP. 1625.

OT THE GENEROUS READER.
IF (as is wittily moralized) infants at their first entry into the world,
bewail the fall of our first Parents; I find no reason why those that are of
full age may not vera voce, condole either private distempers or public
calamities; or that I should not publish this abortiue birth, expostulating
against those Empiricks and firebrands, that labor to inflame the Church, and
incense the state, that thereby a plurisie of troubles and general combustion
might ensue indangering the peace of the one, or troubling the calm of other.

As my style is dull, plain without affectation, rather to deliver truth then
show art: so are my aims sincere and free of all squint-eyed inducements.

My duty to the Church, allegiance to my Sovereign, and danger of
schismatic praesidents are the fires that have tempered this Telamonian
shield, under whose shelter this Shepheard-like subject opposes the naked
simplicity of truth against the enraged Goliahs of this age, armed with
glistring shows of finest forgery.

One favor I crave, that thy misprision wrong me not, as if I did not
distinguish such grave, sober, and peaceable spirits in the Clergy or Laity,
at home or abroad, that (though different in opinion in some points of
external discipline and policy) contain themselves within the precinct of
that unity and modesty prescribed by the Apostles in like cases.

As I esteem it sacrilege to detract from the least desert of any sober
Christian: so hold I it Religion to unmask the viperous brood of Parricidos,
whose inuenomed shafts I pass by with contempt, neglecting whether such dogs
bark, snarle or fawn. Dum conscientiae satisfacio nihil in famam laboro
sequatur vel mala dum been mereor; dark shadows do no less attend
beautiful then deformed bodies, in brightest Sunshine. If I should labor other
satisfaction, it were an effect of frenzy not of hope, since it is no truth
but opinion which trauelleth the Coasts without pasport, that I am to survey.

If thou read iudiciously without partiality I expect thy favorable censure of
this task, meditated when the raging waves of stormy Seas incensed with
thundering winds, advanced deaths pale colors to the terror as well of
Mariners as Passengers; penned after my safe exposall upon a foreign shore,
when the sad remembrance of some of my friends and familiars lately sunk into
the insatiable belly of the vast Ocean, much distempered my brain, and
confused my memory; now published to the praise of that supreme Majesty, by
whose grace I hope hereafter, in a more calm air, to erect a thankful
memorial of so great a delivery. Farewell.

P. S.

VOX VERA.
IT is the humor of ambitious, seditious, and scismatiticall spirits, in the
entry of their designs to study popularitie, Favor in apud Stob.
and being drunk with vulgar applause, the vain glory thereof raises their
conceits many strains higher then really they are: as if Greatness and Wisdom
engraven in their forehead by open force, or subtle persuasion, might surprise
both enemies and friends, Lact. lib. 3. Philost.
when in true portraiture they resemble the rearers up of Babel, the Furies
that most torment the world, and that Cerberus that sets open hell gates, to
let loose such spirits as fill the world with imposture, in this period, or
rather dregs of decaying time, 2. Tim. cap. 3. v. 2.3.4.5.
wherein the imperious nature of domination in irregular minds cannot endure
limitation, but must, and will, range abroad in the wide wilde-field of
humors, and draw attentive Auditors to the Prologue of such Tragedies as are
embellished with shows of great matters; or rather false hopes to conquer the
world with the Sword of the Spirit: as if all others were possessed with a
Lethargy or Frenzy (extreme diseases that cannot be cured with Manna and
gentle remedies) and that such Quacksaluers are only the Physicians to cure
the world so deadly distempered.

Eu^ histor. Eccles.
Thus from the beginning has God left some remnants of Cananites to prove
Israel by them, and to teach them ware that did not know it before, thereby
trying the faith and patience of his Church, which never wants Seminaries of
Atheism, and brochers of lewd liberty, who under religious habit are the sole
enemies to all religion.

Floren. Schon.
Sub hoc mantili and euerriculo multarum fraudum, fer^^da ingenia violentiam
naturae, aut profundam ambitionem velare student.

The time allotted to these ensuing obseruatio^s should run out, The Induction
before I brought to the view of the Reader, the least part of those instances
of this kind, wherewith both Churches and States have been infected or poisoned;
all which I will leave, and only bring to the Stage some few of the most
recent disloyal practices, and self conceited scismaticall opinions, of
homebred pharisaicall hypocrites, that blush not to assume the face of an
harlot, surrepticiously challenge the title of the Church, and send abroad such
positions, as labor to draw sovereignty into contempt, annihilate just laws,
taint superior powers with disgraceful notes, and erect democracie or
orderlesse confusion, in both Church and State, if the most devouring stomach
of ambition or singularity, could swallow such choking morsels before it come
at them.

Ludit in humanis deuina potentia rebus. He that made the world, can make such
learn by their errors, Plus est in artifice quam in art.

Would to God I could sail by some other point of the Compass, then by that
which directs my course against those rocks of division, or sinking
shallowes of disloyalty, whereupon it is likely, some Separatists from the
Church of great Britain are already ship-broken; and that others, yet tossed
with scismaticall storms, are like to be cast upon the same Coast.

Let it not then seem strange to the eye of preiudicate opinion, that the
common obligation of every good subject, tieth me to expostulate against the
malicious forgeries of such enemies to peace; as uncover these Trophes of
disgrace, which they have erected to tell their shame to posterity, and to
sound the depth of these riotous misdemeanors, which in my late survey of the
united Provinces, I have seen, at Amsterdam, and other places; where
dispersing of infamous Libels, might either curry favor in the eye of
licentious Libertines, malecontented Fugitives, or professed Enemies.

There, I did behold, every Bookesellers shop, and most Pedlers stalles, laden
with the nullitie of Perthes assembly; the Altar of Damaseus, the Dialogue
betwixt Theophilus and Cosmophilus, the Speech of the Church of Scotland to her
beloved Children, and the course of Conformity joined with all these
(severally printed before) reprinted in one volume, and to be sold at no less
rate then if they had been Oracles of Apollo.

Secondly, did come to my hand the petition of the Kirk of Scotland to the
heigh Parliament of England a methodicall well digested piece beseeming the
pretended Church that did prefer it: next was offered to me, Speculum belli
sacri, or the mirror of holy war, a squint eyed work looking at military
instructions, but aiming at idle impetinent, impudent and fond applications, as
if Giges ring had been upon the Authors finger, or his whole body sheltered
when his head was not covered: next to my greater admiration, did I behold
Altar Damascenum, seu politia Ecclesiae Anglicanae obtrusa Ecclesiae
Scoticanae a formalista quodam delineata opera Edwardi Didoclauii, cui locis
suis inserta confutatio Paraneseos Tileni ad Scotos, cui adiuncta Epistola
Philadelphi de regimine Eclesiae Scoticanae per Anonimum. These were closed up
a malicious Satirisme against a learned grave Treatise written by the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, whose integrity of life, and sincerity of
Religion, none but barking curres can tax.

In all these trumpets of Sedition, whether in English to ensnare domestike
natives, or in Latin to persuade foreign alients to their faction, sacred
scripture was never more sensibly corrupted, more wickedly wrested, more
impertinently applied, neither was ever the sacred person of Sovereignty, the
dignity of the learned Clergy, the communion of Christians and the loyalty
of good subjects more trampled upon, by the most profane Atheist or heretic,
or by Satan himself then by these poysonable Satirismes ouer-flowing with
gall, and masked with preposterous zeal; in which mirrors of conspiracy every
good subject may observe, that if it were as easy to some of those violent
spirits, to bring their purposes to their ends, as it is to find shadows for
their pretenses, it is to be feared the fruits of their unsanctified doctrine
should have been dyed in blood long ago, and warranted with sic dicit Dominus
A bloody disposition is as well concomitant to scismatikes as professed Atheists,
Erasm. in apo.
and where ever the quicksiluer of separation is ingredient, there the fire of
contention is unquenchable, howsoever it may be smothered for a time into
ashes of seeming holiness. Pirates have their prayers as well as honest
Merchants; Fulgosex. Sweton. Dion. Nic.
Geta in killing his brother Caracalla had his bloody Mask; when Satan
appeared to Saul, Sa. 1.1.18.14.
he was lapped in Samuels Mantle; Mahomet did abuse the world with the name of
the Angel Gabriel; May. 4.6.
the Tempter could allege Scripture against Christ himself; and it is
credibly reported, that an Amsterdam sister did enencourage her own daughter
to perjury by telling her, It is better to fall in the hands of God, then of
man. Ask whatsoever scismaticke the reason of their profession, and they will
answer, that the sacred Scripture is the level whereby they square the frame
and infallibility of their several Churches; Knox ad Nobilit. Scot. and in
his her of Scot. Good man upon the 17. of Exodus
why may not then Didoclauius, Philadelphus, Anonimus, or the other late
Lybellers imitate such presidents, and pervert scriptures as well as others; yet
me thinks it should seem strange in the eye of sober judgment that men
professing to have the only truth of religion should equally prosecute their
seditious designs without conscience in contempt of authority, as they make
Idols of their own braine-sicke conceptions against the rules of true wisdom.
When any of contrary opinion, following the ordinance of the Church,
strengthened by civil power, would lovingly persuade them to forbear to walk
in forbidden paths, they close their ears, or without weighing of reason,
answer by the words of John, We are of God, he that knows God hears us, as
for the rest, they are of the world and the world whose pomp and and vanity
they follow hears them: when the dignity of authority, and honor of Gods
Magistrates is vpholden against them, or their inabilitie to judge in the
mysteries of State shown them: they answer with the Anabaptist, God has
chosen the simple. Will you so sensibly convince them of folly, that very
children may vpbraid them of it, they will tell you that Christ's own Apostles
were accounted mad. Self conceit and flattery has so tickled and scratched
their tender ears, 2. Tim. 4.3.
that they are impatient of the least touch of rough truth. When admonition nor
no fair means can prevail, let them but feel the lightest dram of justice,
they straight lay upon Gods vicegerents; whatsoever they any where find
against the cruelty of most blood thirsty tyrants, drawing to themselves all
such sentences as Scripture has for innocence persecuted for righteousness,
as if every seditious disturber of State that suffers for disobedience and
breach of Christian unity might challenge the name of a Martyr.

These be the paths wherein separation walks, the steps it does tread, the
doctrine wherein it is trained up in the school of faction and the toils and
tossings of unquiet spirits that are so distasteful to men of more peaceable
temper, that if violence done to religion, uncharitable railing against
Majesty and Magistracy, might be buried in silence, they would rather suffer
millions of personal aspersions, then interrupt the peace of the Church or
quiet of the state, by opposing the sismaticall practices of restless brains,
who like fishers in troubled waters, delight in commotions and tumults: Quam
dignitatis sedem quieta republica disperant eam perturbata se consequi posse
arbitrantur.

But when the King which is the head, or the State which is the body, or
Religion which is the soul of the commonwealth, are in question to receive
prejudice; necessity, which is a law above all laws, supplies the place of an
ordinary calling: then it is a harmefull modesty to keep silence, or too late
to discover such sulphurious mines when the match kisseth the powder. As when
the shadow of mount Athos reaches the I Will Lemnos, it is a sure forerunner of
the going down of the Sun, and time for shepherds to impale their flocks: So
when seditious confusion strives to ouer-reach both Church and State, it is
time as well to subject as magistrate according to their several places, to
remove such fuel, least the fire become unquenchable, and bring ruin on the
one, and desolation on the other. O miserable times, vbi tacere non licet quid
cuiquam licet?

Is it not a most arrogant presumption, that humorists under zealous pretexts
should prefer singular paradoxes of pride and contention, for every
circumstance of least moment, to the feeding of their flocks, upon the sweet
pastors of humility, charity, and other Christian duties? it is above
admiration, that others should glory more in their adherents to such lying
Oracles, then in their Christian obedience enjoined or piety professed. Is
there a more palpable error then to receive every article of external
discipline with the like reverence, honor them with the like regard, and
defend them with the like tenacitie, as if they were matters of faith commanded
by canonical Scripture.

The Apostles and sacred writ have delivered unto us, no other precepts,
concerning the external government of the Church, then that all things in the
Church may be done decently and in order: But on the contrary, ^. Cor. 14.4.
our Didoclauius and his followers charge us at no less peril then our
souls, that we mar all decency, ouerturne all order, by disparaging the
state with contempt, and making that honorable Title of true Catholic ever
liable to scandal, if not to scissure, so long as fantastical suggestion
prates that the Church cannot stand except tied to every circumstance of
policy and discipline, when indeed such designs are only to erect
democratie, and bring confused paritie into the house of God, by men who
profess they know God but by their works they deny him. 2. Tim. 3.5.


Flor. Scen.
Religio passim in ore improbitas in cord, liuor honesti zelo personatur,
malidicentia fucat morbum titulo libertatis, and tam callide haec imponunt vt
nosci nisi difficulter non queant, porro quia vinenum quo dulcius eo
periculosius est.

We are now become Saints in show, but Scithians in substance; it suffiseth if
we can prate of our external knowledge, boast of our verbal speculation,
enforce a sophisticated dispute, disprouing our obedience to those whom God
has set over us. Tandem eo dementiae deuenimus, vt gloriemus iis, quibus
erubescere oportebat and quod vnum habemus in malis bonum perdimus peccandi
verecundiam.

Let us look with impartial eyes upon the late proceedings of our own
Separatisis, and upon what reasons their fained griefs are grounded, and we
shall easily perceive whether the Church their Mother if they disclaim her not
(as some already have done) has left her motherly care, or his Majesty, unto
whom they owe obedience, if they have any conscience (which is to be doubted)
has exceeded the extent of Sovereignty, or they their Ministerial function,
or dutiful allegiance in impugning either the one or the other.

That I may clear this the better, and show Hercules by his foot, I will leave
generals, and descend to my particular observations picked out of a short view
of some few passages contained in the huge Chaos of those infamous libels,
which I have already mentioned, whether they go current under the name of
Didoclauius, Philadelphus, Anonimus, or other titles, rather distinguishing
audacious attempts then persons.

In the Epistle to the Altar of Damascus, censuring his Majesty's learned and
Princely Basilicon doron, these be the words of Didoclauius, Auaite hostem
nobis infestissimum regem Brittanniae, etc. A little after in that same
Epistle, Pro principe Apostata non orandum docet Apostolus, ordines in ordinem
redigere posse tirannum, and gladium e furiosi manibus extorquere, verisimile
est aliquos censuisse, nam id sentiunt viri docti.

Thirdly, in that Epistle he is not ashamed to proclaim an impudent known
untruth in these words. Anno secundo post regis in Angliam aduentum 300.
Ministri vel liberate concionandi mulctati, v^^ beneficio priuati vel
excommunicationis fulmine icti, vel in carcerem coniecti, vel solum vertere
coacti etc. superiorum temporum annals replicanti reperire non est grauiorem,
sub vllo principe fidem orthodoxam profitente persecutionem.

In the course of conformity, page 88. these be the words of the same author;
the Idolatry of Jeroboam (says he) might have as well been defended, by the
authority and kirk of that age, as Idolatry of this age by the State and
Clergy; now join all these together and you shall the better without comment,
understand the one by the other, and by what spirit a private man, impudently
taxing King, Clergy and Government to which he ought obedience, prefers
such doctrine to which he is ashamed, otherwise to affixe his name, then by
anagrammatizing Dauidis Calderwodi into Edwardi Didoclauii, as if none but the
brethren of his own language could dissolve such a Gordian knot, explain this
subtle Hierogliphicke, extricate this labyrinthian riddle, or find out a
Woodcocke by the eye.

To come from the Title to the Subject, there was never Christian pen that did
blot paper with so barbarous Aphorisms, scandalous comparisons, and
dishonorable reproaches, all which untruths from the mouth of a shameless
lybeller are honorable badges to virtues.

Miriam was branded with leprosy, Number. 12.10.
because in bitterness she once reproved Moses for his Ethiopian wife. 2.
Sam. 16.5. Genesis 9.22.
Schemei rayled but once against the Lords anointed, and yet had his reward.
Cham but once mocked his fathers drunken nakedness, and yet had his fathers
curse; but this cursed Schemei, and unnatural Cham never cease to curse both
Prince, Prophet and Priest, and upbraid the comely clothed sobriety of his
parents, and yet looks to be honored as an Oracle or canonized Saint.

How dares this Cirian Wolf bark against that Moon, Stob. apud Plin.
whose light borrowed from the great eye of Heaven, dissipates the Cimerian
darkness of that night, in whose obscurity he thirsts to prey upon the
innocence of unwary sheep, or thinks this bastardly brat that his Majesty
has not thousands, the least scratch of whose pens is able to brand his face
with black infamy, if they would interrupt more profitable studies by honoring
a factious libeller, with answer to beggarly collections, borrowed as well from
the dregs of scismaticall opinions, as from the corrupt pudles of some double
tongd Lawyers, and informatory papers of the seditious brethren of his own
profession, Chilon optimam pronuntiauit Remp. quae maxim leges minime autem
Rhetoris audiat. Sto. Ser. 41. Non est opus quoties libet ogganire eadem
conuitia resellere vind. Phil. page 951.
every material point whereof is so fully already answered, and convinced by
men learned, truly religious and Church Councels, confirmed by Parliament, the
representative body of the State, that if truth might have trust, or reason
place, the chief maintainers of that orderlesse frame might be satisfied, or
give sentence against themselves to be thrust out of the Church for such
irregular, rude and intemperate passions, as in bitterness of gall makes a
scissure in the unity of the Church, and exposes the sacred name of
Sovereignty to contempt, or rather annihilates it.

But lest it be thought, that rather passion then reason thus transports me, I
will first examine the suggested degrees of persecution, whereupon this trumpet
of sedition builds his reasonlesse railing, and then the dignity of the
government whereof he so much boasted.

To come to the first, he aggrauates the persecution by the number persecuted,
viz, 300. then discending to the persons of some prime men so persecuted, he
names Master Robert Bruce, Master Andrew and Master James Meluils, Epist.
Altar. Damasc.
with some other few.

The first, he says, has been terra iactatus and vndis, or subjected to the
extremity of persecution, for the space of twenty three years: then after an
emphaticall Epilogue of his descent and praises, he exclaimeth, anima mea cum
anima tua Bruci.

For the praises due to that reverend well descended Gentleman, I think he
has said too little, and that he has deserved the pen of a more famous
Author to blazon his commendation; but that Master Robert Bruce will echo a
rayler, with anima mea cum anima tua Dioclauii, is more then I will believe.

That the least touch of any such severity has bin used against Master Robert
Bruce, it is more then himself will confirm: the limitation of his residence
within such places where his Ministry might be most profitable, and he least
troubled with seditious motions of violent spirits (whose inconsiderate
attempts much greeueth him) was done upon mature deliberation, and warranted
with divine and humane Laws.

Master Andrew Meluil a learned man, whose memory, as on the one part, I will
not mention without modest respect: so on the other part, lest I should wrong
the truth, or smother his Majesty's gracious respect to him; I can say no less
then his intolerable fiery humor seconded with a misregard of his superiors
and place, did precipitate him into the abridgement of his liberty. In all
which time his Majesty's care was such of him (as I have heard Master Meluill
confess) that never subject of his condition had greater favor at liberty
then he in restraint; neither was the Duke of Bulloignes request for his
liberty, without his Majesty's known willingness, who condescended at first,
or rather prompted the Dukes motion. Master James Meluil a man of more mild
disposition and quiet temper, yet so far engaged in the factious course of
his brethren that he could not reclaim himself when (as is well known) he
most earnestly desired: he lived at Berwicke with greater content, and had
better means allowed him then ever he had in Scotland, neither in all that
time was his Majesty's benevolence wanting.

Some others of the Ministry that were sentenced to exile, in mitigation of a
capital judgment given against them, upon acknowledgement of their offense,
were recalled and restored to their own or better places.

If there has been, or yet be, any in Scotland silenced or confined, it was,
and is, upon their contemptuous misdemeanors, and upon mature legal
proceedings against them; whereof the whole number (so far as I can learn)
does not amount to half a hundredth, far less multiply to three hundred
enlarged by the lybeller.

If he calls those persecuted Saints, whose benefices his Majesty has
enlarged out of his Crown revenues, he erreth not so much, if he had said six
hundred, as he does now in mistaking three hundred for fifty or fewer: but it
is the nature of base ingratitude, to receive more easily bad impressions then
good, to abstract from the realitie of benefits received, and aggrauate the
least misconception of inuiuries offered.

Nihil amas cum ingratum amas, neque stipula leui^^ pondus, quam fides eius.

It is said by that famous but dead statua of Memnon did always resound
cheerful echoes, when the Suns golden Beams did shine upon it; but now many
living statues in place of cheerful acclamations of joy and content, for so
great benefits as they daily receive, send back nothing but bitter
exclamations, and whatsoever may eternize ingratitude whose blushing pen
writes royal favors in dust, and imaginary disgusts in marble.

Lo this is the persecution, this the tyrranny, and these be the persecuted,
Epist. Vind. Philadel.
quibus nihil relictum nisi miseram vita^ vt miseria^ sentiant. Whether this be
a true history or an apochriphall fable, I appeal to impartial censure,
whether in the most strict enquiry into those just animaduersions, or rather
preuentions of further contempt against the refractarie Ministers, any thing
can be found but divine wisdom, long patience and justice, rather
ouerseasoned with mercy, then affected to the least inclination of severity,
or whether it be Antichristian zeal accompanied with pride, malice and
contempt, or true zeal attended with Faith, Charity, and Humility, that
tickleth the fancy of the penman of the greatest persecution that can be found
in any history? This is the Philadelphian Eusebius and learned Rabbin that out
of the Sanhedrime of his fiery brain must rule both Church and State by such
Catilinarian Glosses, as introduce mutinous anarchie and are only vailes to
cover the face of treason, Epist. Vind. Philadel.
that it be not seen in its ugly shape. This is the champion Didoclauius,
whose Herculean labors must re-erect Disciplinam optime stabilitatem and
feliciter administratam, or more truly, the frame of implacable paritie,
agreeing in nothing but in discord, and only constant in inconstancy, as
shall appear by the discipline so highly advanced and pictured by another
brother of the purer profession.

Phil. de Reg. Eccles. Stob: page 1.
Although, says Philadelphus, our Church acknowledge four sorts of Ministers,
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deaecons, yet the office of Doctor has not been
in use otherwise then in the Schools, but the reformation was effected by
other three members, with the help of the Nobility and Communaltie.

First, then we have a Doctor one of the four pillars of the foundation of
this government; yet that neither Philadelphus or his brethren have made, not
only no use of that name, but rather persecuted it with extremity of envy,
their bitter inuectiues against the late institution of Doctors in Scotland
will fully demonstrate; because the title of a Doctor seemed to look a little
higher then paritie could well endure, they did reject it which by time might
have ouer-topped them, and used the help of some of the Nobility and violent
common people, in the reformation; the first were powerful, being invested in
the Church revenues, the other forward and fit instruments to advance anarchie.

Here is a fourefold frame lamed already of a foot by their own records, if a
politic or natural body may not subsist entire without a prime member.

Now let us distinctly examine the progress of this external government,
wherein first behold (which Philadelphus smothereth in silence) the good Corn
purged with the Chafe, the Wheat with the Cockle, or the good things removed
with the bad, and the ancient monuments and policy of the kingdom ouerthrown
or demolished by headstrong violence.

Next, that they might not seem to ouerturne all order at once, Philadel. p. 3.
Bishops that renounced Popisme were continued, conditionally, that they should
maintain Pastors in their Diocesses.

Episcopis qui eierato Papismo ad causam religionis se adiungebant concessum vt
reditibus fruerentur, ea lege vt pastores in suis diocesibus alerent.

Next, were superintendents established in the place of Bishops as well to
admit and exauctorate Ministers as to administrate divine service, Philadel.
ibid. page 3.
Statuit Ecclesia ex selectissimis Pastoribus duodecem eligi, quibus daretur in
designatis sibi prouinciis potestas sacra administrandi auctorandi and
exauctorandi pastores, hos superintendentes apellabant and insumptum maiori
stipendio instruebant.

Not long after (whether the emenencie of superintendents did become suspicious
to general assemblies, Ibid. p. 4.
or whether they did not keep their accounts straight, they were first tied to
a yearly account to the brethren assembled; after that, certain Commissioners
of the Ministry were adjoined to them (as it seems) to keep them within the
limits of their injunctions, howsoever superintendents and the former Bishops
were only fires to premature the ensuing anarchy, thundered out by John Knox,
by whom the government of the Church was wholly directed.

In hoc negotio nemo nescit maiorem Knoxii quam omnium superintendentium luudem
fuisse. Vind. Phil. page 27.


Phila. p. 5.
In the assembly holden at Leeth, anno 1571. January 12. Bishops were again
established, but not without opposition following; the next year in the Sinod
holden at Pearthe, wherein the disciples of Knox made earnest protestation
against the government of Bishops. Anno 1573. the general assemblies did
inioyne Bishops to have no further authority then superintendents had before.

Ibid.
In the assembly holden at Edenborrough, ann. 1575. it was disputed, whether the
office of a Bishop was a place of charge or of dignity, a Thesis not unlike
that of the Popish Clergy making question to whom the Lords Prayer should be
directed.

Page 6.
In the assembly following at Edenborrough, anno 1576. the office of Bishops is
declared titular, and they tied to the government of one Flock, without
supremacy at all, over other Pastors, so that now they are a Stage lower then
superintendents, with whom they were equals by the Canons of the former
assembly. Ibid.
Anno. 1577. the second book of Church government was confirmed and published,
the Hierarchy of Bishops condemned, and new laws of discipline established.
Ibid.


In the assembly holden at Dundie, anno 1580. Bishops were deuested of all
authority, their office declared to be a humane invention received to the
prejudice of the Church, to be razed out of the government thereof, and they
enjoined to yield to this decree, under the pain of excommunication. But lest
such daily nouations might argue Proteus-like changes in this government, Ibid.
Philadelphus subioyneth a reason, multae erant de negligentia and ignorantia
Episcoporum quaerelae. Such lips, such latice, or a mad conclusion of a fond
proposition, as if I should say, because Philadelphus, Didoclauius and the like
firebrarnds are the stains of the Ministry, and disturbers of the Church;
therefore the office of all Pastors is utterly to be defaced and forbidden: the
cases are matches, if the one may stand in Law, the other may; and if we
condemn the one, we must condemn the other; for, if we reason from the abuse
of good things to the removing of them, we shall fall into an anarchy and
overthrow all reason.

In the assembly holden at Glascow, 1581. April 24. Ibid. page 6.
Presbiteriall government, and what else might advance democratie, was
established, and continued without great increase, till the assembly holden
1590. that paritie began to wax like a gourd; then were Commissioners or
Provincial ouer-seers discharged, and their power conferred upon Presbiteriall
assemblies, as the undoubted right of those pupils that were but nine years of
age.

Comissionariorum sieve visitatorum prouinciarum potestas abrogata est, Phil. p.
6.
eorumque munus Presbiteriis tanquam ius suum concessum est. Phil. p. 6.


From the beginning of Presbiteriall government unto anno 1600. or thereabouts,
by the records of general, prouincial, presbiteriall assemblies, and
Parochial sessions, nothing is to be found but the Austrian plus vltra daily
encroacht upon, and every day new devises. In the time of this raging confusion
Majesty was ouer-swayed with clamourous railing, faction incited, maintained
and defended by adherence of most part of the Ministry to the strongest party
of those combustions, that were too common in those days, but now are happily
removed by the wisdom of that King, whom refractarie furies has from his very
infancy so barbarously, insolently, and unthankfully opposed, that by divine
and national Laws justly might he have curbed such madness with a more
strict censure, then by his mild and royal regrate in his learned Princely
Basilicon Doron, Epist. Altar Damasc.
that he had found more truth and loyalty, amongst the dregs of his Subjects,
then with those, who against all moderation, and the conscience of their
profession, had left no practice unassayed against Sovereignty, that either
faction or vulgar applause could conciliate.

I might add here many rare paradoxes, insolent misdemeanors, and bold
attempts, not beseeming Christian sobriety, much less the approbation of a
well settled government: but if it appear, that eithet the frame or
administration pictured by Philadelphus, be orderly or any way sorting with an
happy government, I desire to know what is anarchie, disloyalty and sedition?
but I leave the pressure of such festered sores, and continue my inquiry in
the late actions of that impure Spawne of those Separatists whose Grachus
doctrine, Catechism of sedition and school of faction is neither compatible
with the Laws of God or Empire, or any thing else then the over flowing of the
surfeiting stomach of Muncer the Anabaptist, who drunk in self-conceit, did
bost to conquer the world with the sword of the Spirit: Et cogere vniuersum
orbem gladio Gedeonis ad nonum Christi regnum instituendum: Gual. Tug:
But lest any man should doubt of the perfection of the government so highly
advanced, Philadelp. p. 7.
Philadelphus crowns it with tum quidem been currebamus.

It is well said Sir, yet give me leave to tell you, that often times the more
haste the worse speed, and that festina lent in government is more sure, and
comes often times more safely home, then that hot spur, that either spoils
his horse, or runs himself out of wind or joint; or as your anarchie that
was rotten before it was ripe. Yet let us hear an uncharitable gloss upon an
Apocriphall text, or the reason which Philadelphus gives, that this happiness
was interrupted by the bringing in of Bishops.

Diabolus (says he) hanc faelicitatem inuidens tertium Episcoporum genus noua
art supposuit. Philad. ibid.


For answer to such profane censures, I can say no less, then that as his
former running course did show more will then wisdom, and has shortened the
life of consistorian discipline and prematured violence: so is his ragged
reason against all reason or probability, that the Prince of darkness and
confusion should envy anarchy, and have any hand in the frame of good
government, which is a chief type of Gods presence, and the snafle that
curbeth the pride, self-conceit and presumption of unstayed spirits, who often
times in repining against Magistracy, are authors in their own destruction.

Thus have you heard, how Didoclauius and Philadelphus do tilt at King and
Clergy; now you shall hear another bird of that same feather run the
wild-Goose chase at Council and Court, taking aim through a false looking
glass, lately framed by a Scottish Separatist, and steeled or put in a rauing
style at Leiden by an English Brownist.

Specul. bell. Sacr. page 97.
A forme-changing Proteus (says this new Doctor) a treacherous Seianus, a time
serving Abiathar, a Statizing Achitophel, a calumniating Doeg, are the only
Councillors: but Constantine tried his Courtiers fidelity to him, by their
piety toward God; but now a man truly religious, is thought unfittest for
state affairs, The Doctors reason.
because they cannot say he is an honest man; but with this conditional, if he
were not a rank Puritan.

The first part of this bold untrue calumny, deserves rather the examination
of a whip then of a pen, or of a pillory then of a reply; yet I wish that the
fond fool, the Author, should know that his Majesty has more, truly
religious, wise, learned, loyal Councillors and Courteours, then there be
honest men Puritans of his opinion in the whole world, in which large
circumference I do verily think there is not one.

On the contrary, I may truly affirm, that there be few Courts or Statesmen in
Europe, or elsewhere can parallel, none exceed either the fidelity or integrity
of those in great Britain: if all be not a like affected, or any, otherwise
inclined, then human eyes can see, or the wisdom of a wise King prevent, God
must be their judge, and their conscience their witness. A runnagate that has
put his hand from Gods plough, This Lybeller was once a Minister, but did
lately co^mence Doctor of physic at Leiden.
and turned Quackesaluer, is not to censure those whom he ought not to name but
with honorable humble respect. The brethren of his own profession, whom he
calls truly religious, and whom in all his applications he thinks the only
able men to rule both Church, Court and Camp, are thought unfit (as he says)
for State affairs; To that part I answer, that every good subject has great
cause to thank God that our King is more wise, then to admit any into his
Council or affairs of State, whom all men (besides themselves) know to be
fairded with false colors of religion, and more fit to be fagots for
combustion of State, then to be helpers in supporting the heavy frame of
Empire; because diseases of this kind are hereditary to most of this family,
infusing from one to another, a taint or staggers in their vital spirits, as
if they were bitten with a mad Dog, which frenzy makes them unserviceable,
either in Church or Commonwealth, but specially to be incapable to be upon
Council of Kings, who are the only bars that impeach their proceedings, for
this cause they cunningly labor to induce the people to condole their yoke of
obedience cast off such fetters, and purchase their liberty.

The reason which the Doctor gives, is like his physical receipts which
trouble his patients more then the disease: for certainly, if we may call these
Puritans, whom this lybeller esteems to be so; King, Council, and Court,
have just cause to take exception at the very name which is but a stain of
Puritanisme; for my part, if it be lawful to judge men by their actions: I
may safely say, that he can never be an honest man to God and to his country,
that conceiueth such damnable thoughts, far less he that publishes such
hellish positions, and that besides all other poysonable trash every where
intermixed in this Doctors bitter pills, this one Colaquintida so corrupts all
his other drugs, that it proclaims him to to be an impudent rayler, a
Pseudo-puritan, or rotten hearted hypocrite, and not a Puritan, of which number
I wish my self, and all others to be, if human infirmity might aim at such
perfection, so long as it is clothed with mortality.

But thus it falls out, that as well the best men as their best actions set
and performed, on the conspicuous Theater of the world, are always attended
and entertained with black detraction and calumny, the deformed Brats of
malcontents, ignorance or envy, who loath the Nectar-like drops that fall from
heaven upon sweet flowers, and delight only to suck the poysonable juice of
gall and wormwood.

Hence it is that factious spirits, violently agitated with outrageous passion
of singularity, envy, anger, desire of rule, and popular applause, are only
quiet in commotions, Stob. apud. Plut.
peaceable in tumults, happy in calamities, disaffecting no less amicable
concord, then regal power and authority, thereby offering unto Gods deputies
and their just commands, the pests and poisons of their infected and ill
affected minds, imitating those barbarous nations, who in their sacrifices did
offer the gall and vilest parts of their beasts. What can we call the malicious
censuring of sacred persons, or designs, but a kind of sacrilege and
blasphemy, both against God and Kings, of whom all discourse ought to be full
of Religion, reverence and respect?

O merciful God! what wit is able to sound the depth of those dangerous evils,
whereinto the malicious nature of scismaticall sedition veiled with religion,
is able to sink it self, rather then to acknowledge error in those things
which it has taken upon it to defend, Course of conformity. page 88.
against the stream of public resolution, ranked in the eyes of singularity,
with the most tyrannous government that ever did see the Sun?

Miserum est peccare, miserius delectari, miserrimum excusare, and tum demum
consumata amentia est cum ad studium malum opinio quedam pietatis accesserit.

The motto of Jack Straw, Wyat and Kett was viuat Euangeliu^, and now the
pretext of conscience is a color of disobedience to every casheerd Leuite or
ignorant consistorian, whose studies are by wresting Scripture to destroy
unity, beget a scisme in the hearts or subjects, and make it their common
place in writings, discourse, or in the Pulpit to leap from the lives of their
flocks, to enueigh against government, and presumptuously incroach without all
reverence upon the affairs of Princes, as they were able to demolish the
walls of the Church, shake the foundations of the State, and live Libertines
without controlement.

When authority commands any thing that is to be presumed not against, but
for advancement of Religion; I would gladly know who is to be confer, whether
the things commanded be lawful or not, or whether some singular contentious or
malecontented spirits, transported with wrong ends, may oppose the Church in
his Majesty's laws, giving life unto them? If Authority at any time swerue
from the strict observance of religion, in its own integrity, in matters of
discipline, that remissenes ought to incite Churchmen to devotion and piety,
to explain the sense of Scripture with all humility, to acquaint as well
Princes as people, with the will of God by preaching, to turn the wrath of God
from them by prayer; that so obtaining a blessing upon their labors, they may
by practice confirm such in the faith by their works, as they have won by
their words to embrace and believe it.

Ex pede Herculem, the tree is known by the fruit, and not by the flourishing
shadows of substance. Exclamation and railing, howsoever personated in
religious habit, is not so much to the preservation of religion as the Romans
did superstitiously imagine the keckling of Geese was to the safety of the
Capitolium. Ambros. sermon. de obed,
Contentious bitterness is as opposite to the peace of the Church, as oil to
the quenching of fire. God is not in the bitter division or alienation of
affections, nor in the raging fire of seditions, nor in turbulent tempests and
whirlewinds of contradictions and discentions; But his blessed Spirit is in the
sweet gentle breach and still calm wind of peace and concord.

If any man say, they are warranted by their conscience, contentiously to
impugn authority, anull the laws of a free Monarchy, and make a
Metamorhposis of religion, at their pleasure when every misconception tickleth
their fancy: I answer that they balke the high way wherein they ought to walk,
neglect the maine end at which they should drive, and aim obliquely at private
gain, vain glory, satisfaction of some base humor or passion. If our
conscience tells us this or that, and cannot prove what it tells, but by shifts,
conjectures and shadows; then it is not conscience at least no true, but a
lying conscience, that so misleads us; no, it is rather our fancy, our peevish
preiudicate and forward conceit, which we are bound to resist and subject our
own perverse crooked will to the will of God; Melanch. Epirom. Philos.
who has subjected us to lawful Magistrates, whose hearts are so deep and
unsearchable, by reason of the multiplicitie of affairs, and variable ways
they are forced to walk for the weal of their people, that often times when
they seem to err to these; who ought to be holden in suspense, or that
understand not the language of State, their actions tells their wisdom to the
world, as well in protecting their subjects within, as curbing their enemies
abroad. In consideration whereof, the book of public determination once
opened, every liege man is to acquiesse therein; because Kings are Gods
deputies to execute justice and judgment, and to level singular oppositions
by laws established; if they do it not, the fault is theirs, to whom the
prevention of contempt, or animaduersion into such laws does belong.

When Micha will set up an Idol and assume a chamber worship to satisfy his
erring conscience, Judge. 17.5.6.
the reason is subioyned, because there was no King in Israel, but every man
did what seemed good in his own eyes. Conscientia non est contra scientia sed
cum scientia, our conscience must be joined with knowledge, otherwise we
Idolatrze unto our own hearts, whilst we obey an ignorant or etring
conscience; howsoever it may seem right in the eyes of scismaticks, Prouer.
14.12
yet such a conscience is but a melancholy imagination or maleuolent invention,
the end whereof are the ways of death.

As the Laws of God must guide our consciences in matters of Faith: so the
positive Laws of the kingdom must be the high way wherein every good Subject
must walk, in active obedience, in matters not repugnant to that faith.

Again, Kings are dispensators and dilposers of the law, but they are not
holden to satisfy every private contentious or curious head, which pretend
conscience for disobedience, or answer every delinquent with arguments; if they
did so, their work were infinite. It is strange then in the eyes of sound
judgment, that some rebellious factious spirits should thus roar, range, and
rage as if we had neither Prince Priest nor Judge. The Apostles and Fathers
obayed Nero a Monster and Tyrant; Dioclesian a cruel persecutor, and Julian an
accursed Apostate. When there was not a Christian King upon earth, Saint Paul
commanded Titus to put the people in remembrance of their obedience to Princes
and Rulers. Neque aliud remedium proponitur priuatis hominibus tirannis
subiectis, preter preces and lachrymas and vitae mendationem.

There can be no just cause enabling subjects to arm against authority;
because a public action must be warranted with a just cause, a good intention,
and lawful authority; the last whereof can never fall into private hands,
which are not to vendicate that cognizance which belongs to the tribunal of
heaven.

That transcendent Majesty by whom Kings reign has reserved their audit to
himself, that they may be more careful to keep their accounts straight and
rule with justice. The Iura Regalia of Kings are holden of heaven and cannot
escheat to any earthly power, far less to a subject. The Law has two
properties, the one to show men what they should do, the other to punish the
transgressors; the king has interest in the first, but is not further subject
to the second then to his Soueraign in heaven, whose deputy he is in this
inferior Orb of the earth. All popular commotions, unreasonable railing,
vomiting of unchristian scandal, factious conspiracies, and treasonable
practices, are the badges of disloyal and treacherous subjects, who ought to
testify the patience of true Israelites, and the obedience of true Christians.
Arma mea preces meae, nec possum nec debeo aliter resistere, says Saint
Ambrose. Phil. 3.3.
The Apostle tells us, That we are to do nothing in the Church through
contention or vain glory, but that in meekness of mind every man think
another better then himself.

Supporting one another through love, Ephesians. 4.23.
endeavoring to keep the unity of faith in the bonds of peace, doing all
things without reasoning and murmuring.

For the end of the Commandments is Love out of a pure heart and of a good
conscience, Phil. 2.14. Tim. 1.56.
and of faith unfeigned, from which things some have erred and turned unto
vain ianglings.

Now, in contempt of these Oracles of direction, the discourse of religion does
so busy the world, Epist. histor. the word.
that it has well near driven the practice of it out of the world, where
charity and truth have only their being in terms, as the Philosophers
materia prima.

Religious discourse is now so canuased in the mouth of most men, yea at the
tippling table of every Scoulding Drab, vayled with the name of a Sister, that
any man might resolve that took notice of their zealous discourse, patheticall
griefs and not of their lives that there were nothing in their desires, but
the purchase of heaven, and that they used the world as a reposing place
toward their celestial habitation; when on the contrary their actions tell
the world that they are but Comedians in religion, whilst they act divine
voice, but in their lives renounce both their persons, and the parts they play.
Curiosity, Singularity, and Faction, Althus. Pol. c. 2.
are the three evil spirits that have ever troubled the world, and yet rage
amongst Separatists in our Northern Climate, where, we may behold Curiosity
by pestilent vapors ascending from proud stomachs, make question of every
principle of received truth: we may see that Singularity apprehending the
Theorems of Curiosity, will Judge and rule all, Genesis 3.5.
and labor to steal men's hearts, and persuade their consciences, that they
shall be like unto gods.

Who is so blind that he sees not Faction, as Flagellum Dei, striving to arm
Curiosity and Singularity with power to afflict their Contradictors? These be
the 3. corrupted springs that send out such impetuous inundations of strife,
that labor to ouerflow, the peace of the Church and ingrosse Gods true worship
to such prodigals that are not initiate in the first elements of Christian
duties. Brus. lib. 35.


Phelautia, and Phantasia so swells their hearts with pride, and load their
heads with distraction that they run into desperate courses as Furies, neither
regarding Majesty nor Laws, preferring confusion to order, Anarchie to
Monarchy, as if Imperium in imperio querendum esset, a Sovereign should be
commanded by a subject, or the body be above the head.

If any ask them by what warrant they do these things, presently they apply
all things spoken by Nehemiah and the rest of the Prophets, touching the
repairing of the City of God or the walls thereof, as the Holy Ghost had
meant to foresignifie, what every Mercenary firebrand of their profession
should do or suffer, for whatsoever position without reason, and against
authority, he takes upon him to defend; yea some impudent Stoickes amongst
them will tell you, who knows but they be the men? In their ordinary discourse
and plagiarie pasquils, they assume the titles of Gods persecuted Saints, the
secret ones for whom God spared the world, Gods elect vessels, his dear
children and the like attributes, These be the titles which Didoclauius gives
to his brethren every where in his Satyrs. Genesis 27.22.
rather beseeming the Prologue of Miles gloriosus, then to be the assumptions
of sober Christians, but godly names do not justify godless men, they are
but vpbraided when they are honored with titles whereunto their lives are not
suitable. Many have Jacobs voice and Esaus roughness, words of piety but
actions of Babel and the pride of Lucifer in the insatiable aspiring to rule
both Church and State, or be governed by none of them; Tertul. de prescr.
but it were good such men would consider that Satan finds more difficulty in
overthrowing a humble sinner then proud Saint.

If we look upon the peaceable conversation of the most earnest Champions of
Puritanisme, we shall find their chief Treaties of peace are extrema non
media, rather to continue the flame then quench the fire, and to increase
malice then to prevent mischief. To leave those of the Ministry that are so
tainted with sophisticated tincture of Pseudo Puritanisme, and come to the
laytie, either in the country or city that are squared by that frame, the
most part of the first sort (I speak not of all) are rigorous exactors upon
their poor hunger-starued tenants, not sparing to suck their blood, grind
their faces and expose them to the extremity of misery, before they want the
least part of their rent, which the ground cursed for such merciless
oppression refuses to yield. If any man deprecate such cruelty; their answer
is ready, we take but our own, which God allows to every man. If any
strange beggar cry at their gates, he must be sent back to his parish of to
the stocks; but to acquit them of this inhumanitie, I wish that every parish
were able to maintain their own poor, and I commend such policy as a type
of good government: yet, if sometimes some hunger-starued beggars, straggle
without their parish, I think it more charity to relieve their half famisht
life, then without Christian compassion to send them away, or add cold to
hunger.

Others, in Cities or Towns, known by the usurped title of the pure
profession, are sorted in Lawyers Merchants, Mechanickes, or under Officers of
commerce the end of whose calling is, or should be, by co^mutatiue justice to
supply the necessity of each other. The Lawyer or Advocate is truly to lay
open the Law, for the determination of controversies and preservation of peace;
neither wants the kingdom of Scotland, (...) men both religious and learned
of this sort, but it is to be feared, that in it there be Pseudo Puritans that
hold non est iusto lex posita, 1. Timot. 1.9.
as if there were not a Law for such Lawyers, but that they may demean
themselves, as if they were above the Law, and take what cause they list in
hand though they know it to be unjust. Their office (say they) is not to judge,
but to plead, and therefore they speak with more affection and earnestness
against the truth then for it; a good cause will speak for it self, but he
deserves praise that maintains a bad cause well: this is the way to make him
famous, get Clyents, and so wealth.

Although the Law limits takings, and calls the excess extortion; yet the
purest brother of this kind may take what fees he will: this lex loquens, or
tongue of the Law, can tell his Clients that the intention of the Law is to
limit men that they should take no less, and it confines such that can get no
more. In other vocations, such as have taken a valuable consideration for their
pains, are liable to the censure of the Law, if they perform not their work,
yet these notwithstanding their Fee, may speak or hold their peace as they
please: for though they have two hands to take Fees on both sides, yet have
they but one tongue, and that is double, which may give council to both, but
cannot speak bu for one at once. Demosthenes had as much for holding his
peace, as Aeschines had for pleading. The doctrine of restitution is a Popish
point, and the name of Catholic, though in the Creed they cannot abide. In all
other things they like well to be universal, that is to be for every man, or
to be for one man, in one case, and against him in another, in questions of
resemblance. How can a brother of the consistorian congregation walk wrong
that has the Law, the rule of equity in his hand, and the immunitie of
assumed evangelical liberty? but the issue often times declares that those
ways are not right, and that male parta, male dilabuntur.

Next, let us look upon the Merchants and Tradesmen the brethren of separation,
and we shall see that they propound private gain to themselves, as the maine
end of their seeming devotion; that under this cover they think it tolerable
to cheat or cosen what they can, either by sophisticated wares, false weights
and measures, or by any other close device sealed by yea and nay; because it is
a praise worth part of their trade, a mystery of their profession, without
which they cannot be thought to be good husbands, or thought fit to deal in
the world, and for warrant, forsooth they will tell you, Mat. 10.16.
with a whyning voice, Christ commands us to be simple as Doves, but wise
like Serpents.

They are strict obseruers of every duty in the first Table, which touch not
the corruption of their profession; but for works of mercy commanded of the
second Table, they know not what they mean or perhaps think them superstitous
though they hear God himself say, Hos. 6.6.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

They will not swear perhaps that is to open a sin for their purpose; but if
lies will (...) their ill conditioned commodities, they will let none ^ye by
the^, nor none lie beyond them. In a word, they make no conscience to gain by
whatsomeuer course cloaked with a feigned show of devotion. The residue of the
life allotted to this short task, should fail me, if I should insist upon the
Antipathie betwixt their profession, manners, and life, or if I should bring
some of those best-masked hypocrites upon the Stage, I should need no other
colors to paint them, nor pensill to delineate them, but their own: but in
distaste of the lavish scandalous Tongues and corrupted Pens of most of their
profession, I will forbear and hold it Religion, not to insult over any man's
personal infirmities; I love better to point at public diseases, then to
lance private vlcerous sores. I have no further aim at any man's person, then
may conduce to the truth of this Subject, and vindicate wronged Innocence from
the inuenomed Shafts of forged Calumny and Malice. I balke secret
Conuenticles, Loue-Feasts, Chamber-Exercises, gauding Pilgrimages, and
seditious Exhortatories, more vehement then if Turcisme or Iudaisme were set
up, and Religion laid at the stake. I could point at every Mirmidon, as well
in their Presbiteriall as Consistorian, Achilles; at the Authors of the
Instructions sent to Amsterdam, for advancement of the Catilinarian Works of
Didoclauius Anonimus, and Philadelphus; by what Conuoyes the brethrens
Contribution was sent, and who returned huge Volumes of seditious Libels,
printed at a dearer rate, then the abaters would willingly have bestowed either
upon Subsidy, Hospital, or other more pious uses.

But I will not insist upon those cauterized sores, whose insensible estates I
ought rather to condole and sollcite remorse, then by unfolding my knowledge,
animate authority so much provoked and contemned. Neither am I so vain
glorious apprehensiue as to think my self able to raise the least dust with
other feet then my own, to work upon more excellent judgments, or with my
weak Oratory persuade them to any course beyond their natural inclination:
but if I should aim at what may be objected, I should do no more then perhaps
some would do, if I were arraigned at the bar of their judgment.

Therefore, as it is no part of my secret meaning to draw any good subject into
contempt; so neither will I set any fairer mask upon the face of this cause
then naked truth will afford. What I write is as far short of that which I
might write, as a shadow of substance, scismaticall opinions from truth,
bitter railing from Christian charity, or a stopper of the shot which
follows. Military errors are ever dangerous, and oft-times irrecouerable, but
discourse curtailed or shrunk through want of instruction or meditation may be
regained by further search, or lengthened upon the tenter hooks of better
opportunity, without prejudice of present inabilities.

What increase scismaticall talents have yielded, what confusion of order, and
breach of the sacred bond of love has sprung from these contentions, every
man's experience has found; the authors have been blinded with the beams of
singularity, malice or ignorance, and the world with pretext of zeal,
conscience and devotion: by them the sheep have been taught to despise their
Pastors and the hearts of their Pastors alienated from the love of their
flocks. Such wrangling has so eclipsed the face of humility* charity and
common honesty, that most men are now ignorant, that the storehouse of the
Church is full, when she is rich in good works, and when Christ her spouse is
fed, clothed, and visited in his hungry, naked, and diseased members. Our
unnatural divisions have killed the vety heart of devotion, withheld many
zealous Pastors and dutiful subjects from the building of the Sanctuary and
the public service, Nehe. 4.17.
or forced them with Nehemiah to build with one hand, and oppose the violence
of these times with the other. The common people are so tossed betwixt error
and truth, that their hearts are laid open, and themselves made naked to
receive every impression of corruption and vanity. By reaping those bitter
fruits of contention. Separatists like blind guides strain out a Gnat and
swallow a Camel: they have left the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment,
Mercy and Fidelity; Math. 23.24.
these things they ought to do, and these things whilst they contend about,
less they leave undone. But happyer shall they be whom the Lord when he
comes finds doing those things, then those whom unawares he shall surprise,
contentiously disputing, either about those curiosities that are above heaven
or under earth, Res quam nec scire datum, nec scrutari religiosum; Flor. Scon.
Embl.
or about the outward frame of discipline, and other frivolous questions so
much agitate after public determination.

In matters of the first kind, we are rather religiously to admire and
reverence those mysteries and secrets of Gods council, which he has not
revealed, the^ fondly to look upon that Sun, whose brightness is able to dazzle
our eyes, perhaps deprive us of sight, if we approach too near to those sacred
fires, whose scorching heat will rather consume then cherish our cold
capacity.

Vna and quidem maxim laudabilis audacia hic, nihil audere, vnum acumen nihil
cernere, vna scientia nihil scire

In matters of policy and external government questionable of the second
sort, it has been the wisdom of former ages to follow the ways of peace, to
honor, reverence and obey, next unto the voice of God, the ordinances of the
Church wherein they lived. Si Ecclesiae non audiuerit sit tibi tanquam ethnicus
and publicanus. But now Didoclauius and his brethren think themselves too
glorious to stoop to so low an ebb, and are swollen so high that the walls of
ordinary rivers are not able to keep them within their banks.

But (glory be to God) there is no just cause why any man should hearken unto
the scismaticall voice of exite, or separate from the Church of Great Britain;
every article, of whose faith is grounded upon the sure rock Christ Jesus, and
subject to no battery; she acknowledges no other supreme head but him, no
other rule of faith but his word, no other propitiatory sacrifice but his
death, no purgatory but his blood* and no other merit but his obedience. Nemo
super hoc fundamento aliud ponat quam quod positum est. 2. Cor. 3.11.
To this Church does belong the covenant, the promises of Peace, of Love, of
Salvation, of the presence of God, of his graces, power and protection. We have
that Catholic Church which is founded upon, and agrees with the truth of the
Scripture, that antiquity which agrees with the verity of the Scripture, that
number which worship God according to the rules of the Scripture, so far as
human infirmity can reach; we have that succession which succeeds in the
truth of doctrine delivered in the Scripture, that unity which believes the
trinity taught in Scripture, and that visible congregation which is seen to
God as he has revealed himself in the Scripture.

Our ceremonies virulently opposed by the schismatic dregs of our own
separatists, other braine-sicke sectaries, or profane hypocrites, are few, but
Minister many instructions, neither burthning the Church with the multitude, or
blemishing her face with the superstition of external rites, in all which she
follows her doctrine as the beams the Sun, a shadow the body, or a line
the Center. As in our Church the word is truly preached: so in every
circumstance of policy and discipline there is no repugnancie to that
doctrine, or to that decency commanded by the Apostles.

In the whole frame of our external government God has his true worship,
Princes lawful obedience, the laws due respect, and Pastors beseeming
reverence. All our policy tends to the pure preaching of the word, right
administration of the Sacraments, to the lawful vocation of Pastors,
charitable supplying of the poor, to the sedulous correction of manners,
careful remouall of scandal, and to the cherishing of Christian unity.

Thus has our Church all the notes by which she may safely walk in this
doubtful way of mortality, if some personal infirmities, or abuse of good
Laws, sometimes eclipse the dignity of offenders (as they have done in the most
pure Church is that ever was, or shall be, in the Church militant) they are by
private weakness or omission, but not by general institution and allowance.

In one word, our Church is every way happy, if with all other blessings, her
children may be conjoined in Fear, Ephesians. 4.5.
Love and obedience, as they are in one Lord, in one Faith, and in one
Baptism, that as the love of Christ combineth them one way; so the communion
of Saints may unite them another way. For, what Aesculapius can cure that
state, wherein every singular spirit, factious fondling, or malecontented
humorist, neither regard the face of Majesty, the wisdom of Councels, nor
their obedience to Laws: but on the contrary, magnify nothing but the
obortiue births and fiery oppositions of their fond conceptions; measuring all
things according to the wild and giddy apprehensions of their own crazy
brains, as if the sole skill of good government had left her public
habitation to dwell retired with some few of a party cullored livery, some of
whom do not blush to persuade their over capable auditors, of such pleasing
errors, that it is the special illuminatio^ of the Holy Ghost, whereby they
discern in the Scripture every circumstance of their discipline, or other
position, which others cannot: but such men would do better, not to trust to
every spirit, Epist. Ioh. 4.1.
because there are but two ways whereby the spirit leads men unto all truth,
the one extraordinary extending it self but to some few, and is now ceased;
the other common unto all that are of God.

The first, by a special divine excellency we call revelation, and the second
way is called reason. If the spirit by revelation has discovered unto the
separatists, the secrets of their discipline, and liberty of their lavish
tongues and lawless pens, Tertul. de prescrip. c. 30.
which are the trumpets of sedition, disobedience, malice and scandal, they
must man and wife profess themselves Prophets; or if reason led by the hand of
that spirit, they must for every inuectiue, and article which they disperse and
hold, show some reason as strong as their Satirs are bitter, or their
persuasion earnest. It is not the fire of railing, or the feruency of
persuasion, incensed by malice or passion, but the soundness of reason, which
must declare opinions to proceed from the Holy Ghost, and not from fraud of
that spirit, who is strong in illusions. They that take upon them to impugn
authority, are to found themselves, and examine whether they be puffed up with
pride, making their imaginations. Idols; 1. Tim. 5.4.
or whether they can prove their vocation as Moses and Elias did, that he
that called them to so high a dignity, may give them power to approve their
vocation, and induce the world to honor and reverence them for their
extraordinary works and supernatural virtues.

But if Didoclauius, the Patriarch of Pseudo-Puritanisme, and other separatists
of his profession, show not their vocation by other miracles and better reason,
then by accursed scandal, profane censure, and seditious lybels, quae in
verecundae frontis nebulones olent We must not take Brightmans Apocalipsis,
Apocalipseos, the altar of Damascus, and other the like Chimeraes of
distraction or melancholy, and malecontented meditations for warrant. Because
all the gifts of Gods spirit do so naturally tend to brotherly love and common
peace, that we have just cause to suspect that if such doctrine did proceed
from Gods spirit, it should be delivered in sober, calm and peaceable manner,
according to the inspiration of Gods spirit, and not in bitterness of railing
and lybelling.

Melle prius quam fell tentandae sunt euangelicae curationes.

Other Simbols of pastoral vocation there be, as perfect zeal, right
knoledge, a good conscience, not to be railors, contentious, and authors of
division, to be patient in persecution, loving the unity of brotherhood and
deputed to death. If with any part of the former, and this balance of the
sanctuary, the life, doctrine, and pretended zeal of our Separatists agree, let
al of sound judgment follow or favor them as they find cause.

I have not swerued from the truth in the least circumstance thereof; or if I
would, the recent actions which I oppose, will not suffer me to belie the
authors. If I have exceeded my intended brevity, the intricacie of the subject
will free me. If I have been constrained rudely and disorderly to heap
together this discourse in a shorter scantling, then the multiplicitie of
adverse calumnies require, I hope I shall find a time to supply that
necessitous escape. If my rough hewne discourse seem somewhat harsh to the
delicate ears of separation: Saint Jerome will answer for me, That against
schismatic insolency no censure can be too strict, or expostulation too
severe.

If all that I have said be conferred with the least impudent personal
aspersion of thousands, vomited by those firebrands, whom I have slightly
shadowed and delineate, my style will prove more smooth then such hellish
practices deserve, or common patience allow; and so I come to my threefold
advertisement.

FIrst then to come to you (my Lords) that are Bishops and Rulers by place in
the Church of Scotland; I need not to call to your memory, that you are the
Sickles, under your Sovereign, to cut down every Weed in the Garden of the
Church, the Snaffles to bridle Schisms, and the Sentinels to foresee ne quid
detrimenti Ecclesia patiatur. You know well, that your Authority is to cut off
the head of this Hidra of Division, which springs up with such violence, that
your care and vigilancie is, so far as may be, to ease his Majesty of those
Tumults wherewith he is daily so much infested; that you are as well to defend
every Breach in the Walls, as Rupture in the body of the Church; and that
every escape of Omission in your places, is no less liable to scandal, then
faults of Commission in your persons. Your Innocence is much wronged by
Didoclauius and his brethren Separatists, who labor as well by all such secret
practices, as by public Satyrs, at home or abroad may draw your Authority or
Persons into contempt. But my hope is, that your long patience will call to
your consideration, that the wisdom of good Government looks ever exactly
at first into the transgression of those Laws that are to be observed by
future Ages, and that Clergy and Learning, Magistracy and Laws are so
chayned together, that as without Learning the one cannot be instructed, so
without respect to Laws, Magistracy walks without attendance, and is rather
a title of honor then a frame of obedience. As we do not more reverence and
adore God in the stupendous architect of the world, then in the wise conduct
of it. So do we not more admire Magistracy in the compassing and composing
the extent of their government, then in the prudent administration and
preservation thereof, from injustice, violence, sedition, faction and
dissension the earthquakes that remove it from the Center.

There is no possible way unto peace and quietness unless the probable voice
of every entire society or body politic overrule all priuare opinion of that
same body. Councels are to no purpose if once their determination set down,
men may afterward defend publicly their opinions. As these things which the
law of God leaves arbitrary, are all subject to the positive Laws of the
Church, and to be used till like authority see just and reasonable cause to
alter the^: so these Laws of the Church abridge private men's liberty in such
things that are not dissonant from the Laws of God; if it were not so, we
should ouerturne the world and make every man his own commander and Judge.

These considerations I leave to your fatherly care, if I have said too much,
or to little purpose; it is, because I can do nothing but tattle; but if I
were able to do more, I would do it, that our divisions might not be told in
Gath, nor our nakedness published in the streets of Askelon.

IN the second place, I come to you of the Ministry of Scotland, or elsewhere
within his Majesty's Dominions, that are Lanternes of direction unto your
followers: To you that thus frame the peoples hearts, and on whose shoulders
lies the burden of this cause, which so troubles the common Peace.

I beseech you lend me patient hearing to that which in few words I shall
deliver unto you from my soul, and in the sincerity of my heart, and whereof
I hope you will judge more charitable, then to think that you read the words
of an adversary against that Truth which you say you profess, but of one that
desires to embrace the same Truth with you, if it be Truth. Although I be not
of the Tribe of Leui, yet am I of the Tents of Sem: Regard not then who it is
that speaks, but weigh the truth of what I shall speak.

First, if without fore-stalled or preiudicate affection you will truly
examine that same external Government established (which you oppose) you shall
find it such, as neither the Law of God or man, hitherto alleged, are of
sufficient force to disprooue your obedience thereunto: but on the contrary,
that the Frame of that Government which you maintain is insufficient to
establish any well affected Conscience, so long as it opposes the current of
lawful Authority: Neither in all your impartial inquiry shall you find one
clear proof whereby it may be demonstrate, that your Opposition is not by
mis-conception and error named the Ordinance of JESUS CHRIST.

Though you much urge Apostolical imitation, yet my hope is, that there is
none so obstinate amongst you, but will confess, that many things of the same
nature were harmless in the Apostles times, which now would prove
impossible, or scandalous; as the administration of the Eucharist after supper,
washing of feet, oscula sancta, the community of goods, the feasts of
charity, manual exercise, and the like; whereof, some, many years after were
retained in the Church, and now upon good considerations, are removed, and
other things established, which the former times could not have, and are more
fit for the Church of Christ, then if for conformities sake to those times,
they should be taken away. Or if a necessitous imitation of Apostolical times,
should be yielded in the external government of the Church, all the passionate
exhalations of Didoclauius, and the like disturbers of State combined with your
best reasons, will never be able to prove that your complete form of
discipline, was wholly practiced in any age but in this, which for insolency
and contempt may be called the worst, or that it is otherwise warranted but by
marvelous poor conjectures and wresting of Scriptures to singular opinions.

Therefore give me leave to entreat you by that humility which is the crown
of well affected Christian minds, by the obligation which you owe unto the
peace of the Church, by the care of your own souls and salvation of Gods
people committed to your charge, that (beside many other important
considerations) you will lay before you the necessity of unity and intestine
tranquillity at this time, when now or never your allegiance challenges your
loyalty and united forces.

Animos vestros commune iungat periculum, simultas post sit, ne tum denique
vestra intelligatis bona, cum quae in potestate habetis ea amiseritis.

Meditate deeply with your best recollected senses, that if his Majesty
should now cherish in his own bosom the least Coal of homebred Sedition,
that might obviate the successful issue of his just and holy designs, the
World might justly take notice, that his Royal providence is far short of
that care which so long has vpholden the most peaceable Government that any
Age can parallel.

Call to mind, that as God has given him a wise and understanding heart, to
judge betwixt good and evil, so has he given him a strong Arm, to cast out
from his people every root that brings forth Wormwood and Gall. Epist.
Mirror of holy War, dedicated to the high Court of Parliament of England.
He needs not a Speculum belli sacri, or a Looking Babble, to inform him,
that the open enemies of State are quickly discovered; but the Mothes, Cancers,
vlcerous sores, and Hecticks arising from seditious subjects, are seldom seen
till they be past cure, and become the spoil of State, and opprobrie of
Statesmen. Neither is he ignorant, that whatsoever subject repineth against
just Laws, or incroacheth upon the Regalities of the King, either seeks to
wear his Crown, command it, or to disclayme his allegiance.

Think not then, that a King so religiously wise, for satisfaction of fond
iealousies (which he has further secured then modesty or reason could have
entreated, far less importuned) will re-establish a confused Anarchie, or
give way that an Oligarchie of Elders, composed for the most part of ignorant
and mutinous members, shall be the Lesbian Rule, to square, judge, direct,
govern, and be the Dictator of Church and State at home and abroad. As his
Majesty's long experience has taught him, that such tumultuous Councels of
orderlesse paritie are the dis-tuned strings that marreth the Harmony of the
Church, and disturb the quiet of the State; so in thankful acknowledgement,
that God has been so propitious unto him, in giving him an understanding
heart, endued with providence, prudence, moderation, and goodness, whereby he
has happily diuerted and dispersed all maleuolent aspects of disasterous
stars, which have threatened the least eclipse of the sunshine of those
peaceable days which we have so long possessed, he can do no less then
continue his former care, and provide for the safety and body of his Empire,
that every good subject may sleep in his Watchings, and rest in his Labors.

Add to these Considerations, that his Majesty's white Colors have long
attended your submission at the Gates of your Rebellion; if his approaches draw
nearer, who knows what may follow? An advised Fabius is no less to be feared
then a fighting Marcellus. True wisdom knows as well how to sacrifice at the
Altar of Mars, as to offer in the Temple of Minerua, and is no less seen in
the Mysteries of War, then in the Councels of Peace. Sometimes the day that
begins with Sunshine, ends with Storms, and some who now refuse to
sing Gloria Patri, Some of this pure profession has bin lately so mad, as to
impugn that Gloria Patri should be read in the Church Liturgy, or sung after
the Psalms
perhaps hereafter may be taught a Lesson of obedience, Sicut erat in
principio. You cannot justly complain, but that patience has been admirable,
which has given way to those violent Spirits, whose actions now show, that
without pulling of them upon their knees, they can be hardly reduced to order:
but if others be wise, they may make good use of such madness.

Optimum consilium aliena frui insania. It is bad policy to let danger knock
at the door, and it is a worthy saying beseeming a Statesman, That solid and
grounded courses which keep dangers aloof, L. Verul.
are better then fine shifts and deliueries, when they are near.

Damb. in cause. Crim. Dec. lib. 7. Farin. Bod. de repub. Iac. 1. parl. 2. c 43.
Iac. 5. parl. 6. c. 83. Iac. 6. Parl. 8. c. 134. Parl 10. c. 10. Parl. Parl.
14. c. 259. Ed. 1. an. 3. c. 25. Hen. 8. an. 37. c. 10. Phil. and Mar. an. c 3.
Eliz. an 8. c. 7.
I will not act the Ciuilian, in resolving whether or not Conspiracies,
entertainment of intelligence for Faction, private Conuenticles inciting
Commotion, or the abaters and Ministers of instruction to treasonable attempts,
be within the compass of Treason; because it is evident by our ancient and
modern Municipall Laws, which are, or ought to be the bridles to break and
curb unruly Colts.

If a friendly interest might have place, I could wish, that such of you as
know the danger to which you are liable, should appeal to a Pardon in mercy,
by tendering your obedience to conformity, whilst you have time, and not to
stand to a trial in Justice, when perhaps it will be too late for those Royal
Offers and Remonstrances, so often rejected, to yield to those Metaphysicall
repining Spirits, who can discern the face of the sky, but cannot discern
the difference of times, or their own danger, when destruction like Damocles
sword hangs perpendiculer over their heads.

It is objected by Demades against the Athenians, that they never entreated for
peace, but in mourning gowns, that is after great calamity in war. After
wit is often times bought at a dear rate by the disloyal children of pride,
singularity and disobedience.

In nobis id verum quibus hostis in latere, and non tantum ad Portas Hanniball,
and tamen dulci fortuna litigamus.

It cannot be expessed how much it greeueth the heart of every sober
Christian, that sovereignty, Magistracy, and things of special excellency
should be thus bitten at by men ouerflowing with peace, whom God has endued
with graces of wit and learning to better purposes, and that gentle admonitions
which ought to reform them, do but increase their obstinacy, and are
occasions of laboring more earnestly to entangle unwary minds in the snares of
their opinions.

Gens hominum fertur rapidis obuia fatis.
Incerta sui, stigiasque vltro querimus vndas.
There is none so ignorant amongst you, bur knows vos estis dii, is a
prerogative or summum imperium given to Kings, and estote subditi, a command of
obedience, telling subjects, that as the hand must wither that touches: so the
tongue must fall out that taxes the Lords anointed against whom the very
Angels of heaven give not railing judgment before the Lord.

Epist. Iud. 1.9.
When Michael the Archangell desputed with Satan the Prince of darkness
about the body of Moses; he durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said
increpet te dominus, the Lord rebuke thee.

In the old Testament Kings were directly governors ever the Church; they did
purge corruption, reform abuses, brought the Arc to her place, builded the
Temple, dedicated the same, 1. Sam. 6. 1. Reg. 16.3.8.
and renewed the covenant betwixt God and the people. To these actions their
titles given by the Almighty are suitable; They are called the sons of the
most high, Esaias 49.23.
Gods, Angels of God, nursing Fathers of the Church, and the Lights of Israel.

Tit. 1.3. Romans 13.1.2.3.4.5. 2. Pet. 13.14. Mat. 22.21.
In the new Testament, obedience to Princes is every where enjoined, and every
soul commanded to be subject to them for conscience sake; in the whole book
of God they are vindices vtriusque tabulae, by commanding due obedience to be
given to Gods co^mandeements, and in giving life to the ordinances of the
Church by their civil sword. August. Epist. contra Donat.
Both divine and human laws enable Princes to prevent confusion of opinions
and scismes that infect the world with Atheism, and ouershadow the face of
Christian simplicity with self-conceit, Tim. 6.20.
school subtleties, vain babbling, and opposition of science falsely so called.

It is a fond arrogant presumption to intrude every singular conception upon
the Church, by railing and malicious aspersions, and not by modesty and reason,
by which only divine truth will issue and be brought to light. All contrary
factious practices, tumultuary motions, and virulent inuectiues, have ever been
condemned as arch policies to animate sedition, and give the vulgar people
heartning to make God the author of rebellion, and themselves his deputies in
the execution.

This assumed liberty daily beaten in popular ears is only a Circean song,
rather beseeming the hoords of Tartarians, then commonwealth of Christians, a
paradoxe in which all Princes have interest, and an insolency incredible to
posterity, if every Aristarchus may censure, every Gracchus give sentence, or
every subject sit in judgment against sovereignty.

They are bad Statesmen that unjustly take from the subject to add to the
prerogatives or revenues of Kings, thereby they weaken sovereignty, deprive it
of the love of the people, make the life of it troublesome and subject to
diseases: but you like worse Statesmen, touch the string of sovereignty with
too rough a hand, or rather break it in pulling the natural feathers from it,
to enlarge popular liberty.

In advancing this Anarchy, you open a door to all manner of evils, which with
licentiousness and disobedience rush into the commonwealth and make the great
frame of sovereign Empire unproportionable, uncomely, and altogether
unserviceable, either for restraint of vice, advancement of virtue, or for
uniting of inward power against foreign force, which are the main ends of
royal institution. The large and sure point of mediocrity is lost in the
narrow compass of your singularity, wherein few or none have ever found it;
for, if affairs be not euenly balanced without approach to extremes, Church
or State government may err upon either hand, and so fall into an anarchy or
tyranny.

Fata si liceret mihi
Fingere arbitrio meo
Temperem Zephiro leui
Vela, ne pressae graui
Strepitu antennae tremant
Tuta me media vehat
Vita decurrens via.
Quicquid excessit modum
Pendet instabili loco.
As wisdom is the sacred worker of all things: so is a modest carriage one of
her chiefest effects, arming the possessors with a well composed orderly
modesty, as well to encounter the secret Ambuscados, as open assaults of
adverse accidents. Neither does wisdom flourish in any thing more then in the
religious mutual chaste amplexures wherewith order, unity and love embrace one
another, perfuming heaven and earth with a delicious fragrancy, which shines
like a resplendent light in the firmament of the Church and common wealth.

Hieron. ad Damasc.
Si quis in hac arca non fuerit, peribit, regnante diluuio; si quis extra hanc
domum agnum commederit prophanus est.

The sweetness of Music has mastered men's fiercest affections, and it is
wittily emblem'd, that harmony caused the stones of Thebes join themselves in
uniform proportion of building.

If you picture or present to your selves, the excellent blessings that will
acrue to the cause of religion by the unanimous ioynture of all true
professors, certainly you shall at once in the same measure grave in your
hearts a religious reverent respect toward that sacred bond of unity and love,
so much distracted by passionate distempers.

There is nothing more contrary to religion, then that orderlesse anarchy,
sedition, calumny, strife, envy, and malice, the rebels of heaven incensed by
contention, should be entertaind as most welcome guests to those who assume the
sole title of purity. But if you will have the world to be the Theater of your
praises, or dignifie your desert with so glorious titles, consort your love,
charity, wisdom and peaceable conversation, with those attributes wherewith
now your actions show you but hood-winke the world.

In your long digging the barren desolate and unfruitful quarry of dissension,
you have gotten nothing but unserviceable stones for the sanctuary, and
rubbidge of scandal for your selves: but from the rich mines of obedience,
peace and christian society, you shall reap a golden harvest of those fruits of
our faith, which are only able to direct us toward heavenly Jerusalem.

O! then call your actions to a reckoning, examine the cause you have taken in
hand, laying aside that bitterness of gal wherewith hitherto you have
ouer-abounded, and with meekness searching the truth.

Think you are men and may err. Sift impartially your own hearts, whether it
be force of reason, or vehemence of passion that feeds your opinions.

When you discover the truth, seek not to cover it with glosing delusions,
but acknowledge the greatness thereof, and think it your greatest victory when
the same ouerruleth you.

Deceive not your selves, by thinking, that staying (...) our own Country you
may as well shake off your allegiance, far less inuest your selves in
sovereign Power (which is a Note above Ela, set to the Tune of John Knox,
Geneuating in a wrong Diapason) as some by running to Amsterdam, make
themselves Libertinos and Ciues alienae Reipublicae, to their shame.

If others Separatists will follow their Sent, or if perhaps their further
contempt procure them a Mittimus, or safe conduct thither, certainly the
Church will be eased, and the State disburthened of those unquiet Spirits,
whose ensuing misery will make them sensible of their unadvised choice, in
leaving Gods people committed to their charge, and in prostituting themselves
(against either conscience, or wisdom) to be slaves, at least consorts, to
the impure Lusts of Iudaisme, Sectaries, or Schism.

Neither is it to be feared, that the Nurseries and Schools of Learning in
Great Britain are so barren (as Didoclauius impudently vpbraideth them) that
they cannot supply the Ministry with Pastors every way as able, and in the
point of conformity to Gods Ordinances, more fit to be Laborers in the Lords
Harvest.

In your ordinary discourse, and in that poysonable Libell, falsely entitled,
The Speech of the Kirk of Scotland, you desire to have a hearing; that by
reasoning, matters in question may be determined, and that the Laws already
made may sleep, and have no power over you, till publicly you either confess
your error (which is Aethiopem lauare) or by sound reason draw others to your
opinion.

If it might please his Majesty, upon whose approbation the matter depends,
to condescend so far, the cause of the Church maintained is such, that it
needs not to shun any trial but rather appealeth to any solemn conference,
where in quiet orderly sort, reason and not confused voices of preiudicat
opinions might have place.

But certainly, according to the reach of my slender judgment, your desire in
this, is, but a glistring show to dazzle poreblind eyes, and altogether
dissonant from reason, that (laying aside the concourse of divided minds in
those assemblyes, which hitherto have been found fruitless) laws once
established, which ought to exact obedience and constraint thereunto, should so
far stoop from taking effect upon you, till some disputant can persuade you
to conformity; or that public edicts received should cease to be executed, in
case this or that private person, led by some probable conceit should make
protestation against them.

There was never yet any thing so agreeable to reason, which has been free of
opposition: for this cause it is a maine end why Counels are assembled, that by
sentence of judgment they may determine those strifes that disputes can hardly
do: our nature is so laden with wilfulness and self conceit, that there is
small hope, matters of this quality will have any quiet end, unless definitive
determinations given, may stand and enforce a necessity of silence thereafter.

Your own Patriarch Didoclauius tells you, that by royal permission you
have celebrated more Cocels in 60. then has bin in England these 300. years.

In Ecclesia Scoticana vbi nulli erant Episcopi aut Metropolotani plura
Concilia Nationalia a prima reformatione celebrata sunt quam hos annos 300. in
Anglia prouincialia, Altar. Damsc. page 58.
vbi Archiepiscoporum longam and in erruptam seriem iactitant.

What has been the fruit of all those Councels, I have already told you, and
every weather-beaten Sehpheard can tell you that they were either the Vshers to
storms, or the Stage whereon they were acted?

What has been his Majesty's pious endeavors in those assemblies for removing
many needless questions amongst you, wherewith public peace has been
disturbed, none knows better then your selves; or with what base ingratitude
his royal favors has been repaied, (to instance one for all) the insolent
practices of some of you since his last benevolence, for your competent
maintenance, will witness. Yet does his invincible clemency (a thing admirable
to humane eyes) continue rather willing to regaine you, then to make you the
subject of his justice.

Magni scilicet animi est iniurias in summa potestate pati.
Nec quicquam gloriosius Principe impune leso.
Since Heaven, Earth, your own Souls, the testimony of your friends, and the
fruits of your labors bear witness against you, here is no reason but that
same authority which you usurp, may be maintained by the overthrow of such as
by further contempt continue insensible of duty or favor. Men seldom kick
at pricks without harm, or dance in Nets not seen, your proiects run byas,
your policies are discovered, your Machinations are laid open, and for ought
that can be seen, nothing rests but expectation of your speedy amendment, or
of condign chastisement for offenses of so high quality. Rebellio in
Principes conatu irrito imperia semper promouet.

If these considerations may move you, it will be a great joy to me, and far
greater benefit to you; no less in regard of your spiritual then temporal
condition; if it happen otherwise, remember that I have discharged my
conscience in so hard and stiffe-nected an age, wherein Pride, Singularity and
Contention rage against Humility, Unity and Christian Society.

The nearer things come to their Center, they move the faster; the nearer the
Sun approaches the Zenith, it is the hotter, and when lewd misdemeanors are at
full height opposed against Virtue, an eclipse or total subversion must follow.

LAstly, as a feeling Member of common Danger, I arrive at the Haven of all
good Sub^ects, at whose Gates the Contagion of Schism has not yet sought
shelter, as well in all dutiful affection congratulating your bypast
constancy, as soliciting your wonted obedience to God and his Vicegerents.
Gods manifold blessings inuit you to the one, the long peace which you have
enjoyed, enioyneth you to the other, and the remembrance of both, challenge on
your part thankful hearts, modest tongues, and reciprocal obligation for so
high binding favors.

If you will follow the light of sound sincere judgment, without cloud of
prejudice or mist of passionate affection; remember that the bonds of Christian
unity are so to be maintained, that the bonds of humane society be not
dissolved.

If you will wind up all your Ends upon this Bottom, follow not such Guides
as lead you from Jerusalem to Samaria, from the Mountain of God to the Valley
of Benhinnon; neither affect such Quacksaluers as inflame your wounds with
bitter waters of Meribahe, when they should annoint them with sweet balmes of
Gilead: Make a concord of discords, an union of division, and contend
religiously for good life, peaceable conversation; and by excellency of
Learning, who shall do most good in Church and Commonwealth.

Let true humility kindle heavenly zealous sparks of Love in your hearts, to
the increase of Virtue, that the highest reach of your ambition may be to
glory in your service to God, and to be esteemed good subjects to the King.

Lay you Prayers, Humility, and Patience upon the Altars of God, against
Cursing, Pride, and Fury; and on whom he sends the true fire of zeal, to
the confusion of sin, let that be received.

Suffer not the seamelesse Coat of your Savior to be any more cut in pieces;
Unity and discord will not abide in Noah's Arc, and Christ will not be divided.

Let all bitterness and anger, and wrath, crying and evil speaking be put
away from you, Ephesians. 1.^1.
with all maliciousness.

That you may be pure, blameless, Phil. 2.15.
and the sons of God, in the midst of a naughty and crooked Nation,
amongst whom you shine as Lights in the World.

But if you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, Iam. 3.14.
rejoice not, neither be liars against the truth.

This wisdom descends not from above but is earthly, Ibid. 15.
sensual, and deuillish.

For where envy and strife is, Ibid. 3.16.
there is sedition and all manner of evil works.

Be not stumbling blocks to your friends, nor Trophies of Triumph to your
enemies or like Watermen looking forward, but rowing backward.

Do not curiously pry into the Mysteries and Cabale of Princes, which are so
unsearchable, that without touch of disloyalty or admission they are not to be
approached by subjects in whom it is contemptuous looseness to be more apt to
censure things that are best done, then willing to understand the reasons why
they are done.

Aspire not with Adam to eat forbidden fruit, in giving hearing to such
Serpents as plead religious shows, but are far from Religion in their
hearts: Genes. 3.6.
but look rather what you should do, then be ready to applaud the fair
colors of foul Errors, or the glistering shows of such whited Tombs, Matthew.
23.27.
on whose frontispeece think you see written, -- Pulchra lauerna
Da mihi fallere sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus obtice nubem.


If your study be thus to Unity, Love Charity, Sincerity, and Obedience,
your Glory shall shine in your Faith, your Faith show in your Works, and
Mercy and Truth shall meet in your lives: so shall your strength neither
consist in the dis-ioynted Bones of Disloyalty, or in the strengthlesse
sinews of Schism, Disobedience, and arrogant Presumption, the roots of
ancient and present Distempers; but in the strong Arm of your dutiful
allegiance and humble submission to the pleasure of that great Majesty, who in
his own time, to his Glory, your comfort, and terror of all contrary Power,
will unite every member of his glorious Body, or in the overthrow of Korah
wash away every Spot in your Garment, dissipate every Cloud that obscureth your
Light, eradicate every fruitless Tree in your Garden, calm the raging Waves
of foaming Seas and tempestuous Winds, that withold you from your Haven, and
so fix every wandering Star in your Horizon, that either in Mercy or Justice
his great Name may be glorified, the unity of the Church may flourish, and
obedience to supreme Powers increase.

FINIS.

