Apud Falkland vltimo die mens^s Iulij, ANNO. DOM. 1599.
Ane Act anent the Registring of Saisings, Reversiones, and some other
writtes, for the better trial o^ the falsettis daily invented and occurring
within this Realm.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD And his Estaites presently conveened, Considdering the
gre^^ hurt his Majesty's subjects sus^einis; and the innumerable falsettis
daily invented, by forging of diver^^ private writtis: The same being keiped
obscure, quhill the moyen of the trial of the falset of them be taken away;
Specially instruments of saisings, reversions, bands for giving of reversions,
assignations to r^versiones, intimations of the same, and discharges of
reversiones. Quhilks writtis, being secretly keip^^ up, gif they be true, to
the prejudice of parties; Or maliciously obscured, gif they be false, quhill
process of time, decease of parties, witnesses and writters, take away all
adminiclis of improbation; Na pu^lick records being established, quhairin all
parties may find resolution of the estait of any Lands quhairwith they mean
to contract. FOR REMEID Quhairof, It is statute and ordained, tha^ in all time
cumming, all instruments of saisings, reversions, bands for giving of
reversions; discharges of reversions, assignations to reversions, and
intimations of the same, quhilks sall not be registrat within the buikes of
Counsel and Sessioun, within the space under written. And likewise, exceptand
saisings of Burghs lands, halden in free burgage, given upon resignation maid
in the Baillies hands, conform to the Act of Parliament, be insert and
registrat in the Registers, presently appointed to that effect, within forty
days, nixt after the making and perfyting of the same; vtherwaies, to be null
and to make na faith in judgment, nor out with. And the said nullitie to be
received be way of exception. And the said Registers, for the greater ease of
the Lieges, to be established in the particular places following: That is to
say, Ane in the town of Kirkwall in Orknay, for the haill inhabitants and
Lands, lyand within the Schireffedome of Orknay and Zetland. Ane in the Burgh
of Innernes, for the Schireffedomes of Innernes and Cromartie: Ane in the Burgh
of Elgin, for the Schireffedomes of Elgin, Forres, and Narne: Ane in the Burgh
of Abirdene, for the Schireffdoms of Abirdene, Banff, and Kincardin. Ane in the
Burgh of Dundie, for the Schireffedome of Forfare: Ane in the Burgh of Perth,
for the Schireffedome of Perth, and Stewartrie of Stratherne: Exceptand the
Stewartrie of Menteith. Ane in the Burth of Striviling, for the Schiriffedomes
of Striviling and Clackmannan, and Stewartrie of Menteith: Ane in the Burgh of
Cowper in Fyfe, for the Schireffedoms of Fyfe and Kinroschyre: Ane in the Burgh
of Edinburgh, for the Schireffedome of Edinburgh principal, and Constabularie
of Hadingtoun: Ane in the Burgh of Linlithgow, for the Schireffedomes of
Linlithgow and Bathcat: Ane in the Burgh of Lauder, for the Schireffedomes of
Berwik, Roxburgh, Selkirk and Pebles, and Bailliarie of Lauderdaill: Ane in the
town of Hammiltoun, for the Schireffdome of Lanerke, Exceptand the Burgh and
barronie of Glascow. Ane in the City of Glascow, for the Barronie of Glascow,
and the Schireffedome of Renfrew: Ane in the Burgh of Dumbartane, for the
Schireffedomes of Dumbartane, Bute, Argyle, Arrane, and Tarbeit: Ane in the
Burgh of Air, for the Schireffedome of Air, and Bailliaries of Kyle, Carrick,
and Cunninghame: Ane in the Burgh of Wigtoun, for the Schireffedome of Wigtoun:
Ane in the Burgh of Dumfreis, for the Schireffedome of Dumfreis, and
Stewartries of Kirkcudbrycht and Annerdaile: Or onie other place or places mair
convenient, as the keiper of the saidis Registers shall think expedient, dew
intimation being made to the Lieges of the same. And the said evidents to be
registrat in the particular buikes, appointed for ilk Schireffedome, as said
is. And to the effect the said office may presently, and in all time cumming, be
the mair faithfully ministrat: STATVTES and ordaines, the same to be annexed and
incorporat with the office of Secretary. And the foresaids registers, to be
called the Registers of the Secretary, in all time cumming. And that the
Secretar, present and to cum, have the said office, as ane proper part, and
pertinent of the said Secretary: Make, and constitute particular deputies,
ane or maa, in every ane of the places foresaids, of guide fame, literature* and
qualification; for quhom he sall be answerable, and quha salbe resident within
the said town and burgh, reddie at al times to receive fra the parties their
evidents, and regestrat the same within the space of twenty four hours, nixt
after the receipt thereof, and deliver to the presentar of the same, their
Evidents marked be him, with the day, Month, and zeir of the registratioun;
and in quhat leaf of the buike the same is registrat: And sall take allanerlie
for his pains, the sum of thretteene shillings four pennies. As for the
price of ilk leaf of his Register, written on both the sids: And according
thereto, sal tak proportionally, for registring of every ane of the said
Evidents. Quhilk depute to be appointed, as said is, for keiping of ilk
register foresaid. Sall twice ilk zeir, at the feast of Whitsunday and
Martimes, make ane roll of all Evidents, presented and marked be him, the half
zeir preceding, and sall affix the same on some public place of the town
quhair he remains, that the same may come to al parties knawledge. And the
said registers to be filled be the said deputes, to be marked be the
Secretare or his deputes, to be appointed be him to that effect, with ane note
of the particular number of the leaves, that the same sall contain. And the
saidis registers, after the filling of the same, to be reported to the said
Secretare, to remain with him, and be patent to all our Sovereign Lords
lieges, that fall have a-doe with the same. The extract of the quhil^ register,
sall have als great faith and strength, as gif the original war schawen,
except the parties havand entres to oppone against the said^^ writtes, offer to
improoue the same, be way of action or exception. In the quhilk caise, the
party purchaser of the said evidents, and vtheris havand entres to defend the
same, salbe halden to produce the principalles and originalles; notwithstanding
that they be registrat, as said (...) And that none of the said Evidents, be
of force, strength, or effect, to any intentioun, bot to be null and of nane
avail, except the same (...) registrat, as said is. And his Majesty, and
Estaites foresaidis, hes ordain^d, their presents to be published* betuixt and
the twenty daye^ September nixt-to-cum, at the mercat-croces of the heid
Burrowes of this Realm, and vthers places neidfull: And to have effect and
(...) at the elleuint day of November nixt-to-cum: In this instant zeir of God,
1599. zeires. And that their presents be ratified in the nixte Pa^^^^ment, and
be authorized and allowed be the Lords of counsel and Session.

Prented at Edinburgh by Robert Walde-graue Prenter to the Kings Majesty. 1599.


