THE SICK SOULS SALVE.

BY WILLIAM SCLATER.

BATCHELAR OF DIVINITY and Minister of the word of God at PITMISTER in Somerset.

printer's or publisher's device AC: OX


AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL Mr JOHN HORNER ESQVIRE, and to the devout ANNA his wife, at
MELLES in Somerset, mercy and peace be multiplied.
Worshipful, If to any thing Isa. 50.4.
the tongue of the Learned be necessary in a minister, it is to the ministering
of comfort to the weary soul. To most other parts of our function, knowledge
speculatiue in a sort suffices. To this and the appertinences, only sensible
experience. And he shall in vain temper with a wounded spirit, that cannot
subscribe himself a Apoc. 1.9.
Brother and copartner in the same tribulation. The wiles of Satan in this
kind, none knows, but by experience; nor prevents or defeats, except by 2.
Cor. 1.4.
the same comforts, wherewith himself has been comforted of God. If I said
also, experience only makes fit h^arers, I should not err. How God has dealt
with my poor soul, either in the wound, or cure, I had rather thankfully
acknowledge to my gracious God, then foolishly publish to inexpert men. This
only I say: God is wroth, when he hardens; just, when he breaks; gracious and
rich in mercy when he binds up the sinners heart. The Romans 8.15.
spirit of adoption, is joyful: the spirit of fear, dreadful: but the Romans
10.8.
spirit of slumber, most woeful. They are dead that feel nothing; in the way
to life, that feel wrath; they live indeed, that feel Gods love in their
hearts, infused, or instilled by the holy Ghost. I had rather feel wrath, then
feel nothing. But Lord how should they love thee: whom thou have brought from
security, to fear; from fear, to feeling and experience of thy favor? But I
forget the measure of an Epistle. You have here what you have felt; the
intolerable misery of a wounded spirit. Balm also from Gilead, if not to cure,
yet to assuage the grief. I pray God the Father of mercies, and God of all
consolation, make it sovereign to your souls: that as you have felt the wound,
which who can bear? so you may taste Phil. 4.7.
the peace, that passes all understanding. Lord Jesus say Amen.

Yours Worships in the nearest bond. WILLIAM SCLATER.

PRO. 18.14. A wounded spirit who tan bear?


IN this verse Solomon sets out unto us the summum malum, as I may term it,
the misery of miseries, that can in this life fall into the sense of man. A
misery, which who so feels in extremity, he would, I dare say, excha^ge it
with the extremest of tortures, that man's cruelty can devise to inflict.

A wounded spirit. And he amplifies it in a comparison of vnlikes. Protasis;
the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; that is, all other miseries
conscience pacified can solace, and sustain. Apodosis: But a wounded spirit,
is an evil intolerable; who can bear it?

The spirit of a man; that is, Conscience, settled in peace thorough feeling of
Gods love, will sustained. affords solace, and support to all other
afflictions. Its said of Gods people, they endured Heb. 10.34.
with joy the spoiling of their goods, viz. having conscience assuring them of
Gods favor, and promised recompense; of the Macchabees, Heb. 11.37.
they were stoned hewn a sunder, slain with the sword, banished, famished,
and yet endured. Our home Martyrs with what chearefulnes bare they the violence
of fire? So mighty a supporter of man's weakness, is a pacified conscience.

But a wounded spirit, that is, Conscience it self distressed; when that that
should solace all other afflictions, is it self discomforted: that hell who
can bear? that is to say, none without special, and even extraordinary grace
sustaining. Of it consider we two things. 1. The nature of it; what a wounded
spirit is. 2. The attribute here given it; Intolerablenes; Who can bear it?

A wounded spirit, is a conscience distressed thorough fear, or feeling of
Gods wrath due for sin. The wound is distress; the sword, Gods wrath:
piercing, sometimes by fear, more then feeling; sometimes by feeling, and the^
the wound is bleeding. The degrees of it are three. 1. That which is called
Act. 2.37.
Compunction, or the pricking of the heart; in comparison but as the prick of
a pin to the gash of a sword: a lighter distress, if any of this nature may be
light, according as the Lord is pleased to respect our infirmity. And with
this, it may be, some enter into Gods kingdom. A second degree, is that which
is here called, the wounded spirit; when conscience is plunged into a deeper
distress, thorough more fearful apprehension of the terrors of the Almighty.

The last degree, is that which the Psalmist calls, the Psalm. 51.17.
Contrite, or broken heart. A heart as it were ground to powder with the weight
of Gods wrath pressing it. And these different measures might be all
exemplified in Gods children, if daily experience did not evidence them the
same man feels sometimes less, sometimes more, remorse being not always in
like measure in any.

From which different degrees of this wound, something may be inferred by way
of reproof of sundry of Gods children. As some ye shall find of Gods
children that think this their misery, that they can in no greater measure
feel the burden of Gods wrath, due for sin, in their Conscience. Now if this
were their grief, that they can in no greater measure grieve for their sins:
such grief I should cherish: But whiles they wish for a greater wound, then
the Physician thinks expedient for their strength, I say as our Savior to the
sons of Zebedee; Mat. 20.22.
they know not what they ask. For can ye drink of the cup? etc. Can thou
bear the burden of thy sins? This wound intolerable, as Solomon thinks it,
art thou able to endure? We are not ignorant of 2. Cor. 2.11.
Satan's Wiles; and we have great cause to fear, if the Lord should farther
press us, least we should be swallowed up of sorrow. Luther speaks
excellently to this purpose; God many times keeps from his servants the
horrible, and ghastly aspect of their sins, in wonderful mercy; least the
horror of them, and Gods wrath due for them, should overwhelme us. And this
remember, if you endure the least prick of this sword, it is merely from
grace, not from any strength that is in Nature.

An other sort there are, and they as heavily complain of the depth of their
wound; as the Church in Jeremy, Lam. 1.12.
See if there be any grief like mine, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in
the day of his wrath: was ever any so far plunged in distress? And here often
begin almost to quarrel with God himself, and murmur at his hand upon them,
that when he leaves other miscreants in utter senslesnes of their spiritual
estate, he thus heavilie presses, and only not oppresses them. To whom let
this advise suffice. 1. Let them consider that the cause of their wound is in
and from themselves; Genesis 3.8.10.11.
their sins procured it; God only as a just judge inflicts it. 2. Let them
weigh withal, that not only extremity, but even eternity of this horror they
have deserved; even that which I say, has Isai. 66 24.
the worm that never dies, and the fire that never goes out. And think they
much, if the Lord for a moment chaste^, that he may for ever have mercy? 3.
Tell me thou that murmurest; whither think thou rather to be chosen? A
conscience wounded, or a conscience seared; a heart ground to powder, or a heart
past feeling of sin, or wrath? Certainly, though it be true that Solomon
speaks, a wounded spirit is an evil intolerable; yet if thou have any
rectitude of judgment, thou will easily acknowledge, the state of a man
wounded, far better, then the state of one hardened; in these respects at
least: Act. 16.30.
1 That sense of the wound drives to seek remedy.

Yea 2 Isai. 61.1.
prepares, and makes fit to be cured. 4. Let such remember what the Lord
speaks to the Apostle, 2. Cor. 12.9
his grace is sufficient, and he perfects his power in our weakness, and has
promised, 1. Cor. 10, 23.
not to suffer his to be tempted above strength, etc.

Lastly, let it not be forgotten, that usually comforts are 2. Cor. 1.5.
proportioned to afflictions: the less the wound, the less the comfort; the
more the trouble, the more plentiful the consolation, when God is pleased to
grant it. And of the nature of this wounded spirit, thus far. Whereto I will
add one thing of some consequence, before I proceed to the attribute, that is,
touching the subject, or persons into whom it is incident; And thus propound
the question:

Whither this misery may fall into Gods children; or whither it be peculiar
only to the vessels of wrath? To this the answer is, that not only castawaies
or men unreconciled to God, but even vessels of election, yea the dearest of
Gods Saints actually partakers of adoption, are subject unto it. Yea more, All
Gods children, except these only in whom the Lord works extraordinarily, as
Infants, etc. sooner or later, in one measure, or another are thus wounded.

Gods children therefore consider in a double time, 1. In the act of their
calling. 2 After their effectual vocation.

In the act of their calling, when God is bringing the^ out of the power of
darkness, it is generally true of al, they feel it or else are never truly
called. And this is evident, not only by instance, but by general doctrine.
Elihu describing the Lords proceedings with his children in their first
conversion, thus sets it out, Job. 33.14.16.17.18.19.20.21.
God speaks once and twice, and men hear it not, etc. Then opens he the
ears by his corrections which he has sealed, etc. by this especially here
mentioned, as appears by effects thereof described in the process of that
Text. Our Savior professes Mat. 9.12.13.
he heales not the whole; but the sick; came not to call the righteous, but
sinners, that is that feel their sins and groan under the burden of them,
to repentance. And therefore this once I dare avow; none ever had conscience
truly pacified, that first felt not conscience wounded.

Now whether a man, after he is in state of grace, may feel this wound bleed a
fresh: is a greater question with some thorough their weakness; though if we
co^sult with Scripture, and experience, the question is out of question. Job.
33.29.
All these things (says Elihu truly) will God, work twice, or thrice with a
man, that he may turn back his soul from the pit. Examples are frequent; see
David complaining that he had Ps. 32.3, 4.
no rest in his bones by reason of his sin, his moisture and marrow consumed
with the extremity of this anguish.

Compare Ps. 77. Job. 13. that place especially is eminent. 2. Cor. 12. there
was given me (says the Apostle) a prick to the flesh, etc. many interpret it
of concupiscence and the stirrings of lust; but impertinently, and against the
circumstances of the place: for stirrings of lust are no gifts of God; neither
are in any respect to be reckoned amongst infirmities, which Paul would
rejoice in: rather understand it of this sting of conscience which he felt,
pressing him down to the nethermost hell in his sense, that was erst taken up
to the highest heaven.

If any demand reasons why the Lord is pleased thus to deal with his children,
these may be assigned, whiles we set down the diverse kinds of this wound,
according as the ends of inflicting are diverse. The kinds are five. 1.
Penal, inflicted for punishment properly so called; such was that of Genesis
4.13, 14 Mat. 27.4.5.
Cain, and Judas, merely penal, and a beginning of their hell, whereunto
castawaies many enter even in this life. 2. Castigatory; for chastisement of
some particular disobedience; such Psalm. 32.
that of David, a chastisement for his sins; the like of many of Gods
children: so long as they hold on their course of obedience without
interruption, so long Gal. 6.16.
mercy is upon the^, and peace, as upon the Israel of God; but if once they
shall turn their liberty into license, when once that peace of God cease
Philip. 4.7.
to keep their hearts within the bounds of obedience, farewell then their
peace till repentance be renewed; Job. 13 26.
God then writes bitter things against them; and makes them possess the sins
even of youth. 3. Probatory; for trial; such probably was that of Job, chiefly
for trial; and such perhaps is that of Gods children sometimes most strict in
obedience. 4. For prevention of some future sin; so Paul, 2. Cor. 12 7.
Least I should be exalted above measure. God in mercy before hand letting us
feel the smart, that he may affright from practice of sin. Says Bernard,
Quandoque ei, qui peccato quovis obligatus tenetur, Bern. de tripl. misericord.
pie immittit Dominus amaritudines quasdam, quae mente^ occupant hominis, and
expellunt perniciosam delectationem peccati. God often in his love, seeing us
entangled in some sin, casts into our souls some bitterness to possess the
mind, and to expel the pernicious delightsomenesse of sin. The last is of
mixed nature; partly for chastisement, partly for trial, partly for prevention.
And of one of these four kinds is the distress that any of Gods children
feel.

If any would know how to put difference betwixt this wound as it is felt of
Gods children, and that which is merely Penal in aliens; let him consider,
the different effects, or consequents thereof according as the persons differ.

1 Thus works it upon Gods servants in the first feeling of it: glad they are
to advise with any that is able, or likely to afford them comfort; and resolve
what ever the prescription be, to give way to it in their practice; Luke 3.12,
14.
what shall we do, say soldiers, people all affrighted with John Baptists
thundering sermon? Act. 2.37.
what must we do to be saved, say the distressed Jews, etc? as if they had
said, prescribe what thou will, be it never so harsh to flesh and blood, never
so crossing to profit, pleasure, reputation, any thing; we are resolved to do
it, that we may obtain comfort, that a castaway ever comes to so peremptory,
or steady resolution thou shall hardly find.

2 To a child of God, Job 33.23.24
the Interpreter, that one of a thousand that declares to a man thus perplexed
Gods righteousness, will be for ever welcome, Romans 10.15
his feet beautiful that brings the tidings of peace, and reco^cilement with
God. Is it thus with an alien, longer then he has use of a minister?

3 The wound once felt makes for ever fearful to offend; Gods children once
scortcht with the flame of Gods wrath, for ever Heb. 12. vlt.
dread that consuming fire; from others, whiles they are upon the rack, we may
hear so^e good speeches; seldom see performance when Gods hand is removed.

4 Such ye shall see wonderful Mat 5.3.7.
compassionate toward others in like misery, what they have felt themselves
they cannot but commiserate, and pity in others by experience of sorrows they
learn compassion.

5 Such, ye shall see, of all others men of strictest practice; and those
little sins (as some term them) which others swallow without scruple, they
carefully fly from, as odious in the sight of God. More might be annexed; but
this shall suffice for explaning the nature of this evil; A wounded spirit.

The attribute follows, which is intolerablenes. Who can bear it; that is to
say, none without special, and extraordinary grace sustaining. The
intolerablenes of this evil I mean not at large to amplify; hearts, that
feel it, easily acknowledge it, and I am loath to multiply their fears; those
that never felt it, till they feel, will not believe. Only take task; 1 by
the fearful extremities it has driven many into, Mat. 27.5.
Judas was not alone in his discomfortable end, but has had (alas for pity)
and has daily many followers? Job. 2.4.
skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for life, but life yea if
it were te^ thousand lives, me^ that feel this wou^d in extremity with out hope
of release, will prodigally cast away to be rid of this torture.

2 The fears it affrights withal are strange Prove. 28.1.
They fly, says Solomon, when none pursues; even Levit. 26.37
at the noise of a leaf shaken, tremble at their own shadow; yea are Ier 20 4.
a terror to themselves. Afraid (says David) and affrighted, Psalm. 53.5.
where no fear is.

3 Yea what extremities has it brought Gods dear Saints unto? Job, the
mirror of patience, yet under this cross so impatie^t, so unlike himself, that
Job 6.8.9.
he wishes for death. Ps. 77.8, 9.
David, the man after Gods own heart, it drove, if not to blasphemy, yet to some
thing near of kin to blasphemy. The like or greater might be insta^ced of
others.

Heathens to express the horror of it, set it out in that fiction of hellish
furies following the flagitious, with burning firebrands, and torturing with
all extremities. It may perhaps seem strange, this evil should be so
intolerable: pains of the body many by fortitude have outborne; yea pains of
fire, some, not only Martyrs; but miscreants have endured; other griefs of the
mind, time, or counsel, or necessity, or something digests. What should be in
this point of conscience to make the wou^d so intolerable? Respon. There are in
this evil two things eminent, more then in other. First, whereas in all other
afflictions, man has to do with man, or at worst with Devils; in this man
co^flicteth immediately with God himself, frail man with the Almighty God,
sinful man with the holy God, Hab. 1.13.
whose eyes are pure, and can endure no unclean thing to stand before him;
that is in his wrath Heb. 12.29.
a consuming fire.

2 Whereas in all other evils a man is still a friend to himself: in this he
is at war with himself, a scourge to himself, Ier. 20 4.
a terror to himself. And whatsoever he is, or has, all conspire to work his
torture; understanding, memory, senses, members, whatsoever is within him, with
out him; what he thinks of, remembers, sees, hears, all turns to his torment:
and therefore no marvel if it be so intolerable.

To draw now to conclusion of these generals; thus applying, and making use of
this attribute of intolerablenes given to this evil. We have a company of
gallants in the world, men for the present, as Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4 19.
past feeling, and given over to work wickedness even with greediness; that
laugh at the sheepishnes of Gods children, who of scruple abstain from idle,
yea from profane speech, yea from lewdest and most ungracious actions, oaths,
perjury, whoredom, so do my, blood, any thing alike to them; heaven, and hell,
God, and Devil, peace, and trouble of conscience, all are with them but
fables. They talk of Hell (say they) and torments thereof, as preachers will
have them intolerable; the Mar. 9.43, 44
worm never dies, and the fire never goes out. Now if this be al their hell,
the gnawing of a worm, etc. who would be so foolish, as for it to bar
himself of the pleasures of this life?

Now Lord, that thou were pleased to grant such Atheists, but one hours sense
of that worm which they so much scoff at: I am persuaded its neither poverty,
nor prison, nor sword, nor fire, nor any other torture, but they would choose
to make excha^ge for it; all the world said one once, for a good conscience;
wonder we at the wish? The wound of conscience (says Solomon) who can bear?

Let us all therefore be admonished to take heed how we wound conscience, and
bring on our selves this insufferable evil. Of all blessings of God incident
to this life, pray for this, the peace of a good conscience; Phil. 4 7.
it passes (says Paul) all understanding: of all mischiefs, keep thy self
from this, a torturing, and accusing conscience; says Solomon, who can bear
it? Would thou know what makes it? It is sin, any sin, be it but a
scruple, or dram, never so little it frets like poison in the bowels. It may be
indeed, custom of sinning, as a callum, or brawny skin, makes conscience
senseless for the time: but, that callum once removed, no flesh so tender. But
especially beware of sins against Conscience; that is sins against knowledge,
a and recoyled against by conscience: these are the torturing sins indeed, that
rack conscience, when God is pleased to awake it: when men Iac. 4.17.
know they do evil, and perhaps hear the voice of conscience, as another Lot
admonishing, Genesis 19.7.
oh deal not so wickedly; or as Joseph to his Mistress, Genesis 39.9.
how can thou do this great wickedness and sin against God? and yet break out
to enormities: these fear; they turn in their issue, into gall and wormwood.
And herein, alas, how desperate are many? running to practice of the grossest
enormities, which nature it self conde^ns; as whoredom, drunkenness, etc: and
never considering (conscience being thorough custom of sinning stupefied) how
deadly they wound it, and what horror they lay up for themselves, against when
God shall be pleased to enter judgment with them. Oh that they would but
consider the lamentable ends of such sinners, that this Genesis 4.7.
Lion of an evil conscience once rowsed, thorough horror, drives many unto.
How many (alas) how many every day hear we of running with Judas to the
halter, to be their own hangmen, or cut throats, and posting as it were, out
of the hell of an evil conscience, to the hell of fire, and brimstone, burning
for ever before the throne of God? And why should any living in the same sins,
secure himself from like judgment? But of the wound this far?

3 Let us see now what that balm is, so sovereign, that has virtue to cure
it: or in plainer terms, what course is to be holden of such as are
distressed, that they may find comfort. Two principal Ingredients we have in
S. Peter's prescript to his patients at Jerusalem. Act 2.38.
Amend your lives, and 2 be baptized for remission of sins: salues
sovereign indeed for a wounded soul, we can find none better then repentance
2 and faith, and whatsoever is a means to assure us that our sins for
Christ's sake are forgiven us. This do therefore, when the Lords hand shall in
this kind be upon thee: search thy heart diligently for whatsoever is amiss in
thee; leave neither sins of age, no nor of youth, sins of life nor of
nature vnsifted: for all these humble thy self under Gods mighty hand, Is.
1.16, 17, 18.
cease to do evil, learn to do well; the^ though thy sins be red as
scarlet, the Lord shall make them white as wool. But this be assured, never to
have this wound soundly cured, till thy sins, those especially thou feel
most galling, be repented.

2 This done; go on in thy prescript, using all holy means to obtain faith
in the blood of Christ; Heb 9.14: Romans 5.1.
that blood, and it only, infused has virtue to cure the bleeding wounds of
conscience. The meaning is; thou must labor to see, and believe thine own
share in Christ's death, and satisfaction, that thou may be able to say as
Paul from sound experience, Gal. 2.20.
Christ loved me, and gave himself for me. This persuasion once upon sound
evidence obtained; whatsoever Devil, or conscience can suggest for discomfort,
is easily removed; and till that assurance in some measure be gotten, never
look for solid peace in thy conscience. And therefore (by the way) hear not
them that teach, you can never be assured of your salvation, or pardon of
sins in this life; what Job. 16.2.
Job speaks of his friends in his affliction, is true of such teachers;
miserable comforters are they to distressed consciences. No rack is so
torturing to the body, as is their doubtful suspense to a wounded conscience.

3 And as a means to obtain it, carefully Heb. 10 25
frequent the assemblies and gatherings together of the Saints; where God has
appointed his interpreters, those ones amongst thousands, to declare unto man
his righteousness: though it may be, some little ease may be obtained by
other private helps, yet sure they forsake their own mercy that forsake our
assemblies.

Hitherto join Christian prudence, in fitting thy meditations to thy present
estate. The law is indeed a good Iac. 1.23.
looking glass, wherein we may behold the many blemishes, and ouglie
deformities of our life, and nature; an excellent Ier. 23.29.
hammer to break the stone of the heart: but consider, the heart broken needs
rather Isai. 61, 1.
binding, then breaking; the spirit wounded, rather lenitiues then corasiues.
In this case therefore, Repentance and faith once in any measure obtained, that
comfort of the Apostle is fittest to be meditated; Romans 6.14.
we are not under the law, but under grace: he means in respect of
justification. And therefore though the law condemn thee for remainds of
sin: yet grace acquits and accepts thee for thy faith in Christ.

Lastly beware of hellish courses, which many take; as merry company and
sports, to drive away qualmes of conscience, as some profanely term them: the
Dan. 5.4, 5, 6
hand writing on the wall makes Belshazzar tremble in midst of his iollitie:
they are but as a draught of cold water in a fever, mitigating the fervor for
the present, yet so as it after exasperateth the grief.

Having thus handled the generals; it remains now that we proceed to some
particulars: the rather, for that the weakness of most is such in this misery,
that except their own particular (and the particulars are almost infinite) be
salued, little, or no ease is brought to the distressed. Our order shall be
this; First consider we the several occasions out of which this distress
arises. 2 (For that my purpose is to speak of it only as it is in Gods
children, for chastisement, or prevention) see we what these special sins
are, which by the several distresses God would correct, or prevent in his
servants. Lastly, as the Lord shall enable, proceed we to remedies such as
either Scriptures, or experience has approved for sovereign.

Let no man require exact method, or curious sorting them to their heads; no
nor enumeration of all particulars, which are almost infinite. It shall suffice
to propound those only that occasioned this pains, and that in the same order,
which the sick soul, for whose sake this pains was first undertaken,
confusedly kept in uttering her distresses.

And in the forefront, place we that that arises from supposed vnpardonablenes
of sin. This is the general that most affrights; opinion that the Lord either
cannot or will not pardon transgressions committed: so long as, but that
principle of the Leper is holden, Mat. 8.2.
Lord if thou will thou can make me clean, anguish of heart is never so
great.

The sin the Lord would by this distress chasten, or prevent in his
children, seems probably this. A former conceit they have had in the days of
their vanity, that of all things pardon of sins is easiest obtained at the
hands of God; a stroke on the breast, and I cry God mercy, thou have thought
perhaps sufficient to purchase a pardon.

The Lord would now teach thee, it cost more to redeem a soul, and that
pardon purchased with the price of his own sons blood, is not so prodigally
bestowed.

Now this first distress is usually strengthened by three other particulars. 1.
Greatness of transgressions. 2. Long continuance in a course of sinning. 3.
Our own indisposition to partake forgiveness. For greatness of sin we have
Genesis 4.13.
Cains instance. And though the issue be better in Gods children, then in the
brood of Cain, yet the distress it self is incident to Gods dearest servants.
And herein alas how witty, and even Rhetorical are Gods children to aggravate
their infirmities? still they will be finding out somewhat, wherein their
sins have exceeded the sins of others, to which the Lord has granted
pardon. It is true, they confess, 1. Tim. 1.13
Paul a blaspheamer, a persecutour was received to mercy; but what he did be
did ignorantly through unbelief: I against my knowledge, and conscience. Peter
sinned grievously Mat. 26.75.
but wept bitterly; my heart is so hardened that not one tear can be wrung out
for my many sins. Manasses shed much blood, but in his tribulation, Par.
33.12.13
he prayed earnestly and humbled himself greatly before the Lord God of his
Fathers: I besides a few cold wishes, and a little hanging down the head after
the guise of those Hypocrites, Isa. 58. find no such thing in my self. The
sin which the Lord would hereby chasten, and prevent, is our former
extenuations, and slight esteem of the offense of God. we were wont to say of
our sins as Lot of Zoar, Genesis 19.20.
are they not little ones? and our soul may live. Oaths, say profane men (and
perhaps we have said too) what are they but words? and words, but wind?
Scoffing and fabling and wanton speech; but merry talk? Profane sports, honest
recreations; grosser enormities, humane frailties. The Lord would now teach
thee otherwise to esteem sins; to weigh them in the balance of the sanctuary,
not of thine own fancy: and perhaps the sins thou formerlie thoughtest little,
are now felt as a burden too heavy for thee to bear.

The remedies are these. First humble thy self before the great God, whose
offense thou have so lightly esteemed; pray God to forgive this thought of thy
heart, that ever thou have thought any sin little; and resolve hereafter to make
conscience as well of smaller, as of greater sins, knowing that thou art Mat.
12.36.
countable for the least, even to an idle word.

When thou have this done, consider then the endlesnes of Gods mercy in Christ
Jesus; view the Ephesians 3.18.
height and depth, and length, and breadth, those immense dimensions of Gods
grace and love in Christ. Hear the Lord himself describing himself to Moses;
Ex. 34 6, 7.
The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, abundant
in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and
sin, etc. So many attributes of mercy and grace, so few of power and justice,
what argue they? but almost a greater propension to show mercy then to execute
judgment.

Hear the Apostle. 2. Cor 1.3.
God the father of mercies; again, God which is rich in mercy. Hear Isay,
Isai. 55.7.
He is very ready to forgive; hear S. James, Iac. 5.11.
of much bowels and tender commiseratio^. And reject that saying of Cain Genesis 4
13.
my sin is greater then can be forgiven: Mentiris Cain, says S. Augustine; thou
lie Caine; for greater is Gods mercy then al ma^s iniquity.

When thou have thus dwelt a while upon meditation of the endless mercy of
God; see then the 1. Pet. 1.18, 19.
price paid to expiate not only little, but even greatest sins. Is there any
think thou so great, which the Heb. 9.14. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
blood of the son of God, a person so excellent, cannot expiate?

Nimirum Deus meus (says Augustine) si aequa lance delicta peccantis hominis
and redimentis gratia librentur Authoris; non tantum oriens ab occidente, sed
inferior separatur infernus a summo Coeli cardine. Now surely my God (says S.
Augustine) if the offenses of man sinning, and the grace of God redeeming be
piezed in even balance, the East has not so far difference from the West, nor
the lowest hell, from the highest heaven, etc. Ad unto these, those sweet
promises propounded in the word of God. Isai. 1.17, 89
Cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Though thy sins were red as
scarlet, they shall be white as wool. And out of them frame this comfortable and
sound conclusion. There is no sin capable of repentance, but the same is also
capable of pardon.

Lastly consider examples of great sinners received to mercy, 2. Par. 33.12 13.
Manasseh, Peter, 1. Tim. 1.13, 16.
Paul, etc. and know Gods dealings are exemplary, in them the Lord shows what
al might expect, that by their example should in after times believe and
repent.

A second particular strengthening this distress is long continued practice
of sin with contempt of grace offered. This is that that more exasperates the
wound, and makes it bleed a fresh. I know (says the distressed soul) Gods
mercies are infinite; Christ's merit, endless: but I have long dwelt in
practice of sin, neglected many a gracious invitation, foreslowed repentance;
that now I am persuaded, the judgment threatened by the Prophet has seized on
me; Ezec. 24.13.
because the Lord would have purged me and I was not purged, therefore I shall
never be purged.

The sin the Lord would hereby chasten and prevent is procrastination: and
those profane resolutions; time enough yet; repent when we are old: and those
hellish speeches, young Saints old Devils; youth must have his swinge; and let
us be merry, we can never do it younger. The Lord would by this distress teach
thee, that, it is Lam. 3.27.
good to bear the yoke in youth; that repentance the sooner it is performed,
the more comfortable; and that grace must be accepted when the Lord offers it,
not when we shall be at leisure. And now I dare say, thou wishest, thou had bin
sooner wise for thy soul, and even in youth laid the foundation of thine
endless comfort.

For remedy, this do: first bewail delays, now so discomfortable in sense;
and pray God to pardon, that presumptuous neglect of his gracious invitations.
And now purpose to Ephe. 5.16.
redeem the time, and 1. Pet. 4.2.3.
as much time as remains in the flesh, consecrate wholly to the service of God.

This done, build thy self upon persuasion of this truth: that promise of
pardon is made without limitation to any time, person, or number of offenses,
repentance being once performed. Jerusalem had long weltered in the blood of
the saints: yet hear our Savior; Luke 19.42.
oh if thou had known but in this thy day, the things that belong to thy
peace: that is to say, notwithstanding all the blood of the Prophets, and
cruelty that has passed from father to son along so many generations, yet now
had repentance turned away the judgments prepared for thee. And the Lord by
his Prophet; From the days of your fathers ye have gone astray, yet return
and I will heal your rebellions. There is Ephesians. 3.18.
a length as well as a breadth of Gods pardoning mercy. It is as long as large,
to every one in any time seriously repenting.

A third occasion of this distress is, that arises from our own
indisposition and disability to perform the conditions of pardon, faith and
repentance. This is that that especially wounds conscience. The former
principles after some pawse will be granted: God can pardon, and no time past for
such as ca^ repent. But for me, alas I feel nothing but hardness of heart and
security: nor ca^ I, as I should, in any measure of godly sorrow, bewail my
foul sins so long continued. God cannot pardon a sinner impenitent and
unbelieving.

The sin the Lord would by this distress chasten, is our former proud opinion
of free will, and conceited ability in our selves to believe and repent at
pleasure. How often have those speeches rashly passed from us, we will repent in
old age, or when the Lord summons us by our last sickness; as if we had
repentance at command, and could at our pleasure perform it. The Lord would
now teach thee; that it is not in man to convert himself, or to turn from his
sins. And that it is as Ier. 13 23.
easy for a Blackemore to change his skin, or a Leopard his spots, as for a
sinner accustomed to do evil to learn to do well, without a supernatural
work of Gods spirit turning us that we may be turned.

Remedies. First humble thy self before God for this proud conceit thou have
carried of thy self in nature: acknowledge with the Apostle, thine own
disabilitie so much as by 2. Cor. 3.5.
a thought or desire to further thine own salvation; And let God be
acknowledged the Phil 2.13.
worker both of will and work in this point of co^version.

When thou have thus humbled thy self under Gods mighty hand, pray then with
that poor man in the Gospel. Mark. 9.24.
Lord help my unbelief; and with the Church, Cant. 1.4.
Draw me that I may run after thee. Lord, say thou, I know Ier. 10.23.
it is not in man to convert himself, nor to turn unto thee: Lam. 5.21.
Turn thou me o Lord and I shall be turned, Convert thou me and I shall be
converted. And after thy promise, Ezec. 36.26.
take out of my bowels that same heart of Stone, and give instead thereof, an
heart of flesh, remorsefull for sin, and flexible to the obedience of thy
holy will.

When thou have thus craved help for thy natural infirmity, consider then
that these very Mark. 9.24.
feelings and strivings against unbelief are beginnings of faith; the feeling,
and bewailing of hardness of heart, is the seed of godly sorrow. And remember
how graciously the Lord has promised not to despise the desires of the poor:
and how he has taught very Romans 8.26. See Neh. 1.11
sighs and groans to be acceptable prayers. And therefore proportionally very
grief for not grieving, to be godly sorrow; very sorrow for not believing, to
be belief, at least in Gods merciful acceptance. And of this first maine
distress and the several occasions thereof, thus far.

A second special distress, is that which is occasioned by suspicion of
hypocrisy: herewith are Gods children long and often perplexed, that though
they have performed many excellent things savouring of grace and faith
unfeigned, yet this fear they have in all these been but as hypocrites, either
for fashion, or fear, or vain glory, or hope of temporal benefit, performing
al whatever they have done in religion and the service of God.

The sin the Lord would by this distress chasten, is our former contentment
with the shadows of saving graces. Time has been perhaps, when we have
thought civil honesty to be regeneration; God forgive us, sound repentance;
mumbling of Pater nosters, zealous prayers; formalitie in hearing etc the sum
of religion. The Lord would now teach thee, its not every faith that saves:
and it must be more then civilitie that brings to heaven; more then formalitie
that makes a Christian; more then lip labor that makes a prayer.

Remedies. First bewail this error, and for it humble thy self before God,
considering it is Mal. 1.8.14
not the blind and the lame, nor formalitie that satisfies that God, that
styles himself a great king and terrible amongst the heathen; and has
threatened a curse to the deceaver that has in his flock a male, and vows a
corrupt thing.

This done; continue diligently to 2. Cor. 13.5.
try and examine the graces that God has bestowed upon thee; it is one end
perhaps, why the Lord has permitted thee to this jealousy of thine own
estate. But yet where God gives evidence of sincerity, shut not thine eyes,
neither derogate from the work of Gods spirit, that by this suspiciousnesse of
thine own estate, and striving for sincerity, would seal up to thy soul,
that thou art no hypocrite, but an Ioh. 1.47.
Israelite indeed, one in whom there is no guile.

And perhaps in this view of thy self, thou shall discover graces in thy
self, such as in that manner cannot be in a hypocrite. Example: Thou shall
never find a hypocrite willing to extenuate his good things, or to aggravate
his sins. Search and see whether in things commendable, he be not willing to
take notice of the least; yea to arrogate more then is due: to lessen his
sins by all possible excuses. See the hypocrite in his colors; because
forsooth he was Luke 18:11.12.
no fornicator, no extortioner, etc had given a little scattering alms, paid
tithes etc. therefore not men only, but the Lord himself must take notice of
him as of a prime servant. Now if thou shall ask thine own heart, it may be
it will tell thee thou art free from these and far less sins, and yet
seem to thy self the 1. Tim. 1.15
chief of sinners. Thou have done these and far greater works of piety and
mercy, and yet think thy self not worthy to be numbered amongst the Ephesians. 3.8.
meanest of Gods Saints. Was ever hypocrite thus opinioned of himself? I dare
say not one.

2 Again, was there ever hypocrite that could love a child of God, eo nomine
because he was a child of God? Ishmaell that hypocrite lived in Abraham's
family, was circumcised, and no doubt performed outward conformity in
religious exercises used by his father: but could Gal. 4.29.
he love Isaac the son of promise? Yet this I doubt not but thou can say of
thy self Psalm. 15.4.
Thou honor them that fear the Lord; Psalm. 119 63.
delightest their company; cheerfully according to ability, Romans 12.13.
distributest to their necessities. And whilst thou so 1. John. 3.14
love the brethren, can thou make question, whether thou be translated from
death to life?

3 Again, ever read thou of an hypocrite, that could Pro. 9 7,8.
love a rebuker, a man reproving his personal sins? We read of Herod Mark.
6.20.
he reverenced John Baptist, never that he loved him; yea for his plain rebuke
of incest, he often desired the murder of him: of the Act. 7.54.
Jews, that with some patience and attention they heard St Stephens narration;
but his reproof was as gall and wormwood. Now when thou find David's
affection in thee, that thou can Psalm. 141 5.
desire to be reproved, and countest it a benefit: can thou doubt whether the
Lord has made thee Prove 9.8.
wise to salvation?

4 Lastly, can thou name the hypocrite, that ever could say, his conscience
bearing him witness, that he was grieved for imperfections of obedience?
mourned for this, that he could in no greater measure fly from the corruption,
that is in the world through lust? or that Romans 7.23, 24.
counted this his misery, to be led capt^ue sometimes to the law of sin?
name that hypocrite if thou can. And if thou find these things in thy
self: will thou be so injurious to thy own soul, so unthankful to Gods
spirit dwelling in thee, as to say, he has wrought no more in thee, then he
has in an hypocrite? God forbid.

But proceed we to other particulars strengthening in many this iealously of
their sincerity. They are 1 decay of graces formerly felt in more liuelyhood,
and greater efficacy: this is an usual, but a fearful distress; causing
many to think of all that ever they have formerly felt, it was nothing but the
hypocrites vanishing flashes. It is true says the wounded spirit; I have felt
that true of my self that Job so comfortably professes, Job 23.12.
I have preferred the words of the Lords mouth before mine appointed food; I
have known the day, when I could with earnestnes of affection and feeling of
wants, have powered out my soul before my God; I could once have wept for my
sins, etc. but now alas, and with weeping they utter it, none of all these can
I feel in my self.

The sins the Lord would hereby chasten or prevent, are, 1. Pride and that
swelling of the heart with co^ceitednes of our own eminency above others. 2
Unthankfulness for our little or more grace received. 3. 1. These. 5.19.20.
Discontinuance of care to cherish and increase received graces by means
sanctified: perhaps we have grown remiss in hearing, prayer, meditation,
conference, use of sacraments, etc. 4 Running into occasions of decaying, as
loose, profane, irreligious company, from society of such as fear God, by Romans
1.12.
whose mutual faith we might have solaced each another.

Remedies, 1. Bewail these sins all or any of the^ that thou can probably
think to have bin occasions of thy declinings. 2. This done, consider there may
be in Gods dearest children decay of graces in part and for a time. Of the
church of Ephesus it is said, she had Apoc. 2.4.
fallen from her first love, yet still retained esteem of a church, even with
the Lord Christ. Of the Philippians says the Apostle; Phil. 4.10.
your care begins to spring again: belike they had had their winter, that a
new spring revived. It is true the Lord has promised that Mat. 16.18.
hell gates shall never prevail utterly to overthrow our faith, or any other
grace accompanying salvation: but he has no where promised to preserve
continually sensible exercise of any grace. Faith he preserves: but continual
exercise of faith has he promised to preserve? Yea we have instances of his
Saints that have fallen to acts of infidelity: in Genesis 20.2.
Abraham himself, whose faith is so renowned; in Mat. 26.74.
Simo^ for firmnes of faith surnamed Ioh. 1.42.
Cephas. The Lord will have his graces eb and flow in his servants, says
Augustine, ne facilitatem in omnibus assecut^ nostrum putemus esse quod eius
est, least if we had attained facility in all things, we should think that our
own which is merely his work. Who of us all, does always hear with equal
attentio^, reverence, cheerefulnes, etc: or pray with like earnestnes of
desire, feeling of wants, assurance to be heard? Or do any thing at al times so
as at some?

4 Lastly; let it be considered, that the Lord usually withdrawes the use of
some particular grace, that some other may in greater measure show forth it
self in us. Ex: Ps 51.12.14, 15.
Joy and reioicing in his mercy he withdrawes that he may bring to practice of
humiliation.

A second thing strengthening jealousy of sincerity, is the small measure of
our graces received. The distress hence arising, I may well call the good
distress, the comfortable discomfort, since this brings with it its own
comfort: yea is itself the matter of most solid: consolation. Grief for
little obedience, is it not comfortable? 2. Cor. 7.11.
indignation at our imperfections, is it not a fruit of repentance? See it
exemplified, Mar. 9 24.

The sin the Lord would: hereby chasten or prevent, is former contentment with
our small measures, and that sufficit we sang to our selves in times of
prosperity. Perhaps we have bin thus minded; any measure of faith would serve
turn for comfort in times of greatest temptation: any measure of practice, so
we were free from gross enormities, would suffice to salvation. And it may be
we have scoffingly thrown of care of strict carriage, with that of Solomon
profanely mistaken, Ec. 7.18.
we may be just overmuch.

For remedy, humble thy self for these very thoughts, and pray God to pardon
neglects of means to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

This done, consider that grace is rather measured by quality then by quantity:
obedience more by sincerity then by muchnes. Its not so much inquired how great
or little, but how sincere obedience is: faith, if it be 1. Tim. 1.5.
unfeigned, though but as a Mat. 17, 20.
grain of mustard seed; obedience, though mingled with many weaknesses, yet if
it be Rom, 6.17.
hearty, has promise of gracious acceptance. And if thou lackest evidence of
sincerity, take this for one infallible, grief for thy defects and
imperfections. Let that also be weighed, that small graces may yet be true whiles
they are small; little faith is faith, as a little fire is fire, has the nature
of fire as well as the greatest flame. God despises not little things in
obedience offered unto him. In the sacrifices of the old law, not the price of
the gift, but the ability and affection of the offerer was respected.

In this evil thou art not alone, but have Romans 8.23.
all Gods Saints partakers with thee.

The smallest beginnings are 2. Cor. 1.22.
pledges of greater favors where is thankful acceptance, and Mat. 25.23.29.
conscionable use of those already received, to the glory of the bestower.

Lastly, let it not be forgotten that Paul to this purpose alleges: what we
want in our selves, Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4.
we have in Christ Jesus, if not performed, yet punished, and to us pardoned.

The third strengthener of jealousy is present insensiblenes of Gods graces
working in us: an usual accide^t, but a great discomfort.

The sin chastened is, either unthankfulness for that experience we once had of
Gods spirit working in us, or that presumptuous license we took to our selves
in sinning, whiles our evidence staid firm with us.

1 For remedy, pray God to pardon unthankfulness and presumption.

2 This done, consider graces may sometimes lie hidden in us, yea work in
respect of our acknowledgeme^t insensibly. The Luke 17.20.21.
kingdom of God, said our Savior, comes not with observation; and it is as
Mark. 4.26, 27.
seed that comes up and grows we know not how.

3 It was David's case, Ps. 50.10.
Create in me (says David) a clean heart O God. His heart, no doubt, was even
then cleansed: for doubt we of cleannes, where Gods spirit takes up his
dwelling? or make we question whether he Zech. 12.10.
sanctify, where he teaches to pray? yet Create, says David, speaking ad
sensum, according to that nothing he felt of cleansing.

4 Lastly remember how diversely the Lord gives evidence of his spirits presence
in us. Sometimes a child of God perceiues little difference in practice betwixt
himself and very aliens; yet let him view his affections, he may see grace
there: sometimes again, more may be seen in practice, then in the affection:
how ever, whilst in either, thou have cause of comfort.

The last particular in this kind discomforting, is falling from purposes, and
almost vowed resolutions of a steady course in obedience.

The sin the Lord would hereby chasten or prevent; is Ec 5.1.
presumptuousnesse in vowing or resolving, with out serious imploring of Gods
assistance to enable, or due acknowledgement of our own impotency in
performance.

God will ever be known Phil. 2.13.
sole worker of will and work, of purpose and execution. The sin was Mat. 26.
Peter's, and the chastisement he tasted.

1 For remedy, humble thy self for rashness in vowing, and pray God to keep
thine eyes open always, to behold thy natural weakness and mutabilitie.

2 Next learn ta distinguish betwixt the general and particular purpose; I
mean betwixt purposing to cleave unto God in performance of all holy duties,
and purposing in such measure to serve him. Perhaps in the measure and
particulars purposed, there have been faulting, but still in all likelihood
the general purpose remains.

3 Put difference betwixt falling from purpose, and falling from execution of
purpose in particulars; there is great ods betwixt the two. 2. Sam. 11.4, 5.
David fell from execution of that Ps. 119.106.
sworn purpose to keep Gods judgments, yet not from purpose.

4 The kinds and degrees of falling would be pondred. There is an Heb. 6.6.
universal falling from the general purpose; that indeed is discomfortable:
and there is a failing in particular performances; whence without wrong to thy
self, and condemning the whole generation of the just, thou can not conclude
thy no-adoption.

5 It would be considered whether the Heb. 10.26.29.
contrary profane purpose have succeeded in thee. A man can never say he is
wholly fallen from any grace, till he see the contrary succeeding in room
thereof.

6 Lastly in this kind fell Mat. 26.
Peter, and yet obtained mercy. And as is aforesaid, Gods dealings are 1. Tim.
1.16.
exemplary. In one he shows what all in like case may on like conditions
expect.

Let us go on to other particulars; and amongst these, as most discomfortable,
offers it self, that which arises from abundance and fowlenes of evil
thoughts, of blaspemy, atheism, lust, murder, self destroying, etc. These
very thoughts and suggestions are such, as we think cannot stand with grace.

The sin the Lord would hereby chasten, or prevent, is our little
acquaintance and notice taking of that greatness of corruption that is
natural unto us. Original corruption is little known of most, how far it
spreads, and what it compriseth, till effects thereof be seen in us. And for
sins so monstrous we are generally of Hazaels mind; 2. Reg. 8.13.
Is thy servant a dog that I should do, yea or once think of sins so
monstrous?

Perhaps also it is our lack of compassion toward others, overtaken
sometimes in some action of these sins. We have a precept with Gal. 6.1:
meekness to restore such as are fallen; upon this consideration that we our
selves may be tempted, yea overtaken in acts of the fowlest particulars. It is
our fault to turn compassionate restoring into bitter invectiues, and heavy
aggravations of our brethre^s falls; which perhaps occasions the Lord to permit
us to such like extremities. It may be its our unthankfulness for our
preservation through grace from the sins we see daily committed by others.
The falls of our brethren should be as so many sermons of thankfulness to God,
by whose grace we stand, and incitements to humiliation, and watchfulness
against our own corrupt inclination: would to God it were not too true of us,
that we ascribe our freedom from sins so foul, even to goodness of
nature. The Lord would now teach us, that our hearts are equally sinkes of
uncleanness.

1 The remedies are, First humiliation and prayer for pardon of these sins
all, or any of them, we can discover in our selves.

2 For comfort, consider, first whether they Iac. 1.14.
come out of thine own corrupt heart, or are Ioh. 13, 2.
cast into thee by Satan. If they come from Satan immediately, they are our
crosses not our sins, till we have embraced them some measure of allowance or
consent.

3 It is a comfortable truth taught by the Apostle; Romans 7.20.
that no more of our sins is imputed, then we approve. What thou disallowest
and abhorrest in thy self, and strivest against, God never imputes to
condemnation.

4 Lastly weigh what the Lord aims at in permitting his children to be thus
assaulted; and thou shall find it to be thy benefit, rather then discomfort.
One end is to acquaint us with the measure of our faulty misery, that Rom 5.20.
as sin abounds in our acknowledgement, so grace may abound in the Lords
pardon. Its our error to think our selves naturally inclined to no more
sins, then we feel actually and ordinarily stirring in our selves. 2. He
would by this occasion stir us up to Mat. 26.41.
watch and pray against every sin: even such as through secret persuasion of
our immunitie from them, often get greatest advantage against us. We usually
arm our selves against no more, then what we feel our selves actually and
often tempted unto. 3. He would teach us to magnify his grace that has freed
us from the reign and dominion of these sins; the seeds whereof we see
budding in us.

The last distress which I purpose to conclude withal, being last of those
that were propounded by the distressed; is the long delay of restitution after
use of the means. We think the Lord should presently grant what we pray for,
and not so long withhold comfort conscionably sought in the means sanctified.

The sin the Lord would hereby chasten or preve^t, is, our neglect to accept
grace offered unto us. Perhaps its true of us that is spoken of the Church in
the Canticles, when the Cant. 5.2, 3.
Lord has been wet with the dew of the night we hate not opened unto him, but
foreslowed the time. Is it not just with him, as David speaks, to make as
though he heard not, and to differ deliverance?

1 For remedy, first bewail, and pray for pardon of thine unthankful
neglects.

2 Consider then this is no new thing. The Apostle in like Extremity 2. Cor.
12 8.
besought the Lord thrice, that is, often before he received answer.

3 Though God delay, 1. to chaste^ neglects, 2 to kindle affection, 3. that
graces so hardly obtained may be valued according to their worth: yet Luc.
18.7, 8.
will he not always despise his children that cry day and night unto him.

4 God hears diversely; by giving either the blessing desired, or another
equivalent; as if not deliverance, yet 2. Cor. 12.9.
grace sufficient to support us.

5 Lastly, comforts when they come, are usually 2. Cor. 1.5.
proportioned to the measure of tribulation. Much trouble receaues in the end
plentiful consolation.

A particular strengthening this distress, is fear of falling to some
fearful extremities. A thing wherewith Job was so much perplexed, that he
prayed for death to prevent it. I will subioine his words. Job. 6.8, 9, 10, 11.
Oh that I might have my desire, and that God would grant me the thing I long
for: that is, that God would destroy me; that he would let his hand go, and
cut me off. Then should I yet have comfort, though I burn with sorrow, because
I have not denied the words of the holy one. See thou not thine own case
exemplified?

The sin the Lord would prevent or chasten hereby is, our former
fearelesnesse of such extremities, arising from proud conceit of ability to
preserve our selves; and that rash censuring and befooling others, whom the
Lord has been pleased thus to humble. We have heard perhaps of blasphemies
etc. which extremity of anguish has droven Gods children unto; we have read
of others fearful dispaires, wherein they have perished; and began to censure
them of folly or impiety for sins so extreme: now the Lord would teach
us, that how ever we applaud our selves in respect of our better stay of our
selves, yet the downfall is headlong when the Lord is pleased to leave us to our
selves.

1 For remedy, pray God to pardon these sins.

2 This done, labor to fortefie faith in the gracious promises God has made
thee of sustentation and preservation. As faith increases, so fear abateth;
as it ebs, so fear flows. And to this end consider Ioh. 17.15.24.
that Christ has prayed for preservation from all separating extremes. And
God that cannot lie, has promised 2. These. 3.2.
to preserve; at least not utterly to cast off: but though they fall, Psalm.
37.24.
yet to put under his hand.

3 To fear sin as sin, is it not a note of adoption and regeneration?

4 Thou have 1. Ioh. 5 18.
a promise of preservation from the sin unpardonable; if others prevail
against thee, they may wound thee perhaps, but not unto death. And of these
wounds of conscience thus far. Other particulars many might have been
instanced; but these suffice for the occasion. If any desire more, he has at
hand the labors of these reverend soule-Phisitians, Mr Greenham, Mr Perkins,
and Mr Downham: men excellently experie^ced, and conscionably traveled in this
healing part of divinity.

Only as an Appendix, some general grounds necessary to be known against the
evil day shall be annexed.

1 The testimony of the spirit of God Romans 8.16.
witnessing that we are the sons and daughters of God, is no vocal
testimony, such as that of the Act. 10.4.
Angel to Cornelius; but first those general testimonies Evangelicall, Ioh.
1.12.
He that receaues Christ. i. that believes in his name, has this prerogative
to be the child of God: Mark. 16.16.
and he that believes shall be saved, etc. are part of this testimony. 2.
That ability Gods spirit gives us to believe in Christ, is the testimony from
whence we conclude that we are reconciled unto God. 1. Ioh. 5.10.
He that believes in the son of God, has this witness in himself; his very
believing is that witness.

2 Graces of God out of us, as Election, Adoption, Justification, etc. are best
2. Pet. 1.10. 2. Tim 2.19.
discerned by graces within us, as Faith, Love, Patience, Obedience.

3 In temptation it is Psalm 51.12.
not safe to judge of our Adoption, and Justification, by peace of conscience,
and joy in the holy Ghost: but rather by our holy affections, and inclinations
to obedience; As fear of God, and care to depart from evil.

4 In anguish of soul it is safest to look ad minima; to the least seeds and
grains, as I may term them, of grace. As Neh. 1.11.
desire to fear God; Gal. 5.17.
lusting against corruption; grief for our imperfections; dislike Rom 7.15.
and disallowance of our selves, and our actions.

5 The gory of faith stands in this Psalm. 22.1. Job. 13.15.
to believe above sense, yea against feeling.

6 Holiness makes us not accepted of God; but Ioh. 2, 5.
show ethonly that we are approved of him.

7 Our services are not approved for the goodness of our performance; but they
are 1. Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

8 In the agony of conscience none more unfit to judge of us, then our selves:
though at other times we are sick of self love, and too partial in our own
case; yet in this state we are most uncharitable to our selves.

9 When thou art brought lowest by affliction, Ps. 32, 3, 4, 5.
humble thy self lower under Gods mighty hand, acknowledging his justice in
thy affliction, and thine own unworthiness to receive the least comfort.
There is secret pride in our hearts even when we are brought lowest by
afflictions.

10 The more vile thou art in thine own eyes, the more precious art thou in
the sight of God. Isai. 57.15.
He dwells with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to reviue the
spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart.

11 Let no seeming unfitness keep thee from exercises religious public, or
private. The weakest performances are far more acceptable then whole of
omissions.

12 Ps. 32.1, 2.
Remission of sins and peace of conscience are favors worth waiting for. If
the Lord should keep thee on the rack even till the last gasp, and ^^en
impart the least drop of his sons blood to purge thy conscience, unspeakable
were his mercy toward thy soul.

13 Conflicts with corruption are infallible signs of grace.

14 Victory over Satan seems doubtful, thorough ou^ infirmity: is Romans
16.20.
certain, by the promise of God.

15 2. Cor. 12.9.
Gods power is perfitted in his childrens weakness.

(...)
