Sermons Experimental: ON PSALMS CXVI. and CXVII. VERY VSEFVLL FOR A VVounded
Spirit.

By William Slater D. D. sometimes Rector of Linsham; and Vicar of Pitmister,
in SVMMERSET-SHIRE.

Published by his Son WILLIAM SLATER, Mr. of Arts, late Fellow of Kings
College in Cambridge, now a Priest, and Preacher of the Gospel in the City of
Exeter, in DEVON-SHIRE.

Davidica intelligit qui Davidica sentit. O come hither, and hearken all ye
that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done for my soul. Psalm.
66.16. LONDON, Printed by John Raworth, for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be
sold at his shop, at the sign of the Pide-Bull, near Saint Augustines Gate.
1638.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
AS from me these well meant Papers have been ingenuously imparted to the
public view, so be thou entreated as ingenuously on thy part to give them
welcome: I can indeed no otherwise call them mine, than as a labored
transcription from a dark Original has made them so. 'Twas not for that I
longed to see my Name in Print, (the common surfeit of the Age) nor that I would
pretend the eager importunity of others, the usual Plea of most for this
forwardness) but merely for the Vtility of their own Matter, that I was so
studious of their Evulgation; Which I conceived to be most seasonable, for that
the intention of them is not by any needless speculations to possess the
head, or any intricated Controversies (which like Rebekah's Twins too often
make a Genesis 25.22.
Struggling in the Churches Womb) to perplexe the brain, but by a sweet
Devotion, in their fit Application, to salve, and cheer, and settle the heart.
I have not seldom bestowed my thoughts upon the observation, how the licet on
the one side, and the fortasse on the other, has been too apt to breed that
monster in the Theology, or to use Bernards word, Bernard. ep. 190 fol. 248.
L. M.
Stultilogie rather of the vulgar multitude, that the best Religion is
Neutrality, as if they minded to join issue with those Academicks of old,
whose profession was to doubt of all things, but to resolve of nothing; or if
as Meteors floating in the air, they wave, not wholly in irresolutions, yet
whiles the mind is fetched off from the Scylla of Superstition, instantly they
are cast on the Charybdys of Prophanenes: Means they have, as Esay's waters
that covered the Sea, Isa. 11.9.
overflowing, to (Know) the Truth; The cause of all these vicious propensions
in them is that of Saint Paul, they do not ( 2 These. 2.10.
Love) this Truth, to their Salvation: Upon which ground, that Bish. Hall.
Mirror of Devotion has informed us, that Gods School consists as much, if
not more, of Affection, than of Speculation. Wherefore to warm those cold
affections, and to transform our Knowing to more ( 2 Timothy 3.5.
Power) of Godliness; I thought good to offer to a general perusal these
pious Dictates of this Authors grayhead, each of them having been first
experimented in his own soul, and actuated by his own life: Let them make
the same impression, which the latter words of a dying Saint (for such were
these) are wont to make upon thee: And since they show themselves in public but
as Posthumes, raised as it were out of almost eleven years obscurity, as
Lazarus from the Grave, and so as He, they walk (...), but in their Ioh. 11.^^
Grave-cloaths only, and seem by reason of their long lodging in the dust, to
resent something of the earth, and to need some spices of a trimmer and more
polished vestment; Know, that howbeit the pencill was perchance bequeathd to
me, yet because the Hand of that Apelles, which drew this picture into these
first colors was absent; I durst neither my self adventure, nor suffer any
else to be dawbing, or painting on of any other, that might not be right and
proper to the lineaments of the original Pourtrayour: Lay on but thine own
Christian Candor only, and all is well. In hope whereof I commit thee to the
Lord, and am

Thine in our Common Savior, WILL. SCLATER.
Exon. Iun. 2. 1638.
Errata.
Page 33. lin. 25. read, rebounding. p. 35. l. 31. r. break. p. 46 l. 26. r. be
we. p. 68. l 13 r. ferventest. p. 106. l. 10. r. infidelity. p. 108. l 22. r.
rectified. p. 118. l. 31. r. ventrousnesse. p 121. l. 24. r. weigh. p 130. l.
21. r. courtesy. p. 134. l. 20. r. Adiaphoris. p. 135. l. 31. r. vowed. p. 153
l. 25. r. intolerable. p. 172 l. ^5. r. initiation. p. 173 l 31 r. ought. p.
177. l. 5. r. misunderstanding. p. 178. l. 9. r. on. p. 190. l. 14. r. in
mercy.

PSALM. 116. verse. 1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications: because he has inclined his ear unto me; therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live.
THe time of the Psalm, implying the occasion of composing, seems to have
been, after the bringing of the Arc from the house of Obed-Edom, to the City
of David; see 2. Sam. 6. and 1. Chron. 15. this is evident, verse. 18, 19. It
seems also not long after, if ye compare the promise of David to pay his
Vows, ver. 13. with the burnt offerings and peace offerings made by David, 2 Samuel 6.17, 18, 19. and 1 Chronicles. 16.1, 2, 3. What time it should seem, he took
new occasion to recount the many mercies the Lord had vouchsafed him, in
delivering him from so many inextricable dangers, so long, as to see himself
seated in quiet possession of the Kingdom over all Israel; and the Arc and
Tabernacle seated in Jerusalem.

The sum and scope seems to express the fruits and gracious effects Gods
favors experimented had in him; as First, Increase of Love, ver. 1. Secondly,
Vow of sincere obedience, or confidence, ver. 9. Thirdly, Public profession of
his Name, ver. 10. Fourthly, Celebrating with praises, and all testimonies of
thankfulness, the glory of Gods Grace, Justice, Mercy in his mighty
deliverances: who doubts? but withal to stir up the people, and to inform
them of their duties, in case of like favor vouchsafed them of God.

In the two first verses is expressed a public profession, and protestation of
his love to God increased, the first gracious fruit of Gods favor toward him;
Wherein considerable are, First, The Matter of the protestation, I love,
Secondly, The intentive, or Motive, He has heard. Thirdly, The issue, and
farther Consequent, I will call on him as long as I live.

Verse. 1.
I love: Hebr. Ahabti: Septuagint, (...): vatablus dilexi: but Smatterers in
the Original know preter-tense denotes actum continuum, and signifies present,
as well as past acts: Iunius, Sat hubeo boldly, and without example. The object
of love whereto this act passes, is not expressed, but easily supplied out of
ver. 4, 5, 6. Him he means, who had heard his Prayers, whose style is some
where Psalm. 65.2.
the hearer of Prayers; the Gracious, Just, and Merciful God, ver. 5.

I love: The affection of Love we better experiment, then are able to express
in definition Nominall, or Real: It seems to comprise. First, Complace^tiam,
the pleasing, and delightful approbation of the person, or thing loved; see
Mat. 3.17 (...), see Psalm. 139.17. Secondly, Benevolentiam, heartiest
well-wishing, and desire of their good and welfare. Thirdly, Oblectationem,
delight-taking in the thing loved; 1 Samuel 19.2. confer. 1 Samuel 18.1, 3. Genesis
34.3, 19. and in all things wishing good unto it. Fourthly, Desiderium fruendi,
Genesis 34.8. Caeteri actus, ut benefacere, etc. videntur actus amoris imperati.
Fifthly, Adhaerentiam, A cleaving to the thing beloved, Genesis 34.3.

This then it is that David professes. First, That he found pleasure, and
delight in the Being, Attributes, Works of God, of Power, Justice, Mercy,
Injunctions, Prohibitions, etc. Secondly, That it did his Soul good to
contemplate on him. Thirdly, How much he desired, that he might have all
contentment amongst the sons of men, in their acknowledgment and procuring of
his glory; Wherein though no access of Real good can be made unto God, yet is
it bonum aestimatum. Fourthly, How for his part his Soul cleaved unto God.
Fifthly, How he longed for the fruition of him.

I love the Lord: Oh Si! Oh that there were such hearts in us, that we could
every one say as David, with David's spirit, upon his evidence, I love the Lord:
it were more worth, then all these; First, to know all Secrets. Secondly, to
Prophecy. Thirdly, to move Mountains, etc. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. etc. I love the
Lord; It Is more, then I know the Lord, for even Castawayes are Heb. 6.4.
enlightened; More, then I fear the Lord, for Devils fear him, unto Iam. 2.19.
trembling; More, then I Isa. 1.15.
pray to God; What should I say? More, then all Services, then all Virtues
separate from Charity: truly say the Schools, Charity is the form of all
Virtues, because it forms them all to acceptability, for that nothing is
accepted but what issues from Charity, from the love of God.

Ans. And I ask, Who does, or can do it? I mean, with David's truth: Would
thou love them that hate the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Enter affinity, league of
amity with an Idolater? Would thou entertain as thy familiars, men enemies
to God, and all goodness, Psalm. 139.21. should such tarry in thy house? Psalm.
101.4, 7. Would thou haunt their company? Ier. 15.17. Psalm. 26 4.5. Show them
the least countenance? 2 Kings 3.14. Give them a God speed? Ioh. Secondly,
Would thou hate them that love God? Tim. 3.3. Amos 5.15. (...) cannot be
(...), or (...); and that for goodness, because they love God? 1 Ioh. 3.12.
Thirdly, Have thou the Worlds good, and see thy brother in need? yet shuttest
up thy bowels of compassion toward him? how dwells the love of the Father in
thee? 1 Ioh. 3.17. Gal. 6.10. Fourthly, Could thou delight in the dishonor
of the Name of God? Ps. 119.136, 158. Fifthly, Could the noise of his approach
to judgment, and thy full fruition of him be so unwelcome? see Act. 24.25.
Luke 21.28. 2 Timothy 4.8. Sixthly, Could means of Union with him be so
unwelcome? as Amos 8.5. Psalm. 42. and 84. throughout. Seventhly, Could thou
turn the grace of God into wantonness? Iud. v. 4. and therefore be Vicious
because the Lord is Gracious? see Psalm. 130.4. Hos. 3.5. Eighthly, Would every
scoff of a jeering Ishmaelite drive thee from the service of God? see Cant.
8.6. Act. 5.41. Heb. 11.26.

Ninthly, Would thou in thy necessity fly to any rather then to thy best
friend? What, to a Witch? 1 Samuel 28.7. to an Idol, a Devil? 2 Kings 1.2. from
the living to the dead? Isa. 8.19. Certainly, its Vox Sanctorum propria, The Sea Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. 2 These. 2.12. Ephesians. 3.18.
peculiar property only of Saints, to say, I love the Lord. Wherefore David
directs his speech to Saints, as hoping amongst them the exhortation might
have place, Psalm. 31.2^.

Reasons make it plain. First, They only see the depth of that misery, which
sin brings with it; I mean not the pains only, and punishments, which
reprobates also sometimes feel, but the want of the image of God, the misery
that is in necessity of sinning, Romans 7.24. Secondly, They only have the
feeling of Gods love Romans 5.5.
shed abroad in their hearts; I mean, in remission of sins, reconciliation,
etc. see 1 Ioh. 4.19. Thirdly, They only comprehend the greatness of Gods
love in Christ, Ephesians. 3.8.

Take evidences, they are infinite. First, Who but they fear to offend him?
Ier. 32.40. Secondly, Who but they care to please him? Psalm. 40.8. Thirdly, Who
but they grieve at his dishonor? 2. Pet. 2.8. Fourthly, Who but they take to
heart the tokens of his displeasure? As they are such; therefore says David,
Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, etc.

So that make sure to thy self thy charity, love of God; thou make sure to
thy self for ever, thy election, thy calling, thy justification, adoption,
sanctification, salvation, etc. other gifts are in a sort all common, this
peculiar to Saints.



Propter se, that is, for Gods self sake, for his own sake he may
Concupiscentially, and as a Mercenary: or as others say, Nature affords love of
God, perhaps Vt Authoris Naturae, non item ut Authoris aeternae beatitudinis:
that is, as of the Author of Nature, but not as of the Author of eternal
happiness, which is properly Concupiscentiall, not the love of Amity, see
Judge. 17.13.



De certitudinali scientia, of the knowledge of certainty, and of that under
which there cannot be falsum: But yet David could say, as upon certainty, I
love the Lord: and why not we, having the 2 Cor. 4.13.
same Spirit of faith, and charity? Secondly, The Spirit of God is given us,
that we may 1 Cor. 2.12.
know the things that are given us of God; and not to know charity the prime of
all virtues? the Col. 2.14.
bond of perfectness? Thirdly, Scriptures, many are written to this end, that
we may 1 Ioh. 5.13.
know we have eternal life, Conjecturally only think you? and not as upon
certainty, or upon what better evidence, then our charity? Fourthly Grace
perfects Nature, destroys it not; I mean in natural faculties; and since this
is natural to the reasonable soul, to know its own motions, and actions, and
inclinations, (as themselves confess there is Actus reflexus) whether the
motion be natural, or supernatural; yet by the native, and imbred faculty of
the soul, a man knows, or may know the motions of it. Fifthly, Grace indeed is a
stranger to Nature, yet so, that when it has place, it overrules, and
domineers over Nature, and curbs the inclinations, and propensions of it: Thus
usually it seems, A neighbor whom we every day see, we notice not so much,
because we know him: but let a stranger come amongst us, and meddle but a
little as a See Genesis 19.9.
controuler, every man's eyes are upon him, and scarcely one action of his
escapes without our notice: so, etc. I hope ye can apply. Sixthly, And why not
as well as my knowledge, or my faith, which themselves say, a man may upon
certainty discern in himself?

Principium charitatis, the fountain of charity,

So is also the fountain of faith, Veritas prima, the first verity, or truth,
unknown also to us, yet that we may know, by their own confession; Why not
Principium charitatis, the beginning and fountain also of charity? Yea, and
that with a knowledge of certainty, though that certainty indeed be not
altogether perfect, and complete. Hold it then for a truth, Its possible to
know that we love God; as well as that we know, or fear, or believe, or obey
God: And in that persuasion, address thy self to make the love of God known to
thy self. Notes hereof are;

Notes of the love of God.
First, Where the true love of God is, there do all other loves vanish; love of
pleasures, profits, honors, life, etc. in comparison of God: my meaning is,
had thou rather Mat. 10.37.
part with all these, then with thy God? I dare say, thou truly love him.
Secondly, How art thou affected to the Image of God, shining in his children?
Does that draw thy affection? that is, Do thou love them, 1 Ioh. 5.1. and 1
Ioh. 3.14.
because they resemble God in holiness, and purity, and mercy, and patience?
My soul for thine, thou art thereby a seed of God, as is said of Abraham.
Thirdly, How art thou affected toward the Commandments of God, and the duties
that he enjoins thee in them? Can thou say, as David, Oh my God, I am Psalm.
40.8.
content to do it, I delight to do it; at least, are they not grievous, or 1
Ioh. 5.3.
burdensome to thee? Go over the whole world of Aliens, thou may see them
sometimes doing, and keep doing, but think thou with See Am. 8.5. and Mal.
1.13.
delight? Fourthly, How art thou affected toward the signs of Gods favor, or
disfavour? Does this glad thee above all, that he is pleased to lift up the
light of his Psalm. 4.6, 7.
countenance upon thee? Does this vex thee? That the Lord takes from thee the
signs of his love; A token infallible, that thou love him. And thus far of
the matter of David's Protestation, I love the Lord.

Now follows the Motive, or Incentive; Because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications. How comfortable is it to the soul, that Gods favors to us
inflame our affections toward him, Psalm. 130.4. There is mercy with thee,
therefore thou shall be feared: Oh blessed soul that can so say! And marvel
not that I call upon you to prove love; for surely, fear to offend, or
displease, is the soundest token of love to our God, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of
Christ, wherewith he loved us, constrains us: Oh, Foelix necessitas, blessed
necessity that compells us to do our Savior service! Surely, Non sic impii,
non sic, With the wicked it is not so: God is merciful, therefore they will be
sinful.

See then how the favors of God affect thee; therefore observe in such men,
when the Lord crosses them in what they sought in his service, they are ready
to blaspheme him to his face; see Mal. 3.14. Thirdly, There are favors of God,
that through commonnesse grow vile, and but by want have not their price seen,
as subjection of creatures, Psalm. 8.6, etc. But is it a special favor? A
privilege? That ravisheth, and therein cannot a child of God satisfy himself
whiles he extolls it; therefore see by all circumstances, how he loves to
augment it; let such as love thy salvation, say continually, Let God be Psalm
70.4.
magnified; see what titles David rejoices to set upon Gods favors, Psa.
88.10, 11, 12.
Loving kindness, Faithfulness, Righteousness, Wonders: read also, Romans 5.6,
7, 8. and 1 Timothy 1.12, 13, 14 etc. Surely the least favors of God affect his
children to inflame affection; if it be but a Neh. 1.11.
desire to fear his Name; if it be but a Gal. 5.17.
lusting against the flesh; Oh yet, because it is a token of Gods love, because
it is more then they have deserved; for this they love God. But is it a
spiritual blessing? A blessing, that concerns life, and 2 Pet. 1.3. and Ephe.
2.3.
godliness? With these worldlings are not at all affected, Ps. 4.6. the reason
is, because they see not, nor 1 Cor. 2.14.
can see the excellency, or worth of them; No, this is Privilegium justorum,
the privilege only of Saints, to prize Adoption, as Saint 1 Ioh. 3.1.
John, admiring therein the abundant greatness of Gods love to his soul in
Christ Jesus; to say, as Saint 1 Pet. 1.18.
Peter of faith; yea, of trial of faith, its much more precious then gold:
This is Privilegium justorum.

cords of love, to love God? Is there in it any thing supernatural?

There are Bern. de diligendo Di^.
four degrees of loving God. First, Vt bonus sit nobis, that he may be good to
us, this Mercenary; see Judge. 7.13. Secondly, Quia bonus fuit, because he has
been good unto us, this gratitudinis, matter of thankfulness to Almighty God.
Thirdly, Quia bonus in se, because he is good in himself, and in his own nature
most amiable. Fourthly, When neither our selves, nor ought that is ours is
loved, but Propter Deum, so far as it has reference to the glory of God, not
life, not Romans 9.3. and Exodus 32.32.
salvation it self; this is (...), Amoris Divini, and they must be as Saint
Paul, and Moses, extraordinary servants of God, who aspire to this measure. But
the question is of the second of these degrees mentioned; and surely, if we
look to the state of the world, this we shall find; that either the favors of
God move not, because they are not apprehended as his favors, but rather as
things that betide them by course of nature, or fortune; or if they work any
way, it is in Pejus, making them the more to Romans 2.4. and Iud. ver. 4.
despise God. But if the question be De possibili, what nature elevated above
it self, by grace may ascend unto, the solution is more difficult. First,
Nature it self may be directed that there is Debitum, that they owe, as a Debt,
love to God for his favors; therefore we see Barbarians much affected at Paul's
speech, Act. 14.17, 18. Secondly, We read of sundry testimonies of
thankfulness amongst Heathens, after good things received, as victory, health,
etc. To Apollo; who howsoever they erred touching God, yet in universality they
erred not; they meant it to that Numen, that they thought Author of their good
success: and surely, we cannot be too nice, and curious in examining our
gracious estate in this particular; for it is mavelous difficult to
distinguish betwixt the lowest degree of grace, and the highest of nature;
especially in gifts that are made Distinctive and Characteristicall, we shall
find the Devil cunning in counterfeiting, and I am persuaded there is many a
Christian thoroughly persuaded of his faith, and love toward God, who yet erres
in his persuasion; that is an excellent evidence that Solomon give us, Cant.
8.7. When many waters cannot quench it, no opposition stint it, etc. But
fourthly, Is the question of spiritual blessings, and of the true God? Surely
the natural man has no relish of them; to wit, so far as they are 1 Cor 2.14.
spiritual: but as they tend to win him reputation, or honor, etc. amongst
men, as Simon Act. 8.18.19.
Magus; or as the Persians became Hest. 8.17. see Psalm. 4.6.
Jews; or else secondly, only whiles they enjoy the blessings temporal, which
they prize the only blessings of God; therefore let the Lord turn the course
of outward things, its true of them what the Devil slanderously imputed to
Job, they are ready to Job 1.11.
curse him at his face, see Mal. 3.14. Mat. 13.21. But show me the man amongst
the many millions of naturalists, of Jobs mind, Cap. 1.21. and 2.10. as Heb.
10.34. as Apostles, Act. 5.41. or but as David, to see, and feelingly to
acknowledge a goodness in affliction, Psalm. 119.68, 71.

Because he has heard my voice, and my supplications, that is the voice of my
supplications. Psalm. 78.34, 35. Neh. 9.27. What should hinder us to say, 1
Kings 21.29.
Ahab, so far as to grant respit of the evil. First, It is in temporal
things only, which come Eccles. 9.1.
alike to all; but do they pray pardon of sins, salvation of souls? Then see
Mat. 7.22, 23. Mat. 25.11, 12. Pro. 1.28. Secondly, It cannot be denied, but
that God in his love, and approbation of things that are good in their kind,
though evil by accident in the doers, grants some such rewards to evil men:
Its Austins opinion, that the Lord therefore prospered the Romans, during their
strict observance of temperance, justice, and such like moral virtues, gave
them amplitude of Dominion: the just Lord loves righteousness, yea, so loves
it, that he rewards the shadow of it, as in Achab. Thirdly, this would be
weighed; that the Lord is ever Psalm. 111.5.
mindful of his covenant, and for it made with the fathers, sometimes does
good to the children, see Neh. 9. Fourthy, Amongst the congregations of wicked
men, in the Church especially, are some, who entreat for the sins of the
people: David tells of Moses standing in the gap, our Savior, Lu. 13.8 Fifthly,
It is for his own Names sake, Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. Exodus 32.12, 13, 14.



Deuteronomy. 4.7. Secondly, To gratify them, and to be inclined by their prayers to
grant; so God hears not the wickeds prayers, but only the prayers of his
Saints. Others, First, For general mercy, they are his creatures. Secondly,
His Church, to whom promises many are made. Thirdly, To prevent blasphemy, etc.

Isa. 1.15. Ioh. 9.31. Pro. 15.8. in which, and the like places, it is said,
That God will not hear the prayers of the wicked?

They are to be understood; First, Of some exorbitants amongst sinners; Genesis
13.13.
Sodomites. Secondly, Or of their prayers in Prove. 1.26, 27, 28.
extremity. Thirdly, Or of the blessings which concern life, and 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
godliness. But what, when yielded a common blessing? Is therein no cause of
love? see Mat. 5.45. and Act. 14.17.

But therefore is David's heart inflamed to the love of God, We are, First, more
careful to please him. Secondly, More fearful to offend him. Thirdly, More
zealous for his glory. Fourthly, More fill our mouths with his praise. Fifthly,
And make straiter steps to our feet, or else, how shall we be able to say, that
we now fear not some greater evil that way, or shall betide us? Ioh. 5.14.
else, how shall we be able to say, the Lord in favor of us has heard our
prayers? With me, this goes for a rule to judge, whether God in mercy grant me
things I pray for, does it tend to my spiritual good, advancing Gods grace in
my heart? Then say I, God in mercy, and of special favor has heard my
prayers; But am I the worse for what I obtain? or not the better? how do I
fear, lest the Lord has heard me as Psalm. 106.15.
Israelites desiring flesh, when leanness was withal sent into their souls.

There are three things that hinder such motions of love to our God. First,
That many scarcely acknowledge any work of providence in swaying these outward
things; supposing all guided by nature or fortune. Secondly, That we look not
through second causes to the chief, and principal sender, whose but
instruments these are, Hab. 1.16, 17. And we in part the like, as if the vigor
of the disease because of Nature stayed; or as if the cold of the time were the
only cause of mitigation; whereas if we would speak, or think as Christians,
we should see God in the means. Thirdly, The proud opinion of merit, if any
thing in the world, overthrows it; I shall never believe any Merit-monger does,
or can think himself beholding to God, for any his favors bestowed on him; for
while he thinks he has obliged God unto him by his devotion, how does he not
rather think, God ows him thanks, rather then himself any way indebted unto
him? But that our hearts may the better be stirred up to the Duty, Consider we,
First, our no-merits; our Merita malae; yea, how stained the very prayers we
made were, with manifold blemishes, as doubtings of obtaining, coldness of
affection, etc. Secondly, See misery of the want. Thirdly, Preferment God has
given thee in it. Fourthly, The sweetness in enjoyment passes all treasures,
Cant. 8.8. The whole substance given, for love, would be contemned; surely it
is something that Numb. 22.18.
Balaam said, if Balak would give me his house full of gold and silver, I
cannot go beyond the word of the Lord; yet said the Apostle of him, he 2 Pet.
2.15.
loved the wages of unrighteousness, and ran greedily after the Iud. ver. 11.
reward; power of providence restrained; but when Will restrains, and we so
highly prize Gods favor, that for no thing, never so precious, we will
adventure his offense, this is supernatural. Lastly, All things work together
for the good of them that Romans 8.28.
love God.

VERSE. II. Because he has inclined his ear unto me; therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live.
THis Verse contains another part of that fruit, that the mercy of God
brought forth in him; A Vow of limiting his Devotions to God: wherein are two
things observable. First, The matter of it. Secondly, The incentive, or motive.
In the first, take notice of the thing resolved of, Invocation of Gods name.
Secondly, The time, In diebus meis, in my days, as the Hebrew bears it, or as
it is rendered in our last and best Translation, As long as I live. Secondly,
The motive is, because he has inclined his ear unto me.

Because he has inclined his ear. Take heed ye here conceive nothing grossly of
the Godhead, as if he had any such fleshly, or bodily member, as eye, or ear,
etc. God is a Ioh. 4.24.
Spirit, a substance Luke 24.39.
incorporall, immateriall; but as David teaches to interpret, hereby he
signifies, not the instrument, but the faculty and ability to do what by these
bodily organs we perform, Psalm. 94.9. The inclining of the ear, signifies the
bending of our best attention to take notice of what is spoken; for such
gesture we use, when we desire thoroughly to understand what is said to us; see
Psalm. 45.10. Pro. 22.17. Psalm. 86.1. it is that, with Psalm. 130.2. he calls
attentiveness of the ear: yet withal somewhat else is imported; namely, the
Lords demitting, and humbling himself so low, as to take notice of his
petitions, Prove. 22.17. and Ier. 7.26. and 25.4. Pro. 5.13. As if he had said,
Since the Lord has pleased so low to demit, and humble himself, as to attend to
my prayer, therefore, etc. And certainly it is a matter of marvel, as to me it
seems, that the great God of heaven and earth, should stoop so low, as to
regard the prayers of the sons of men; so every where it is accounted by
Saints, and they are a little astonished at the wonderfulnesse of it; so David,
Psalm 103.5.6.
who is like the Lord our God, who dwells on high, and yet humbles himself
to behold the things in heaven and earth! And observe David's style of this
mercy of God to men, expressing ever matter of wonder, as Psalm. 107.6, 8. and
19.21. and 28.31. compare Psalm. 102.17, 18, 19, 20. and 17.6, 7. show thy
mavelous loving kindness, Ps. 31.21, 22. he has showed me his mavelous
loving kingdnesse, because he heard the voice of my supplications. And
certainly, if ye please to compare the greatness of Gods Majesty, First, with
the infirmity of man in his best estate. Secondly, With his quality as it is
now depraved. Thirdly, Considering the quality of our prayers. Fourthly, The
preferment we have in it above Angels; ye will see in it mercy no less then
mavelous. See Solomon admiring it, 1 Kings 8.27. But will God indeed dwell on
the earth? Vox admirantis, non dubitantis; behold, Heaven of heavens cannot
contain thee: yet will thou here manifest thy presence by hearing prayers? What
is Psalm. 8.4. and 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
man? and who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer?
etc. confer. v. 12. but consider him as depraved, the wonder grows yet more
mavelous, as it is amplified, Ps. 107.6, 8, 19, 21. that the Lord should
humble himself so low as to hear prayers of sinful man, provoking him daily
with his sins: And what prayers? full of doubtings, wanderings, coldness of
affection? etc. and see our preferment. First, Above Angels, as Heb. 2.14. for
hither also may that amplification be referred. Secondly, To other men not of
the Church; Deuteronomy. 4.7. what nation so great, to whom God comes so nigh, as the
Lord our God to us in all that we call unto him for?

Do we enquire reason of it? None can be given, save this only, Deuteronomy. 10.15.
(...), Tit. 3.4. the love of God to man, and there is no marvel, if that love
of God to man, amongst all Gods loves has its special name: (...), etc. are
not read, but (...), from his specialty of favor is this.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, Adam! How can we amplify
the kindness of great men? of Kings, as Hest. 5.11.12.
Haman; nay, if it be a far meaner man, a Basket-justice, or a petty
Gentleman, that vouchsafes us a greeting, or grants a request, how pride we
our selves in it? How do we never satisfy our selves in praising their
courtesy, their affability, their humility? And yet they do but duty; are men
of our own mould, subject to Iam. 5.17.
like passions as we: Oh that there were such hearts in us toward our God, who
is so ready to hear us! that King of kings, and Lord of lords, whose dwelling
is in the heavens, yet humbles himself to take notice of our prayers; and who
comforts us exceedingly against that temptation of Satan, taken from
consideration of our own unworthiness, and it is that that often dismayes from
duty; Grace is sometimes over modest; For, first, God commands it. Secondly,
Promises to accept it, Psalm. 50.15. Thirdly, Christ mediates, Revel. 8.
perfumes our prayers. Fourthly, Upbraides no man, Iam. 1.5. This arms us also
against that pretense of Papists, for invocation of God by Saints; we are not
worthy? and with Princes we deal not so? yet God loves to be so dealt withal,
he humbles himself, Psalm. 65.2. and 113.6. And this should teach the proud,
and haughtiest upon earth, to imitate their Maker, and not to slight petitions
from meanest creatures: in spiritual things it is true, there is neither bond,
nor free, all are Col. 3.11. Iam. 2.5.
one in Christ Jesus, yet in outward state God has exalted one above another;
that it is a wonder, how the heart of many is so swollen with pride, and
haughtiness, that a poor man may not speak unto them! Oh dust and ashes, proud
worms-meat, gilded potsheard, art thou more lofty, and higher then the Highest?
Yet humbles he himself to the cry of the poor, etc. So let us go, and do
likewise.

Therefore will I call upon him. So David thinks himself much obliged unto God,
because he would vouchsafe him audience. Is it not then a strange inversion
Romanists have made? God is obliged unto them, because they pray unto him; so
far beholden, that for this that they pray, he must in justice pardon sins,
and accept it as satisfaction for other defects: Mentior, if this be not their
doctrine, that prayer is a work of satisfaction, making Gods justice amends for
their other things amiss. I know what they talk of the painfulnesse that is in
it, and of the charity that forms it; but this I would fain know for my
learning: First, Who is it that has benefit by our prayers? God, or we? Whose
necessities are supplied? Gods or ours? What, when we reap benefit by prayers,
God See Job 35.7.
none, shall we think the Lord beholden unto us? Secondly, Who is it that gives
hearts to pray? If Paul say true, we know not what, or how to pray as we ought,
except Gods Romans 8.26. Zech. 12.10.
Spirit help our infirmities; Who are we, that we should be 1 Chro. 29.14
able to offer so willingly? says David; and who are we, that we should be
able to pray so fervently, so devoutly, so faithfully? Thirdly, Nay, in our
best prayers, are there not doubtings, waverings, wanderings, coldness of
affection, yea Isa. 64.6.
pollutions? and yet forsooth, God is beholden to us that we will pray to him,
not we to him for his grace in hearing. Fourthly, Is it not Debitum? have we
not a mandate to pray? suppose it be with greatest devotion, with longest
continuance, yet is it not commanded? How then, say they, we make amends for
other sins by praying? as if the creditour were beholden to his debtour, for
that he pays his mite, when he ows his talent.

But we return to David; Not God to him for praying, but he to God is beholden
for hearing; and so far, as that now he binds himself to limit his devotion
to God, so long as he lived.

The question a new is raised; Whether it be lawful to vow a commanded duty?
Why doubt we? It is a duty to limit our devotion, our religion to God, yet
David vows it; suppose you, he sinned in it? elsewhere, he swears to keep Gods
righteous judgments; did he sin, or supererogate? Surely such vows have this
good use to Gods children; they ever increase the obligation to performance,
and make more fearful to offend.

But let us see the meaning of the words. First, The thing he vows, is to call
upon God. Secondly, The continuance of it, so long as he lived. Invocation in
Scripture, is taken, First, Tropically, for the whole worship, and service of
God, as 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2. Secondly, Properly for that Act of religion,
which we call prayer; whether one, or both be here meant, is not curiously to
be disputed, though perhaps he means properly.

As long as I live. Heb. in my days; which Master Iunius with more acuity,
then solidnesse, limits to the days of his affliction; as if David here meant
no other days of his, then the days of his affliction; as he would make
probable by, Psalm. 137.7. and Lam. 1.21. Better our English Paraphrase; so 2
Kings 20.19. Is it not well, that peace and truth shall be in my Days?
Hezekiah, What means he? In days of his affliction? Nay all days of his life:
Job 27.6. My heart shall not reproach me in my Days; What Is that? Not all the
days of my life, see 1 Samuel 1.11.

But so does David now to limit his devotions, this of prayer especially, to
God only; that no other god, falsely so called; nor, I dare say, Saint, nor
Angel, should rob God of his honor. And such fruit should Gods favors have in
us, to glue our hearts unto God; and to make us continue glued unto God without
separation; see Act. 11.23. Psalm. 16.2, 4, 5. and 115.3. to the 12. verse.
These reasons we have. First, That favors we have from God none other can
afford us; nor Saint, nor Angel, nor Idol, nor Devil; amongst the gods there
is none can do as thou do; when Baal's priests are brought to trial, how
does Elijah ply upon them? Cry 1 Kings 18.27.
aloud, questionless he is asleep, or in pursuit of his enemies; Isa. 63.16.
Doubtless, Thou art our Father, our Redeemer, though Abraham be ignorant of
us all. Secondly, Besides, we know the Exodus 20.5.
jealousy of our God, how ill he brooks the least lowering look toward an
Idol. Thirdly, The impotencie of all other Idols, whether real creatures, or
but phantasmes, to help and succor us, or to avenge their own quarrel; Will
ye plead for Judge. 6 31.
Baal? If he be a god, let him plead for himself, etc. Fourthly, Is there any
more ready to hear? more merciful to respect our misery? more humbling himself
to incline ears to our prayers? they mislead you, that would have you to go to
God by Col. 2.18.
Angels. First, Where is your warrant? Secondly, Can they hear? Thirdly, Are
they more willing to hear?

Kings 18. yet have we David's reason to limit us to our God, and his religion.
First, How many gracious deliverances has he given us? How often has he made
our enemies the tail, us the head? Secondly, How many prayers of ours has he
heard? in famine, in pestilence, in war? Thirdly, What wonderful peace, and
prosperity has he given us? and yet doubt we, whether we be in the right? I am
not of their mind, who ensure truth of religion by outward things; I know the
primary rule is Gods word. But, Secondly, when Gods word has so clearly
warranted our religion, and withal we see the might of his mavelous Acts in
prospering those states, and kingdoms that profess it; It is a secondary
argument to encourage us to continue in the grace of God. I beseech you,
brethren, think upon this above all other duties, when I am dead and gone:
Above all nations that ever were Christian, never saw any more plentiful
tokens of Gods favors, then we; if we shall now turn back to Popery, take heed
lest he make not us a spectacle to all the Churches of the world, as he did the
Jews.

Now the good Lord unite our hearts to fear his Name, to continue in the grace
of God, to limit and appropriate our religious services, and devotions to that
God, whom we have so often experimented to be so gracious unto us, that by no
imposture of the wicked we may be drawn away, and fall from our steadfastness.
To him for his mercies in hearing our prayers, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

VERSE. III. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold
upon me: I found trouble and sorrow.
THis tends as I think, to explication of what is foresaid of David's fervent
love, and vowing himself Gods servant. For it may be demanded, What is the
favor of God so great that thus makes thee devoted to his fear?

I Will tell you; I was in misery inextricable, and he helped me. Three things we
have here to be noticed. First, David's state, in this Verse. Secondly, His
behavior, Verse. 4. Thirdly, The event, Verse. 5, 6.

Sense. The sorrows of death, compare Psalm. 18.5. Act. 2.24. (...), the pains
of Death; yea, as it were of a woman in travel: compassed me, as Psalm. 40.12.
and 118.10, 11, 12. so that there appeared no possible way of escape. Pains of
Hell, Sheol, that is, Mortiferi, Lethales, Deadly, and Mortal: Sheol,
oftentimes in Scripture signifies the Grave, as Genesis 37.35. and 42.38. and
44.29, 31. sometimes, Hell of the damned, Psalm. 86.13. Deuteronomy. 32.22. Ps. 9.17.
The sum is, Pulls and straights of mischief so great, as seem to threaten me
with Death: In a word, so called; First, Either by similitude, like, or
proportioned to them. Secondly, Effective, such as threaten me with Death, and
the Grave; Deadly, Hellish are the pains and torments I feel.

Found me; See Genesis 44.34. Now so calls he the perils he was in from Saul, and
other persecuters, by Metonymie of the effect; sorrows for perils, because
they wrought in him such Deadly, and Hellish sorrow, as in the end of the Verse.

Observe.
But so see what straights of trouble, what perplexed sorrows, and inextricable
pulls Gods dearest Saints are sometimes plunged into, see 2 Kings 19.3.
Children come to birth, and there is no strength to bring forth; his whole
Church see in like straights, Exodus 14.10, 13. Three children, Dan. 3.21.
Daniel himself, Dan. 6.16. see Psalm. 88.3.

What Reasons? See Deuteronomy. 8.2. There was a nearer cut into Canaan then by the
wilderness; and such as wherein they should not have fallen upon so many
exigents, Red sea, Famine, Thirst, etc. Why that way? Psalm. 10.4, 5, 6. the
ungodly is so proud, he cares not for God, neither is God in all his thoughts;
especially when all things are prosperous, then flourishes this pride: That
cursed nature we have all in us, except by grace, and gracious means, it be
restrained, or reformed: Marry when extremity of pain, and peril comes, as
David notes of the Israelites, Psalm. 78.34. and as it is noted also of
Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. then they sought God; shortly then, it was to
pull down their pride, and to drive them to their God in true devotion.
Secondly, To prove what is in their hearts, as it is said of Joseph, that the
word of the Lord Psalm. 105.19.
tried him; the basest Persian will be a Hest 8.17.
Jew to enjoy their privileges: and I doubt not, but there are some who endure
some fight of afflictions, but when it comes to matter of exigent, and
extremity, ye then see them to fly off from God, and say, it is Mal. 3.14, 15.
vain to serve him. Thirdly, To glorify his power, and mercy, and grace in
their deliverance, or sustentation, 2 Cor. 12.9. to see a creature so frail,
with constancy to endure fire, frying, sawing asunder, Heb. 11.37. lie long as
Lawrence and yet insulting over the fury of Tyrants, and daring them to do
their worst; who can but say, Digitus Dei est hic, The finger of See Exo. 14.13
God is here, and none but his? Fourthly, To teach us, says 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.
Paul, not to trust in our selves, but in the living God; How loath is nature,
how hard is it in grace, not to Pro. 3.5.
leave a little to our own wisdom and power? that often, till all other
hold-fasts fail us, we forget to cast our care upon God, or to rely upon him.
The Lord to beat us off from these, sometimes permits unto extremities.

Take heed how ye condemn broken reeds, Job 13.26.
bitter things against them, lest ye condemn the generation of the just; yet so
did the wicked in David's time, Psalm. 22.8. and Psalm. 71.11. You must Know:
First, That Gods love is not known by Eccles. 9.1.
outward things. Secondly, And what think you of our Savior, A man of Isa.
53.3.
sorrows, and extremities, and who saw as many exigents as any? Yet of him
proclaims the Father from heaven, He is my Mat. 3.17.
beloved Son, in him I am well pleased.

But, Secondly, is it not strange, Gods children should so judge of themselves
on this occasion? Certainly it is true, what censure they would tremble to
pass on others in like case, they spare not often to pass on themselves. Of all
passages in the story of Job, that one thing wonders me; that with all the
pleading of his friends, whereby they labor to prove him hypocrite, yet still
he maintains, not that he was without sin, but void of gross hypocrisy.
Thirdly, Think not when thou come to Gods service, and have for Gods cause
forsaken the world, as Judge. 17.13.
Micah, therefore God must now bless thee in outward things, especially
whilst precisely thou keep this way. First, Where is thy promise absolute,
and unlimited? I dare say, thou can not allege one. Secondly, Have thou a
privilege above all Gods servants? or has God, or will he for thy sake make
another way then by the Cross? Act. 14.22. I know God is pleased to respect
our infirmities, yet without some afflictions, and perhaps exigents, can thou
hope to enter Gods kingdom? or think thou walk with a right foot to the
Gospel? see 2 Timothy 3.12. Thirdly, Have thou not learnt, that God has to this
end sanctified afflictions, to wean thee from the earth? or art thou ignorant
of the sin, that hangs so fast, and presses down so sore? Heb. 12.1. Know
thou neither the stubbornness of thy Nature, nor thy strong propensions to
evil? Certainly it is true, there are of Gods own, many, whom rods amend not,
they must be scourges, yea scorpions, as Rehoboams.

I found trouble and sorrow. The word signifies such sorrows as are usually
joined with Isa. 35.10. and 51.11.
sighing; it should seem then Gods Saints are sensible of their afflictions,
and they pierce them often with sorrows inexplicable; I speak not only of those,
which come as chastisements, but such also as come as trialls: Hezekiah Isa.
38.3.
weeps sore, David makes his bed to Psalm. 6.4, 6.
swim, his soul is vexed, groans, cries; in one place, he Psalm. 38.8.
roars for the very disquietnesse of his heart.

Reasons are; First, Though they have put on grace, yet they have not quite put
off nature; strong Heb. 5.7.
cries, and tears, we read even of our Savior; and of his soul, that it was
Mat. 26.38.
sorrowful unto death; he fears, and mourns, yet without sin: The fear of
death, and sorrow is natural, yea according to rectitude of Nature. Secondly,
Though they know God cannot hate his children, yet they know, he may be, and is
often angry with his Saints: The Lord was angry with Moses, with whom he spoke as
a man with his Number. 22. See Deuteronomy. 3.14, 15, 16.
friend; and whether our exigents come for trial, or for chastisement, Gods
children cannot always easily discern. Thirdly, There are infirmities incident
to the best Saints; Jobs Job 6.11.
fear I confess a little distrustful, in regard of Gods promise, 1 Cor.
10.13. yet such blasts, or blooms of distrust, does sense of natural infirmity
often cast upon us. Fourthly, Often times in afflictions extreme, Satan, shall I
say, or Conscience, presents to our Genesis 4.21.
remembrance our sins; and then if affliction be gall, and Job 13.26.
wormwood, even unto Saints, who can wonder? 2 Kings 22.19.
Josiah: There is something like patience, that is not so, we call it
stupidity, Ier. 5.3. thou have smitten, but they have not sorrowed, Pro. 23.35.
It is said of Job, in all this he did not sin with his mouth, neither charged
God Job 1.22.
foolishly, but who doubts but the loss of so many children pierced him as a
father? except perhaps we think grace makes us (...), without natural
affection; which Paul taxes amongst sins that accompanied a Romans 1.31.
reprobate mind.

Two faults, or errors, come here to be reproved. First, Of them that when
Gods hand is on them by loss of things dearest, please themselves in this,
that they are not moved with their affliction, they feel not the smart of Gods
visitation; and herein they pride themselves, as if they exceeded Job himself
in measure of patience; as if a man that had a mortified member should think it
his fortitude, that without sense of smart, he endures the cutting, or searing
of it; Nay, fear rather, lest it be stupid; of such patience he said well, who
said, it was Virtus Asinina. Secondly, There are another sort of people, that
when they see in any man mourning, or sorrow, though never so moderate,
presently begin to condemn of impatience, or to persuade to patience: in loss
of friends or children, monitions in this kind, to keep a mean in mourning, I
blame not; howbeit, I find never any Prophet, or Apostle, condemning mourning,
no nor lamentation, see 1 These. 4.13. and see Jeremiah 2 Cor. 35.25.
lamenting the fall of Josiah.

VERSE. IV. Then called I upon the Name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee,
deliver my soul.
IN the former Verse, is declared David's state, and condition, full of deadly
and inextricable perils, here in this Verse, we have his behavior; his issue
ye shall see anon; Verse. 5, 6. In his behavior, we have two things. First, An
Act I called. Secondly, The form of Prayer he used. To call upon the Name of
the Lord, is to pray unto God, 1 Cor. 1.2. as singing unto the Lord, and
singing unto his Name are the same; see Psa. 135.3. Of this Act has been
spoken above already; therefore I shall here treat of it shortly, and only as
it is here inferred immediately upon the mention of his troubles, and
perplexities; and so from thence we have commended to our notice thus much;
That no extremity of affliction can drive Gods children from him, they quench
not devotions, inflame them rather; See Psalm. 44.17. to the 22.
Doctrinally we have it, Hos. 5.15. and Practically, Job 13.15. though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him, says Job. See Psalm. 44.17. to the 22.
Three things only I find in this kind, wherein they have been defective.
First, Preposterousnesse in seeking, as in 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
Asa, preferring the Physician in the first place before God. Secondly,
Over-fearfulnesse, Ezra 9.6.
dismaying to approach unto the Throne of Grace, yet approaching also as Ezra
blushes in Gods presence. Thirdly, Outward feebleness in particulars, as in
Primative Christians. But of any one, whom it wholly drove from God, I never
find mention; But with the wicked it is not so; The Ier. 44.17.
Queen of Heaven shall be God, if she will give Victuals; the Lord of Hosts
shall be forsaken, if he bring to exigent: that is a cursed speech, whether of a
cursed man, I know not, at least I say not, 2 Kings 6.33.
This evil is of the Lord, and why shall we wait on him any longer?

The form of Prayer it self next is to be noticed; it is short, but pithy;
full of earnest, and most passionate Devotion.

Sense, Maitah, Erue, Rescue; My soul, that is, my life, or my person, as verse.
8. Now though I doubt not but David in some of his afflictions used larger
form of words, yet to this sum amounted all; O Lord, I beseech thee, rescue
my soul; wherein are almost all things required to acceptable prayer. First,
The Person, or objectum cui. Secondly, Faith of Audience. Thirdly, Earnestness
of Affection; Annah. Fourthly, The matter, Rescue my soul, That Regular.

I would not be mistaken in what I deliver Doctrinally from hence; but sure it
is true, rightly taken. It is not multitude of words, but muchnesse of
affection that forms our prayers to acceptability: Two faults our Savior
found in the Pharisees devotion. First, Matthew. 6.7.
(...), Vain babbling, or needless repetitions, as that of Battus in the Poet,
-- and erant in montibus illis, and erant in montibus illis. Secondly, (...),
Much talking, many words: Eccles. 5.2.
Solomon gives Item against it, especially in all speech passing twixt God and
us; Let thy words be few, pithy as thou will, but few, fit for the matter thou
prayest for, and such as befits the Majesty of that God whom thou prayest unto.
And if a man consider the use that speech has in prayer, I mean private
prayer, it is not to Matthew. 6.32.
inform the Lord of our wants; for he knows what we need, before we ask, and
professes his audience of Romans 8.26. Exodus 14.15.
sighs, and groans: But first to express our affections, by that instrument,
which God has given us for that end, to wit, our Tongue, Psalm. 35.28. See
Psalm. 5.1, 2, 3. Secondly, Then to kindle our affections, that when we hear
from our selves the sound of our misery, or wants, or blessing, by the
redounding thereof upon our minds, our affections may be doubled; whereto if
few, as well as many words suffice, quorsum (...); to what purpose is the use
of many? The point in hand is tender, and must warily be dealt withal; yet
give leave to mind you what I observe in perusing the Psalms; the chief
pattern I know extant for Devotion is, Psalm. 5.1, 2, 3. there are, First,
Words. Secondly, Meditation, to guide them. Thirdly, Crying, to show the
Earnestness of Affection; one term he there uses is borrowed from War; I
will direct, order my prayer, as Curiously as men do their battle, where no
man must be out of rank, nor hear a word out of his order: Truly Aug. ep. 121.
Austine, Aliud est sermo multus, aliud diuturnus affectus, there is difference
between much speech, and much affection; our Savior spent whole nights in
prayer; and we must never think our prayer long, while our affection keeps up
in vigor; Multum loqui, est in orando rem necessariam superfluis agere verbis,
multum autem precari, est ad eum quem precamur diuturna and piacordis
excitatione pulsare: In a word, as a man may not beat upon, and blunt his
affection with babbling, when he feels it languish, so while he feels it in
vigor, he may not over-soon break off his prayer.

Rome, which they number amongst their most meritorious and satisfactory works;
It is this, to pray by the Bead, by the Tale, so many Ave-Maries,
Pater-nosters, in a strange tongue which they understand not; and he is counted
the devoutest man, who spends most hours in prayer; in the interim, neglecting
all other offices of Religion; or special calling; for my part, rumpatur,
pereat, let him burst, and perish, that opposes Devotion, especially this part
of it that is spent in prayer: But first, Is there no place for Meditation, for
Eccles 5.1.
Hearing? Secondly, Is this to pray, to blatter we know not what in a strange
tongue? How do they in praying attain the end of ends, which is, says Austin,
not to inform God, but First, To mind our selves of what we ask. Secondly, To
excite affection. Thirdly, And why so many words, so much babbling? As if the
Lord we serve were asleep, as Elias speaks of Baal; or as if fewer words with
more affection did not better please him, Eccles. 5.2.

Secondly, It shows us the great grace of God,

Thirdly, If I should prescribe a form of private Austin; Let them be frequent,
pithy, passionate; but yet consider whom you have to deal withal; few words,
but pithy, and affectionate, such as beseem such a Majesty to be called upon
withal.

The issue remains, He helped me. But before he comes to express the issue, he
seems a little to interrupt himself, and to breathe out into celebration of the
grace, and mercy of God, which he had experimented in his deliverance.

As touching the sense of the words; by Graciousnesse of God, we conceive, that
property of his nature, inclining him above our merits, without our merits,
against our merits, to do good unto us; see Psalm. 111.4. and 86.15. Exodus
33.19. Righteousness or Justice, that inclines him to give to every one what
belongs unto him. If any ask how justice appeared in his deliverance, this is
the answer; First, There is Iustitia dicti, as well as facti, Justice of word,
and promise, as well as of fact, and deed, 1 Ioh. 1.9. Heb. 6.10. Secondly,
They put upon God a threefold Justice, according to a fourfold person he
sustains. First, That whereby he does what is meet for him that is good; that
is, naturally good, to do for his creatures, from this Justice issues his
loving kindness, see Psalm. 36.6, 7. and 40.10. Secondly, Paternum, Fatherly
justice, so it is equal, and just he should protect his children, Psalm.
103.13. hear their prayers, Matthew. 7.11, etc. Thirdly, Judiciary if you think
here meant, It is just; Justice requires it of God himself, to vindicate the
innocent from their oppressors, and to give them testimony of innocence.



Psa. 7.3, 4. and 18.19, 20, 21. Our God, that is, the God whom we serve,
taking it contradistinct to idols, as Psalm. 115.3. Is merciful; the word
signifies tenderly merciful, such an one as whose bowels yern upon our
miseries; so propense is he to releeve them; by old Zachary they are called
Luke 1.78.
Bowels of mercy.

But in this passion of devotion, two things he commends to every devout soul,
in any experiment he has had of any attribute of God. The first is,
Observation, noticing and observing those attributes of God, which have
manifested themselves in the blessings reached unto us; or in any his
operations toward the sons of men; see Psalm. 107.43. who so is wise will
observe these things. Iehu no great good man, yet had his observation of the
truth of God spoken by his Prophets, 2 Kings 10.10. Know now that no word of
the Lord shall fall to the ground, confer. 2 Kings 9.36. Saint Paul, 1 Timothy
1.15. he is in a long commemoration of Gods grace toward him in his
conversion; in the midst of it, he breaks out to this point of observation;
Certainly it is a truth, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.
Saint Peter to Cornelius, Act. 10.34. I perceive of a truth that God is no
respecter of persons. David, Psalm. 147. He binds up the broken in heart, he
tells the number of the stars. Why goes he not on in his numeration? Devotion
wills him to notice this observation, Great is our Lord, and of great power,
his understanding is infinite.

The benefits thence accruing to us, are specially two. First, It is an
excellent strengthening of faith, concerning all truths God has revealed
touching his Nature and Will: ye may observe Gods own servants sometimes
overtaken with doubtings of the Attributes of God; of his Mercy, and Grace, the
Prophet, Psalm. 77.7, 8. of his Truth, Jeremiah, Ierem. 15.18. Will thou be
altogether unto me as a Liar, and as waters that fail? Of his Power,
Zechariah, Luke 1. and Sarah, Genesis 18. yea, Moses, who had so often seen the
power of God, yet at a time doubted, Number. 20.12. Here now has Observation
place, as a potent means to strengthen our Faith.

The Nature of God, and Conclusions touching it, we have delivered in the
Scriptures, and had we no experiment, are bound to believe them: the evidence
of all, and arguments demonstrating them, we have in his works of Creation, and
Providence; specially in the things that we see wrought before our eyes: To
this end tends the History of Scripture, and had we wisdom, we should observe
in the daily proceedings of providence toward others, toward our selves, what
would silence the godless thoughts of Infidelity. Justice, Truth, Power,
Mercy, Goodness, etc. we daily experiment, and yet, fools as we are, observe
not; No marvel then, if in time of Temptation our Faith grows so languishing.

A second benefit thence issuing, is hope of obtaining what ever good thing we
experiment, according to the promise of God, See 1. Sam. 17.36, 37. in David,
and Paul, 2. Cor. 1.10. and 2. Tim 4.17, 18. David goes farther, to time of
forefathers, Psalm. 22.4, 5. And the reason is good, such as the Lord has been
to others, to us, so will he be to us, if we resemble in behavior.

I say as Moses, Oh that this people were wise;

There lives not the man on earth, but tastes all these in his own person; yet
how few are they that observe them: So of Threatenings, Sundry precious Promises
are given unto us, faith 2 Pet. 1.3.
Peter; Not one, I dare say, but his Children rightly qualified have seen, or
may see exemplified; That he will be a God to the righteous Parents, and to
their seed, who can but observe? certainly, it ravisheth me to consider; and
though weak in Faith, and much conflicting with doubtings, yet it strengthens
my Faith, to see Gods Grace toward others: So of Comminations for Drunkards,
Whoremongers, etc. I see it daily exemplified, Why doubt I? But surely if in
our own particulars we would be observant, we should much more be fortified;
David fetches it ab ovo, from his Birth, from the Womb of his mother, Psalm.
139.13.
On thee was I cast from my mothers womb, thou have been my God from the
womb. I beseech you be exhorted to this point of Prudence, believe me no more,
if you see not Athisme, Infidelity, Distrust, Unthankfulness, Disobedience,
all evils die in you. Two things there are that hinder it. First, Opinion of
fortune in all these Accidents of common life, as if there were no providence
guiding them; yet to a Sparrow our Savior extends Mat. 10.29.
it, yea, even to Pro. 16.33.
Lots, the things most chanceable. Secondly, The second hinderance, is the
ascribing the good or ill success of our lives to the means; if evil, to our
imprudence or wilfulnes; if good, to our own wisdom and industry; whereas
alas, What is our All, except the Lord give the Psalm. 127.1.
blessing?

The second thing observable in this passion of devotion is, the passionate,
and devout expression, and celebrating with due praise the attributes of God,
which he had experimented; so filled he is with ravishment in the contemplation,
that interrupts his speech, he cannot express the benefit, but first he
celebrates the praise of the attribute: like passages you may observe many in
reading the Psalms, speeches broken, and seemingly interrupting the sentence,
and making a kind of solecisme, when yet if you truly did understand the
affection of a soul truly devout, you will find them most pertinent. Ephesians.
2.4, 5. The Apostle intends to remembrance the people of their blessed change
of estate, from being dead in trespasses, and sins, to spiritual life; the
speech would have passed full enough for the sense, in the simplest
commemoration; but mark how devotion interposeth, God which is rich in mercy,
of his great love wherewith he loved us, has quickened; like see, 1 Timothy 1.
The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant in faith and love. Do you ask me a
reason of it? and I ask you, Why does the Sun shine? Why does fire burn? No
man can give reason of it: It is the nature of the creature, and this is the
nature of devotion. Marry, if you would ask me a reason why he should so do, I
could give many, but it is impertinent to the point in hand: we handle not now
matter of duty to urge obedience, but matter of property, that tends rather to
trial: And so make use of this point, see how thou art affected, when thou
meditatest the many benefits God has done to thy soul feel thou such
motions as these; thy belly, as Job 32.19.
Elihu speaks, is full as bottles of new wine, thou must speak to the praise of
God, else thou breakest, as Jeremy, I cannot hold, it is well, and I bless
thy soul; my belly, says David, Eructabit, shall belch out thy praise. But on
the deadness of our indevout hearts in this behalf! We can sometimes speak of
the blessings we enjoy from God, and perhaps we sometimes express our noticing
the hand of God teaching these favors to us* but show me the man of David's
spirit, that breaks out into the magnifying of the grace, or mercy, or power,
or goodness of God: In a word, two faults I observe in this kind in us.
First, That either we languish in the praise of the God that has done so great
things for us, and with a little bare lip-thanks pass over his benefits.
Secondly, Else are not distinct, or particular in noticing the special
attributes we have experimented; me thinks, I would have a Christian so
skillful in this kind, that he should know to what property of God he should
ascribe every benefit he enjoys, every work, or operation of God to his
creatures; in some shine wisdom, in some goodness, in some long-suffering, in
some patience, in some grace, and mercy, in some justice, etc. But the wisdom
of a Christian should be this, to be so distinct in knowledge, and observation,
as to know, to whether attribute to ascribe whether blessing: As in a body
perfectly mixed, there are all elements, yet still one predominant, so in all
the works of God toward the sons of men, Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and
Peace, Wisdom and Power, have their concourse, yet so, as some one or other
have their predominance: Let our wisdom be such in observing, that we may not
let pass that special attribute, without special celebration* so does David
here, and Saint Paul also in like sort, 2 Cor. 1.3. styles the Lord, on like
observation, Father of mercies, and God of all comfort; As for example, In
pardon of sin, there is Wisdom, there is Justice, etc. but the predominant
is Mercy. Secondly, In crowning of our services, there is eminent Grace and
Bounty. Thirdly, In supporting in temptations, there is, Power, etc.

VERSE. VI. The Lord preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he helped
me.
IN this Verse we have; First, A conclusion. Secondly, The proof of it. In the
conclusion again three things. First, The blessing, Preservavation. Secondly,
The Author of it, the Lord. Thirdly, The persons capable, and their
qualification, the Simple.

Preservation, conceive their safeguarding from evil, from mischief, as 2 Timothy
4.18.

Simplicity in Scripture often hears ill, as bad as folly, so Prove. 1.22. How
long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and Prove. 7.7. Among the simple
ones there was a young man void of understanding; and again, Prove. 9.4. Who so
is simple, let him turn in hither: and so the word after the Genuine Etymon
imports, A silly man; one that with any persuasion is lead, or mislead, to any
thing, as Pro. 14.15.

Here he styles them so, whom else he calls plain men, and harmless, (...).
Phil. 2.15. Saint Paul calls such men perfect; see also Romans 16.19. and (...).
1 Cor. 14.20. They are such as honestly keep the plain way of Gods
Commandments, without those slights, or creeks, of carnal policy, for which
men are in the world esteemed wise, see Genesis 25.27. Jacob called a plain man.
Simple or foolish, he calls them (...), because they are generally so esteemed
amongst the wise of the world; not that they are so silly as they are esteemed,
for if the Lord can judge of wisdom and folly, the only fool is the Athiest,
and profane person, Psalm. 14.1. the only wise man in the world is the plain,
downright Christian, Deuteronomy. 4.6. who keeps himself precisely in all states to
that plain honest course the Lord has prescribed him: And to such simple ones,
Gods fools, who in their misery, and affliction, keep them only to the means
of deliverance, and comfort, which the Lord has prescribed them, belongs this
blessing of preservation, and safeguarding from mischief, or destruction: so
Solomon, Prove. 16.17. The highway of the upright is to depart from evil; the
benefit is, He that keeps his way, preserves his soul; see also, Prove.
19.16, 23. exemplification see in Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.9, 10, 11, 12. and 16.7, 8,
9. read the excellent speech of Hanani the Seer.

Reason if ye ask, none can better be given then this, That it gives unto the
Lord glory of wisdom, more then all the turning of devices amongst the wicked;
How pleases it the Lord to see himself magnified amongst his children, to see
them deny themselves, their own wisdom, and policy, and to rely simply on
him? And where have you seen any person, or state, leaving the direct broad way
which the Lord has prescribed, ever prosperous? It was (in the eye of reason)
a notable policy that Jeroboam* used to prevent the revolt of Israel to the
house of David, see 1 Kings 12.26, 27, 28. but it became a sin to the house
of Jeroboam, to cut it off, and to destroy it from the face of the earth, 1
Kings 13.34. This may learn us to bewail the wisdom of some states in the
world, and to wish they were more simple; I mean, in David's sense, to keep Gods
high way, to make hi^ statutes of our counsel; though Moab and Ammon be
confederate together, these devices without God shall be unprosperous; though
hand join in hand, yet shall not the wicked go unpunished.

But for our own particular; Let us count it our best wisdom to cleave close
to our God, to walk in his ways, to this belongs promise of Gods protection,
Psalm. 91.11 Excellently David, Psalm. 5. compassed about with so many
adversaries, ver. 8. Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, because of mine
enemies, make thy way straight before me; this do, hereby thou shall be safe,
Psalm. 37.

These Caveats remember. First, It being a temporal blessing, is to be
understood with limits ordinary to such favors; As first, With exception of
the Cross. Secondly, Reservation of power to the promiser to chasten
particular delinquencies. Secondly, Though perhaps we suffer loss, yet life
given for a prey, Ier. 45.5. Thirdly, Manner of preservation diverse. First, By
sustaining, 2 Cor. 12.9. Secondly, By taking us from evil, Isa. 57.1. Thirdly,
Or by deliverance out of evil, by giving issue, 1 Corin. 10.13. 2 Pet. 2.9.
See Annotat. ad 2 These. 2.16. page 210. Edit. 1627.

The proof follows; I was brought low, and he helped me. Where we have two
things considerable. First, The ground of proof chosen to make it good, and
that is experience. Secondly, The sufficiency of the proof. The ground of
proof is experience, or example; which, if any thing, most swayes, as most
running into sense: so is God pleased graciously to exemplify his promises for
the confirmation of our faith. And this generally observe, there is not a
promise of God in any kind, but we have seen, or may see it daily exemplified;
that if for his bare word we believe not, yet for his works sake we may believe
him: Sure it is true, In days of famine we shall be fed, Psalm. 37. so we are
sure was the family of Jacob, so was Elias, so the widow of Sa^epkath: Surely
it is true, God will deliver his out of temptation, though his wrath come upon
the whole world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.9. so was Noah, so was Lot delivered,
etc. Sure it is true, In pestilence we shall be preserved, except either we our
selves hinder it, or except God means us some greater good in it; Israelites
were so, Exodus 12. Certainly it is a truth, God will not leave the righteous,
nor their seed, except perhaps they degenerate; Kept he not so his mercies to
David? It is undoubtedly true, God shall bring the innocence of the righteous
to light, and make it as the noonday, Psalm. 37. Was it not so in Joseph? In a
word, Ye cannot name the promise of this life, or of that to come, which God
has made to his Church, but he has plentifully exemplified, according to the
purport, and tenor, and intention of the promiser: God shall certainly bind
up the broken in heart, he shall give medicine to heal their sorrows; David
experimented it, Psalm. 32. Though the righteous fall, yet shall he not be cast
off, Psalm. 37.24, etc.

Oh, we of little faith, why doubt we? have we a promise from God? and are we
sure, we rightly understand it? and that we have our due qualification? Then we
be assured, that heaven and earth shall pass, ere a title of that promise shall
fall to the ground: God has pleased by promise to make himself our debtor, and
the better to confirm our faith, has exemplified his promise; and yet doubt
we? Yes; For though to some we see them exemplified, yet as many we see
destituted, and our selves experiment them not? With the limits intended, I
dare swear, they have been exemplified, if they have failed, we fail in the
condition. Secondly, We err, Toto coelo, if we think all Gods promises are
intended after the Letter, some are made good in the equivalent. Thirdly, We
deceive our selves, if we think our habitual being the children of God, gives
us title to the fruition of all his promises; there is Actus and Exercitium
also required. Fourthly, How far are we wide, if we think God has not
reserved power to try our faith, and patience, by removing sense of love, by
writing bitter things against us? etc. But rightly understood, thou have seen,
do see them all exemplified: And seeing God has for this end exemplified,
that he may confirm our faith, and expectation; The wisdom that from hence I
do commend unto you; is, First, To acquaint your selves with Histories Divine,
written for this end, says Romans 15.4.
Paul, that we might have hope; in reading them, this wisdom let me commend
unto you. First, To distinguish personal from general promises; there are
personal promises made to some of Gods children, as that of David, He should
not want a man of his seed to sit upon his Throne; but is it a general
promise, then see and observe, perhaps you shall find they not pertaking in
it, have failed in particulars; or else, see thou any to whom it is not made
good, see then, if thou can not observe God to have in some (other) way, or
kind made good his promise, 2 Samuel 10. God will do me some good for this evil.

Secondly, There are some promises peculiar to some special times, some
universally belonging to all times; See an example of the first of these, Mar.
16.17, 18. These signs shall follow them which believe; peculiar to the
Primitive times of the Church, while the state of religion was now in altering,
and the Gospel planting amongst the Gentiles: He that now shall attempt it, the
end being ceased, shall be prodigium; That of Joel ^.28. Sons and daughters
shall prophecy, young men see visions, old men dream dreams etc. was the
privilege alone of the first age of Christianity, Act. 2.17. But is it a
general promise to all persons, times, states of the Church, not one but has
had, has, and shall have plentiful exemplification? Thirdly, There is
considerable the manner of performance, and the thing it self promised; the
manner may be several, when the thing is general* not all by miracle fed as
Elias, nor as Elisha by Angels delivered; but this give me leave to say,
Infidelity toward any of Gods gracious promises, is fouler in us, then it
could be in the ancient Patriarchs; What had they but bare word to rest upon?
Behold us compassed with a cloud of witnesses, from Abraham to David, from
David to Christ, from Christ to this day; and if we now waver in faith, after
such plentiful exemplifications, our infidelity shall be most heinous. The
sufficiency of proof comes next to be handled, It is here from a particular
example, or experiment; Is that true what Logic teaches us, From one
particular instance to conclude truth of a general Rule? Yet in Divinity it is
frequent, from particular examples to prove general conclusions: Let us see
some, Romans 11.1, 2. God has not rejected any of the Jews whom he foreknew; How
is this proved? For I also am an Israelite: Again, Romans 3.28. All that are
justified, are justified by faith, How proved? Romans 4.1. Abraham was so
justified; 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. Christ came into the world to save all penitent,
and believing sinners; How proved? I a persecutour, a blasphemer, was received
to mercy. And this firmly holds according to the Rule of Reason, when the Ratio
formalis, The Reason of the blessing is general; For example, Is this the
Reason why David was preserved, because simple? Then from that instance follows
the inference, All simple shall be preserved. Was the reason of Abraham's
justification, his faith? Then wheresoever is true faith, there also is
justification, etc. Secondly, We must know that Gods dealings are exemplary, 1 Timothy 1.16. Romans 4.23, 24. Thirdly, God is no respecter of persons, Romans 2.14.
He is rich in mercy to all that call upon him, Romans 10.12, 13.

Make much even of particular examples,

VERSE. VII, VIII. Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee: for thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes
from tears, and my feet from falling.
ANother Passion, or passage of David's devotion, upon meditation of Gods mercy
in his deliverance from pressure; And the words are, in sum, a sweet
soliloquie of David with his soul, checking it after a sort for the disquiet,
and unrest it passionately had plunged it self into, by occasion of his many,
and grievous outward pressures; Deduction it has by way of use, and inference,
from his experience of Gods mercy in his preservation: The form of carriage is
in a Rhetorical Apostrophe (for what is more eloquent then Devotion)

Considerable therein; are, First, The effect of David's outward pressures, They
wrought the disquiet and perturbation of his soul. Secondly, The check he gives
to his soul, for admitting such perturbation. Thirdly, The chearing he affords
it. Fourthly, The ground of that cheer, The Lord has dealt bountifully; which
in the eighth Verse he evidenceth by particulars of favors vouchsafed him.

The rest of the soul, Matthew. 11.29.
(...), is the calm temper of the faculties thereof, and the sweet repose it
finds in the fruition of what yields it contentment, Heathens called it (...),
or Tranquillitatem animi, which they anxiously sought, but never enjoyed: This
Christian rest of the soul is that sweet temper, and tranquillity, grace frames
in the faculties of it, and the sweet repose it finds in Gods mercy through
Christ: That David had formerly enjoyed, but now found interrupted, through the
manifold afflictions outward, and inward, he was pressed withal, and therefore
checkingly advises his soul to return thereto, and to enjoy the former
tranquillity. So ye see how far afflictions work upon gracious dispositions,
even to the disturbance of the tranquillity of the soul; It is little Paul
says, Heb. 12.11. no affliction joyous, therefore adds, it is grievous: Psalm.
42.5, 11. and 43.5. we read of dejecting the soul, of tumults in his soul,
Psalm. 6.3. of vexation, and Psalm, 38.8. he roared for the very disquietnesse of
his heart: And you may observe the same to issue out of four causes usually.
First, Violent Passions, whether grief, or fear, or wrath, etc. when they grow
immoderate, toward violent, what a cumbustion fill they the whole man withal?
Iam. 4.1. See envious grief, and desire of revenge in Haeman, what disquiet it
works, Hest. 5.13. and 6.12. So Ahabs covetousness, 1 Kings 21.4. Secondly,
Conflict. First, Twixt sanctified reason, and appetite, when reason persuades
one way, affection draws another, and each strives for victory. Secondly, Twixt
rectified conscience, and affection, when affection would carry to evil, and
conscience would restrain from evil. Thirdly, Twixt corruption, and grace,
Romans 7.23. the law of the members rebelling against the law of the mind.
Thirdly, Guiltiness, as Psalm. 32. and 38. and 51. This is piercing above
measure, Psalm. 38.3, 4. I mean, when either new sins are unrepented of, and
for which we have not yet received assurance of pardon into the conscience,
etc. or when the Lord presents to the soul old sins, without manifestation of
favor in the pardon of them, as Job 13.26. Who can express the terror of
that unrest the soul is then possessed withal? Fourthly, Apprehension, whether
true, or fained, it matters not to the disquiet of the soul; It was a false
apprehension of Job 13.24. that God counted him as an enemy; he meant his good,
as his trial, his humiliation, his justifying against all the slanderous
imputations of Satan; Yet how perplexed is that holy soul? False, that of
David, that God had Psalm. 77.8, 9.
forgotten to be gracious, or had shut up his loving kindness in displeasure;
yet is he troubled, overwhelmed, breaks sleep, yea is astonished, Psalm. 77.3,
4. But is the apprehension true, then no marvel, if the soul can find no
rest; It was true that God had taken from him the joy of his salvation, Psalm.
51. inhibited lively operation of his sanctifyng spirit, Psalm. 32, etc. Here,
if he roar for the disquietnesse of his heart, who marvells? Who, I mean, that
ever tasted how gracious the Lord is?

through passion, or conflict, or consciousnesse of evil, or apprehension of
wrath, they find for present happily no rest in their souls? What, when
through sinful infirmity they bewray impatience, murmuring? etc. Therefore are
they none of Gods? Et quidni Davidem, Jobum, Jeremiam, and quicquid sol unquam
vidit renatissimum ex renatorum albo expungimus? Then condemn we the whole
generation of the just. Pity, compassionate, comfort such perplexities; for
either thou may in like sort be Gal. 6.1.
tempted; thou art yet in the Heb. 13.3.
body, Hodie mihi, cras tibi: and God is often moved to Pro. 24.18.
turn his hand from them to thee, that he may teach thee more compassion; and
Jobs friends for this fault are sharply rebuked, Job 38.2. and sacrifices
expiatory for that sin prescribed, Job 42.7, 8.

Flatter not thy self by misunderstanding the Mercy and peace shall be upon
them that walk after the rule, Gal. 6.16. But think you, without interruption?
Where is that promise? Has not God reserved to himself power to chasten, to
try, to prevent, etc. Though favor be not lost, yet sense is often
interrupted; and though God never hate, Ioh. 13.1. yet is often angry with his
dearest servants, etc.

Beware how we provoke the Lord to remove

Occasions of the souls disquietnesse.
I will mind you of the occasions how Gods own servants have fallen into it.

First, Giving liberty to their reason to exact Psalm. 37. and 73. Ier. 12. Hab.
1.13, etc. Thus curb it. First, He is an absolute Lord, Matthew. 20. Secondly,
Yield, that there must be difference betwixt him that serves God, and him that
serves him not: Must this difference needs be in outward things? Eccles. 9.1.
Suffices it not, that we have our preferment in spiritual blessings? Ephesians.
1.3. And is he bound presently to manifest it? see Mal. 3.18.

Abraham in Ishmael, Jacob in Joseph, David in Absalon; None but God has
chastened; read the stories.

David, Psalm. 51. And so is the Effect of David's Pressures.

Follows now the check David gives his soul for such causlesse disquiet; Return
unto thy rest, O my soul: Enjoy thy old tranquillity, solace thy self in God:
so does grace check its own passions, the storm of violence once overblown,
especially for what disturbance rises from outward pressures, see Psalm. 42.5,
^1. and Psalm. 43.5. and Psa. 77.10. It is mine infirmity; and Psalm. 73.22. he
be-fools, be-sots, be-beasts himself for it; What a fool? What an ignaro? What
a beast am I to be thus vexed, and disquieted for what Gods provident hand
disposes?

And weigh it well, ye shall see reasons enough of controuling our selves in
this behalf, that we suffer either passion, or mis-apprehension to rob us of
so great a benefit as is the quiet of the soul. First, Where have we learnt to
equal, to overvalue any outward blessing to the peace of the soul, which
passes all understanding? Phil. 4.7. Secondly, Where, to advantage the devil
against us, to work upon our passions, till perhaps we be swallowed up of
sorrow, 2 Cor. 7 11. We are not ignorant, says Paul, of Satan's wiles. Thirdly,
Is it just with God to afflict us? Have we sinned against him? Why then do we
not willingly bear his wrath? Mic. 7.9. Fourthly, Have we forgotten the
consolation, that God offers himself unto us as unto children? Heb. 12.5. His
promise, that he will do us good for this evil? 2 Samuel 16. and in the issue
make us partakers of the quiet fruit of righteousness? Heb. 12.11.

Bear we not our selves in these unavoidable passions, check, curb, control,
correct them.

How to judge of passions inordinate.
Thus learn to know when they are faulty. First, Do they exceed their measure?
Grow they unreasonable? So that if thou should ask thy soul, as Rahel, Why
am I thus? as David, Why art thou so disquieted within me? And can thou give
no reason, when permitted to such measure? Then think, thy otherwise lawful,
are turned to be sinful passions. Secondly, Do they disturb reason, and
understanding, stupifie and benumbe it, that it cannot stir it self to
meditate, or do they command in the soul? Then know they are immoderate.
Thirdly, Do they hinder performance of holy, and necessary duties, invocation,
meditation, etc. or but cast dullness upon the soul in the performance of these
duties? Then know, they are grown immoderate. I say not, but to such measure
they may arise in the wisest, and most sanctified; yet when they do rise to
this height, they have in them what deserves our check. Now the remedy or means
to work it in us, is to consider Gods bountiful dealing with us; see Psalm.
42.5, 11. and 43.5. and but the expressions of Gods favor in that kind,
nothing can settle the disquiet of the soul.

The cunning of the tempter is this, To keep the mind wholly musing on our
evils, diverting us from the mercy God remembers in the midst of judgment,
Hab. 3.2.

See I beseech you, see the enumeration of favors that David has, Psalm.
103.3. who forgiveth all thy sins, heals all thy diseases, redeemeth thy
life from destruction, crowns with loving kindness, and tender mercies, who
satisfies thy mouth with good things, which executes judgment for the
oppressed, which makes known his ways to his children; and which touches the
point in hand, Verse. 9, 10. He neither keeps his anger for ever, nor deals with
us according to our sins, punishing ever Citra condignum, rewarding Vltra
condignum.

Oh that this people were wise, to consider how favorable, how bountiful God
is in the sharpest of his corrections; How would it silence passion? How well
should we hereby provide for the rest of our souls?

VERSE. VIII. For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling.
IN this Verse, David gives us the evidence of Gods bounty to him, in the
enumeration of particular favors conferred on him; wherein are, First, The
several favors. Secondly, The result, or issue of them, Verse. 9.

The favor in general is deliverance; From what if you will know. First, From
misery painful, from death, yea from tears; for the sentence rises (...).
Secondly, From misery sinful; My feet from falling.

For the sense; Thou have delivered, that is, rescued, as Psalm. 6.4. even when
he was at the pits brink he rescued; My soul; That Tropically put sometimes for
the Person, as Exodus 1.5. Act. 27.37. sometimes for life, as Hest. 7.3. Genesis
9.5. Job 2.4, 6. whether sense you take, you err not, they are co-incident, Me
or my life: Else thus; The soul has a twofold consideration. First, As a
natural form of a body so organized, so it lives in the body. Secondly, As a
spiritual substance, or subsistence, having in it a power to subsist, and
exist in it self without the body; Death for the time, deprives it of the life
that it has in the body, not of that life, or being it has in it self: But
this not all the benefit; Not only so set me out of deadly peril, but which
yet more amplifies his bounty; Mine eyes from tears; The meaning is, From all
sorrow, or evidence of sorrow, or cause of sorrow, in respect of outward
peril, as Apoc. 21.4. When God is said to wipe all tears from the eyes of his
Saints; The meaning is, He takes from them all sorrow, and crying, and pain, as
the Spirit explicates himself. And my feet from falling; That is, Me from
falling, Synechdoche Metaleptica.

But so see we the nature of a heart truly thankful to God, there is not a
blessing, nor degree of a blessing, nor circumstance of a blessing, but it
takes notice of, and publishes, My soul from death, my feet from falling;
Rescued me when falling, that the circumstance; Mine eyes from tears, the
degree. Psalm. 103.2. Forget not all, that is, not any one of his benefits; so
also, Ephe. 1. From Verse the third to the fourteenth; Paul for his own
particular, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13, 14. generally for us all, Romans 5. from verse. 6. to
the 11. see also Psalm. 107.8. To praise is not simply to say him a thank, but
to commend, and amplify the riches of his grace, and mercy, toward us.

Lord that we had David's spirit,

The better to enlarge our hearts to the duty, and to teach you how in
meditating Gods favors to be holily Rhetorical: Let me mind you, First, of
the misery that is in the want, suppose it be in remission of sins, in
knowledge of God, in peace of conscience, in ministry of the word, etc.
Secondly, Our unworthiness to obtain such blessings, Genesis 32.10. I am less,
says Jacob, then all thy goodness, and the good Centurio^, Mat. 8.8. Lord I
am not worthy; which and much more we shall easily force our selves to
confess, if we consider our behavior before God unconverted, full of
obstinacy, and of disobedience, Tit. 3.3. 1 Timothy 1.13. and with all our
unthankfulness, and neglect, and abuse of his favors, since our calling,
enjoyed, see Ezra 9.8, 13. Thirdly, Our impotencie, without grace of God, to
acquire, or retain them, Romans 5.8. Fourthly, The preferment God has given us,
either in the blessings, or in the measure of the blessings, or in the
circumstances, see Psalm. 147.19, 20. Fifthly, Comparing our selves with others,
perhaps more righteous then our selves, more careful to seek God, in
likelihood, such as would have made better use of his mercies, as Matthew. 11.21.
These are grounds of this holy Rhetorique, which if by your selves you will
work upon by meditation; Trust me no more, if ye find them not such as will
sweeten Gods favors toward you.

Reasons pressing the performance, meditate these. First, Nothing sooner stops
the fountain, and current of Gods bounty, then does unthankfulnes; this hazards
to an utter deprivall, as Romans 1.21. Secondly, Or else, the blessing shall be
scanted in the measure, as to the Jews, Amos 8.11. Thirdly, or else the
blessing continued, shall turn to a curse, and snare unto thee, as riches
reserved for hurt, Eccles. 5.13. The word to harden, Isa. 6.10. knowledge to
aggravate sin, and punishment, Ioh. 9.41. Secondly, according to the measure
of bounty, and favor contemned, or slighted, so usually is the measure of
wrath in the day of visitation, Matthew. 11.23. Jews highliest advanced in Gods
favors. Never did Nation under the sun drink deeper of his wrath, see
Deuter. 28. Levit. 26.

And my feet from falling: Whether means he into penal misery, and mischief,
or into sin? There is Lapsus moralis, as 1 Cor. 10.12. Err I? or would David
here be understood of sinning? so Psalm. 73.2. My feet were almost gone, my
steps had wel-nigh slipped. And if I be not deceived, the carriage of the Text
swayeth to such understanding, rising still from the less to the greater.
First, It is more bounty to be kept from grief then from death, for there is a
greater enlargement from misery; but it is not more bounty to be kept from the
sense of affliction, then to be kept from death, which is the greatest of
temporal evils; but it is more bounty in a gracious eye to be kept from
sin, then from death. Secondly, How his eyes from tears? If not kept from
sin? That had sure cost him many a tear, as Peter, Matthew. 26.75. But
understand it De lapsu morali, so still rises the gradation to enlarge Gods
bounty; yea, which I count the greatest blessing, in these afflictions he kept
me steady in my course of piety, and suffered not afflictions to sway my heart
from him: still in a gracious eye, the benefit seems greater to be delivered
from sinning, then from greatest outward affliction; that is the reason Saint
Paul, Romans 8.37. triumphs over all afflictions, 2 Cor. 11. and 12. He counts
them his glory, his crown; but speaking of the prevailing of corruption in
particulars, he bemoans himself as the miserablest man alive, Romans 7.24.

The reason of this is, for that rectitude of judgment is so far vouchsafed,
that such men sanctified, can discern twixt good and evil, twixt evil and
evil; and in their eye Malum culpae, is greater then Malum poenae, The evil
of sin, then the evil of pain; For, First, That makes evil, not this;
Puniri non est malum, comparative scilicet, sed fieri poena dignum. Secondly,
In afflictions they know they may retain favor of God, not so in sinning.
Thirdly, That opposite to increated, this to created goodness; And besides
this, hahaving tasted the smart of sin in the soul (as who has not that is
Gods?) What affliction is comparable to that of an accusing conscience?

rather then be counted odd, or singular, run into any sin of
good-fellowship, swear, swagger, drink, and be drunken, etc. rather then feel a
little sickness, run, to sorcerer; rather then a little loss in their
goods, to a Cunning-man, a Witch, that is, says Isa. 8. from the living to the
dead, from God to the devil: Oh that Christians had learned but what some
heathens thought! that to be virtuous is more happiness, then to have the
wealth of Xerxes, the pleasure of the Epicure, the Dominions of Alexander, the
honor of the great Cyrus, or Darius; That it is more miserable to be vitiously
inclined, then to endure the poverty of Irus. Learn, I beseech you, learn
herein to reform, and rectify your judgments; see Joseph, Genesis 39.9. How
shall I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? To this end
meditate. First, The unavailablenesse of all outward benefits, to stead us in
the day of Gods wrath; What then can be like to this? Isa. 38.3. I have walked
before thee in the truth, and uprightness of my heart. Secondly, What hazard
thou make of soul for fulfilling the lust of the body, thou will be inclined
to make Moses his choice, Heb. 11.25. To suffer afflictions, then to enjoy
pleasures of sin. Thirdly, How do we forget, That for all these things the
Lord shall bring us to judgment? Eccles. 11.9. Fourthly, Fear him that can
cast body and soul into hell, Luke 12.5, etc.

Secondly, Try we our selves by this; I do not say all grace stands in this;
for I know a natural man's judgment may be so far cleared, as to confess,
it is greater evil to sin, then to be afflicted; and yet it is something, as
Paul speaks, Phil. 1.10.
To dis^ern the things that differ; And surely, He is not far from the
kingdom of God, who has his judgment thus far rectified: But, First, In
whom judgment so far works, that when the least sin is offered, or a great
affliction, chooses rather to be afflicted, then to sin against God, he has
in him something supernatural. Secondly, He that can more heartily thank God
for this, that he has delivered from the power of sin, then from bodily
calamities; he has in him something supernatural.

Thirdly, He, whom this meditation calms in his pressure; Well, though God
suffer me thus to be afflicted, yet he has delivered from the power of
darkness, he has kept me from sinning against him, and in that meditation
finds contentment* that man has in him something supernatural. And tell me,
thou that art so much discontented at the course of Gods providence, in
dispensing outward blessings; To whether of the two, think thou, is he most
bountiful? To thee, whom he has made rich in faith, though poor in this
world, or to those Epicures, and worldlings, whose bellies he fills with his hid
treasure, yet suffers to live in dominion of the 2 Timothy 2.26.
Devil, Lazarus or the Glutton? Say not therefore, Gods ways are not equal;
even now thou may discern betwixt the righteous, and the unrighteous, if
thou know how to value blessing with blessing, and to give the spiritual
pre-eminence above the temporal.

My feet from falling: Yet warily understand, Not as if David had not at all
sinned under his afflictions; for see verse. 11. his extravagancie in his
passionate censures; and story testifies what more then Simulationem cautelae,
his affliction drove him unto, before Achish King of Gath: But there is
slipping, Psa. 73.2.94.18. suppose in those passionate murmurings, and
discontentments Gods children feel rising under the Cross. Secondly, There is
falling perhaps into grosser sin, as impatience, blasphemy, abnegation, as
Peter, Matthew. 26.75. Job 3. Ier. 10.14. And thirdly, There is Prolaepsio, or
Ruina, Psalm. 44.17, 18. In one of these at least the Lord is gracious to
support his children, see Job 1. and 2. Psalm. 44.17, 18. Hebr. 11.35. Fourthly,
Stumbling at, Romans 14, etc.

Comfort your selves with these things; 2 Kings 22.20
Josiah was taken, and Genesis 5.24.
Enoch, Ne malitia mutaret intellectum, and many other righteous, Isa. 57.1.
Yet questionless there are some, whom God reserves to trialls, perhaps sharp,
and bitter; surely the tenderness we show toward verbal persecutions, may
give us cause to fear, in respect of our selves, we shall be more delicate, and
timorous in the fiery trial: yet here is our comfort, God has been mighty in
man's weakness, enabled many a weak Christian to endure great fights of
affliction, and to resist in striving against sin, to the shedding of blood;
that cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12. are so many evidences of Gods goodness, and
power to support us, see Romans 15.4. This rest assured of, either he will not
suffer us to be tempted, or else will give issue with the temptation, 1 Cor.
10.13. Nothing shall separate finally from Gods favor, Romans 8.38.

VERSE. IX. I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living.
THe Result of David's Deliverance; else, as some conceive, a Promise, or Vow of
thankfulness to God for his great bounty toward him.

Sense. The reading may be diversely conceived; I shall walk, so it denotes the
sum of the blessing, or, I will walk, so it points at the duty. Walk before
the Lord, Walking with God we read of Henoch, Genesis 5.22, 24 which the Apostle,
following the Septuagint, renders, Pleasing God, Heb. 11.5. and in Genesis 17.1.
we read of walking before God, prescribed to Abraham, and the explication
after a sort sub-joyned, and be thou perfect or upright; the practice of the
precept in that sense, see Genesis 24.40. by Abraham; see also Isa. 38.3. 1 Samuel
2.35. I will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before mine anointed for
ever: that is, minister, or do service, to mine Anointed, the Messiah, in the
Priests Office; Confer. Luke 1.74, 75.

In the land of the living: Fondly do some Ancients here conceive heaven, or
the heavenly country to be understood; and thereupon take occasion
Allegorically to show that this earth is Terra morientium. Consult with
Scripture, ye shall find it imports no more but this upper face of the earth,
where living men dwell, and converse; as Job 28.13. where shall wisdom be
found? man knows not the price of it, neither is it found in the land of the
living; that is, amongst men here on earth, Psalm. 52.5. David fortelling the
destruction of Doeg, God shall take thee out of thy dwelling place, and cast
thee out of the land of the living; Clearly, Isa. 38.11. I said, I shall not
see the Lord in the land of the living, I shall behold man no more with the
inhabitants of the world: The whole sense amounts to this sum; I shall live
to do God service amongst men here on earth; and that service will I perform in
the uprightness, and sincerity of my heart; contra, see Job 10.21, 22. Psalm.
88.12.

Which, me thinks, he utters with the voice of joy, and thankful rejoicing,
that the Lord had so graciously delivered him from those deadly perils; for
this end, that he should yet live amongst men to do service unto God.

Notice it then as no small blessing of God to have life prorogued to do good
service upon earth, whether in the Ministry, or Magistracy, or family, as a
craftsman, or husbandman; For in all these, says the Apostle, Col. 3.24. ye
serve the Lord Christ.

Three things we may observe in the practice of Saints, serving to evidence
this truth. First, Bitter wailings, and lamentations, when God has threatened
to take them away by untimely death; see David making his bed to swim with
tears, and with hearts grief pi^^ed away with sorrow in his sickness; Why? if
ye ask, Psalm. 6.5. he saw he was likely to be cut off from doing service unto
God. Hezekiah, Isa. 34.14. Like a Crane, or a Swallow, so did I chatter, I did
mourn as a Dove, Ver. 3. Wept sore, I said in the cutting off of my days, I
shall go to the gates of the grave, I shall be deprived of the residue of my
years, compare Verse. 18, 19.

Secondly, A second thing observable in their practice, is their earnest
deprecation of untimely death, and fervented supplication to have life
prorogued; Psalms are full; see Psalm. 102.23, 24. his wailing, he weakened my
strength in the way, he shortened my days; Then said I, O my God, take me not
away in the midst of my days, let that wrath be upon my adversaries; nay even
when years were come upon them, yet some remains of ability to serve God, Psalm.
71.18. Now that I am old, and gray headed, forsake me not; until I have showed
thy strength to this generation, and thy power to them which are yet to come;
see Psalm. 30.8, 9, 10.

Thirdly, Observe again, the joyful thanksgiving that they have returned unto
God, when he has pleased to renew hopes of surviving, Isa. 38.17. Thou have in
love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption.

Papists would assign this reason; For that the blessedness that stands in
the vision of God, they were excluded from, shut up in the strait of Hell,
wherein though they rested from outward miseries, yet wanted their souls the
chief part of beatitude, the blessed vision, and fruition of the Godhead. Was
that the matter? Yet were they In refrigerio, in a place where they received
comfort, Luke 16.25. And of Elias it is noted, he was taken up into heaven,
that he with Moses appeared unto our Savior at his Transfiguration, Matthew.
17.4. who doubts, but clad with heavenly glory?

Our people fancy another reason; and that forsooth is, because they had not
in the old Testament that clear revelation of the glorious state of Gods
Kingdom, nor that plentiful assurance of their salvation, that we now have:
And was that the reason they desired so long to live? First, herein we affirm
untruths, for had not Abraham, and Moses, and David, as firm assurance of the
blessed state of Gods children after this life, as the ordinary rate of Gods
people now? see Heb. 11.10, 26, 27. And secondly, slander the generation of the
righteous; not because they had less assurance of Gods love then we, but
because they had less self-love then we, yea, more zeal for God, and desire to
do good to his Church; willingly suffering the respit of their own glorious
reward, to the end they might, though on hardest terms, bring glory to God,
and do him service in the land of the living; Therefore this reason themselves
give always. First, For that they saw the one half then of them, which also
was made to be an instrument of Gods service to lie brute, and senseless in the
grave. Secondly, For that they desired to benefit the generation then living,
and to propagate Gods praise to succeeding posterities, Psalm. 71.18. Isa.
38.19, 20. See also Psalm. 30. and 88. and 6. and 115.

Beloved, Remarkable is Gods providence to me, in casting me without any
thought, or choice of man, upon a Text presenting to my memory, even according
to the time, this great mercy of God to my soul, delivering my soul from the
pit of corruption, that I might yet live to do him service in the land of the
living. Worthy were my tongue to cleave to the roof of my mouth, my right hand
for ever to forget her cunning, if I should now forget, or pass over with
silence, the great love God has shown to my soul, in delivering it from the
pit of corruption: O Lord enlarge my heart to praise thee.

At Bristoll.
Even upon this day, according to the time of life, this time twelve months,
was I in the jaws of death; none that beheld me, saw so much as the least hope
of life, my soul had not the least commerce with the body, so far as I know:
Much about this hour, God was pleased graciously to look upon me, to show me
some glimpse of his mercy, some beginnings of life, some hope that I should
walk before him in the land of the living: and hitherto by Gods mercy I live,
performing him weak, but hearty service in his Church. Lord, what is man, that
thou so visitest him? Who am I, the least of all Saints, the chief of all
sinners, on whom thou thus magnifiest thy mercy? What is that service poor I
have done? What that service thou reservest me to do? O Lord, be pleased to
reveal it unto me, to make me worthy, by thy grace, cheerfully to perform it:
Da quod jubes, jube quod vis; for thou have redeemed my soul from hell, my life
from death; thou have continued abilities, and opportunity, to do thee service,
to walk before thee in the land of the living; Blessed be thy glorious Name, O
Father of mercies, and God of all consolation; blessed be thy Name for ever,
and ever, and let all thy people say, Amen.

Secondly, Correct that error of your judgments, wherein I know you please
your selves many of you ignorantly, as if it were a matter of grace more then
ordinary to pray for death untimely in respect of the term of nature: This
hold for a Rule; I dare say, it is certain; While God gives ability to do him
service, or opportunity, or has use of us in meanest service; be it but, as
David, to declare Gods righteousness to the generation present; as Hezekiah,
the father to the child to show Gods truth, Isa. 38.19. so long ought we to
desire to live; we sin, in wishing our premature death. And well weigh it,
and tell me whether such desires, upon what ground soever, argue not rather
self-love; more love of our selves, then of our God; when God has use of our
service on earth, to wish our selves out of the world. Who can show me any
Saint of God, in old, or new Testament, who ever made prayer to God, or
approved himself in the desire of death, when God had use of him here in the
land of the living, without apparent fault: Elias, 1 Kings 19.4, 14.
he indeed in a passion prays unto God for death; and his reason mark, (which
should have been a reason rather to move him to pray for preservation of life)
because now there was so great use of his service for the benefit of the
Church. That of Job, and Ier. 3. and Ier. 20. are apparently passionate wishes
of flesh and blood, arising from discontent at their crosses, which I think no
gracious man allows in himself, or another.

And make what pretenses you will; I dare undertake to evidence the prayers,
the desires are sinful, to wish death as long as there is ability, or
opportunity to do God any service upon earth, or use of service upon earth.
First, That of Job 6.
Job, upon this ground, I have not yet denied the words of the holy One; seems
fair; neither can I blame his fear of his own infirmity: but yet there was
faithlesnesse in the wish, for has not God promised to support? 1 Cor. 10.13.
Secondly, That of imperfection of grace, and sins by defect in the service of
God, is as plausible as any thing to legitimate the desire; yet it proceeds
from a false ground: It is false, that the longer we live, the more we sin;
if we be Gods, the longer we live, the less we sin; sin is mortified
daily, and we bring forth Psalm. 92.14.
more fruit in our age. Thirdly, That of evils to come, from which to be taken
away aforehand, is promised as a favor, Isa. 58.1 and 2 Kings 22.20. yet
warrants not the wish: This let us be assured of. First, Simply if we speak;
Proroguing of life to the utmost term of nature is the blessing; untimely
death, simply considered, is the judgment; That it turns to a blessing is by
accident, it is a blessing by accident. Secondly, I do not think but Iermi^hs
blessing was in the fruit as great as Iosiahs* for though Josiah saw not the
evil, yet Jeremiah endured the evil with patience, in the mean time did
service to God in sustaining his Church; I^siah went before Jeremiah to heaven,
Jeremiah had more glory in his time. In a word, Some God takes away from evils
to come in mercy, and favor, they are such as he sees likely to be overcome of
the evils; in that respect he shows them favor; others he reserves to taste
the evils, to give testimony to his truth; To them this is a favor, yea and
simply the greater favor.

Is the question, which is rather to be desired?

Answ. Simply if we speak, Prerogation of life; for that is natively the
blessing. Secondly, For the comparison, it is to be me^sured by the quality,
and state of the persons; Has God use of their service upon earth? First, They
ought to prefer Gods glory before their own salvation. Secondly, They shall
be assured, God will give issue with the temptation, 1 Corinthians. 10.13. Thirdly,
Neither loose they ought in the measure of their reward; as, according to
pleasures in sin, so much torment; so according to pains in this life, is the
measure of our glory.

If you will ask me, how we shall know whether God has use of our service upon
earth? Surely, The question is obscure, and curious; to be measured only by
continuance of abilities, opportunities, or calling from God: But because it is
uncertain; This rule walk by. First, Though simply, if we compare state with
state, it is best to be with Christ; for that is the end of our life, there is
perfection, and consummation of holiness, there is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore. Yet, secondly, for thee, whose service God has use of
on earth, it is better to live on earth the years of Methuselah, doing God
service, then to be whirried, as Elias, with chariots of Angels presently into
heaven: In heaven thou have thine own glory, on earth thou promotest Gods
glory, and in the end, find a glorious reward, proportioned to thy measures
of doing service to God here upon earth.

What then may we say of them, whom God has taken away in the prime of their
life, as that peerlesse Josiah, amongst the posterity of David?

Answ. What? but what Saint Paul speaks of the Martyrs, The world was not
worthy of them, that people unworthy of such a pearl, a Prince so peerlesse as
was Josiah; for now the Lord remembered the sins of Manasseh, and the time of
vengeance drew near upon that rebellious, and gainsaying people. Secondly, Or
that God saw their weakness, and some likelihood of their corruption,
therefore took them away by death, as Henoch by transmutation, Ne malitia
mutaret intellectum. Thirdly, Or they had served their generation according to
Gods will, as is said of David, Act. 13.36. therefore fell asleep; or, as our
Savior, Had finished the work which God had assigned them to do, and were
therefore taken away unto glory, Ioh. 17. they had finished their course, and
kept the faith, and were now to receive their crown of their righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. And yet it is true, while God gives ability, and opportunity to do
him service upon earth, while he calls us to do him service upon earth, while
he has use of our service of men upon earth; it is his great blessing to
reserve us to walk before him in the land of the living; to be preferred in our
choice, before the hastening of our salvation, and glory in the kingdom of
heaven.

Blessed be thy glorious Name, most glorious God, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, for all thy mercies, for thy mavelous loving kindness shown to me in
a strange city, in rescuing me from the gates of death, and from the jaws of
the grave, in love delivering my soul from the pit of corruption, preserving my
life to walk before thee in the land of the living. Lord God, What shall I
render unto thee, for all thy benefits thou have done unto me, for this
unspeakable mercy thou have vouchsafed unto me? It is little, too little for so
great a favor to praise thy power, thy goodness, thy grace, thy mercy, thy
truth; and my heart is too narrow to comprehend the height and depth of thy
love to me in Christ Jesus: even in this one favor vouchsafed unto me, Lord
enlarge my heart and ^ffectio^s fill it with love of thy Majesty, zeal of thy
glory Take up body and soul, what ever I am, or have to thine own use: Behold
Lord, truly I am thy servant, disi^ing to do thee service upon earth; Lord
accept my endeavors, pardon mine imperfections, give more strength to perform,
Lord, I am willing to do it, yea, my heart is ready: Be pleased Lord to accept
these calves of my lips, this poor weak morning sacrifice of praise, and
thankesgiving, which goes not out of fained lips; Lord thou know it, accept
it therefore for thy promise sake, for thy mercy sake, for the merits sake of
son Jesus, the Mediator of all Grace, and mercy to the sons of men: To him
with thee, O Father of mercies, O holy Spirit Comforter of the Church, and
chosen children, be all honor and glory, for this, and all other thy mercies
toward all Churches of thy Saints, for ever and ever. Amen.

That might here be annexed; by all good means to cherish life, that we may
perform the service God expects from us.

Scripture points us to four causes, or means of shortening life. First,
Immoderate sorrow, especially for things of this life, Prove. 12.25. Heaviness
makes the heart sloope, Prove. 15.13. By sorrow of heart the spirit is broken;
see 2 Cor. 7.10. Secondly, Intemperance, whether in diet, or other luxury;
which what tends it unto but the shortening of the days? Plures gula, quam
gladias* and it is that the Lord foretells to men given to the flesh, Prove.
5.11. The flesh, and bod^ are consumed: see Prove. 6.26. and 7.23. Thirdly, To
this add those other gross crimes, for which God has threatened untimely
death; the blood-thirsty and deceitful live not out half their days; either
the sword of the Magistrate seizes on them, or else Gods immediate hand takes
them away, as we see in Absalon, Adonijah, etc. Fourthly, immoderate pining of
the body; with immoderate fasting, watching, labor, though never so
religiously employed; see Col. 2.23.

If we follow the second reading, which perhaps is here implied, it implies the
promise, or vow of David, in thankfulness unto God for his mavelous
deliverance vouchsafed unto him. Wherein are three things considerable. First,
The act. Secondly, The manner. Thirdly, The mean. First, The act is to walk, or
to serve God. Secondly, The manner, in sincerity. Thirdly, The mean, employed
in the Trope, Before him.

But so see we the general fruit of all Gods gracious deliverances vouchsafed
us, and the duty we owe him in liew thereof; that is, to do him service in that
rank, or station, whatsoever it is God has placed us in; so Zachary speaking
of the end of that great deliverance from spiritual enemy, it is to serve him
in holiness, and righteousness, Luke 1.74, 75. and Psalm. 50.15, 23. hence
David's acknowledgement, and protestation, Psalm. 116.16, 17, 18.

To fill up the meaning, that must be weighed; That the Lord expects, in
respect of special favors, special service; increase of our measures,
according to the measures of our abilities: Ye must understand, that there is
upon all a general obligation, and duty of service that they owe unto God;
arising from benefits they enjoy in common with others, as Creation,
Providence, Redemption, Word, etc. which bond, yet by special favors, grows
more strait; especially when they grow toward personal, and we become after a
sort proprietaries in them: for example, Israel had a bond of service, as
heathen, from Creation, and Providence, but much more for the specialty of Gods
favor in their deliverance from Egypt; wherefore that is prefixed as a reason
of obedience to the Decalogue, Exodus 20.2. in showing his word unto Jacob, his
statutes, and ordinances unto Israel so is the bond yet more increased, Psalm.
147.20. Levi had yet more then Israel* God had singled them out of all the
Tribes of Israel to minister before him, Number. 16.9. therefore he looked to be
sanctified by them especially, Levit. 10.3. wherefore, see this a circumstance
of aggravation upon Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. that he rendered not unto God,
according to the benefit done unto him.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders
he does unto the sons of men! Psalm. 107.8, etc. I mention not to us of this
Kingdom the common favors other Churches have enjoyed with us; the specialty
of Gods mercy, his Personal favor, Lord! how have they been magnified, and
made mavelous upon us? How many strange, little less then miraculous
deliverances God has bestowed upon us; in that Invasion attempted in 88. from
Gunpowder-Treason; It is our shame, and sin, that we have not in zeal for our
God become presidents, precedents to other Churches; yet would God, we had but
equalled them, how should I hope the Lord would still continue his favors upon
us!

But what has this wrought in us? but fearful pride, security,
licenciousnesse, even by that occasion, that we have experimented the Lord to
be so gracious unto us; as if we were persuaded as Jews, Ier. 7. either that
the form of godliness obliged him unto us, and the very name of a Church must
link him to our State; or that his promises of favor were absolute, without
condition, God binding himself to us, without expecting performance of our
Restipulation: Nay, see if these favors of God have not turned to us as
occasions to increase to more ungodliness; Do ye thus requite the Lord? Deuteronomy.
32.6.

Two things I propound to Gods people to be meditated, the better to stir
them up to the duty. First, There is no so firm entail of Gods favors to any
particular Church, but that disobedience, and unthankfulness, easily cuts off:
The promise to Jews, how runs it in fairest terms of perpetuity; Here is my
rest, here will I dwell for ever, and that of David, He should not lack a man
of his seed to sit upon his Throne for ever: and yet is Jerusalem now become
heap^, and that people have now long sitten without a King, without a Prince;
How stands Gods truth then? First, It was meant with condition of their
constant obedience; And secondly, to the spiritual seed, Luke 2.

The second thing is this; The more God has m gnified his favor, and mercy,
to any people; in case of their unthankfulness, he has the more increased
their vengeance; see Mat. 11. Deuteronomy. 28. Levit. 26. He has made the Jews an
astonishment, an hissing to all nations, his mercies were not more mavelous,
then now their plagues are wonderful; and take we heed, it prove not our
condition: God has begun to plague the cities where his Name was called upon,
and his wrath Mic. 1.15.
creeps in the Church, as Micah speaks, from Lachish to Mareshah, from Mareshal
to Adullam, the glory of Israel: This only is the odds; they drank first of
the cup of Gods wrath, perhaps because the Lord reserves the dregs, the
bitterest, and most banefull part for us; his hand is lifted up to strike, and
is yet stayed, till it be more exalted: but this let us be assured of; the
higher it lifts, the heavier it lights, the greater shall our stroke be.

It shall behove us then, to notice the specialty of Gods favor, and mercy, to
us, I mean our personal favors, our privileges; the favors, wherein we have
had our propriety; That, if any thing, excites to thankfulness.

Surely there is none of us but have our privilege, if not in the favors, yet
in the manner, or measure, or means of convayance, I for my part can speak it:
This in short let us notice, though for common favors, an ordinary measure of
service may seem competent, yet for specialty of love, the Lord expects a more
then ordinary service to be performed: Oh Lord enlarge my heart, incline it to
that measure.

The manner follows; It is as before him, that is, as See Genesis 17.1. Isa. 38.3.
Scripture every where interprets its self, in truth, in sincerity, and
singleness of heart, which is the general qualification of all services of
God, that forms them to acceptance.

Thus understand, the Matter of all services performed unto God, whether in
common, or special calling, is the same, and they are, for the substance of
the act, performable, as well by hypocrites, as by Gods children; The form or
manner of performance, in sincerity, is peculiar to Gods children; for example,
to See Ps. 1.15.16.
preach Christ, and to publish the mystery of the Gospel; that is, of remission
of sins, and salvation by the death, and obedience of Jesus Christ; so does
Judas as well as Peter; so did Demas as well as Paul; but, says Paul, they not
sincerely, as appears by their motive and intention; so of 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
Amaziah, in point of justice, and ordering the Commonwealth as a Magistrate,
he did that which was good in the sight of the Lord; here was his bane, he did
it not with a perfect heart: They come unto thee as thy people comes, says
the Ezekiel. 33.31.
Prophet, and they sit before me as my people, and they hear thy words; yet do
they but flatter with their double hearts, they hear, but will not do, their
heart runs after their covetousness: What could Elias have done more then 2
Kings 10.
Iehu for the substance of the Act? He beats down the Image of Baal, slays
his Priests, and all his Servitours; and for this service the Lord rewards him;
yet departed he not from the sins Jeroboam, 2 Kings 10.30, 31, 32. wherefore,
Hos. 1.4. even this fact of Iehu is punished in his posterity.

Sincerity wherein it consists.
What is sincerity?

Answ. The Scripture has two terms to express it. First, Ephesians. 6.5. Col.
3.22.
(...), Simplicity, or singleness of heart, which commonly they thus
interpret, when there is a concord twixt the action, and the affection, twixt
the heart and profession; to which commonly they oppose (...), eye-service; we
read in Scripture of a heart and a heart, a double heart; in Ecclesiasticus we
find a woe unto that sinner that goes two ways; the description of an
hypocrite; whose emblem is a Waterman on the Thames, his face, and arms, and
whole body with full strength is toward the Bridge, and yet is his course
intended Westward; see Ezekiel. 33.31. Come see, says 2 Kings 10.16.
Iehu, how zealous I will be for the Lord of Hosts, so indeed his act
pretended; Ah hypocrite, it was for nothing but to secure the kingdom to him,
and his posterity.

The second term is, (...), the whole heart, which the old Scripture calls Cor
perfectum, a Genesis 17.1. and 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Isa. 38.3
perfect heart; the meaning is, when the utmost of our strength and endeavor
in gracious abilities is extended to do God service; as David, Psalm. 119. With
my whole heart have I sought thee; that howsoever there be, and will be defects
in our best performances; yet we are able to say, it issues not from want of
See Heb. 13.18
will, and unfeigned desire, or strenuous endeavor, Romans 7.18. but merely from
defect of ability.

Evidences of it you may thus number. First, Notes of sincerity.
When it is according to all Gods Commandments, Luke 1.6. that there is not a
duty, nor parcel of duty, which wittingly, and willingly a man omits; see
also, Psalm. 119.6. Understand it thus. First, As far as knowledge, and
illumination goes, and opportunities are offered for their performance; the
whole of man's duty, Paul, Tit. 2. has referred to three general heads. First,
Purity. Secondly, Justice. Thirdly, Sobriety. In one of these all hypocrites
have failed; in all of these Gods children are found upright.

Secondly, Constancy in Gods service without defection, accompanies sincerity,
Psalm. 119.33. It is not the hypocrites flashes, Matthew. 13.21. be they never so
eager, and fervent, that forms our services to sincerity; Iehu drives in fury;
Better the slow pace, so we keep going in the right way, and sooner we come to
our heaven; yet pardon we must all pray for, interruptions in courses of
obedience, as Peter, David; and for our standings at a stay; for abatements of
our fervor, when the temper of the Angel of Ephesus shall, as not seldom,
light on us, Rev. 2.3.

Thirdly, The contentment, and cheerfulness, and See 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Ephesians.
6.7. Isa. 58.13.14.
willingness we find in doing God service specially is remarkable, Psalm.
40.8. I am content to do thy will, O Lord, says David; glad of occasion to do
God service; Oh that my heart were made so direct, Ps. 119. whereas it is a
weariness to the hypocrite, Mal. 1.13.

Movites hereunto. First, Weak services sincerely performed have acceptance
with God more then the more glorious that are done in hypocrisy, Pro. 15.8.
Secondly, Defects are winked at; Lord! how many? while, in the main, the heart
is upright, see in Asa, and I^hoshaphat, etc. Thirdly, The reward certain.

The Mean remains: Before God: Meditation of Gods Omnipresence, see Ps. 139.
Heb. 4.12. 1. Chr. 28.9. To ignorance, or unbeleef, or inconsideration of this
principle, we may impute hypocrisy, all evils; see Ps. 10.11. and 73.11. and
94.7.

Thus for confirmation of our judgments in that principle. First, Let us
consider Gods effects in his creatures; he has given us eyes to see, ears to
hear, hearts to understand; and can we then suppose himself void of that
faculty? see Ps. 49.9. Secondly, We are his workmanship; our thoughts and
motions of our hearts are, for the substance of them, his operations; the ill
application is from us, the draught is from God. Thirdly, His word in our
mouths searches to the discerning of the thoughts, Heb. 4.12. and this, me
thinks, should make an Athiest say, God is in us of a truth; see 1 Cor. 14.25.
Fourthly, Our conscience has this power, 1 Ioh. 3.20. How much more God, who
is greater then our hearts, etc.

Lord, Thou have dealt graciously with thy servants, and magnified thy mercy to
us in this kingdom; pardon we pray thee our unthankfulness, stir up our
hearts to more diligence in thy service, lest we provoke thee to make us
spectacles of thy wrath, as thou have hitherto graciously made us of thy mercy:
And Lord, purge our hearts of the leaven of hypocrisy, that in singleness of
heart we may serve thee; To this end, cause us always to consider that we are
in thy presence, to whose eyes all things are naked, and uncovered; Hear us, we
beseech thee, and answer us for thy Son our Saviors sake, Jesus Christ. Amen.

VERSE. X. I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted.
Connection this; Why all this? Answ. I believed, therefore have I spoken; the
sense, see 2 Cor. 4.13. The particulars are. 1. His Act. 2. The issue, or fruit
of that Act. In the Act again we consider. 1. What it is to believe. 2. What it
was that David here now believed.

For the first, First, There is doubting, that is, when a man hangs in
aequilibrio in even poyse betwixt both parts of the Contradiction, as suppose
the question were, Whether Adam fell immediately upon his Creation? Secondly,
There is suspicion, that is, When a man has some inclination to believe the
thing to be true, merely out of the possibility of the thing to be, as suppose
the question were, Whether Christ should have been incarnate, if man had never
fallen? Thirdly, There is opinion, that is when a man has some probabilities
inducing him to believe the thing propounded to be true, as if the question
were, Whether we shall know each other in heaven? Fourthly, There is Science,
when a man upon certain demonstrative proofs assents as upon certainty to the
Truth of the thing propounded, suppose the question to be, Whether there be a
God? whether this God be one? Fifthly, There is Fides, when a man firmly assents
to the truth of the proposition, not for argument probable, or demonstrative,
but for the authority of the Testis, or witness that does speak it; as for
example, Whether God be One and Three? There can be no argument, a priori,
brought to demonstrate it, only because God testifies it to be so, Who best
knows himself, and the diverse manners of existance: Now, firmly to assent to
this Article, is an Act of Faith.

What was it that David professes here to believe?

Answ. It was, That he should walk before God in the land of the living.

The quaere is, Whence was this Testimony?

Answ. It might be, that he had, as Isa. 38.
Hezekiah, his word from God, that he should live to reign over Israel,
notwithstanding all the oppositions of Saul; Nay, questionless it is true, he
had from Samuels mouth such assurance, that he should reign over Israel, 1.
Sam. 16.12.

Secondly, There is a Twofold Testimony of God. First, One is Verbal.
Secondly, Another is Real, as for example, When the Apostles preached Christ
to the Gentiles, they testified it was he, whom God had appointed to be Savior
of the World; this was a Verbal Testimony. Secondly, But God confirmed this
word by miracles, by signs, and wonders, This was a Real Testimony, Heb. 2.4.

But whereto serves all this?

Answ. It is well, if from this you understand the nature of Faith; wherein who
almost erres not? not every persuasion, or firm assent to a thing as true, is
divine Faith; Saint Paul says of himself before his Conversion, Act. 26.9. he
thought, and was persuaded he might do many things against the Name of Jesus;
according to that of our Savior, Ioh. 16.2.
They that kill you shall think they do God good service; And who makes
question, but these all were lead by a word of God, sounding to their
apprehension such, as carried away their Conclusion clear. I am persuaded it
is true, there is many a Papist in this Kingdom, thinks truly, and is thoroughly
persuaded, that all the errors of the Trent Council are Gods Truth; and they
are not all so sottish, but they see Texts of Scripture alleged to that end.
And what can you think of Anabaptists, have they not Scripture. to induce them
to believe that Children ought not to be baptized? What of Brownists? Have they
not 2 Cor. 6.17.
Scripture for their separation? Tertullian did no wrong, when he said
Scriptures were officina haer^sium, a shop of Heresies, if by Scriptures you
understand the Scriptures taken after the Letter; for it is true, the Letter is
often fairer for Heretics, then for Orthodox Christians; as that passage was
for Arrius, Pater major est me, The rather is greater then I: I spare
mentioning the errors of our own people; only I advise.

First, Beware how you make scripture sound otherwise, then the Inspirer of
Scripture, meant it; and this know, not every conclusion, or Article that has
the Letter of Scripture fair, is Gods Testimony; but only the Scripture taken
in true sense, after the intension of him, who inspired it.

For my part, I say as Moses, would God you did all prophecy, and were able to
interpret! But this let me tell you, it is fearful taking Gods Name in vain,
when men shall peremptorily say, God said what never came into his heart: Said
God ever, Infants should not be baptized? It never came into his heart: Said
God ever, that we may have no commerce with wicked men in word, and Sacraments?
or that otherwise we could not be assured, we were ever taken out of the world;
that is, out of the state of the world? He never said it, nor did it once come
into his heart. Said God ever unto the people, It shall be lawful for you to
interpret Scripture publicly, or privately, doubtful Scriptures, I mean? or,
Did he ever promise, ye should know what was concealed in them, but by your
ministers? He never said it, it never came into his heart to think it: It was
never Gods mind, the people should be their own guides; for if so, he would
never have sent Philip to guide the Eunuch, Act. 8. 31. nor Saint Peter to
teach Cornelius, Act. 10. Think of it as you please, it is not my Popery, but
your Pride to think, or do otherwise. Secondly, This well helps us to dissolve
the doubt Papists casts on us, when we teach, that the Assurance we have of
Gods love in particular to us is a point of Faith:

They ask, Where is our Word?

Answ. To which many things might be answered, First, That we have a word
Intentionally particular, as when Saint Peter says, ^o Act. 2.39.
you were the Promises made, it is all one as if he had said to thee, and thee.
Secondly, Generale applicatum ad hunc and hunc is aequipollent to a particular,
as when they in their penetentiall Forum say, absolvo te, so we when by
Sacraments we apply the general promise. Thirdly, Gods Testimony is not all
Vocal, there is a real Testimony Gods work in us, 1 Ioh. 5.10. He that
believes in the Son of God has this witness in himself, his very believing
the impression of Faith on his soul, is Gods Testimony; wherefore such are said
to be sealed by the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 1.22.

Follows now the fruit of David's faith, in these words; Therefore have I
spoken: It lovs not to conceal, delights rather to utter its Credulity, pro
loco and tempore, see 2 Cor. 4.13. Romans 10.10 also Psalm. 40.9, 10.

How far we stand bound to the performance, is matter of profitable enquiry,
and in these times (though peaceable) something necessary?

This is the Resolution for the general. First, It being a precept
affirmative, though it binds semper, yet it binds not ad semper, nor is
absolutely necessary to salvation to be actually performed; save only pro loco,
and tempore; suppose when it draws with it neglect of honor due to God, or
edification and furtherance in faith to brethren. The Precept touching
confession is two ways to be conceived. First, Consule 2 These. page 71, 72,
73. and in cap. 1. v. 11
Negatively, binding not to deny. Secondly, Affirmatively, binding to confess.
Not to deny the faith at any time, we are bound at all times upon pain of
damnation; whether this denial be by words, or deeds, or signs; Christ
thunders, speaks not, Luke 9.26. Secondly, The tears were bitter which Saint
Peter wept after this sin, Matthew. 26.75. Thirdly, Church Censures in all
times severe against it, admitting none to reconciliation, but after tedious,
and longsome penance. Fourthly, No marvel, for that is simpliciter, and ex se
malum.

Now, when, or in what case we are bound to actual, and open confession of
faith upon pain of damnation, (I suppose in times of persecution) is matter of
difficult resolution: Rules herein some thus assign: Such confession is
sometimes an act of religion, as when without it the honor due to God, and his
truth, should fall to the ground, then a duty to confess. Secondly, Of duty,
either by courage to win an alien, or confirm a weakling, or to prevent
apostacy of the wavering; then a duty to confess. Thirdly, Of justice, in
respect of the person a man sustains, or office he bears, suppose of a Pastor,
or Teacher in the Church; then a duty to confess: Howbeit, when religion, or
charity, or justice bind to confess, they leave us to the dictate of prudence.

We have a more sure word of prophecy, to which we shall do well to attend;
That one Text in Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.15.
as to my apprehension it (sounds) speaks more fully to guide us, then all the
voluminous writings of their Angelical, and Seraphicall Doctors; Be ready
always, etc. Rules these; First, Secundum animi praeparationem, The precept of
confession binds all, so that we must be ready at all times to make confession
of faith, when God calls thereto; yea, though death stand ready to deter us;
see Luke 9.23. Take up the Cross daily; 1 Cor. 15.31. Die daily. Secondly,
When actual confession is necessary, as when our confession puts on the nature
of an Apology, or necessary defense, and justification of truth exagitated by
oppositions, and calumnies of adversaries, or is endangered to suppression by
violence of persecution; then say the Lord calls thee to confess thy faith,
then think a woe belonging not only to the denyer, but even to the betrayer of
the faith. Thirdly, Especially, if there be (...), one that of authority
interrogates, or else, of necessity begs of thee an opening of thine
understanding, and credulity in the mystery of faith in Christ. Other questions
here also fall in to be discussed as pertinent to this purpose; As, First,
Whether it may not be lawful to conceal our faith in times of danger* or,
whether it be lawful to fly in times of persecution? or, whether it be
warrantable ultroneously to offer our selves to martyrdom? etc. For the
plenary resolution of each whereof, together with their several applications,
I remit the Reader to my Notes upon the 2 These. 1.11. where these questions are
purposely, and upon somewhat like occasion, largely discussed, and resolved.

VERSE. X, XI. I was greatly afflicted: I said in my haste, All men are liars.
(...) annexed, This Passage is here brought in by way of Prolepsis, or of
Anticipation; as if he had said, Yet conceive me not as vaunting of such
perfection of faith in these afflictions, as if I had not so much as conflicted
with infidelity; For I must confess, I found more then wavering in the
exercise of faith, I said, All men are liars.

The words then tend to mitigate what he said of the strength of faith; and in
sum, are a confession of the defects he found in the exercise of faith;
wherein considerable are. First, The sin, I said, All are liars. Secondly, The
cause, or mean-accidentall of his sin, Sore affliction. Thirdly, The next
occasion of it, His hasty, and unadvised passion.

Sense. Affliction we call all those pressures outward, or inward, which
commonly come under the term of Malum poenae, which deprive us of those things
that are good to sense.

Their lightness, or greatness, is commonly measured by the good they deprive
us of, in state, in fame, in person, or dignity, etc. or by the measure, and
degree wherein they strike us in either, or else by our esteem, and
apprehension of the good they deprive us of, and they are commonly greater, or
less in our sense, according to the price, or esteem we set upon the good
thing whereof they strip us: Let a worldling be touched in his goods, it
grieves him more then if he be robbed of name, of health, of children; Touch a
parent in the dearling, that is a great affliction: In a word, mostly they are
lighter, or greater, according to our apprehension; though they have in them a
real lightness, or gravity, according to the kind, or degree of impression;
such David's here.

I said in my haste: Some render, In praecipitantia, some, In ecstasi; he
means, in the haste, and violence of his passion, before he had thoroughly
deliberated on what he should say or think, as Psalm. 31.22.

All men are liars: Is that a fault? Is there not truth in the assertion? Romans
3.4.

Answ. It is true, all men are liars, Comparative ad Deum, Shall man compared
with God be righteous? Man's righteousness is more then menstruous in that
comparison, his truth, in respect of Gods, is mere falsehood and lying; as there
is none good but God only, namely, originally and essentially, so none is true
but God, in like sense; yet as Barnabas was a Act. 11.24.
good man, by participation, so are men all that are sanctified; so truth we
partake from God in our renovation, this being part of the Image of God: Take
man in his natural inclinations, so he is a liar, a murderer, what not? Yet
take him as regenerate, and sanctified, so he hates lying, and speaks Psalm.
15.2.
truth that is in his heart: But last of all, ye must understand, there are
some men that in some things are privileged from lying, speaking by an
infallible Spirit, as Prophets, and Apostles in all they spoke, and wrote, as
instruments, or Scriveners of the holy Ghost, so were they privileged from
lying; Psalm. 45.1.
My tongue the pen of a ready writer: They spoke as inspired by the holy Ghost,
2 Pet. 1.21. so they could not err, or lie in any thing they delivered to the
Church, or to any person they spoke unto as from God: Now this was David's
sin, that in the generallity, he wrapped in Samuel also, who had spoken unto
him in the Name of the Lord, and assured him of succeeding Saul in the kingdom
of Israel, and of stablishing his throne over that kingdom; and this is the
fault David confesses here of himself: Lo here then, to what exigents, and
extremities of distemper Gods great servants are brought through great
afflictions; to doubt, to question, yea, in passion to deny the truth of God,
and his fidelity: confer that, Psalm. 89.19.37.38, etc. To like end tend, the
whole 37. and 73. Psalms, though, in part, on another ground: How violent
impressions afflictions have had in men most renowned, Job, Jeremy, Peter,
many other servants of God, Scripture histories abundantly teach you.

Reasons if you shall ask me, I can give none better then these. First, Nature
is fertile of all sins; no sin, nor degree of sin, may seem strange to us
in any man, so far as he is natural; not blasphemy, not Atheism, not
infidelity; let it therefore prevail above grace, as often it Romans 7.23.
does, the best men will show, what they are by nature. Secondly, Next, is
divine desertion, Gods leaving man to himself, as often in particulars he does,
so he did Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. whereof if ye shall ask reasons, take
these. First, To humble us. Secondly, To make us hold fast by God. Thirdly, To
teach us compassion, Luke 22.32. Thirdly, What should I tell you of the Devils
suggestions, which as we seldom want, so least under heavy afflictions, see
Job 2.4, 5.

Marry, if you enquire of the occasions, I can show you many. First,
Overconfidence of our own strength, by which occasion David confesses, his
great trouble fell, Psalm. 30. and by this reason fell Peter, Matthew. 26.
Secondly, Next, if not ignorance, (for so far I am loath to charge so great
Saints) yet inconsideration: First, Of the manner of convaying promises,
whether temporal, or spiritual, or eternal, which are not absolute, but
conditional; yea, even in spiritualls tied to means; and with reservation of
power to the promiser to chasten, try, manifest grace, etc. Secondly, Of the
strange means by which God brings his purposes to pass, even by such ofttimes
which seem to overthrow the promise, and to cross the performance of it; as
when David has promise of the kingdom, what less appears then a kingdom, in
the whole course of David, so many perils he was plunged into? Thirdly, You
may observe to be giving leave to reason to oversway in decision of things,
which are but merely upon faith, and power of the promiser; so Sarah, and
Zachary fell upon their fidelity; she laughing at the promise, he doubting,
because he saw all in nature against it.

Heb. 10.38. Yet secondly, from this ground, let no man throw himself into
unnecessary affliction, much less wish, or pray for it; For, know thou what
thy issues shall be? I mean, when thou go out of thy ways, and headlongest
thy self into such temptations? Have you forgotten Saint Peter's issue, upon
that occasion? Who bad, or warranted him to enter the high Priests hall? there
to hazard himself to death; see 1 Cor. 10.12. Look you, there is difference
twixt a great affliction imposed by God, and little cross drawn upon our
selves; Be it never so grievous, when God imposes it, rest assured, he will
strengthen, 1 Cor. 10.13. but when we put it upon our selves, then fear, God
surely punishes such presumption.

There be of you who long for days of persecution, who dares pray for death,
before God sends it, or wish him to send it, before the time of nature, or
perhaps the hour of prescience; how know you, you shall be able to endure the
pangs thereof, I mean, when you call for it? Has God made a promise in any
affliction we seek, or cast our selves upon, to support us? Show us that
promise, and then insult, else sure we know not our selves; God who made us,
knows us and our mould, it is his great mercy that he keeps us from temptations
of our forefathers, for, a thousand to one, but we should perish under them.

Secondly, Learn hence to moderate your censures Jobs friends, and that for the
state of their persons; or else secondly, mavelous rigorous and austere in
censuring the sin, and then we cannot satisfy our selves in our Rhetorical
amplification, by all circumstances of the sins that they have fallen into;
Oh that we could remember that of Saint Paul, Gal. 6.1.
We may be tempted; yea, and as foully overcome, as they that have foulest
fallen; let not him who girds on his armor, boast as he that puts it off:
excellent is that advise of Saint Bernard, excuse his intention, if thou can
not his action, or if the fall be so foul as to admit no extenuation; yet say,
Vehemens fuit tentatio, quid de me illa fecisset, si accepisset in me similiter
potestatem?

Thirdly, You will say perhaps, what odds twixt infidelity of David, and that
of others, professed Infidels?

Answ. In the fact none more then in other sins; David's adultery and murder is
Quoad genus facti, all one with that of Am on and Absalom, yet a difference is
to be seen twixt one and other; Two you have here expressed; First, It is not a
light affliction that occasions Gods Saints to doubt, or murmr, or grow
incredulous: the devil was deceived, when he said of Job, that his loss of
goods, or children, would make him curse God to his face; Job 1.22.
In all this Job sinned not with his mouth, nor charged God foolishly: But
great, and violent afflictions, they work sometimes strangely, even upon
gracious dispositions; the least loss alienates an hypocrite, if it be but
lack of plenty, it makes them ready to devote themselves to the service of the
Ier 44.17.
Queen of heaven. Secondly, Their infidelity is passionate, and indeliberate,
when passions indeed cloud judgment, disturb memory, blind certified reason,
then ye shall see they show themselves men, but give them time to pause, and to
debate the matter with solid judgment, that they are masters of their wits,
and passions are calmed, then they can say, as the Prophet, It is mine Psalm
77.10.
infirmity; then, they Psalm. 73.22.
be-beast themselves for such thoughts; then, as Saint Peter, They go out, and
weep Matthew. 26.7^.
bitterly: Now look to other men, that are habited in Infidelity, hardened in
Atheism, it is not passion that transports them, but in their best advised
thoughts, they study to contradict the truth of God, and of such means, Saint
Iam. 1.6.
James, when he says, (...), it signifies the Discrutatour, or Disputer
against the promise.

It may be demanded, what moved David, or the Spirit that guided him, to
publish this foul crime of himself?

Answ. For the general, Gods Spirit leaving such records of humane frailty in
great Saints, aimed at, First, Our humiliation, and fear; for if such Cedars
fell, such prime Saints sinned so foully, should we be high-minded, and not
rather Romans 11.20.
fear? Secondly, Our circumspection and watchfulness against the occasions;
wherefore ye have usually, together with the sin, the occasion noted how they
fell; Saint Peter through his presumption; David by precipitancie, and passion
here, elsewhere by idleness into luxury, by luxury into cruelty; note we it
against like occasions. Thirdly, God would let us see what we are by nature the
best of us, when we are left to our selves, secured from no sin, be it never
so notorious, or abominable; not from infidelity, not from blasphemy, etc.
Fourthly, Even by this he would teach us, that the justification of the most
righteous is of mere grace, which as it is the reason why we all carry about us
a body of sin in this life, so of the falls of all Gods greatest servants;
wherefore I think it is, that men of greatest grace, have foulest falls noted
of them, yea more then of meaner Saints. Fifthly, That humor of uncharitable,
and merciless censuring of our brethren, overtaken by infirmity, God desires
hereby to prevent, if it were possible; For why do thou in it also condemn
the generation of the just? These reasons of the general.

But why the Penners of Scripture, such as David was, did record their own
faults with such ingenuity, and candor? Our Divines take notice of a special
reason of Gods ordinance, and providence disposing in that kind; to wit, that
men might be assured they sought not in their writings to advance themselves,
or as Politiques to captivate the people to obedience of that holy Doctrine
they taught, out of their sanctity, or dignity: For, would they then have
polished their own blemishes? But that indeed they were overruled by a
supreamer power, whose glory they sought, not their own, in penning the
Scritures for behoof of posterity: wherefore observe scarcely any of the
Penmen of Scripture, but have their blemishes noted; Moses his own, and his
brother Aarons; Samuel the foul falls of his children; Isaiah his own
detracting; Jeremy his own cursing his birth; Amos his mean education; Matthew
his Publicanisme; Paul his persecution; David here his infidelity, elsewhere,
his less then blasphemy, Psalm. 77. Are these the courses of Politicians? See
heathenish Lawgivers, how desirous they were to seem petty gods?

But so, even from this argument, which Scripture it self natively affords, may
we help and cure our infidelity, touching the question so much controverted,
whether Scriptures were inspired from God? I confess, no man shall have firm
persuasion of the Divine Author of them, but by the Spirit of God, 1 Ioh. 5.6.
That is, by the holy impressions which by this Doctrine he fastens upon our
souls; for it is no vocal, but a real testimony; yet are there arguments also
from consent, antiquity, fulfilling of prophesies, etc. of no small force to
work conviction.

Lastly, whereas David confesses his infidelity issued answerable from his
violent passion; Take heed of passions hasty, and unadvised resolutions,
whither may they carry us? Who knows? To infidelity, to uncharitableness, to
casting off of humanity* A wise man will stablish his thoughts by Counsel: Now
unadvised resolutions are in two senses named, as there is a twofold ground for
counsel to direct it self by. First, The one is, as Saint Paul calls it, Flesh
and blood, carnal reason, whereon a man deliberating, shall find a ground for
the corruptest action to warrant, and encourage to it. Secondly, Now David he
tells us of another Rule; Thy statutes are the men of my Council, Psa. 119.24.
Now thus think, though according to flesh and blood they may seem advised
resolutions; yet think, if they be not in their, First, Matter. Secondly,
Measure. Thirdly, Manner of carriage subject to Gods Law, they are in Religion
unadvised resolutions, see Romans 8.7. Yea, be they never so wise, yet so far
as they are not guided by religion, they are unadvised, they are foolish: 1 Samuel 16. How long will thou mourn for Saul? is there no end of thy sorrow? This
makes it Carnal, and take heed it occasion not more crosses. Jonah 4.4. When
Jonah was so over-angry for Gods sparing Nineveh, says God unto him, Do
thou well to be angry? It was unadvised Anger: It seemed an advised persuasion,
which the elder brother would have fastened upon his father, Reason he had for
it, He has spent thy living with Harlots; It is true, yea, but he is a
Penitent, is it not meet then we should joy? Luke 15. I love not to
particularize, I know not what warrant I have for it; but this let me say,
Whatsoever affection of wrath, or love, or Grief, is not in the ground and
measure of it subject to the law of God, that is unadvised; Whatsoever
resolution, seem it never so warrantable in Reason, is not subject to the Law
of God, that is carnal, and to be reputed as foolish, and unadvised. Not to
accept submission of a Penitent, not to joy in his penitency, (which Angels,
and Saints, yea, God himself does) not to notice the least degree of Grace,
(and for it to thank God) not to cherish that Grace by all means, be it never
so little, etc. These Resolutions are not from above, but they are Carnal,
Sensual, I pray God not Iam. 3.15.
Devilish also.

VERSE XII, XIII. What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the
Lord.
THe second effect, or fruit sprung in David from meditation of Gods mercy, and
grace in his deliverance, the sum of it is public thankesgiving.

The Conveyance is in a Rhetorical consultation, or deliberation with himself,
as a man at a stand, or in a muse, seeing his many obligations to God by such
favors vouchsafed, yet not able to recompense; something he knew must be done;
What he should do as best pleasing to God, he studies and deliberates with
himself, and at last resolves.

The parts are Two. First, The Addubitation, ver. 12. Secondly, The Answer, or
Resolution, ver. 13, 14.

He supposes then, there is something which God expects from man in regard of
his favors vouchsafed him; Wherefore it is blamefull in Hezekiah, that he 2
Chro. 32.25.
rendered not according to the Lords kindness. That question of Moses, Deuteronomy.
10.12. Now Israel, what does the Lord require of thee? supposes that there is
something expected, exacted; Whence is that tart reprehension, Deu. 32.6. Do ye
thus requite the Lord? Yet take heed you err not; not as an (...), as a
recompense sufficient for the least favors done unto us, our righteousness
Psalm. 16.2. and Job 22.2. and 35.7.
extends not to him, says David; Thousands of Rams, ten thousand rivers of
Oil, Mic. 6.7. all are too little; Our Selves, our Lives, our Souls, our
Bodies, Romans 12.1. They are not Beneficij Compensatio; they are only
Testimonies, and signs of Thankfulness, so exacted, and so only accepted.

You have heard I think of Meritum Congrui amongst Papists, and (though not
under that term) yet some such thing is pressed by others, that there is a
congruence, a meetnesse, a kind of duty God owes to his creature, in respect
of his own Nature, whereby he is obliged to do good unto it, because it is his
creature; Mentior, If I think not the generallity of our people in this point
Popish, though ignorantly; so willingly they take notice of what God owes them
out of his Nature, so hardly are they brought to understand the duty they owe
to God: How many gracious benefits have we, do we daily receive from God? His
mercies, says the Prophet, are Lam. 3.23.
renewed every morning; And meet they should, for he that made us, must save
us: But what must he do, that is made? Nothing? For life, motion, Act. 17.28.
being? Owe we nothing to our God, for the mavelous deliverance of our
brethren, preservation of our souls from pestilence, Is there nothing due to
our God? Not so much as obedience? Not so much as mending what is amiss? Not
so much as parting with the momentany pleasures of sin? Yet, well fare the
old heathen! And I am persuaded they shall rise up in judgment against us, and
shall condemn us; there was not a victory, or a deliverance, but wrung from
them a sacrifice to those idols, which they adored as God, Christians only
forsooth, God is of congruity at least, obliged unto, etc. Look you, First,
Congruity of doing good to the creature, in respect of God, arises not from
any thing he owes to the creature, but of that he owes to himself in respect of
his own Nature.

Secondly, To say truth, there is no obligation of him to the creature, but
what arises from his voluntary and free promise; Promittendo se fecit
debitorem; and whatsoever men, or Angels can claim from God, they must claim it
Sub titulo promissionis.

Thirdly, Let us weigh that the things which God commands us, or exacts from
us, he exacts not for his own benefit; before ever man or Angel was, he was God
all-sufficient, and he made not the world to acquire any thing to himself,
which he was or had not, for he is El-Schaddai, (...): but to manifest, and to
communicate his goodness to the creature; and the end for which he commands,
or exacts duty from us, is for our good, Deuteronomy. 10.13. in keeping the
Commandments there is great reward; to wit, to the keeper, not to the
Prescriber.

Fourthly, That this our want of rendering to God occasions. First, The
diminishing of his blessings. Secondly, Yea, the utter removal, so we read how
the Gentiles were not thankful for the light of nature, therefore God takes
from them very natural conscience, Romans 1.26. Thirdly, Nay, usually turns
blessings into curses, in stead of favors, powers down wrath, as on Israel.

What shall I render? You may not think David ignorant of that he enquires of;
Moses had long ago resolved it, Deuteronomy. 10.12. and himself here, verse. 13. and
Psalm. 50. see also Mic. 6.6, 7. What then means the question?

Answ. Two things David commends unto us therein. First, That in our rendrings
to God, we should not follow our self-wisdome, or will, but be well informed
that what we perform, be accepted unto him: Saul professes to mean well, 1 Samuel 15.21, 22. when he reserved of the best of the cattle for sacrifice; yet
for that he fulfilled his own wisdom more then Gods precept; the kingdom is
rent from him, see also 1 Samuel 13.12. so also Paul, Col. 2.

Reasons. First, That may be plausible, and pleasing in the eye of flesh, which
is abominable in the sight of God; as when the Gentiles sacrificed sons and
daughters to God, who doubts but by parting with things so dear, they thought
to promerit God? Yet mark Gods Spirits censure of them, 1 Cor. 10.20. The
things which Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice not to God, but to devils.
Intentionally think you? By no means, but in as much as they followed therein
their own, and the devils will, rather then Gods Prescript, therefore they are
said to sacrifice them to Devils. Secondly, You must remember what Paul has,
Romans 8.7. wisdom of the flesh so far as it is not subject to the Law of God,
is enmity to him; and if there were nothing else but this, that it comes from
his enemy, God accepts it not. Thirdly, Nay see how the Lord rejects sacrifices
which himself prescribed; when in the manner of offering, they swerved from his
prescript, Isa. 66.3. He that kills an ox is as if he slew a man, etc. Why?
The things were prescribed for the matter of sacrifice? Yea, but they have
followed their own ways; see also, Isa. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. Who has required
these things at your hands? God prescribed the things; yet in as much as they
were not indeed in the manner that he prescribed, they are as if they had been
mere will worship: of so much avail it is to be well informed of what God will
accept.

That I may not run out upon this occasion, to tax all that will worship in
the Church of Rome, let us be exhorted this to do: We have all in present been
partakers of the blessing, by compassion, of deliverance in our brethren, if
yet the bowels of compassion be in us; personally, of preservation, for God
might as well have stricken us as them, as much merit in us as in them, perhaps
more then in many.

What shall we render? Is a question meet for us? We may fall on that that will
more provoke him; in that himself has prescribed, we may err in the Modus:
Two things therefore I prescribe to every man willing to be informed of his
duty in this kind. First, That for the matter of his service to be sure that
he has Gods word for his warrant; it is not difference of meats, or strict
keeping of Lent, it is not numbering of prayers, etc. Who has required these
things at our hands? These have their place according to their kind, and ends;
but the main of all is this; First, For the general, break off thy sins by
righteousness, Dan. 4.27. else fear, a worse thing will come unto thee, Ioh.
5.14. Secondly, Order thy conversation aright, Psalm. 50.23. that is, in the
actual practice see thou conform thy life to the Law of God. Thirdly, Serve
him more diligently, Hos. 5.15. It is one end of Gods afflictions, to quicken
grace in us; think not the wonted measure of service will serve the turn, but
now since God gives thee rest from thy troubles and fears, think he looks for
thy service doubled from thee, if not in number of services, yet in fervency of
performance.

But if in this blessing we would know what God looks for from us; there is
something for the quality of the judgment, wherein we may inform our selves,
both for the sins, God would have us fly from, and duties he requires of us;
God usually proportions his judgments to the quality of men's sins:
Pestilence a contagious disease; the breath, the houses, the air infects them
that come in it.

What if this be one of the sins that God plagues? Our neutrousnesse upon
lewd society with Drunkards, with Whoremongers, with Idolaters; leprosy it
self, nor pestilence is more contagious, yet will we into such company? we
willingly sport our selves with their sins, unwillingly we shall be plagued
with their plagues; It was wont to be a sign of righteousness not to sit in
the assembly of Ier. 15.17. and Psalm. 26.5.
mockers; precepts I am sure we have frequent, Pro. 4. not to walk in the way
with them, and Ioh. 3. not to bid such, God speed.

Reasons we have many. First, They shall be 2 These. 3.14.
ashamed. Secondly, Others shall fear. Yet herein faulty, do we wonder if God
send pestilence?

Secondly, what if we say the spiritual contagion our selves carry about us,
and have cast upon our brethren occasion it? If not in counsel, and
excitement, yet at least by example; 1 Cor. 5. Know you not that a little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump? I beseech you, brethren, think of this, you
especially that profess the fear of God; abstain you not only from evil, but
from 1 These. 5.22.
appearance of evil; hate you, not the flesh only, but the Iud. ver. 23.
garment spotted of the flesh.

Thirdly, Ye are called to blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. Why then are curses of plague,
and pestilence, wished upon your cattle, your neighbors, your children, in
your fury? Is it pestilence, or plague, we would have? You shall have it, till
God has consumed you from off the earth: these sins break off, and think the
leaving of these sins God specially now requires of us.

Would you know the positive duties God requires? even from the quality of the
judgment ye may be informed. First, the public service of God in the
Congregation, how generally is it slighted by the people? any occasion will
withdraw from it. There was a Law for the Leper, He must not, till his Leprosy
was cleansed, come into the Congregation of Gods people; the same by proportion
is justly holden for the Pestilence: I am persuaded God aimed at this, That
they that would not when they had health, might not in their greatest Necessity
approach to the Comforts that are tendered unto us: Think then the Lord speaks
to thee by this judgment, as Saint Paul to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.25. forsake
not the gathering together of Saints, for there is God specially, many times
extraordinarily present with his Ordinance. Secondly, Christian society of
godly neighbors is that the Lord has ordained for an under means to nourish,
and increase Grace in his Children; Lord! how generally is it slighted? What
through Pride, what through Malice, what through Covetousness; scorn we the
company of Gods people? we may need the help and society of the meanest: And
think God by this judgment calls thee to the duty.

Next for the Modus, What shall I render? Isa. 1.12. Who has required these
things? Isa. 58.5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? The things were
required, but they failed in the manner. The things I commend unto you in this
behalf. First, See to the state and condition of your persons, that you be
truly penitent, and as David, Psalm. 66.18.
regard no wickedness in your hearts, for best duties from such are an
abomination to the Lord. Secondly, See to this, That there be a concord betwixt
thy action, and affection, thy pretense and intention: there is nothing which
God more abhorrs then hypocrisy in his service, for it is both contrary to the
simplicity of his Nature, and withal argues the basest opinion of God that may
be, as if he were a God that saw not the hearts. Thirdly, Let it come
cheerfully from thee, whatsoever thou performest to God, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. non
quantum, but ex quanto; not what thou bring, but with what good affection,
and cheer, thou bring, is accepted; God loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor.
9.7.

What shall I render? The second thing David here commends to us in this his
Rhetorical question, is, The nature of a heart truly thankful: the best it
can render, he thinks too base for the Benefactors to whom he renders it, see 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 15. First, If we compare what we render with what God conferrs;
Heaven for Earth, Deeds for Words, Himself for Nothing, his Son for less
then Nothing. Secondly, If we way how in nothing we obliged him; for who has
given him first? see Romans 11.35. but only his mere grace and mercy, because
he had a favor to us. Thirdly, How ill we deserved at his hands, having sold
our Birthright, as Esau for Pottage, so we for an Apple, Genes. 3. Tit. 3.
Fourthly, How weak, and imperfect the purest services are that come from us to
him, stained as menstruous Clothes, Isa. 64.6.

Prove it as one maine difference twixt Gods true Children, and Hypocrites in
the Church. Cain for form brings an offering as does Abel, Genesis 4. but God had
respect to Abel's, not to Cain's; Cain brings at adventure, any thing he
thought would serve his turn: Abel brings of the first fruits, and the fat of
the flock, Mal. 1. The Table of the Lord is not to be regarded, Halt or Blind,
so it were a sacrifice, all was well, etc.

Who can in this kind excuse himself? The prime, and vigor of our life how
have we spent upon the service of Satan? our best wits how have we tired and
wasted in vanity? The Refuse that age has left us how hardly afford we to our
God? The Attention we yield unto Gods Word, is it comparable to that we yield
to a Judge, or a Justices charge? The Threats of our God, do we so tremble at
as at the Threats of Men? The kindness of God do we so value as the favor of
Men? we do not, such is our sensuality, such our more love of men, of our
selves, then of our God, who yet has done so great things for us!

The better to enlarge our hearts to this duty; let us consider, First, That
God has bestowed on us the choice, and prime of his favors in all kinds; As we
are men, Reason; As his Church, his Word; his Word not only purely, but
plentifully preached; Yea, his Spirit, his Son, Himself: Thus has he
magnified his kindness to us; Wretched men that we are! can we think our best
Devotions too good for such a God?

Secondly, Compare our selves with other Churches; He has given us Peace,
while they are turmoyled in the tumults of War; Victory, when they have been
subjected to many Foyles; Security and Safety, while they daily carry their
lives in their hands; Liberty to serve him, while they many in corners are
forced to steal their Devotions: Thus has God magnified his Mercy to us, and
yet. etc.

Thirdly, Compare our selves with our Brethren in our own Church, and Kingdom,
we shall see God has vouchsafed us our pre-eminence. It is well toward Thirty
years that you have had here the word of God purely, and sincerely taught you*
there be neighboring Congregations, that since the days of Superstition never
yet enjoyed the blessing to have a preaching ministry settled amongst them; If
we speak to the Blessing in hand, Them God has delivered over, us he has
preserved.

Fourthly, Compare our selves with our Brethren and Neighbors living all under
the same means of Salvation; How many see you still living and dying in gross
ignorance of God, in wilful Rebellion and Disobedience? And yet there be those
again that may say, God has blessed the means of grace to them, their eyes are
enlightened to see, their hearts affected to love, and obey his Truth. Surely if
such men can satisfy themselves with an ordinary measure of duty, I shall
wonder.

VERSE. XIII. I will take the Cup of Salvation: and call upon the Lord.
AN answer to the demand: Poculum Salutis, The Cup of Salvation; You may not
think this to be our Drunkards Health; God never warrants either drunkenness,
or drinkings with excess of riot to any, 1 Pet. 4.3. and yet I am persuaded
that profane Custom has originally grounded it self from hence: St Ambrose,
in his time, speaks of some Custom they had to drink Pro Salute Imperatorum;
but well converts it to Oramus pro Salute Imperatorum: The God we serve is not
the Idol Bacchus, to be propitiated with drinking, or drunkenness; It is
devotion and obedience that pleases him.

I could fill you with Expositions, but Quorsum? This understand; The Jewish
Church had three kind of sacrifices. First, Holocausts; wherein the whole was
offered by fire unto the Lord, neither Priests, nor people partaking in them.
Secondly, Sinne-offerings, and Trespass offerings, wherein part was burnt unto
God, the residue was the Priests portion; Marry the Sinner or trespasser
partook in it. Thirdly, They had Peace Offerings, Levit. 7.11. which were
offered in liew of deliverance, and safety from God; Whose Rite was this, That
thereof part should be offered to God, part accrued to the Priests; the residue
to the Offerer, and those whom he invited to partake in the Feast: Examples
hereof, see 1 Samuel 16.3. Prove. 7.14. and, which is most to purpose, because I
think we have thereof what was done according to the promise here; It is said
of David, He offered Burnt-offerings, and Peace Offerings unto the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 16.1.

What is this to Poculum Salutis, The Cup of Salvation in my Text?

Answ. The Cup of Salvation, is, by a Synechdoche, as much as Sacrificium
salutis, that is as much as to say, A Sacrifice, or Banquet, made for the
people in respect of safety, and deliverance vouchsafed unto David: read
diligently the story, 1 Chronicles. 16.

Now if ye ask me the Reason of the Institution, Why the people of the Jews
must thus upon their deliverances offer such Peace Offerings, and with a
Banquet liberally eating and drinking before the Lord?

Answ. First, One reason seems this; namely, To stir up the Offerers
themselves with more cheerfulness, and alacrity to praise God for his mercies.
Secondly, If ye respect others, it was to teach what should be the affection of
all Gods people; that is, as Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 1.6.
To draw others to join with us in our praising God. Thirdly, If ye respect the
lavish multitude, I am persuaded it was one end, that if by naught else, yet by
the belly they might be drawn to know, and glorify the Name of God. From which
ceremonious Ordinance, grounded upon these foundations, something might be
observed, which touches us: ye have been taught, that though ordinances of
Jews binds us not in their superficies, or according to the Letter, yet they
bind according to their Moral Intelligence; as for example, though we be not
bound to abstain from Swines-flesh, yet we are taught by the Ceremony to
abstain from Luxury, which that Ceremonial Observation led unto; So though we
be not bound to our Sacrifices of Goats, and Bulls, no not in Thank-offerings;
yet to the Moral Intelligence we are bound: As this; First, To stir up our
selves by all holy outward means to praise God with alacrity, and cheerfulness
of heart for the favors he has vouchsafed us; and that I am sure is a duty, I
mean not only to praise God, but to use all good means to excite our selves
with cheerfulness to praise his Name, see Psalm. 103. Isa. 38.

This is that which the Rule interpreting the Commandments leads us unto; that
is, Where a duty is prescribed, there all holy means leading to the duty are
prescribed: as thus, To speak Ad cor nostrum, where it is commanded to provide
for families, all holy means conducing thereto are prescribed; because the duty
without it cannot be acquired, frugality therefore is required; so where
drunkenness is forbidden, company with drunkards is forbidden; where chastity
is commanded, abstinence from lascivious company is commanded; where giving to
them that need, there labor is enjoined, Ephesians. 4.28, etc.

We seem to love good duties, 1 Cor. 1.21.
by it we must thither: Fain we would have preaching, but we are loath to
afford the Minister his maintenance, it must be ere ye have it as ye should
have it: Fain we would have assurance of salvation, but we are loath to
mortify the flesh; seemingly we fain to mortify the flesh, yet we are loath
to pinch the belly or the back, etc.

What God has joined together, let no man put asunder; God never meant to
bestow heaven on us, or any thing leading thereto, but by means; I mean for
that which is ordinary.

I beseech you, let these Reasons sway you. First, God never accounts that man
willing to be saved, or to do any thing available to salvation, that refuses
the means he affords to salvation; Matthew. 23.37. I would have gathered you, you
would not; Would not? who would not be gathered to God? But in as much as they
refused the means, therefore, says our Savior, they would not.

Secondly, The means we choose may prove no means, but impediments; when God
appoints the end, himself will make the choice of the means; but for gathering,
and strengthening his Church, he has ordained Word and Sacraments, will we be
saved without these means, we shall never be saved.

Thirdly, Why do we not consider the means may be taken from us? I know no
Kingdom or Church in the world to which they are entailed: The Church of the
Jews, those of Asia were Churches, as we are; so was that of the Palatinate,
yet now we see what is their Fate: Though God will ever have a Church upon the
earth, yet has he no where promised to have a Church in England, see Am. 8.11.

Fourthly, Suppose the means stay with us; yet, First, Upon our contempt they
may be Isa. 6.10.
cursed to us, (that though we hear, we shall not understand) and become
occasions of our farther blindness, and hardening. Secondly, We may be taken
from them, by sickness, prisonment, banishment, death; and then what becomes
of our poor souls? I mean still, where we have carried our selves
contemptuously toward the means: This then I would advise, use the means which
God has prescribed.

Now whereas David according to Gods ordinance, draws others to join with him
in praising God, we observe our duty, and that is not to content our selves
only to do religious duties, but to draw others to fellowship in them; so did
Andrew and Philip, Ioh. 1.46. so it was prophesied of the last times, Zech. 8.
Isa. 2. but our times live to confute prophesies.

We have these Reasons. First, Our reward is greater, Dan. 12. such shine as
Stars.

Secondly, They may supply our defects; all having not like faith, nor like
fervency, nor like disposition to receive; join all together we may perhaps
make a complete sacrifice.

Thirdly, Compassion, me thinks, should move us, Iud. 23. It is likely they
that praise God for us, would more praise him for themselves.

Taxed here are. First, Negligents in this duty, who though for their own
persons they be careful; yet for others are regardlesse; Genesis 18.19.
Abraham's commendation was, he would charge servants and children after him;
His sons we are, if we walk in his steps.

Secondly, Hinderers of the duty. First, Positively, Doing what deterres from
religion, for whom, I may say, is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever, whether it be by counsel, or threatening, or punishment. Oh that such
would consider what Saint Paul speaks, Romans 14.
Destroy not thou thy brother for meat, for whom Christ died; What do thou
but as much as in thee lies, hinder the intention of our Mediator?

What should I say for example? though this I know, the exemplury sinner is the
most grievous of all sinners; To him not only his personal sins, but those
which have been by his example, shall be imputed. And what say you to
toleration of evil? 1 Cor. 5. if it be but connivence at omissions, certainly
it suits not with that should be in Christians.

I beseech you hither let us bend our selves. First, We see Adversaries,
Atheists, Papists, all drawing to their practice; Shall not we be as zealous
for our God, as they are for the Devil?

Secondly, We see the Devil himself bestirring himself, because his time is
Apoc. 12.12.
short; and how short our time is, who knows? once this we know, he that Pro.
11.30.
wins souls is wise; and he that converts another to righteousness, shall
Iam. 5.20.
save a soul, and cover a multitude of sins.

Thirdly, If we shame to learn of carnal men, or of the Devil, let us learn
of God, and consider the end why he gives us gifts, not for our own benefit
only, 1 Cor. 12.7. but for the benefit and profit of others, see Luke 20.32.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

Next considerable, are the means David chooses to draw the people to
fellowship in his thanksgiving; It is by a Banquet: Me thinks he would teach us
to draw any other with our selves, whatsoever he be, though it be by the belly,
to glorify the Name of God; and I assure you, I am of his mind, and dare
avouch it pleasing to God: if Saint Paul could say, when Christ was Phil. 1.18.
preached, whether by pretense, or in sincerity, I know not; but that we may
say, so God be pleased, whether for a little country, or a great one: and if I
be not deceived, this is the reason Saint Paul urges on us to do good to all,
Gal. 6.10. and our Matthew. 5.16.
Savior, Let men see our good works, that if nothing else, yet the taste of
our table-chear may draw them to God; surely, me thinks, whether by the belly,
or by the back, we draw them to God, so they be drawn, it is not material; God
drew the Magicians of Persia by a Matthew. 2.2.
star, fitting the means to their humor: Christ his Disciples fishers, by
promising a fishing of better value; and if we keep our selves to the humor of
the people, while the means are good, and the intention honest, what harm is
it? our Savior fits parables to this end.

I shall seem a fool in speaking my mind, yet I assure you I speak Gods truth,
and no man can on sound ground contradict me: These outward courtesies that are
common, and public, I should advise Gods people to show as much, if not more,
to Aliens, then to those who profess themselves Gods people.

My Reasons are. First, The slighting of them occasions blasphemy of the holy
Name of God, as if we preached no Doctrine of humanity; understand relieving of
natural necessities, is a work of humanity, not only of Christian duty.

Secondly, Respect to them occasions their liking of our Religion, the Faith
that we profess, so that without the Word, they are won by our 1 Pet. 3.1.
conversation: Understand, This is a natural notice, Deus est beneficus, and
bonus creaturis; out of which Principle, Heathens can judge whether our
Religion be of God, for true Religion fashions to the Nature of the God we
serve.

We love (I know not how) enclosures of our favors to them, who are actually
the sons of God; Saint Paul allows them to be preferred, but (if I mistake
not) he means in private, not in public, or common, Gal. 6.10. I am sure our
God we serve, loads with his Matthew. 5.45.
temporal blessings the worst men, and I know not how we can err in imitating
him.

VERSE XI.V. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord: now in the presence of all his
people.
A Second Branch of Resolution; I will pay my vows.

Wherein are three things observable.

First, The Act. Secondly, The Matter. Thirdly, The Circumstances.
What is a Vow? Generally, a solemn promise made unto God, with intention of
obliging our selves to performance.

There is, First, Propositum; Settled and firm Act. 11.23. and 1 Cor. 7.37.
purpose of heart, 1 Cor. 7.37. which place Papists ill traduce to a vow; for
though a vow presuppose such purpose, yet does not purpose make up the whole
nature of a vow.

Secondly, Promissum, a promise, which adds to Propositum, obligation of the
Promiser; and may be either to men, or God; when it is made to man, truth is
violated, if performance follow not; when to God, not truth only, but piety is
violated; Religion binding to performance; and of this nature is Votum.

Thirdly, Iuramentum, when to the promise an oath is added for confirmation,
the Promiser obliging himself to God under the penalty of a loss to
performance; now whether the thing promised be intended to men, or God, the
oath binds.

Fourthly, There is Votum; wherein is a promise, and that made to God; for
vows and prayers have all the same Objectum cui, because they are both Actus
Religionis: so differs it from a promise generally taken, which may be made to
men; To which if you add the other two. First, Solemnity. Secondly, And
intention to bind our selves to performance, ye have the full and perfect
nature of a vow.

Kinds are diversely distinguished. First, By their matter; some are Moraliter
Pia, as when the duties are Morally prescribed, precepted, here the vow
increases the obligation; examples we have, Genesis 28. The Lord shall be my God,
see also, Psalm. 119. and Psalm. 56.12. Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will
render praises unto thee.

If any ask to what use such vows served?

Answ. They are virtuous preventions of inconstancy in moral duties.

Secondly, Monitours, and excitements to more careful observation: Thus it
fares with us often; our necessity, or peril, often wrings from us purpose and
promises of more strict obedience; the storm over-blown, we are often forgetful
of duty; as Pharaoh, as Israel; the pious meditation of a sound obligation by
voluntary vow laid upon our selves, lays on us a necessity of performance;
whiles we think, every omission of duty becomes a double sin unto us. First,
By breach of precept. Secondly, Of Vow.

Secondly, There are vows, Moraliter Impia; such that of those good fellows,
Act. 23. who bound themselves by a vow, by a cursing to eat nothing, till they
had slain Paul; such frequent amongst Papists, confirmed not only by oaths,
but with the solemnest receiving of the Sacrament, to murder Princes, etc. In
which performances is double sin. First, Factum impium, A wicked fact done.
Secondly, Abuse of so solemn an Act of Piety, to Impiety.

Thirdly, In the old Testament were another sort of vows; of duties
ceremonial, as of Peace Offerings, Thanks-offerings, of the several things
they enjoyed, Levit. 27. which the people, either in perils, or otherwise of
voluntary devotion, vowed unto God; see Psalm. 132. with these in the New
Testament we have nothing to do.

Fourthly, Yet something we have a little answerable thereto, which may
lawfully, and conveniently become matter of our vows; such, I mean, as are made
De Diophoris, or of circumstances in things that are De gonere bororum; as to
give Calvin's instance; Suppose a man should observe himself troubled with vain
pride in using costly, or curious apparel; and to prevent this vanity, should
by vow bind himself to abstain from such attire; or if by the use of some
delicious diet, he should find himself infested with motions of luxury, Nihilo
satius fecerit, then by vow to bind himself to abstinence; and to put this
knife to his throat, as Solomon's phrase is, if he be a man given to appetite.

Like is to be thought of the vow of alms, or consecrations to be made to
maintenance of works of piety, or charity, though no necessity to vow, yet
lawful, and in some respect obligatory, and binding.

Other distinctions of vows there are many amongst Divines.

First, Absolute, made peremptorily without any condition, express, or tacit;
an example whereof see, Psalm. 101.

Secondly, Conditionate, which bind only upon supposition.

Thirdly, Temporary vows, wherein a man binds himself for a time, or times, to
fasting, alms, devotion, in this or that measure to be performed.

Fourthly, Perpetual, where a man binds himself for perpetuity; as Rechabites
to drink no wine, nor plant vineyards.

Is it lawful in state of New Testament to make vows?

Answ. Some Divines have made it questionable: The more judicious, ancienter,
and later, otherwise judge, with whom I consent. First, It is that to which
there is a natural instinct, and that universal, as to pray, give thanks,
etc. Secondly, Uses of it under New Testament, as gratitude, firmer obligation
to moral duties, prevention of exorbitances.

Cautionate yet we must be all in entering such an obligation: And thus
generally are the Rules given. First, That the thing moved implie neither
impiety, or injustice, nor uncharitableness.

Reasons are, First, Because to Piety, Justice, and Charity Gods law
peremptorily binds under the pain of eternal damnation. Secondly, Because
this crosses the maine end of a Vow, which is to obliege our selves more
strictly to serve God according to all his Commandments: I spare mention of
the horrible, and hellish vows of the Papists, etc.

I have heard, and taken some such from our people, that conceiving dislike of
the Minister, have vowed never more to hear him: Impious wretch! Will thou
therefore neglect, and contemn the Word of God, because thou distastest the
person of the Minister? What a poor vengeance is this? And on whom falls it,
but upon thine own soul? Thou art angry at the Minister, therefore thou will
put from thee thine own salvation, Act. 13.

Such that of many merciless, and hard-hearted Nabals, who to save their
Penny, their Crumbs; by vow bind themselves never to lend, never to give, Deuteronomy.
15. thoughts of Belial, says Moses: How dwells the love of the Father in you?
how observe you the precept, Do good to all? Gal. 6.10. how observe you the end
of Gods larger distribution? Ye are Luke 12.42.
Stewards.

But sure this goes to the heart; That in our self-will, we either vow, or set
purpose to restrain our selves from duties of Charity to which by instinct of
Nature we stand ever obliged, especially to the children of our own loins: Let
them grow, though in fervor of youth, to notorious exorbitancy, we have vowed,
it seems, never more to admit them to society, conversation, no not sight, or
conference: Have we vowed? That vow is impious; Have we but purposed? That
purpose is impious, uncharitable, unnatural; for shame, for sin alter it.
First, Does not Religion, Charity, Nature, teach a Parent to seek the salvation
of the Child? yea, though exorbitant, and disobedient: How long binds this
Precept? Bring them up in discipline, and information of the Lord. Ephesians. 6.
How long art thou bound Personally to apply Counsels, Admonitions, Comforts,
Encouragements? says Solomon, so long as there is Hope, and that is as long as
there is Life: Are we bound to it toward Neighbors? And not much more to
Children? for sin and shame amend it. Secondly, Has God given them seeds of
Grace? Oh for sin and pity water them; let them not by thy default die;
discourage them not, Collos. 3. Thirdly, But has he given them repentance to
come out of the snare of the Devil? How do Angels joy in them? how should all
Christians rejoice in it? most of all, Parents, Luke 15. What grief like this?
To think I am father of a Castaway, specially when Conscience suggests, I have
faulted in duty, see 2. Sam. 18.33.

O Monica, Monica, Saint Austins mother, How did she sue him with Prayers,
Tears, Vows to God? how did she follow him from Country to Country, though a
Manachee, a Fornicatour, as his own confession is, till she had procured from
God his conversion? And what a worthy Instrument of Gods glory proved he?
Certainly it is true, scarce any have proved more excellent Instruments of
Gods glory, then such as have been most exorbitant; witness Saint Paul. And I
beseech you take heed, when God begins to show mercy, be not you unmercifull,
uncharitable, unnatural.

Secondly, That they be of things within compass of our Ability, if not
natural, yet gracious: Reasons are; First, To vow an impossibility, what is it
but to tempt God? Secondly, To entangle our selves in a snare. And thence is
the exception our Divines justly take against the vows of Chastity in single
life, which they impose on all that enter state of Religion; especially upon
their Priests. Their evasions are, That they bind no man simply to enter such
Vow?

Answ. Not simply, upon an Hypothesis; that is, if he will be a Priest, and in
that office serve God, that Vow he must enter; be he never so well gifted for
the work, be Characters of his gifts never so great, though God call him
without imposing such Vow, yet he must Vow, or not enter. Secondly, That it is
possible by Grace, though not by Nature; as chastity in marriage, and other
sanctity?

Answ. But the quaere is, Whether by Grace common, or by Grace special, and
proper, or, as they call it, Priveleged? Saint Paul says it is a proper gift,
1 Cor. 7. our Savior, non datur omnibus. Secondly, They must show that God
has given promise, they shall receive if they seek it; as he has for graces
of Christianity, Ezekiel. 36.

Thirdly, That to any one person that for the time has the privelege, God will
continue it for perpetuity. Quid multa? How fearful have the fruits been of
such interdicts? What are their Priests? their Covents of Monks, and Nuns,
many of them, other then Stews?

And here by the way let me mind, and monish you, that you be not
over-ventrous in binding your selves by vow to measures of gracious
performances, though in Christian duties, beyond assurance of ability in the
promise, or something equivalent from God: Suppose a man should by vow bind
himself never to doubt of the promise of God; never to admit wandering thought
in his prayer, or hearing, etc. The vow were rash, and may prove a snare to the
conscience; For first, Where have thou promise, God will give such a (...), as
to Abraham? Secondly, Where have thou promise, thou shall never conflict with
doubting? never have thy attention disturbed with wandering imaginations? The
main of the graces for their substance God has promised; the measure, and
degrees, he has kept in his own power to dispose more liberally, or otherwise,
as he shall see expedient for every man's salvation.

The third caution respects the intention, and mind of the vower, which varies
the case so far in vows, that it makes them, and the offers therein vowed,
either pleasing, or abominable in Gods sight; though perhaps the matter it self
be possible and lawful: as for example, to vow as Rechabites, abstinence from
wine, or strong drink, is not simply unlawful; to vow abstinence from such, or
such a meat, etc. not simply unlawful; for they are (...), things left to
liberty to be taken, or refused; and so thou may carry thy self in such vows
that thy abstinence shall please God; Is this that thou aimest at, that thou
may prevent luxury, and intemperance? Thy vow is warrantable, thy
performance acceptable: But do thou think as Papists, that this abstinence
is warrantably a part of the worship of God? Thou sinnest in thy vow: For
first, God has no where prescribed this as part of his worship. Secondly, And
that mind, or intention, brought to such things vowed, and their performance
makes thee culpable of will worship, and voluntary Religion. Put it in a matter
that is prescribed of God as part of his worship; suppose in prayer; though
thou vowest to bind thy self to such a form, to such a number, to so many
times in the day, to such a place, perhaps to thy closet, or to the Temple,
Though to pray be a worship of God, though to pray in such a form, or time or
place, be not unlawful; yet to think, that using such a form, such a number,
in such place, or time, is a worship of God, as it is done so, what is it but
will worship, and voluntary Religion? Lastly, Particularizing in the matter of
the vow, best suits with prudence. Reason is. First, Because generalities are
more subject to error, as being liable to restraints, exceptions, etc.
Secondly, Particulars are best discussed, etc.

Follows now the second particular in this Text, the Act, or office it self,
Payment, or Performance; I will pay my vows.

But what if David performed? Follows it that we must pay our vows?

Answ. This must be considered,; the prime Rule of our Actions, is Precept, not
Example; Though Saints, and Angels, should practice contrary to precept, their
practice might not be warrant to us; for Mic. 6.8. Romans 12.2. Secondly, There
is Typus, and Archetypus. Paterns, are Saints and Angels; Archetypes are God,
and his Christ; Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye followers of God as children; Learn of me, Mat.
11.29. see 1 Cor. 11.1.

The world runs astray by means of example; Give leave therefore a little to
enquire, How far Inferences of Doctrine, may be made from example? Manichees of
old gave this Rule; That where were records of Saints practices, without
special note of Reproof, there the example either bound, or warranted: But
Contra; for what if the general Law were against it? though no particular
reprehension; the general shows, we are not bound, nor warranted to resemble;
for example, when we read of Patriarks Poligamie, we read not of particular
reproof; yet have we a general, Mal. 2.15. God made one, because he sought a
holy seed; and, Non fuit sic ab initio: We read of Sampsons murdering himself
in taking vengeance on Philistims, yet may not infer, it is warrantable for
us so to do; though particular reproof be none, yet the general is Rule
sufficient; Non occides, Thou shall not kill, another, much less thy self, For
he that kills himself, kills a man, and by consequent is Homicida, as Saint
Austin speaks.

Better directions are these. First, What Saints did as Saints, that is, by
virtue, and instruction of common grace, therein may a general Law be made;
Why? Because therein we are all partakers; and for such actions we have a
general Law; Jobs patience, Iam. 5. Abraham^ obedience, etc. We may imitate,
for these things they did as Saints, as Christians, etc. Secondly, Some things
they did by virtue of their special calling, Ministers preached, Magistrates
punished with death, made war against common enemies: The Rule is here,
Inference can none be made, but for men of like calling; Not therefore every
man preach.

Thirdly, In Acts of calling there are different circumstances, and degrees;
says Saint 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Peter, There are supreme, there are inferior Magistrates; not what the
supreme Magistrate did, that may every man do that is in Magistracy, for some
things are peculiar to them as Superiors; Amongst Ministers, all are not of
one rank; There are Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors; Not every thing that an Apostle did, is
warrantable for every Pastor: For example, When the Rulers of the people
inhibit Peter, and John, to preach in the Name of Jesus, notwithstanding they
Act. 5.29.
preached; That is no warrant for us, for this was eminent in their calling,
that they had it immediately from Christ, the great King, and Bishop of our
souls, wherefore could not be countermanded by man; we have ours by men,
therefore according as men tolerate, or inhibit, so must we exercise, or
forbear; Herein holds the Rule, Ejus est tollere, cujus est ponere.

Fourthly, Some things they did warrantably out of extraordinary instinct, as
Phineas, Number. 25. as Elias, 2 Kings 1. confer Luke 9. These not warrantable to
us, except we are sure of like instinct, and inspiration.

In short; For the matter of example, and bond, or warrant from them for the
like; These two principal Rules remember.

First, Are they congruent to the Archetype, the chief Pattern, God and his
Christ, in things that are capable of imitation; therein be bold to imitate:
For example, God does good to good and bad, Matthew. 5.45. So do thou to enemies:
God pardons great sinners repenting, Ephesians. 4.32. as dear children herein
imitate: God is provoked every day, and yet loads us daily with his benefits;
so Luke 17. If seventy times seven times they return, Forgive.

The second Rule is this; Is the duty, or virtue, or action commanded, or
warranted in the Law general? Therein imitate Saints; Thou sinnest by bare
omission, thou sinnest more, if thou neglect excitement by their example; The
Rule is Precept; Example is the excitement.

To the question now; Thus is the answer easy: Binds it us? Yes, and the
rather for the example; David paid what he vowed, Ergo, we must pay what we
vow. Reason is; First, So is the general Precept, Vovete, and reddite Deo,
Psalm. 76.11. see Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22. and Eccles. 5.6. where are three several
reasons to urge it.

Admits the Precept no Dispensation?

Answ. Many things Popish Scholemen, and Canonists talk of dispensing with
thus; and cases they put many: Hold it for a Rule; First, What thou have
regularly vowed to God, no man can discharge thee from performance of; for by
it God makes interest, and title to whatsoever thou have vowed, and who shall
deprive him of his title? Secondly, Gods Law is this; Psalm. 76.11. and Deuteronomy.
23.21.
Vovete, and reddite; Can man dispense with the Law of God?

Howbeit there are dispensations, or something equivalent, which providence
sometimes casts upon us; and which we may interpret as Divine dispensations:
For example, I would suppose a man in his extremity of peril, or sickness, to
vow restitution of what he had fraudulently gotten from other men; perhaps at
the time of the vowing, ability is sufficient; and event may come, by fire, or
shipwreck, that he is suddenly disabled to perform what he had vowed: though
in this case, it is meant; First, The honest purpose should be continued
whenever God should give ability, and make able. Secondly, Though a new
increasing for that cross accident presently ensue not; yet whilst the
purpose is continued, though the act be not at large performed; howbeit pardon,
we must think God in this Case dispenses.

Herein alas! Which of us must not be forced to say, Miserere, Lord be
merciful unto me in this, That in our vows we are behind with our God.

There is in our Baptism a solemn vow made, to renounce the Devil, and all
his works, to believe in God, and to obey him according to all his
Commandments: I dispute not the question now. First, Either, whether it be a
vow properly. Secondly, Or whether it be the vow of the sureties, or of
parents, children be bound: once this I am sure of; Baptism is the entrance of
our covenant with God, wherein as God binds himself, under his hand and seal,
to give us remission of sins, and life everlasting; so we, by the very fact,
covenant, and are bound to new obedience: And if not the sureties, yet the
parents are bound to, Quantum in se, that these things be performed by their
children.

And yet who may not remember, how his infancy, yea nonage much has been led
in vanity, disobedience, and how the Spirit of the air has ruled in him? It is
enough, that we have violated the Precept, it should go near our hearts, that
we have withal violated that solemn vow made to God in our Baptism.

Secondly, If that may seem excusable, because not so personally made, and
entered in day of our nonage, what say we to the renewing of our vow, and
covenant, at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? What time we thither present
our selves, we are, or should be men of discretion, Masters of our own actions;
that we daily offer up bodies, and souls, and lives, all corruptions to be
mortified, all that the faculties of soul and body will stretch unto, to be
employed to the service, and glory of God: And yet when see we in one of a
thousand, care to perform what we so often have undertaken, and vowed to our God.

Fools as we are; If God make not good all that he has promised, for
spiritualls, or temporalls, we are ready to quarrel, and grumble at him, and
to question his fidelity; who promising so largely, performs so faintly:
Whereas truth is. First, God never promised absolutely, but upon condition of
our obedience. Secondly, Has performed more then his promise, keeping touch
with us, even when we deal perfidiously in his Covenant. Thirdly, And our own
hearts examined, will tell us we have failed in our Restipulation: What if we
perish as our brethren, by plague, pestilence, famine, sword, is God
unrighteous, or unfaithful, that takes vengeance? We rather, who have dealt so
treacherously in our covenant, seriously think of it, and now we are again to
renew our ancient vow so often iterated, at least bethink we our selves of our
Restipulation.

What should I speak of those other particular vows, special perils have
extorted from us, in sickness, in other dangers? yet the storm overblown, how
have we returned as the dog to his vomit?

The issues of men thus perfidiously dealing with God, ye may observe to be
these. First, God is made more inexorable in our greatest Necessities, and then
begins to laugh at our destruction, and mock when our fear comes, Prove. 1.
that though we make many prayers, yet then he hears not; Isa. 1.

Secondly, Commonly worse, and greater calamities befall us, as Job 5.14. Psalm.
16. There being nothing, wherewith God is more provoked then by being deluded.
Thirdly, else our hearts more flinty, and obdurate in evil, so that we grow
desperate in contempt, and careless neglect of making our peace with our God;
make but your observation, and tell me, if you find it not true, that our
Savior has, Matthew. 12. The Devil returning, after casting out by vow, and
promise, and purpose, brings with him more, and worse then himself.

The circumstance of the time, Now, might not impertinently be handled; see
Eccles. 5. Deuteronomy. 23.

I touch upon it only: Amongst the circumstances of our negligence, let not
this be forgotten; That whereas the vow binds us from infancy, we have scarce
in old age performed our Restipulation; and this account make, thy account to
God will be from thy very Baptism.

The third thing I rather choose to insist on, is on those words; In the
presence of all his people; confer Verse. 18, 19.

Why does David choose public performance of his vows? Perhaps they were
privately made, and I am persuaded it is true, there were many more witnesses
of the performance, then was of the making; was he vainglorious?

Answ. Not; vainglory is when either by vain means which deserve not praise,
or when by good duties in themselves praiseworthy, men seek the praise of men,
more then the glory of God, Ioh. 12.43. otherwise, by holy means to seek good
name amongst men, with intentionall reference to the glory of God, is not to be
vainglorious, see Phil. 4.7.

What then moved him to make this choice? First, The good of men. Secondly, The
glory of God. It is warrantable for a child of God, to choose the public
performance of his devotions, or other morality, and to prefer it in his
choice to the private: our Savior said not in vain, Let your light shine
before men, and let them see your good works, Matthew. 5.16. Nor Saint Paul Shine
as lights in the world, Phil. 2.15. Tit. 3.8, 14. to maintain or go before in
good works; Nor Saint James chap. 2. Show me thy faith by thy works.

The Reasons are of it. First, Our own fame, Phil. 4.7. Romans 12.17. Provide
things honest in the sight of all men.

Secondly, The adorning of the Gospel; Therefore show all good fidelity, Tit.
3.10. To be faithful suffices thee perhaps for thy conscience, but it
suffices not for the adorning of the Gospel; for as good not done, as not
known done for that end.

Thirdly, For winning of Aliens, at least by way of preparation, see 1 Pet.
2.13. and 3.2, 16.

Fourthly, For excitement by example, 1 Timothy 4.12. neither is that true of
Ministers only, but of the people; whose duty is also to be examples to the
Churches of God, 2 Cor. 9.2.

Filfty, For stopping the mouths of them, that are ready to blaspheme, 1 Pet.
3.16.

We are grown horribly wild, and wanton in playing with Scriptures, and
inferring from them, since God has restored us liberty to acquaint our selves
with the Letter; I am persuaded God will one day plague it in us: For example,
Because our Savior said, Mat. 6. When thou prayest, enter the Closet, the
inference is, Therefore no man may use his Private Devotions in a Public
place; Absurd! I dare say, our Savior never meant it, except S. Paul
contradict our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.8. Pray in all places; and Hannah her instance
warrants the same, 1 Samuel 1.13. Secondly, May we give an Alms in a
Marketplace? I doubt not we may, and even affect, in Case, men's beholding of
our Charity; though our Savior said, Let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does. Matthew. 6.3.

For your better information; First, It was never our Saviors intention to
inhibite all public performance of any personal duty, for see Matthew. 5.16.
He would never then have said, Let them see your good works: see the place
Matthew. 6.5. First, Actus. Secondly, Aff ctus. Thirdly, Gestus. Fourthly, Locus.
Fifthly Finis, Thus conceive, when the praise, and notice of Men is made utmost
end of our Devotion, and Charity, that is forbidden, when we seek it as our
reward, ver. 2. Understand therefore that these are to be understood
Comparatively; Rather Secret wholly thy Devotion, thy Charity, then make men's
applause the utmost intention, as Matthew. 5.29, 40, 41. Thinks any man, but a
scoffing Julian, that he is bound to the Letter simply, or only comparatively?
So true; so here, if we could be informed.

I would I might persuade you, to be thus wise in your choice of Times, and
Places, so to do your good works that men may see them; let their loins bless
you.

I know not how we pretend such declining of Vainglory that we neglect the
glory of God; and we are so loath to do our devotions, and good duties in the
sight of men, that we choose rather to omit what is convenient in Devotion, and
Charity. If ever there were Times for Publication Practical, now are the
days; We have been long branded for Solifidians; and now, it seems, The Two
Religions are come upon the stage, contending which is Truer: Saint James his
rule is this, Pure Religion is to visit the fatherless and widows, Iam. 1.27.
And you be not ignorant, that by these outward fruits judgment of Ignorants is
most inclined.

VERSE XV. Precious in the sight of the Lord: is the death of his Saints.
LOok not any dependence to be here noted: The Text is absolute, and entire in
its self, containing matter of new observation.

In which are three things.

First, Actus. Secondly, Fundamentum. Thirdly, Materia.
First, Actus, Observation, and inference made thereout; For the general of
observation, we treated it, ad verse. 5. Marry there only as it concerned the
Nature of God, and verities delivered us concerning it: Here it is rather of
something that concerns his children, and Gods regard to them; wherein, if in
any thing, our observation should be curious; for that by specialty God is
their God, and his favors to them are all Cum Privilegio: Some favors indeed
are common to his children with the world, as preservation; but herein have
Gods own their specialty, 1 Timothy 4.10. Sun, Moon, Stars, their light, and
influences he has made to serve all nations: marry to fight for his people, as
Judge. 5.20. Privelege to Israel: The works of God lie open to every man's view,
Psalm. 19.1. But his word is shown to Jacob only, his statutes to Israel, Psalm.
147.20. To his Church visible, and hypocrites therein, he gives his word, but
to them mostly in Parables; To you it is given to know the mysteries, Matthew.
13. To some is knowledge given of his word, but through their neglect it
aggravates their damnation, Matthew 11. To his children only it is Gods power to
salvation, Romans 1.16. Herein therefore we should be specially observant. First,
That we might see, and comprehend the specialty of love, Ephesians. 3. Secondly, That
our hearts might be more excited to thankfulness; since special favors
require special thankfulness: Besides, temptations tending to doubtfulnesse
do not so often betide Gods children, either about his Nature in general, or
about common blessings, as about those that are priveleges, and
characteristicall; whether God be Almighty, Just, Merciful, etc. in his own
Nature, or whether so in those graces that are convayed to them with a p
ivelege, about Adoption, Regeneration, Perseverance, etc. This part of Prudence
let us learn; Trust my experience no more, if you find it not extraordinary
comfortable in the evil day.

In five degrees ye shall find all favors of God to stand. First, Some common
to us with all his creatures. Secondly, Some common with all men. Thirdly, Some
common with his visible Church. Fourthly, Some common with all his Children.
Fifthly, And there ^re wherein every of Gods children have something
extraordinary. I would have none of Gods favors put over without notice, and
observation; specially those that are peculiar to his children; least of all
those, wherein God has manifested his mercy toward us above his children, and
own dear servants; because for these God expects extraordinary measure of
thankfulness, and obedience; and the rather would I ye should notice this,
because that most moves us in Christian duties, and courses, that we see not
some special reward twixt him that serves God, and others; see Mal. 3.14.
Speculative knowledge, I confess, is an excellent gift of God, and necessary
to salvation, yet we err, if we think it sufficient; see Phil. 3.8. There are
these evidences whereby you may judge of it in your selves. First, What grace,
or mercy, we taste from God, we are propense to show to others; Ephesians. 5.1. In
forgiveness; Ephesians. 4.32. (...), in patience, in communicating what our selves
have experimented, 2 Cor. 1.6, etc. Secondly, Wonderful desirous of winning
others to like experience of Gods favor, see Psalm. 34.8. Psalm. 66.16. Thirdly,
None more hopeful of others conversion, be their state never so desperate for
the present. Therefore is infidelity, or doubting, of general conclusions in
none more tolerable then in Gods S^ints. The Reason is, Because they have a
furtherance to faith, which others want; to wit, Experience of Gods favor, and
special love to them.

The Fundamentum, or ground of inference is his own experience, as if he had
said, Truly I may say it, for in mine experience I have found it, so often has
he delivered, and rescued me from the jaws of death: So pleases it God, to
give his children special experience of general documents; therefore says
David, Psalm. 34.8. Taste, and see: 1 Pet. 2.3. Ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious: Phil. 1.9. Knowledge and experience.

Reasons are. First, To increase their (...), that though it be true, their
faith, rests principally upon Authority of the Divine Revealer, yet
confirmation it receives from experience: That the word of God is his power to
Salvation, is the document; and though there were nothing else but his
Testimony, we should believe it; but God makes it so to the experience of his
children, that they may be more certainly assured of it in their souls, see 1
These. 2.13.

Secondly, There is in it a condescending to humane infirmity; Simple we are
all by nature; and are generally inclined to walk by sense rather then by
faith, 2 Cor. 5. God considers our mould, Psalm. 103. and therefore tempers
his proceeding to our infirmity, and after a sort humors our nature in the
motions of grace. This favor of God let us not pass over, without admiring
the riches of Gods bounty to us; Lord, what is man that thou so regardest him?
The rather, because it is a teaching peculiar to Gods children; that though the
generals of Doctrine touching Gods Nature, and Will, and special love to his
children, be propounded to all men's minds in the Church; yet this
experimental teaching, in things that concern life, and godliness, is the
priveledge of the chosen; Ioh. 6.45. They shall be all taught of God, they
only in this manner; no men but Gods Elect have that experience of what God
has made several to his servants. There are two kinds, or degrees of
knowledge; One speculative, the other practical, or experimental; The
speculative stands in contemplation; this had Balaam, Numb. 23.10. thence
grew his passionate wish; Oh let my soul die the death of the righteous; The
all-sufficiencie of the merits of Christ to salvation, wicked contemplate; so
of remission of sins, etc. but the experimental knowledge of all these is the
privelege of his chosen only.

But note we how from particular experience he inferres a general Rule; Will
it proceed? God tenderly respects the life of David, Is he therefore so to all
his children? Above in the handling of the fifth Verse, we had an enquiry, How
far general inferences of duty might be made from particulars; and the last
Lord's Day, how far the same might be made from example; Now it is to be
enquired, How far general Doctrines of favor may be made from particular
experiments? Surely, ye shall find it common in Scriptures, from particular
actions of God in patience, or mercy, or power, to infer general
conclusions, see 2 Pet. 2.9. He saved Lot, Noah, therefore knows how to deliver
his: He had mercy on me repenting, therefore will save all penitent sinners, 1 Timothy 1.16. With Jews receiving Sacraments he was not pleased, 1 Cor. 10.5.
therefore, may not Christians presume of favor, because they enjoy the
Sacraments; He plagued them for murmuring, for idolatry, fornication, therefore
take heed of like sins; Romans 11.20. He spared not natural branches,
therefore not thee, but fear also, not being high-minded, thine own cutting off
likewise.

Cautions here are these. First, Be sure thy conclusion be delivered in the
word of God, then spare not to infer according to the latitude thereof; with
God there is no respect of persons, A conclusion in the word of God, I perceive
it, says Saint Peter, Act. 10.34. All penitents shall be saved, Ezekiel. 18.
that is confirmed from Saint Paul's experience, 1 Timothy 1.16. Precious is the
blood of Saints in Gods sight, Psalm. 72.14. from experience David affirms it:
And this Rule well arms us against all Enthusiasmes, and such like delusions,
wherein Anabaptists run to the shipwreck of their souls.

Secondly, Distinguish general from personal priveleges; for such ye shall
read many in the word of God; Number. 12. If there be a Prophet, I will speak to
him by dream, or vision, my servant Moses is not so; To be instructed in all
things thou may expect, but to talk with God face to face, or to be
informed, by dream, or vision, expect not; To the Law, and to the Testimony,
Isa. 8. And, Mal. 2. Priests lips shall preserve knowledge.

Thirdly, Where the favor is general, yet the manner, and mean of convayance
may be personal: for example, to be fed in famine, is a general promise,
Psalm. 37. but to be fed as Elias, by a Raven, or as the widow of Sarephath, by
miraculous multiplying the meal, and oil, was their personal privelege.

Fourthly, As in the Modus, and mean, so in their measure there are that have
prerogative in common favors; as in knowledge, Moses; in faith, Abraham; in
patience, Job; in zeal, David: in revelations, Paul; A measure, except
according to the promise of God, who gives to every one severally as he will, 1
Cor. 12.11.

Fifthly, In application of the general in other men's experiments to thy self,
be sure thou bring like qualification; It is true, God had mercy on Paul
repenting, therefore he will have mercy on all, but repenting, etc. Slight not
therefore thine own, or other men's personal experiences, they bring great good
unto much confirmation to faith concerning the generals; in them we are grown
me thinks too wavering: That is a true Rule, Gal. 6.18. Mercy shall be upon
such, as upon the Israel of God, yet it is upon such as walk after the right
Rule, That Is a true Rule, God will provide thee competencie according to thy
state, and person, if thou keep his ways precisely; yet false weights, and
false measures we must use; else how shall we live? That God will find us a
hiding place in the day of his wrath, is a true Rule, Zeph. 2.3. most
plentifully we have seen it experimented, to Elias, Elisha the Prophets under
Iezabel; Why doubt we, Oh we of little faith? and our selves have experimented
in many particular perils, and deliverances, and preservations, and provisions
that God has made for us; And surely, God is rich in mercy to all, Romans 10.12.
and with him is no respect of persons; His dealings are exemplary, Romans 4.24. 1 Timothy 1.16. so we resemble in behavior.

Follows now the matter of observation; It is enunciated in one simple
proposition, tending to explicate the esteem God holds of the death of Saints,
which some interpret of his Saints in death; Rather, of the death of his Saints.

I could cloy you with interpretations, but Quorsum? The like phrase of speech
we read, 2 Kings 1.13, 14. Psalm. 72.14. Now whether he means their natural,
or violent death inflicted by persecutours, may be quaere'd; Rather this
latter, as Psalm. 72.14. Their blood is precious; to this circumstances of the
Text invite us. First, Rarely does God give way unto it; for so find we the
word Precious put for Rare, 1 Samuel 3.1. Never but upon special cause; And this
is that we have doctrinally, Psalm. 72.14. He does redeem their soul from deceit
and violence, that neither sword, nor cruelty prevails to overthrow it; Psalm.
37.32. Wicked watches Righteous, seeks to slay him, Verse. 33. The Lord will
not leave him in his hand. Plentiful instances we have in Scriptures, I could
begin with Jacob, and so hold on to Eliah, Elisha, the Three Children, Dan. 3.
Fires action suspended, and Dan. 5. Lions mouths stopped; Besides many
extraordinary deliverances of others in latter times, wherein the wisdom, and
power of God, has strangely showed it self for their deliverance, and
preservation, 2 Timothy 4.18. God delivered Saint Paul out of the mouth of the
Lion; Saint Peter destined to death by Herod, miraculously delivered by an
Angel, Act. 12, etc.

Thus understand it. First, While God has use of their service upon earth,
Ioh. 11.7, 8, 9. Are there not twelve hours in the day? Luke 13.32. Go, and
tell Herod that Fox, etc. Ioh. 7.30. No man laid hands, because his hour was
not yet come; and 8.20. Secondly, Except by their death, they may bring more
glory to God, then by their life; Old Polycarpus having served Christ fourscore
years in life, if now to teeth of Lions he become a prey, it is his glory; When
Paul has finished his course, then time to die Martyr, 2 Timothy 4.8. Thirdly,
Mavelous are the dispensations of providence in this kind; sometimes by
peace propagating the Church, sometimes by persecution, Act. 9.31. Phil. 1.12.
Under Dioclesian the Emperor especially this was the course, when weekly,
daily, hundreds of Christians were Martyred; in so much that the rate of one
month taken, amounted to seventeen thousands; yet out of their Ashes sprung up
New, which made Tertullian say, Seme^ est sanguis Christianorum.

I say in our Saviors language, Luke 12. Fear not little Flock; Though evil
days approach us, and come on fast; yet if God have any service for us to do
on earth, it is not all the spite of the world shall shorten our days. First,
A hiding place we shall find in the day of Gods wrath. Secondly, Fire shall
not burn; The Lions shall not devour Daniel, while God has service for him
here on earth; Some Ebedmelech God will raise up to speak good for Jeremy to
the King; some one or other: Boiling oil, or lead, shall not destroy the
Evangelist Saint John; Marvells, Miracles, we read in Church-Story, of strange
deliverances of Saints.

If these move not; yet let us consider. First, Our hairs are numbered, Luke 12.
Secondly, Are ye not of more value then Sparrows? Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints. I remember it for this end, because perhaps
our hearts may be surprised with fears, in this wavering condition we live in;
and our fears may perhaps distract, or deject us: As they spoke, Dan. 3. The
God we serve is able to deliver us; and the Lord will certainly preserve us in
life, while he has use of our service upon earth: Why are we timorous, Oh we
of little faith? First, Meditate seriously the examples of Gods mavelous
deliverances of his people in former times. Secondly, Think of the promise.
First, Either God will keep evils from us. Or, Secondly, Take us from evils,
Isa. 57.1. Or, Thirdly, Support in, or under the evil, that the issue may be
comfortable, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 12.9.

Secondly, As precious things are not parted withal, but at a dear rate; So
certainly it is true, dearly they pay for the blood of Saints that spill it:
Truly said Cyprian, There never was bloody persecution raised against the
Church; but there followed it, as an acoluthite, some extraordinary
remonstrance of Gods vengeance; in famine, sword, pestilence, captivity, and
the like: From the time of righteous Abel to Zechary, Matt. 23. from that very
day to this has it been verified; Cain had his mark, as some say terror, and
trembling set on him; not slain indeed, lest the people should forget it, but
plagued in the posterity: their vicious manners brought in the flood upon the
world of the ungodly. Of Manasseth it is noted, He filled Jerusalem with blood
from corner to corner; himself is carried away captive, and repents, yet to
this cause is imputed the seventy years captivity in Babylon: And our Savior
giving reason of the destruction of Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. says, They had
killed the Prophets, and stoned them who were sent unto them: Those Civil
wars, read of in Roman Monarchy, began not, till persecutions raised
against Christians; decay of the Empire in the heat of persecution; till at
length Mahomet first, and after him the Turk had seized the more part of the
Christian world: What should I speak of particular persons? There is scarce any
noted for notorious in bloody persecutions, who is read to have died a dry
death; or not to have lived in horror of conscience; or hardness of heart, and
blasphemy, as we read of Herod, of Pilate, of Julian, etc. I spare mention of
those endless, and unsufferable torments, reserved for them against the life
to come, 2 These. 1.5. Tribulation to them that trouble us, for them is reserved
the mist of darkness for ever: And do not marvel it; For, First, They cost
Christ dear, even his own precious blood, 1 Corinthians 6.20. 1 Peter 1.19.
Secondly, They were nearly knit to Christ, so near as members one to another,
as the body to the head, Ephesians. 1.22. Ephesians. 5.30. and by compassion he is
tortured when they are tormented. Thirdly, The malice bent toward Christians,
in respect of Christianity, is bent indeed against Christ himself, the head of
Christians; and certainly they who desire to root Christians out of the earth,
would, if they could, pluck Christ out of heaven; In a word, The cause they
suffer for, is Christ's, no marvel if he so tenderly take the shedding of their
blood, which for his sake they spill; For thy sake are we killed.

Amongst many presages of some great evil coming toward us; as, First, The
death of so many Righteous. Secondly, The ripeness of sin. Thirdly, The
unprofitablenesse of our smaller corrections. Fourthly, Our long Peace, and
which grows up with it our deadly security. Fifthly, The melting of our hearts,
as Rahab speaks, Josh. 2. at the noise, or rumor, of the approaching enemy,
etc. Give me leave to mind you of this as one, A principal meritorious cause
of all the wrath that hangs over our heads.

You may call to mind the Tempora Mariana, The days of Queen Mary; How much
precious blood of Saints was spilt as water upon the ground? which yet was
never perhaps expiated by any wrath of God, or by any solemn humiliation of the
people.

Lest any say, These days are past and gone; and we have since had gracious
Princes, who have been Nursing-Fathers, and Nursing-Mothers to the Church, as
was King JAMES, and Queen ELIZABETH, both of most blessed memory? It is true,
but so had Jerusalem after Manasseh, Josiah, that peerlesse King of Judah,
there was none like him before, or after; yet God remembered the sin of
Manasseh; and therefore sent Nebuchadnezzar, a wicked Idolater, to carry them
away captive. Oh that we could think of it, and lay to heart this amongst all
our other sins! Blood defiles the land; the blood of Innocents, the blood of
Martyrs is precious in Gods eyes; we must by our sm^rt know the price of it: Oh
sirs, that amongst all our other sins, this might be matter of our
humiliation; peradventure yet the Lord would return, and have mercy upon us: I
confess, we have many sins of our own personal committing, but this sin
of our fathers, how do we not tremble at? If that be it, that the son smarts
not for the father, except he resemble in the fathers sin? True indeed in
eternal, not so in temporal judgments; that made Daniel confess the sinne^
of his fathers, Dan. 9. and the Lord threaten to visit the sins of the
fathers upon the children, Exodus 20.

It serves, me thinks, for caution to all the brood of Cain amongst us; whose
hands indeed are restrained, but hearts boil with malice against Gods people
for Christianity-sake: And I am persuaded there are amongst us, who, if times
would serve for it, would as willingly carry a faggot to our burning, as they
now shoot out their arrows, even bitter words. I beseech you pray God to give
you better hearts; ye have heard that their blood is precious in Gods sight; it
will cost you dear; honor, or stupidity of conscience, and in the end
everlasting torment.

Secondly, Remember who said, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine
eye, Zech. 2.8. Thirdly, How strict the charge is, Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. Fourthly, Set before your eyes the
example of Gods wrath on former persecutours; People, Nations, Kings,
Monarchies, God has not spared for this sin; Take we heed lest he spare not
us; Nay be sure, he will not spare us, if we have hand, or least stroke in
their persecution, in their blood; Not us of all people, for clearly has the
light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ shined long amongst us, that we
cannot, as missed forefathers, pretend ignorance; they had been nursed in
Popish superstition, we in the true faith of Jesus Christ; if we so far fall
away, as to imbrue our selves in the blood of Gods Saints, for us is reserved
the blackness of darkness for ever: Consider what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things.

Thirdly, Precious, that is, highly he esteems it, as men do things that are
most precious, as their costliest jewels; As if there were not virtue in all
the whole roll of Christian virtues so great as this, to suffer death for the
Name of Christ, Apoc. 12. They loved not their lives unto death, Heb. 12, Ye
have not yet resisted unto bloed in striving against sin, Phil. 1.29. To you
it is given, not only to believe, but to suffer for the name of Christ; as if
therein were Munus, I say not in genere necessarii, but in genere boni, I am
sure, magni: Hence the Apostles joy in it, as in their glory, Act. 5. ult. and
Paul when he would prefer himself before other Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.22, 23,
etc. uses this same Argument: Ancients talk of Aureola Martyrum, The crown of
righteousness is reserved for all that love Christ's appearing: but there is a
Coronet upon that Crown, for them who suffer death for the Namesake of Christ:
Tears are put into a bottle, made varnish to our clarity, and glorious
splendor; no drop of blood but wins us a river of glory, effusion of it, the
whole Ocean, as it were, of beatitude.

It checks our cowardice; Oh we (...), we cowards, dastards, so timorous in
declining our glorry! Why are our spirits so dejected, as to begin already to
halt twixt two opinions? or to resolve of neuterality? or joining to the
prevailing side? First, Know, there were sometimes who were ambitious of it,
Sum and ego Christianus. Secondly, Christ promises to own us, if we confess
him, Luke 9.26. Thirdly, Protests to deny us, if we deny him, Mat. 10.22.
Fourthly, martyrdom is necessary in Casu, Absolutely, always, Quoad
paeparationem animi, Mat. 10.38 39. Fifthly, weight of glory promised to light
momentany afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.17. Sixthly, A cloud of witnesses, yea our
Savior himself gone before us, Heb. 12.12, etc. What if the Lord select us
from amongst his Army of Militants to be his Champions, to take up, or cast
down the Gauntlet in the quarrel to his Kingdom? First, He has promised to
support, 1 Cor. 10.13. Secondly, Given us no Armor for the back, Ephesians. 6. but
thunders woe to the back-slider, Heb. 10.38. Thirdly, Honors with conformity to
Prophets, to Christ in suffering, Mat 5 12. Fourthly, We are far above the
ordinary rate of his Saints, when he culls us out, as it were, to resist unto
shedding of blood. Fifthly, Let us not forget it is the condition of our
reigning with him, Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.12. Sixthly, This way went Christ into
his Kingdom, Luke 24. The disciple must not be above his Master. Seventhly, He
has begotten us to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
1.3. and he first arising up, has given us a pledge of our resurrection to
immortality. Now the good Lord affect our hearts with these things, that we may
all rest assured of protection, so long as God has use of our service in life;
and courageously resolve to glorify him in our death, if he shall call us to
suffer for his Name to the shedding of blood; knowing that our blood is
precious in his sight, and that a drop of it is not shed, but wins us a River
of blessedness. But may we not think it meant of death natural of Saints?
Certainly it is true, their death is precious: understand, death in the child
of God is not a mere passion; there is action, virtuous action in it, death of
impious men is merely passive, as of brutes; and not without resistance, and
sluggish reluctation; and that I say not only of Nature, but of Will too.
Reasons of it are. First, This life they know, the other they know not.
Secondly, Have no assurance of better state in the life to come. Thirdly, Soul
in passage sees terror of Judge; and knowing no share they have in the
mediation of Christ, would live always, that they might sin always: Now in
the death of Gods Saints there is action, virtuous action, the complement of
all virtuous qualities; Therefore St Peter calls it, The laying down of the
Tabernacle; St Paul, His departure; Giving up the ghost; Commending the soul
unto God. In which last act of a Christian, is the perfection of Christian
virtues. First, No faith like this; Though he kill me, when he kills me, I
trust in him, Job 13.15. Secondly, No love like this; To love the present
fruition of Christ. Thirdly, No hope like this; Even when we are dying, to
expect life; when the body is falling, to expect Resurrection. Fourthly, No
obedience like this; willing to consent to the will of God in dying; and herein
to say, Thy will be fulfilled, and I am content to do it, Psalm. 40.8. This
makes even the Natural death of Gods Saints precious in his sight.

VERSE. XVI. Oh Lord, Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son
of thine handmaid: Thou have loosed my bonds.
TO discern Connection in matter of Devotion is difficult, the motions thereof
being for the most part affectionate; Howbeit, here is no difficulty: There is
before mention of the favors God had done him; here is the use of the favor.

Therefore I am thy servant: And it contains a Protestation, or acknowledgement
of his obligations to so gracious a God, as had rescued him from the jaws of
death: wherein note we;

First, The occasion.

Secondly, The matter of the Protestation; amplified by the grounds of it.

Thirdly, The vowed expression of it, Verse. 17.

So see how favors of God work upon a gracious dispotion; forcing, after a
sort, not only to acknowledgement of obligation, but to tendering of service
unto God, see 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Isa. 6.8. Lo! here I am, send me; hence Saint
Austin, Da quod jubes, jube quod vis.

Reasons why it should be so, are; First, It is all the Lord requires of us,
Deuteronomy. 10.12. Secondly, It is the Condition of continuing them; wherefore, when
either we grow slack in our acknowledgement, or divert our selves to other
Authors, God is pleased to remove them from us; Romans 1.21. Gentiles cared not
to keep God in their acknowledgment, therefore Gods gives them over to their
own hearts lusts; Hos. 2.8, 9. She knew not that it was I that gave her her
corn, and wine, and oil, etc. therefore I will take away my corn in the time
thereof. Thirdly, Add hereunto that hereto is linked, the increase of Gods
favors, 2 Samuel 12.8. If that had been too little, I would have given thee more.

Oh that there were such hearts in us! How would the Lord delight still to do
us good? mavelous have his favors been, in the preservation, and
deliverances of our State, yet what has it bred, but increase of our
rebellions? Should not the Lord be avenged on such a nation as this? It is
amongst others a notable presage of our approaching calamity, that we have so
turned his grace into wantonness; and as Saint Paul speaks, abused his long
suffering, and bountifulness, to occasion of hardness of heart, Romans 2.5.

See then, and examine how Gods favors work upon thee; It is something not to
be despised amongst the testimonies of a gracious disposition, to be wrought to
acknowledgement, and dutiful tendering of our selves unto God, you shall never
or seldom see that disposition in the unregenerate; but the more they
apprehend, or taste the favors of God, the more indulgent they grow to their
own lusts: Whether it be, First, That they apprehend not Gods good in them, as
they in the Zeph. 1.12.
Prophet, He will do neither good, nor evil. Secondly, Or whether they think
him to work after the necessity of his Nature, in loading them with his
benefits. Thirdly, Or whether they think them merited by their own formality,
and lip-outward-performances. Fourthly, Or whether they misapprehend the Nature
of God, making him an Idol made all of mercy, and goodness; though Saint Paul
command to behold the Romans 11.22.
severity, as well as the bounty of God. But let such minds be far from Gods
people; Certainly, it suits not with grace; is not in the ordinary course of it
compatible with it; Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord, and his goodness; and
because there is mercy with him, Therefore they will fear him, Psalm. 130.4.

Thus ye shall discern it in your selves, or others; excepting the common
interruptions that accompany humane infirmity. First, Every new favor brings
access to the measure of serviceablenesse to God; That which Ichu speaks of
Baal, Ahab served Baal a little, I will serve him much more, 2 Kings 10. they
much more truly say of their God; therefore see the greatest Favorites have
been most serviceable, Moses more then Aaron, or Miriam, Number. 12. Saint Paul
more then all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.10. The woman in the Gospel loves much,
because many sins have been forgiven, Luke 7.

The means to frame our hearts thereto are. First, Observation, and due record
of Gods special favors to us; they are Lam. 3.23.
renewed with every morning; if we had the wisdom to keep a Diary of them, a
daily Register; (Experto credit) they would warm our languishing affections.
Secondly, There is a holy Reminiscentia, calling to mind of ancient favors;
such especially, as in times of our ignorance, and vanity, God bestowed on us;
even when we knew not God, served lusts, and diverse pleasures, how many his
loving kindnesses did we experiment? David thus fetches it Ab ovo, Thou art my
God, even from my youth, and on thee have I been cast, even since my mothers
womb; see Saint Austin in his Confessions. Thirdly, Next see, how little we
have merited at Gods hand, as Genesis 32.10.
Jacob, I am less then all thy goodness, and truth, which thou have shown
me. Fourthly, How contrary our merits have been, as Saint Paul amplifies it,
Ephesians. 2. Tit. 3. 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. Fifthly, How we have requited the Lord, Deuteronomy.
32.6. since we have received mercy from him. Sixthly, How notwithstanding our
slender retailings, God still is pleased to crown us with mercy, and loving
kindness. Seventhly, How in our best performances, we come short of our
duties, Isa. 64.6. Romans 7.18. so that all we can say is this, we would do good,
yet evil is present. Eighthly, See how many are behind us in the favors of
God we enjoy; He has not dealt so with other nations, Psalm. 147.20. And my
servant Moses is not so, Number. 12.

Follows now the matter of the Protestation; in which observe we the manner of
utterance in two things. First, Rhetorical Apostrophe. Secondly, Ingemination,
expressing either vehemency of affection, or ardour, and heat of affection.
Secondly, The grounds of service, two; First, Filius ancillae, see Psalm. 86.16.
Secondly, Thou have broken my bonds, see Nah. 1.13. Thirdly, The expression of
it, ver. 17. I will sacrifice praise.

We also have causes the same to subscribe, and profess our selves the
servants of God; yea more by many then David here alleges, for he instanceth
in Temporal favors only. First, We also are filii ancillae, sons of his
handmaid. First, Borne children of the Church. Secondly, Many of us having had
Christian education under Christian Parents; Certainly, these much increase our
obligation. It is no small favor of God to be borne in the Church of God, no
slender tie to his service that accrues from our imitation by Baptism
thereunto; if ye consider, Turks, Pagans, Infidells, what can you say of them
but as Saint Paul of Ephesians, Chap. 2. They are without God, without Christ,
without hope, aliens from the covenants of promise, from the common wealth of
Israel. They do not-derogate from Gods mercy, who say, That without Gods
extraordinary mercy, they perish all in their sins, and die under guilt of
eternal damnation. Reasons. First, No name given under heaven whereby we can
be saved, but only the Act 4.12.
Name of Jesus. Secondly, No means to partake him, but the knowledge and faith
of him; The Isa. 53.11.
Knowledge of my righteous servant shall justify many. Thirdly, No means to
know him ordinary but the Romans 10.14
Word; Nor Creatures, nor any Natural notice can reveal him. 1. Cor. 1.21.

Secondly, If we look back to ancient Times, where was a feed of Election, the
Lord was pleased extraordinarily to grant means of Vocation; so to Naa^an, he
sends him to the Prophet; so to the Eunuch, he sends him to Jerusalem, and
Philip to him, Act. 8. Secondly, If we consider other Assemblies of men that
boast themselves to be orthodox Churches of God, and are not; so will the
Blessing farther appear. False and erroneous faith in Fundamentalibus is as
perilous as flat Infidelity; for example; To believe; that there is a God, and
to believe that this God is not Just, or True, or Merciful, is as perilous in
point of Salvation, as to be an Atheist, and to think there is no God: To
believe that there is a Mediator twixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus; and
to believe he mediates, or merits by us, is as perilous as to believe, There
is no Mediator twixt God and Man: To worship God, and the Creature as God, is
as perilous, as to worship the Creature in stead of God: To worship God
otherwise then he will be worshipped, or then he has prescribed us to worship
him in his Word, is as dangerous as to be merely without all worship: 1 Samuel
15.21. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and in vain they worship, who
worship after doctrines of men, Mat. 15.9. And if this be the Faith and
Religion of some so utterly unwarrantable; so crossing to the word of our
Faith, the salvation of our souls, I say, If this be so, then say not but it is
a favor of God to be born in the Church, where God is worshipped as he out,
and himself has prescribed, and wherein we have the true means of salvation;
and as they spoke scoffingly to our Savior, The way of God taught truly.

This favor of God we all enjoy; yet who is there who thinks his obligation to
serve God hereby increased? We dream of the Priveleges of the Church, and think
it sufficient we are born members of it, without taking notice of what they
bind us unto. First, Know every favor of God is an obligation to duty, and
the greater the favor, the greater the obligation, see Psalm. 118.2, 3, 4.
Secondly, Where the favors are vouchsafed, and the service not performed, the
greater, and heavier will be the vengeance; They that sinned without Romans 2.12.
Law, shall perish without Law, they that in Law, by Law; and Matthew. 11. Tire
and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah are not so severely tormented as children of the
Church. Thirdly, Take heed lest hereby we occasion the Lord to remove our Apoc.
2.5.
Candlestick, to take from us the being of our Church; and make us by woeful
experience know the difference twixt serving God, and serving Idols, believing
Christ, and giving way to Antichrist.

If in the other Sense filius ancillae be interpreted, Son of a gracious
Mother, such as Lois and 2 Timothy 1. and 3.
Eunich were to Timothy, certainly the favor is great, and much increases our
obligation to serve God, to be borne, and have education from religious
Parents. First, Such birth brings us within the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. 1 Cor.
7.14. entitles us to the promises of this life, and upon condition of
resemblance, and imitation, to the promises of the life to come. Secondly,
Advantageth us much toward Heaven, whiles we have; First, Our information, and
nurture in the fear of the Lord. Ephesians. 6.4. Secondly, The aid of their
Prayers, and Counsels, and Admonitions, as 1 Samuel 2.23.
Eli, Oh my sons, do not so wickedly. Thirdly, Their daily example, which by
a kind of natural instinct we are inclined to imitate.

Lord me thinks what a shame, and horror is it to see a degenerous seed; and
how do I persuade my self horror of conscience shall be one day augmented,
torments of Hell increased to them, who besides the ordinary and common means
of salvation in the Church, have had their birth and breeding under religious
Parents?

I know not how we pride our selves in this, that we can talk of the Devotion,
and Religion has been in our progenitors; and there are who stick not, though
profanely, to say, They hope for their Parents sake, and through their faith
and piety to go to heaven, though themselves walk in the ways of the wicked.
First, Have you forgotten who said, Think not to say, We have Ioh. 8.39.
Abraham to our father. Secondly, Do you not remember who said, That if the
righteous beget a Ezekiel. 18.14, 24
Son that commits abomination, He shall die in his sin; yea, be the more
tormented because he had so gracious birth, and education? Thirdly, Have ye
forgotten the distinction, of children by birth, and children by imitation; As
the righteous son of a wicked father, dies not for his fathers wickedness;
so lives not the wicked son of a righteous father by the fathers
righteousness, see Ioh. 8. Wherefore you to whom God has granted this favor
of all others, strive to excel in goodness, and think as David, your very
birth of such Parents binds you to extraordinary serviceablenesse toward God.

VERSE XVI, XVII. Thou have loosed my bonds: I will offer to thee the sacrifice
of Thanksgiving; and will call upon the Name of the Lord.
THe second ground of his Service, His Manumission; which under this Trope of
loosing the bonds, Nah. 1.13. the sign put for the thing signified, is
signified; how follows it? Thy servant, for thou have freed me; Saint Peter
answers, 1 Pet. 2.16. though free from other bondage, yet still the servants of
God; this being the condition of our liberty received from other bonds, that we
might serve God.

As if David would teach us this lesson; That our Christian liberty mancipates
us unto God; or, That the freedom God gives us, is but an exchange of our
service; so Zachary, Luke 1.74. so Peter, 1 Pet. 2.16. so Paul every where,
Romans 6.18. being freed from sin, ye are made servants of righteousness; and
Gal, 5.13.

No where does Scripture teach us, That the liberty given us of God, or
purchased by Christ, makes us nostri juris, men at our own absolute dispose,
to live as we list; 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. ye are bought with a price, therefore ye
are not your own; for though you be freed from other Masters, yet his servants
you are who has manumitted you.

Where come to be reproved Two gross sins of these Times. First, The
Understanding. Secondly, Misapplying, or misusage of our Christian liberty
issuing therefrom.

Of the first: That worthy Doctrine of Christian liberty so plentifully taught
by the Apostle, from the Law; how many be there that misunderstand? It is true
that Saint Paul says, Romans 6. We are not under the Law, but under grace; and
Gal. 3.25. Now faith is come, we are no longer under the Schole-master; and 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is not made for a righteous man, etc. with these grounds
misunderstood, how many run wild into all licentiousness? Every man when
his humor takes him, taking liberty to sin, because he is not under the Law:
And when we explicate, not under the Law Ceremonial, or Judicial; see the
shifts licentious nature has, when they desire to be enlarged, that Law is
Jewish; so Papists, for Images; a Law for Jews in respect of pronenesse to
idolatry; So Anabaptists, from oaths imposed to decide controversies, a Law
peculiar to Jews for their rudeness, and propensity to sin: So some profane
Antisabbatarians of the fourth; Anabaptists of the fifth; Gnostics of the
seventh; Priscillianists of the ninth; that if ever there were times to say as
David, now are the days; It is Psalm. 119.126.
time for thee Lord to lay to thine hand, for men have destroyed thy Law.

Let us be warned to be better informed in our judgments; and remember what
our Savior says, Matthew. 5.17. He never came to destroy the Law, and Prophets;
and what Paul, Romans 3.31. We do not abrogate the Law by faith. Thus understand.
First, From obligation to Laws Ceremonial, and Judicial, particular to Jews,
we are freed; so that now no longer lies bond or any man's conscience simply, as
from Gods Precept, to observe days, and times, and difference of meats, and
apparel. Secondly, Yet though that be so, we are not freed from obligation to
obedience of the Moral Law; for that is the Law of nature in all the parts of
it; given to Adam in innocence, when as yet was no difference betwixt people
and people. Thirdly, But when we say we are free from the Law, as the Law is
abrogated to us, thus we desire Scriptures should be understood. First, From
the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. and 5.18, 23. Secondly, From the Justification
of the Law, requiring every man to bring unto Gods judgment seat the perfect
righteousness of the Law of his own personal performance, For without the Law
is the righteousness of God revealed, Romans 3.21, 22. Thirdly, From the rigor
of the Law, that promises no life, nor reward, but to the perfect in
obedience; for our weak services are accepted, yea crowned, by promise of God
in the Gospel. Fourthly, From exasperating virtue of the Law expressed by Paul,
Romans 7.8. see Psalm. 40. But from obedience of the Law no man is freed. Mat.
5.17, 18.

The second error reproved, is the misapplying, and abuse of the Doctrine of
Christian liberty, even when it seems to be rightly understood; as amongst our
more intelligent people, that will confess they stand bound to the obedience
of the Decalogue; and their freedom to be only from the Curse, etc. yet may
we observe many abuses of Christian liberty. First, St Paul notes one frequent
in his time, Romans 6.1. It seems this; That because they were not under the
Curse of the Law; therefore we may sin: Mention, if I see it not rife amongst
many of our people; I would it were not amongst some professing best minds,
that because there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, therefore
they take liberty to sin, Romans 8.1. But where learnt we thus to turn the
grace of God into wantonness, that because Christ has died to redeem us from
the Curse, therefore we should sin against God? Me thinks that of Paul should
rather be our inference, 2 Cor. 5.14. That the love of Christ should constrain
us to live to his glory; withal, therein we should behold the strictness, and
severity of God against sin, which nothing could expiate but the death of the
Son of God: and can we forget what Saint Paul speaks, Heb. 10. If we sin
wilfully, there remains no more sacrifice for sin: and how can we be assured
that we have share in freedom from the Curse, not being freed from the reign
of sin? Romans 6.2. Yea, see the qualification of men freed from damnation,
Romans 8.1. They are such as walk not after flesh, but after Spirit.

Secondly, Saint James notes another; that from the other part of freedom from
Moral Law, inferred a lawful neglect of good works; for since we are justified
by faith alone, what necessity of good works? see Iam. 2. But know we, though
faith justify alone, yet is not alone, Gal. 5.6. though heat of fire warm
alone, yet is it not without light: And are there no uses of good works, but
only to justify us? What say you to these? Obedience to God, Matthew. 5.16.
Ephesians. 2.10. The glory we bring to God in adorning the Gospel, Tit. 2. In
stopping the mouths of aliens, 1 Pet. 2. In preparing them to glorify God, 1
Pet. 2. and 3. and is it nothing, that by them We make calling, and election
sure? 2 Pet. 1.10. And how shall we assure our selves that we are justified,
except by our works? see James 2. And, me thinks, the glorious reward, and
crown of righteousness, which God has prepared for them that love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. should excite us; see Mat. 10.20.

The third abuse is that of the freedom from rigor of the Law; that because
God has promised to accept our endeavors, though mixed with many
imperfections, therefore cry out, Quorsum such preciseness, and such striving
for perfection? as if the Lord had not promised to judge us after the
mitigation of the Gospel. True it is, there is such a promise to spare us, Mal.
3.17. yet withal, there is a precept to make Heb. 12.13.
strait steps to our feet: To walk Ephesians. 5.15.
accurately; To keep our selves Iam 1.27.
unspotted of the world; To abstain from the very 1 These. 5.22
appearance of evil. Secondly, He that promised to accept our endeavors,
required that they should be strenuous, and bent to the utmost of our ability,
Act. 24.16. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. and so only God spares as a father the son
that serves him. Thirdly, The imperfections which God has promised to pardon,
issue not from presumption, or malice, but from ignorance, and infirmity: There
are three sundry degrees of actual sins in men. First, Such as issue from
ignorance, Psalm. 19.12. Cleanse me from my secret sins; Heb. 7. The high
Priest offers sacrifice for sins of ignorance. Secondly, From infirmity or
passion, Gal. 6.1. 1 Ioh. 2. For these were ordained sacrifices of atonement
and propitiation. Thirdly, From presumption, Number. 15.30 And he that thus sins
dies without ransom, for he has in pride of his heart contemned the
Commandment of God; and what do they less, that thus presume of Gods mercy and
bounty? See Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.

But mark we in the next place, the ground of David's protestation, For thou
have loosed my bonds; and see whether it be not applicable unto us: Besides
that freedom from Civil thraldom, and from Spiritual bondage under the Law,
Moral and Ceremonial, in that sense that has been explained, There is yet a
threefold liberty, which we in this Church are partakers of, and they should be
all so many obligations to do service unto God. First, What say you to this?
Freedom from thraldom to Idols, and humane Traditions; Saint Paul mentions
it to Galatians as no small blessing of God, Gal. 4.8, 9. and Col. 2. If we
look back to our forefathers, or cast our eye upon other Nations Christian,
what miserable vassallage live they in under Antichrist, and the Idols of wood
and stone which he has erected? Besides the many will-worships which he
forces upon the consciences of men more then the Commandments of God, from
these bonds God has freed us. Secondly, Come yet to a more general favor of
God; Those of you, I mean, whom Gods truth has made free; What Paul speaks of
Romans 6.20.
Romans, was true of us, We were once the servants of sin; we served our
lusts, and diverse pleasures, we once were holden 2 Timothy 2.26.
captive of the Devil, to do his will; but God, who is rich in mercy has
crucified our lusts; that now we can say, as Paul, Romans 7.25. Though in our
flesh we serve sin unwillingly, yet in our spirit we serve the Law of God,
desiring to 1 Cor. 10.5.
captivate every thought, and affection to the obedience of Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, This is not all; Saint Paul tells us of a spirit of bondage, whose
fruit is fear, Romans 8.15. and it is in every unregenerate man; The nature of it
conceive thus; First, The bent, and propension to sin, remains in the
unregenerate, nothing but fear, or sense of wrath restrains it; therefore that
fear, or sense, removed; they add drunkenness to thirst, as Pharaoh, Simon
Magus, etc. Secondly, There is an averseness, and abhorrence from all
spiritual obedience; nothing but fear of wrath, or hope of reward excites, or
continues it; therefore see Israelites, Mal. 3.14. when they see the proud
blessed, say it is vain to serve God: From this spirit of bondage to fear, has
God freed his children, Psalm. 51.12. Stablish me with thy free Spirit; Psalm.
119. Set my heart at liberty, I will run the way of thy Commandments; And
again, Oh that my ways were made so direct; Where Gods Spirit is, there is
liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. see 1 Timothy 1.9. Lord, that these might be so many motives
to vow our selves servants for ever of the living God.

We are not ignorant of Satan's wiles; and we know what our selves and sins
have deserved; the plague that God threats to Deuteronomy 28.
Israel, to be given up to serve Idols of wood, and stone; that we may by
experience know difference twixt the service of God, and the service of Idols:
but sure if that betide us, miserable is our condition; better we had never
known the holy Commandment, then knowing to turn back.

Secondly, Like let us think whose hearts God has enlarged, and set free from
the slavish subjection to our sins; whose eyes God has enlightened to see
the filthiness of drunkenness, of adultery, etc. And to whom he has given
grace heretofore to detest them; if we shall now again be entangled, our latter
end shall be worse then our beginning, see Mat. 12.

Thirdly, And for those amongst us to whom God has given that spirit of
ingenuity, with freedom of heart to serve God; let them take heed, how they
quench the Spirit, the holy motions, whereby God would bend them to freedom,
and cheerfulness in his service. Consider, First, How bitter such dullness of
spirit is to the conscience, when God awakes it; no less to a gracious mind,
then grosser sins have been in their first entrance to Christianity.
Secondly, Next, how they loose for the time, the best evidence of their being
accepted with God, there being no service that pleases him, but what is
offered with a willing mind; see 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Thirdly, What an aggravation
to every omission it will one day be, that when God gave us alacrity, liberty,
and freedom of spirit to serve him, yet we were backward.

Follows now in the seventeenth Verse, the expression of David's
serviceablenesse unto God, in two particulars.

First, Thanksgiving. Secondly, Invocation.
In the first we have two things.

First, The Office. Secondly, The Style it has; Sacrifice.
Of the first: Thankfulness implies four things. First, Acknowledgement of the
favor of the Benefactour, and our obligation in respect of the favor; see 2 Timothy 1.16. Paul to Onesiphorus, and Romans 16.4. Secondly, Mindfulnesse, and
remembrance of the favor done to us; hence it is a tax upon the chief Butler,
Genesis 40.23. that he remembered not Joseph, but forgate him. Thirdly, Publishing
with praise and commendation, the bounty, and love, and goodness of the
Benefactour, as Paul to Timothy, Onesiphorus his kindness. Fourthly,
Compensation, or recompense, according to ability, and opportunity given us of
God; see 2 Samuel 9.1, 3. Is there yet any of the house of Saul, to whom I may
show kindness for Ionathans sake; so toward Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.32, 33, 38.
And they have in a sense all their place in that thankfulness we are to perform
to our God.

Of the first, see Lam. 3.22. when he saw the Lord preserving the remnant of
his people, It is of the Lords mercy that we are not confounded; Jacob, Genesis
32.10. I am less then the least of all thy mercies, and all thy truth which
thou have shown; 1 Cor. 15.9, 10 Not meet to be an Apostle; but by grace I am
what I am; see also, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13, 14. which All of obligation, and debt of
service we owe to God in respect of his favors; Quid retribuam Domino? As if
he had said, A debt I see, wherein I stand bound to my God, but how I shall
render it I know not; 1 These. 3.9. What thanks can we render unto God, etc.

Opposite unto this Branch of Thankfulness are. First, Slighting of the favors
of God bestowed on us, without any so much as notice, or acknowledgement in
their fruition; How many favors are renewed with every morning, which yet we
take no notice of? As that the Lord adds this day to our time of repentance, or
growth in grace; that his temporalls of health, and use of all his good
creatures are continued unto us. Or secondly, We discern no favor of God in
them, nor think our selves obliged to that endless Majesty for the
continuance, or increase of them; but either think them to come of ordinary
course; or as it should seem for some obligation that lies upon God, either in
his own Nature, or from our merit to confer them.

The second is remembrance of the benefits bestowed on us; as David to his
soul, Psalm. 103.2. Forget not all his benefits: To this end tended the annual
festivities of the Jews that we read of, Number. 29. to continue remembrance of
the favors of God; To this end the Sabbath in old Testament; To this the
Passover, Exodus 12. and our Sacrament of the Supper succeeding in stead
thereof; Hence is the charge Numb. 6.12. Take heed, lest thou forget not the
Lord thy God; and that tax of ingratitude laid upon Israel, Psalm. 106.13. They
soon forgate his works: And I would to God it concerned not us, nor were
imputable unto us; Whiles favors are new, we can a little overly, and for
fashion say, God be thanked; but once year'd and day'd, they scarce ever come
more into our thought: Oh that David's mind were in us! How should the Lord
still delight to do us good? See him fetching it Ab utero, for his own
particular, from the womb; and for the people of God, Psalm. 105, 106, 107. all
penned to mind the people of God of his ancient benefits, delivering them out
of Egypt, etc. We also have had our deliverances from the great thraldom
under the tyranny of Rome; there be yet living who may remember it, but scarce
take notice of it in nature of a benefit; What should I tell of the restoring
of the purity of the Gospel in the days of Queen ELIZABETH? The admirable
victories of eighty eight? The deliverance from Gunpowder-Treason? Our long
peace in the reign of King JAMES? Our preservation from the pestilence? etc.
They are year'd and day'd, and therefore forgotten amongst us. Take heed, lest
some worse thing happen not unto us.

In the days of King EDWARD, God caused the light of his glorious Gospel to
shine unto our fathers, as under Josiah to Israel; it seems they knew not the
price of that blessing; therefore the Lord took him away from the evil to
come, and delivers us over to be a prey to our enemies; What bloody cruelty,
what fiery trial afterward issued, we are not, I think, so Lethargicall, as
to forget; if ever the same prove our lot, thank our selves, for that we have
so soon forgotten the great favors bestowed upon our Nation, etc.

The third Branch of Thankfulness, is publication of the favor of God, with
praise of the bounty therein showed toward us; This is that David calls
praising the Lord; that is, not only commemorating, but setting out the
excellency of his favors bestowed upon us; And this indeed is a special part
of Thankfulness: Therefore observe how Rhetorical the Saints of God are in
all circumstances of Amplification; Sometimes admiring the riches of Gods
favor, as Ps. 31.19. Oh how great is thy goodness! see also, Psalm. 8.
Sometimes confessing they pass knowledge, see Ephesians. 3.19. and 1 Cor. 2.9.
Sometimes in a heap of Epithetes setting forth their excellency; as Ephesians. 2.4.
Rich in mercy; great love; and 1 Timothy 1.14. The grace of God was exceeding
abundant; Sometimes, comparing themselves with others of equal merit, Psalm.
147.20. Sometimes considering their own demerits, 1 Timothy 1.13. their little
thought of the favor, see Romans 5.10. and Romans 10.20.

Opposite unto this Branch of Thankfulness are. First, Extenuating, or
lessening the favors God has bestowed upon us, and vilifying them, as David
speaks of Israel, They Psalm. 106.24.
despised the pleasant land; and as the instance is plain in the unthankful
Israelites, what at first they admired, Exo. 16. at last cried out of, as of a
bread that dried up their souls. Secondly, Accounting his blessings curses, and
his favors rather Tokens of his wrath, and displeasure, as Israel in their
hunger and thirst; Would God we had tarried in Egypt, when we sat by the
fleshpots, and had meat to the full; and was it because there was no graves in
Egypt, that the Lord has brought us out into this barren wilderness? And I
wish we were not culpable of both these signs of unthankfulness! Lord, Who
knows the power of thy wrath? Psa. 90.11. The price of thy blessing, that sweet
blessing of peace, which David prayed for to Jerusalem, Let peace be within thy
walls, and plenteousnesse within thy palaces; and Psalm. 29.21. The Lord shall
give unto his people the blessing of peace; To sit every one under our own
vine, and every one under our own fig tree. Alas! How has it been vilified?
Nay, How has it been thought a curse to the land, by earthly-minded men; and
war, one of the Ezekiel. 14.21.
sorest arrows of the Almighty, wished for rather then peace? Sure I cannot
deny but mischiefs many have issued from peace; as that of Moab, Ier. 48. Our
savor remains in us; as stinking waters gather filth, and putrefaction, so
occasionally, peace. Secondly, Security, and contempt of God, as Laish dwelt
Judge. 18.11.
securely. Thirdly, Luxury, and intemperance, the sin of Ezekiel. 16.49.
Sodom, through abundance of idleness. But comes this from peace, or from our
abuse of peace? Is it the native fruit of this gracious blessing of God, or not
rather grown upon us by accident through corruption of our filthy hearts? So of
the word of God, and worship, the prime of Gods outward favors; insomuch, that
it bears the style often of the Matthew. 13.11.
kingdom of heaven; yet who esteems it according to the worth of it? Nay, be
there not that think it not even the scourge of the times; never merry world
since this preaching came up: and generally, how wanton are we grown, the best
of us, that every man must have it suited in matter, and manner to his own
fancy; some are for plainness; some for nicety, and novelty; and nothing
pleases but what is above the ordinary, etc. Well, brethren, time was when the
word of God was 1 Samuel 3.1.
precious; that was, when it was rare. Secondly, Times may be, (God grant they
approach not) when we may again see Amos his Amos 8.11.
famine.

Time being to speak of other discontents at Gods favor, and not only
vilifying of his blessings, but murmuring at the hand which conferres them: The
Remedies of it are these. First, Consider the misery of the want of these
blessings, which we enjoy to the full, till we nauseat again, and our stomach
recoils at them. Secondly, Weigh well how far inferior our merits are to the
least of these favors of God, Genesis 32.10. Thirdly, See how many are behind
us, if not in the substance, yet in the measures of the blessings: Lord Sirs;
we look to those above us that excite our envy; would we cast our eyes
downwards to those below us, we should see, and say, the Lord had exceeded
mercy toward us; and that his love to us, has passed knowledge, and
comprehension.

The fourth Branch of Thankfulness; is Compensation, or Recompense: Has this
place, or passage twixt God and man? Sure we have Gods complaint frequent, for
Non-retaliation, as Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord? and 2 Chronicles.
32.33. Hezekiah rendered not to the Lord according to the kindness done unto
him.

There are three sorts of Retaliation. First, One equal, or equivalent to the
favors of God; This no Papist dares avow possible to be yielded from man to
God, Psalm. 16.2. Our well doing extend th not to God; and, What is it to him
that we are righteous? Job 35. and, I am less then the least of all thy
mercies, Genesis 32.10.

Secondly, Proportioned, which in a sort they say is answerable to the favors
God has done us; and not Ex pacto only, or by virtue of promise; but
something out of the native virtue, and excellency of the works done, God is
made amends for his favors; yet it was wont to be said, Finiti ad infinitum
nulla est proportio; all that we do, or can do, is but Luke 17.10.
duty; yea, as we do it, not so much as duty, Isa. 64.6. And moreover, of his
own we give him; It is he himself that works all our good works in us, Isa.
26.12.

Thirdly, yet there is which God is pleased to interpret, and accept as
rendrings from us; even whatsoever according to our gracious abilities by way
of thankfulness, we tender unto him; so Peter, 1 Pet. 2.5. Acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ. As, First, The ordering of our conversation aright, Psalm.
50.23. When we so live, as God in us may be glorified, Mat. 5.16. Secondly,
When in our Callings particular, we seek the advancement of Gods glory, as
Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Thirdly, Special occasions often fall out, when it
becomes our lot to stand up for the support of Gods glory, perhaps with hazard
of state, or life; as in Hesters case, Host. 4.16. If I perish; I perish: These
God interprets, and accepts as thankful rendrings, and retaliations to his
bounty. Wherein how answerable we have been to the favors God has bestowed
upon us, and their measures; if I should hold my peace, the stones would speak;
What Nation under the Sun has been able to compare with us in all favors,
that God has done us? as the Lord speaks to Deuteronomy. 3.
Israel; and considering the measures, and continuance of the blessings, we
have been as peerles in ingraditude; turning the grace of God into wantonness,
increasing our rebellions, as God has his blessings upon us: I could wish we
could see the preferme^ts we have had above many our neighbors, in the measure
of the means of salvation, and the continuance of them; the issues whereof,
except in point of knowledge, and that but in a few, has been no great
increase of our obedience; but that in justice, and charity, and mercy, many
ignorants have gone before us. Do we thus requite the Lord? This let us rest
assured of generally for our kingdom; The Lord who has made his mercies
mavelous toward us, will make his plagues as wonderful, that we may be a
byword, Deuteronomy. 28. And at the last day; it will be true of us, that Christ
speaks of unthankful cities, Mat. 11. The state of heathen shall be more
tolerable then ours.

The Style here given to Thanksgiving; It is a Sacrifice; Metaphorically ye
must understand, and by Allusion; so called, because all those Sacrifices
offered in the old Leviticall Law did type out this same thanksgiving, (all
Ceremonies of the old Testament, as Gratian tells us, having in them to be
considered both superficies, and Moralis intelligentia) as the thing which
should succeed in room, or stead thereof; in which respect our Rom 12.1.
bodies; our Phil 4.18.
goods; our thanks are called Sacrifices; The fruit of our lips, Heb. 13.15.
Hos. 14.2. Or else secondly, Because in esteem with God more then al sacrifices
of bullocks, or rams, as Psalm. 50.8, 9. which also perhaps makes David choose it
as the special evidence expressing his serviceablenesse to God. Lo here then
the excellency of thankfulness, far above all sacrifices, or other services
we perform unto God; see Psa. 50.23. He honors me, comparatively understand
it, more then he who brings the fat of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil,
Mic. 6.

Lord, that we could set our selves to it; sure it is the service of heaven,
wherein Angels, and See Isa. 6. Apoc. 6.
Saints are employed; and they who rightly perform it, as Saint Paul speaks,
Phil. 3.20. Have already their conversation in heaven.

At this time especially it is necessary, when we come to receive the pledges
of Gods love, and goodness in our Redemption; whereupon the whole action has
the name of Eucharist; and in which respect, the Fathers called it a sacrifice,
and the Table from which they offered it, in a spiritual sense, an Altar;
wherefore the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was by them also styled Sacramentum
Altaris.

These are helps available thereto. First, See our portion, or sharing in the
blessing; that we may be able to say as Paul, every of us; Christ loved Gal.
2.20.
me, and gave himself for me; it is lip-labor that without this is performed
in respect of Redemption: Thus discern it. First, Redeemed from vain
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Secondly, Setting our selves apart to serve God in
righteousness, and true holiness, Luke 1.74. Thirdly, Zealous of good works,
Tit. 2.14. wherein we may bring glory to God. Fourthly, Permitting our Redeemer
to dispose of us to his glory, whether by life or death; out of this ground,
That we are not our own, 1 Cor. 6.20.

Second particular wherein David meant to express his service to God, is
Invocation; Calling upon him only in case of necessity.

That this is an honor, and service due to God, Scriptures are evident;
insomuch, that Tropically it is put for the whole service of God, as 1 Cor.
1.2. and 2 Timothy 2.19. And consider what honor it gives him, you will easily
acknowledge it. First, Thereby we acknowledge him to be Giver of all good
things, see Iam. 1.17. and that but from him we can expect nothing that is
good. Secondly, Of power, in that therein we acknowledge him able to do above
all that we can ask, or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Thirdly, Of love to man no less
then fatherly, Matthew. 7.11. wherein the Lord so glories, that he has given it
a special Name, (...), Tit. 3.4. Fourthly, Of mercy, and compassion, wherein
the Lord so glories, as in no one of his Attributes; see 2 Cor. 1.3. The Father
of mercie^, and God of all consolation. Fifthly, Of Dominion, and Lordship
absolute, and independent; for whilst we pray God for all we have need of,
what do we but acknowledge him to have in himself absolute power to give, or
not to give farther then by his promise he has pleased to make himself our
debtour? Sixthly, Of his truth, supposing his Pactum, his Covenant, and promise
that he has passed to us; wherefore also ye see it often acknowledged as
inducement to grant; see Neh. 1. Dan. 9. All this shows abundantly, that it is
a service due to God. To all these might be added also, that hereby God is
himself acknowledged as the alone (...), Knower of the heart. Now whether in
propriety, and incommunicably, is now grown matter of question; Conceive thus;
whether no creature, Saint, nor Angel, may participate with him in it, in any
degree? Thus far goes consent; That nor Saint, nor Angel may be prayed unto
as Authors, or Givers, either of Psalm. 84.11.
grace, or glory; because the things we need, exceed the power of all creatures
to give; To which also the Papists themselves add consent of the whole Church,
that nor Saint, nor Angel is to be invocated as Author of the blessings.

How then are they interessed in this honor?

Answ. As mediators of impetration, or obtaining the good things we have need
of; and yet not as principal Intercessors, but as such, as by Christ and his
intercession commend our suits unto God: Wherein you must understand they
palliate only that horrible Idolatry they practice in Invocation of Saints;
for whosoever looks to the form of their prayers, shall find that they pray to
them as Lords of the gifts. Secondly, That they send them not to God by Christ
as Mediator of Intercession, but as men who by their own merits may commend
our suits unto God, and even oblige him to grant what we pray for.

The question at last comes to this issue; upon supposall that they pray to
them only as mediators of impetration; Whether we may invocate Saints
departed as mediators of impetration, or entreat them to entreat for us
favors from God? They say, Yes, because we may so do to men on earth, and that
without any derogation to the mediation of Jesus Christ?

Answ. But it follows not; for a twofold Reason. First, Because for the one we
have a Mandate, to beg the aid of living Iam. 5.16.
Saints prayers. Secondly, We have example of Saints, as of Paul, Ephesians. 6. Romans
15. Thirdly, We have promise from God that the prayer of faith shall find
audience, Iam. 5. neither of which we find of Saints departed. Secondly, For
that we have means to make known our wants to Saints on earth, none at all to
inform, at least our mental desires, to Saints departed; Isa. 63.16.
Abraham knows us not: And for means of convaying them to their notice, there
is none which has foundation in Scripture, what ever they pretend for
revelation of Angels conversing with us, Luke 15.

Answ. We deny not but at times they converse with us on earth; but that they
have their continual commerce about us, we find no Scripture to affirm;
only that they are Heb. 1.14.
sent out upon occasion, for good. Secondly, Suppose our prayers mental only,
as often they are, and often so most fervent; Exodus 14. Why cryest thou? Understand
they them? Without robbing God of his incommunicable glory to be the only
Knower of hearts, they cannot affirm it; it shall ever be his Privelege, to be
Ex se (...).

The second is, That through the incredible celerity of their nature, they do
by themselves hear prayers made to them on earth?

Answ. To which Bellarmine answers. First, That this cannot be true of Mental
prayers, though such celerity supposed. Secondly, That to this end they may
hear all prayers made to them, is requisite not only celerity of nature, but
also ubiquity, when at the same instant so many prayers are made to the same
Saint; and no Motus is in instanti.

Their third is, That they see in God all things; Hence their Speculum
Trinitatis, from the first instant of their beatitude?

Answ. And yet Christ knew not the day of Judgment, though from the first
instant of his Incarnation, he enjoyed beatificall vision. Secondly, Where
find we such a Speculum Trinitatis mentioned in Scripture? Thirdly, Suppose
such a Speculum; It is not Natural, but Voluntarium, so that nothing can be
thence informed, but what God will have them know.

Their fourth is Revelation; That God is pleased to reveal unto them our
prayers, when we power them out before him; And so Saint^ have in former times
known both things to come, yea, and also secrets of hearts, as Act. 5.

Answ. But where find they that God reveals to them the prayers that are made
unto them? Secondly, And says Bellarmine, then would the Saints pray to God
sometimes to reveal to Saints their prayers. Thirdly, And that was as likely to
be vouchsafed to Patriarks, and Prophets in ancient time; when yet it is said,
Abraham knows us not, Isa. 63.

To draw to conclusion in this Point; I would but know for my learning of any
Papist in the world, why I should choose to go to God by a Saint, rather then by
Jesus Christ our known Advocate? Is it because their prayers are more prevalent
with God? It were blasphemy to think it: Are they more merciful? How derogate
they from that glory of the high Heb. 2. and 4.
Priest of our profession? Or is it more humility?

Answ. It is pride, not humility that shows it self in such will worship, Col.
2. And what, is the condition of Saints in new Testament inferior to that of
them in the old? If they without any such ambages might approach unto God
immediately, why not we rather, when Christ appears for us at the right hand of
our Father? Roman. 8. Heb. 7.

And if there were nothing else might breed in us detestation of Popery, this
yet alone should; seeing it so robs God of his honor, of mercy, gratuitous
love to man, omniscience, etc. communicating it in equality, or greater measure
unto creatures; Christ of his meritorious intercession, and of his propriety in
mediating twixt God and us? see 1 Timothy 2.5.

I beseech you, brethren, think of these things. First, We serve a gracious,
and a merciful God, who styles himself the Psalm. 65.2.
Hearer of prayers. Secondly, we have a merciful high Heb. 2.18. and 4.15.
Priest, touched, let us go boldly to the throne of grace, with our
infirmities. Thirdly, For this we have warrant by Psalm. 50.15.
mandate, and promise, which we lack for intercession of Saints. Fifthly,
Encouragements we have plentiful, He gives to all liberally, and Iam. 1.5.
upbraids no man. Fifthly, Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora;
Tutius ad meum Iesum loquor, quam ad quemvis sanctorum spiritum, Austin.
Sixthly, Whether, or how Saints hear our prayers, it is uncertain, and
unresolved amongst some Papists themselves; Why holds not the rule true? Tene
certum, dimitte incertum. That God hears our prayers, rightly qualified, we
know, by his omniscience, immensity, ubiquity, etc. we know also by experience;
we know by his protestation, etc. But that Saints do hear them, we know not.

Secondly, As in the misapplying of this honor from God to Saints, is
idolatry; so in the neglect of it is crime no less then Atheism, Psalm. 14.4.
and detainment of service which we owe to our God; wherein I wish our people
were not all obnoxious, and culpable.

How many families in this Congregation, where prayer to God is a stranger as
which passes all measure of impiety? How many persons, who, except in the
Church, scarce ever have mind of prayer to God so much as by the shortest
ejaculations?

Are we Christians? How deserve we the Style which is this often; such as 1 Cor.
1.2. and 2 Timothy 2.19.
call upon the Name of the Lord; sometimes an holy 1 Pet. 2.5.
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ: yea, how can we persuade our selves we have received the Spirit of
Grace, if not Zech. 12.10. Romans 8.26.
withal the spirit of Supplication? or how be persuaded we have the spirit of
God, if we delight not in the exercise of it? Daniel had spirit of
sanctification, yet was he constant at his Dan.
three times a day to call upon his God, yea then when death was present before
him; David, Psalm.
Seven times a day: and is not the Precept, to pray These. 5.17.
continually? besides, there is nothing we deal with, wherein we have comfort,
except thus 1 Timothy 4.5.
sanctified unto us; And if nothing else will move us, let our own Necessities,
Temporal and Spiritual; for let it be granted we enjoy all things to the full
in things of this life; yet how soon can God strip us of them? How can he break
the Levit, 26.26. Ezekiel. 4.16. and 5.16.
staff of bread, that we shall eat, and not be satisfied? How can he give us
up to that vanity Solomon speaks of, To abound with all things, and yet to have
Eccles. 5.19.
use of nothing? How can he make them snares unto us, as the same Solomen
speaks, That our riches shall be reserved for Eccles 5.13.
hurt to the owner thereof? Especially when, as Pro. 30.9.
Agur intimates, Fullness may occasion a denial of God, or a forgetfulness of
him; Whilst as David speaks, Our hearts are Psalm. 62.10.
set upon them; Whilst, as our Savior speaks, the care in keeping, and fear
in loosing Matt. 13.22.
choke the word of God; or whilst they become fuel to feed our corruption,
instrument^ of injustice, luxury, and what not that evil is? And for our
spiritual estate, supposing us to be in highest favor with God. First, How
can we suppose it, whilst in this duty we are negligent? Rom 8.26. Zec. 12.10.
Secondly, have we attained perfection, who can, or dare say it? Phi. 3.13, 14.
Thirdly, Have we command of grace, at our own pleasure to exercise it, or to
increase it? experience of all humble hearts contradicts it; see 2 Chronicles. 32.
Psalm. 51. Fourthly, In those graces that concern sense, have we a promise of
their continuance without interruption? show me it; so peace of conscience, and
joy in the holy Ghost, except perhaps we will condemn the Psalm. 73.15.
generation of the just; or if any such promise be so according to Letter, yet
is it with limitation to our use of means, amongst which this is the Prime,
Prayer unto God.

And if ever there were times to stir up to this duty, now are the days, for
us especially of this kingdom: The prayer that Psalm. 12.1.
David makes, is fulfilled to us; Help Lord, for there is not one godly man
left, the faithful are minished from among the children of men: behold and see
our (...), and our (...) too all in a tumult; every man seeking his own,
humouring himself, Phil. 2.22.
none the things of Jesus Christ; the cause of the Gospel few take to heart, a
little sollicitous we seem to be of peace in our land; but whether Religion
sink, or swim, we are generally of Act. 18.17.
Gallio's mind, We care for none of those things; but What shall we do in the
Ier. 5.31.
end thereof? Remedy I know none for us private men, but only Preces and
lachrymae, the old weapons of the Church.

The substance of Verse. 18, 19. has been handled before in Verse. 14.

(...).
PSALM. 117. verse. 1. O praise the Lord, all ye Nations: praise him all ye
people.
OPportunely we fall upon this Psalm this On Whit-sunday. 1637
Day, wherein we celebrate the memory of those miraculous gifts conferred on
the Primitive Church, especially on the Apostles, Act. 2. This Psalm
presenting to our notice the great blessing of God in the vocation of the
Gentiles; whereto that gift of Tongues tended.

In the words consider we three things.

First, Duty. Secondly, Persons whom it concerns. Thirdly, Ground of the Duty,
Verse. 2.
Lest the Application of the Psalm to Vocation of Gentiles, seem impertinent;
Read Romans 15.11. where ye shall observe the Apostle so applying it.

For farther understanding, Know that from the days of Abraham and Jacob,
began God to limit his people to one Family and Nation; before that time, all
being Quoad jus, The people of God: in their days, was God pleased, for the
sins of other nations, and specially for love to his people, according to
election, to single out the seed of Abraham, etc. to be his peculiar people;
and to distinguish them by signs from others; by signs, I say, of special
Covenant; as Circumcision in Abraham's family: afterward, the giving of the
Romans 9.4.
Law, and the services; which was the Maceria spoken of, the Ephesians. 2.14.
Partition wall mentioned by the Apostle; insomuch that though all other people
and kingdoms of the world retained the Style, and Title of Nations, and people
at large; Yet none of the people of God, save Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their
posterity; And this enclosure of grace to them, though ye reckon but from the
giving of the Law to Christ, when the distinction grew complete unto Christ,
endured the space of above sixteen hundred years; what time the Jews growing to
height of Impiety, were rejected of God, and in their stead we Gentiles graffed
in, as Romans 11.17. so that in Paul's time they were Concorpores; and from that
time to now have continued the only body of Christ, the fullness of him which
fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23.

So long ago was God pleased to foretell the Calling of the Gentiles; see Psalm.
2. and 50. and 97. What speak we of so late as David? even in the very Covenant
of Abraham it was signified, as Genesis 17.5. and 18.18. and in the sign Romans
4.11.

If the question now be, Why the Lord was pleased so long ago to foretell it;
Thus let him conceive. First, Predictio futurorum, the foretelling of things to
come, I mean of Contingent things that have no cause in Nature, are no small
evidence of a Deity; whereupon, Isa. 45. Idols are put to that issue. Secondly,
The accomplishment of such Predictions are excellent nourishers of Hope
concerning things to come, which we behold only in the Promise; as Iehu makes
the observation, 2 King. 10.10.
No word of God shall fall to the ground; many gracious Promises are given us,
which yet are not performed, etc. Thirdly, Besides, God meant from the
beginning of the Covenant to nourish his people Israel in the fear of his Name,
not willing to give them least occasion of being puffed up with Pride in
respect of his special favor; Wherefore also they are often afterward by the
Ancients of the Prophets put in mind of it, see Hos. 1.

That a man would wonder, save that blindness is come upon Israel in part, to
read how Jews of old, and to this day are averse from the doctrine, which
teaches entertainment of Gentiles into the Church of God: If ye read the story
of the Gospel, there was nothing went more harsh in Christ's doctrine, then this
of taking away the kingdom from the Jews: and when Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles, Act. 13 and 28. preached this doctrine, he always became
unsufferable: But thus deserve they to be blinded in plainest things, that
refuse obedience to the will of God.

Other Errors there are noted of like nature. First, Of Donatists in Saint
Austins days, whose doctrine was, That God had no Church but in Afrique, and
that in the party of Donatus. Secondly, Exactly ye shall observe the same
error revived by Papists and Brownists: Papists laboring for an enclosure of
the Church to their Rome, thereto allege that which specially thwarts it, the
Title of Catholic; for if Catholic, then not Roman no more then Jewish;
that term being devised by Ancients, especially, to distinguish the Church
Christian from that of the Jews: And if to all Nations, then not to Africa
only, or to the part of Donatus, for all Nations must praise God for his
mercy; and therefore no necessity for any man to submit himself to Donatus, or
Brown, or Saint Peter himself; though it be true, out of the Church is no
salvation, yet out of this or that Church is salvation, except Christ be not
the Savior of his whole Body.

But those things which the Lord so long ago foretold to our fathers by the
Prophets he has fulfilled to us their children; making us who once were Aliens
and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12, 13.
nigh to himself by the blood of Christ; To this end tended that gift of
Tongues, Act. 2. The memory whereof we this day Celebrate; For in that so many
Nations heard the Apostles speak in their own tongues the manifold works of
God, it serves to show, that God meant now to verify his Promise to us: I say
only as Romans 15.11.
Paul, Let us Gentiles praise God for his Mercy.

VERSE II. For his merciful kindness is great toward me.
IN these words we have the ground of David's thanksgiving, and praising God.

First, Gods Mercy.

Secondly, The Measure of it, Great.

My purpose is not to insist, on this occasion, in the common place of Gods
mercy; Thus only for so much as concerns the Sense of the Scripture: The
mercy of God some call the property, or attribute of his Nature, inclining him
to relieve the misery of his Creature; some, the Essence of God showing mercy;
Truth is, there is no Real difference twixt his Essence and his Attributes,
save only in our manner of conceiving; The Truth of God, and his Essence are
not two things, but in our apprehension, no more is his Power, Omniscience, etc.

This Mercy of God is of three sorts.

First, General toward all Creatures wrapped in misery, whereof see Psalm.
145.9.

Secondly, Special toward men, 1 Timothy 4.10. preserving them from many
dangers, yea, relieving their miseries with service of his other Creatures; see
Matthew. 5.45.

Thirdly, Singular to his Church; not only in giving them means of salvation,
and deliverance from Curse, but to many of them vouchsafing the sense of his
choicest favors, in remission of sins, gifts of the Spirit, and life
everlasting; And hereof speaks the Prophet in this place: for these are the
benefits which Christ brings to his Church.

As if there were no mercy of God like unto this, The mercy that he shows unto
us in Christ: and surely consider all other miseries, we shall see none like
this, To be without Christ, for the Reasonable Creature. Secondly, The
amplifications it has in Scripture. Thirdly, The kinds of mercy in him
vouchsafed us. For the first, Go over all the miseries of the brute Creatures,
and compare them with the misery of man without Christ, ye shall see, they all
come short of it: The Psalm. 34.10.
Lions lack, and suffer hunger; It is true, but suppose them pined with hunger,
yet with their life ends their misery; When a man out of Christ has endured
Hunger, and Cold, and Nakedness, and Fire and Water, or what ever man can
devise to be most terrible to Flesh, yet is it but a Flea-bite to the misery
whereto a man out of Christ is subject; their Mar. 9.44.
Worm dies not, their fire goes not out; which made our Savior say, It was
better with loss of Lim, or Life to go to heaven, then enjoying all the
pleasures of this life, at death to be cast into hell.

Secondly, Look again to the amplifications it has in Scripture; He denied all
these to Heb. 2.16.
Angels; they fell, and no Redeemer: He denied these to many men, even to so
many as had Psalm. 147 20.
not knowledge of his Laws. Thirdly, In his very Church though offer be made to
all, yet actual performance, and taste only to the Church of the faithful,
the first borne whose Heb. 12.23.
names are written in heaven,; All are not Romans 9.6.
Israel, that are of Israel.

Thirdly, Think of the excellency of the blessings. First, Remission of sins
see David Psalm. ^2.1, 2.
celebrating; and if ever thou have tasted how bitter conscience of sin is,
thou will taste, and acknowledge also how over-gracious the Lord is therein
unto thee. Secondly, Besides, the gifts of the Spirit, and gracious endowments,
whereby we are renewed after his Image: and that which passes knowledge, the
fullness of Joy reserved for us at the right hand of God.

This taxes that earthly, or rather brutish estimate that men set on this
prime mercy of God, preferring before it the worst of those favors they partake
in common with Heathens, with Devils, with brute Creatures, with Hypocrites.

How many be there even of a brutish disposition in the Church of God, who
never have thought of Heaven, or Hell; God, or the Devil; Let them have meat,
and drink, and ease to the fill, as 1 Cor. 15.32.
Paul, and Isa. 28.
Isaiah speak, it is their Summum bonum; and yet the very heathen could say, It
was the thought of a Beast, rather then of a Man: And have ye not heard of him
who had all these things, and yet Luke 16.
afterward was in Hell in torments: or can you forget our Savior? when all is
had that the world can afford you in profit, or pleasure, yet what shall your
advantage be, when you must loose your Matt. 16.24.
Soul? and have ye not heard of them, who cry out What has pride Wisd. 5.8.
profited them, or what the pomp of Riches availed?

Go farther to other gifts of God in providence; Suppose it be Art, Whose is
like that of Aristotle? Suppose it kingdoms, Whose like to that of Assyria, or
Grecia, or Persia, or Rome? Suppose it wisdom, as that of Achitophel, the
Oracle of Israel? Yet what is all this, without the Phil. 3.8.
knowledge of Christ, save only to deprive of excuse? see Romans 1 and 1 Cor.
1.21.

Go yet farther to the power of Knowledge, and Faith, and of deep Mysteries in
the Gospel; the very Iam. 2.19.
Devils herein equal, excel us; and though we had all Knowledge, and Faith,
What were it without Christ? as Saint Paul speaks in the point of Charity, 1
Cor. 13.2.

Yet farther, for I think Hypocrites go farther then Devils; suppose thou
have moral Honesty, as Matthew. 5.20.
Pharisees had; yet must there be a righteousness greater to bring thee to
God: Suppose thou had Matthew. 7.22.23
Prophecy, yet may thou be dismissed with ne scio vos, I never knew you:
Suppose all those excellent endowments, Heb. 6. without the knowledge of Gods
mercy to thee in Christ, What does all this add to thee, except an aggravation
to thy damnation?

Lord, methinks therefore that I might enamore you of love toward this mercy
of God in Christ Jesus, and prevail with you aright to esteem it: Saint Paul
when he comes to speak of it never 1 Cor. 2.9.
satisfies himself in it; desires to know nothing but Christ, and him
Crucified; accounts all but Dung, and Psalm. 3.8.
Dross in comparison; and again, Ephesians. 3.19. it passes knowledge. This being
enamord on it is, if not an evidence of our sharing in it, yet a step toward
it.

Before ever we shall come to know the price of it, Three things must be
removed out of our hearts, which are natural to most men, to all men, one or
other.

First, Ignorance of our misery in Nature without Christ; my meaning is That we
either know not, or consider not what punishment our sins have deserved, or how
strict the justice of God is against them: For remedy whereof I would
prescribe; First, Diligent examination of our lives by the Law of God; Lord,
how many foul sins should the greatest Civilian in the world then perceive in
himself? Secondly, The punishments threatened therein, Gods Deuteronomy. 28. Gal. 3.10.
curse in body, in soul, in this life, in the life to come. Thirdly, The
exemplification of the curse, and the execution upon the breakers of it;
extraordinary upon other men tainted with our vices; insomuch that there is no
gross violation of any Law of God, but we have seen exemplified on others,
might see them in our selves. Fourthly, The strictness of Gods justice, which
without satisfaction, which indeed is satisfaction every way equivalent to the
violation of Justice, accepts none to mercy: And this methinks should teach us
how to esteem of Christ.

A second cause is, Opinion of our own possibility to make satisfaction to
Gods justice; wherewith the whole world of Pagans furnish them with Presidents;
thence grew sacrificings of Pagans of Sons and Daughters; thence all those
whippings, etc. in the Church of Rome, thereby to satisfy the justice, and
wrath of God due to Sins; the same point. For Remedy let us see whether
according to Reason, or Scripture we can possible make amends for sins of our
souls. First, The Majesty violated is Infinite. Secondly, What give we more
then 1 Chro. 29.14
God has given us? Thirdly, What indebitum? as Papists themselves confess it
must be, Luke 17.10. Fourthly, What perfectum? which is the point; so that if
God should enter into Judgment with us, we had not need to pray for mercy in
acceptance, rather then dream of making him satisfaction. Fifthly, Who can tell
how Psalm. 19.12.
often he offends? our Good-works for the matter of them are easily numbered,
our sins are past number; that this we must let alone, for ever thought of
satisfying Gods justice, without a Mediator.

A third cause, That we never yet were sensibly arraigned in our Consciences
for our sins, nor for misery in Nature, nor disability to make amends for
sins of our souls by own strength natural, or gracious: thence is it, that
we know not aright to price the mercy of God to us in Jesus Christ. Beloved
Christians, To sin is common; to feel burden of sin is, if not a special,
yet a rare benefit: that though I say not Reprobates may feel it, and so heavy
that it presses them to Hell, as Cain and Judas, yet surely it is rare amongst
the people of God; so that I begin to be of opinion, that those graces common
to us with some Castawayes grow mavelous rare amongst the people of God:
Judge of it by these evidences. First, The ventrousnesse of some men into
grossest sins for profit, pleasure, or honors sake. Secondly, The little, or
no grief they work when they are committed. Thirdly, The less care of making
peace with God by Jesus Christ, the Heb. 10.^^.
trampling of his Grace, and mercy under our feet. Fourthly, That common abuse
of it in the vulgar, as if they thought his death had purchased an indulgence,
rather then a pardon for sin: But oh that we could learn to prize it aright;
How might we hope it should still continue amongst us! but as the base esteem of
it amongst Jews remooved it to Gentiles; so e contra, may the base esteem
thereof amongst the Gentiles remoove it back again to the Jews; see Romans 11.24.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you a right understanding in all things.

VERSE. II. And the truth of the Lord endures for ever, praise ye the Lord.
THere be Three sorts of Truth. First, Metaphysicall, whereby things are
truly what they seem, or are conceived; or have the Truth, and Reality of
that Essence which is conceived of them; so God is the Living and 1 These. 1.^.
true God; And Idols false gods, see 1 Cor. 8.4. Secondly, A Logical Truth,
which is the conformity of the conceptions of the mind with the things as they
are, and of the words wherein those things are enunciated, see Romans 3.3, 4. so
God is true, truly conceiving, and enunciating things as they are. Thirdly,
Ethicall Truth, the congruence of all our words with the things, and our
conceptions, and of our facts with our intentions, and pretenses: So here
principally understand David signifies; First, That the Lord truly, and
according to the very truth of things avoucheth whatsoever he avoucheth, and
that without all doubling. Secondly, Promissory, which commonly we call the
faithfulness of God; and it stands in two things. First, The Concord of his
Intention with his Promise. Secondly, The answerablenesse of the fact to the
promise infallible; and hereof speaks the Prophet.

And it is said, To last for ever; because to eternity, and without alteration
he is faithful, and true, and unalterably in all times makes good whatsoever
he has promised.

If any shall say, that after this life, when all promises are performed, there
is no use of such Fidelity?

Answ. Distinguish the virtue from the exercise. Secondly, To all eternity
there is use of Gods fidelity; for that his Saints Continue in their
blessedness, is by virtue of his promise, and fidelity; wherefore Divines also
have said, There is some kind of faith that lasts in heaven, which they call
fidem dependentiae.

Thus far of explication. Now that God is thus true, and faithful in
performing all his purposes, and promises according to his own intention,
Scriptures are plentiful, see Deuteronomy. 7.9. Dan. 9.4. not a word goes out of his
mouth but is exactly performed, see Josh. 21.45. and 23.14. 2 Chronicles. 6.14, 15.
2 King. 10.10. Circumstances exactly kept, confer Genesis 15.13. and Exodus
12.41. yea, as his mercy extends to good, and bad, so his faithfulness often to
them that deal perfidiously in his Covenant, see Romans 3.3, 4. Exemplifications
see plentiful in the story of Scripture.

This point needs rather See 2 Thessalonians. cap. 3. ver. 3. page 233, 234. 235. where
this very point is handled, and repeated. Item page 18. and page 210. ibidem.
explication, then proof.

Object. Where is the promise of his coming? see 2 Pet. 3.4.

Answ. First, Times and Seasons he has kept in his own power, Act. 1.7.
Secondly, Where is thy Reason? He comes not yet, therefore will never come.

Object. How the promise of Temporalities made good, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Answ. Take them with their intended modus, and ye shall see they are all
exactly performed. First, They are not intended to be performed, but on
condition that we demean our selves as becomes Gods children, see Psalm. 89.31,
32. Secondly, Not, but with limitation to expediency; so far as they may
advance our spiritual good; so thought Agur, Pro. 30.8. Thirdly, With
reservation of Power to the promiser; either to chasten particular
delinquencies of his children; or to prove, and try them as seems best unto
him, as Job; and Mar. 10.30. or else to pay in the kind, or in the equivalent,
and by conversion in melius, etc.

Object. But what of Spiritual blessings, they are surely absolutely promised?

Answ. There is certainly much misprision among Gods people; Give me leave
therefore a little distinctly to explicate, how Spiritual blessings are
convayed in the promise: They are of two sorts; I mean so far as they are in
this life vouchsafed. First, Some are as it were the recompense of our Service.
Secondly, Some the qualifications to the Service of God, or the Service it self.

Of the first sort we reckon the Peace of Conscience, and joy of the holy
Ghost, whereof see Gal. 6.16. Romans 14. and 15. Peace and comfort in believing.
Secondly, These are not promised Absolutely; But first with limitation to
expediency; according to the diverse tempers of men's inclinations: some there
are whom feeling of these favors continually, perhaps would encourage to
licentiousness, so headstrong is their natural inclination to evil; those
God withholds these comforts from, and leads them on not without the terrors
of a troubled mind to continue in his fear; Some again of a melting, and
tender disposition, whom rigor would discourage, only mildness, and comfort
incline to obediences; to these does God proportion another kind of promoting.
Secondly, Even herein has God reserved power to chasten the scandalous sins
of his people; Wherefore it is that David so often complains of the Psalm. 88.15,
16.
Terrors he felt in his soul. Thirdly, Withal, his Liberty to make good by
way of exchange, as thus; Though he grant thee not so much peace, and comfort,
yet perhaps he gives thee more fear of his Name; more Case to depart from
evil: and ye may observe in many of Gods people, who to this day were never
able to apply the promises, nor scarce ever knew by experience what Peace of
Conscience meant, that yet their lives are most holy, they are readiest in
good-works, scrupulous of sins that many others swallow up. Fourthly, To put
their faith to the Proof; for who believes not what he feels? Fifthly, And
where find we, that the Time, and Season is here limited; Peace shall be upon
them, Gal. 6.16. and yet perhaps they feel it not till the hour of their
death; many such I have known. Sixthly, And universally thus conceive; No man
can show that God has so bound himself by promise, as to exhibit these
favors to his children. First, Either in like measures. Secondly, Or without
interruption: But with these limits know it is true; mercy shall be upon you,
and peace as upon the Israel of God.

There are a second sort of Spiritual blessings which God has promised; which
serve to qualify them to the Service of himself, and in exercise whereof Gods
Service stands; such are Faith, Hope, Charity, etc. All these are promised to
the Vessels of mercy; but de modo quaeritur; the question is of the manner.
First, That their perfection is not in this life to be expected; nor their
freedom from mixtute with their imperfections; and conflict with them in their
exercise, during state of this life: Show me where God has promised, Faith
without doubting, Fear without security, etc. Reasons of it are; First, To
preserve humility. Secondly, To show that they are not availeable to justify
us. Again, in these gifts we consider Two things. First, Essentiam. Secondly,
Gradum. A Competency of the gifts God has promised to all his servants; see 1
Cor. 1.8. yet not promised to give to all Equality of Degrees and Measures; not
to all Abraham's (...), and Moses his meekness, nor Jobs patience, etc. Reasons
are much what as in the Body. First, Every ones office, and employment require
them not, 1 Cor. 12. Secondly, God would by this make us careful of the means
both to beget, and nourish Grace within us, Ephesians. 4.12. etc. Thirdly, We
distinguish habitum and exercitium; the habits are permanent, the acts and
exercise are often interrupted. Fourthly, Diversities there are of eminence in
all kinds of spiritual gifts; in some, more Knowledge, less Affection; in
some, more Affection then Knowledge; in some, more Mercy, in some, more
Humility, Meekness, Temperance, etc. they are not of them behind in any
gifts, yet many behind others in measures of some gifts, see Phil. 2. And thus
understand, ye shall be forced to confess, God is Faithful and true;
unalterably such, and infallibly making good to all his Servants whatsoever he
has promised.

And this reproves our doubtings sometimes no less then quarrelsome, and
churlish concerning the Truth, and faithfulness of our gracious God; with who
though he be (...), Tit. 1.2. yet is often charged with breach of promise to his
children. And ye may observe it to issue from one of these two grounds. First,
Misunderstanding. Secondly, Misapplication of the Promises. For the first, How
many be there who conceive these promises made absolutely, when yet, as you
have heard, made with limitation? etc. especially when they reflect upon
spiritual blessings; For example, Do these things, ye shall make your 2 Pet.
1.10.
Calling sure; we have done, yet are not assured. Secondly, Peace of Conscience
shall follow them, Gal. 6.16. yet scarce ever attain they the benefit in their
greatest study of New life. Thirdly, Temporalls with the straitest hand reached
to them: Understand ye unwise amongst the people; these are not simply
promised, but, as ye have heard above explained.

As for Misapplication, that ye shall observe of Two sorts. First, One respects
their person. Secondly, The other their state, and behavior. First, Persons,
they mistake the qualification of the persons; supposing the outward form of
religion sufficient to interest them in the Promises: as they did, Romans 2. Mal.
3. and Ier. 7. whereas they are not Jews who are so outward; nor is the promise
made to the Ceremony, but to the Substance of Piety, 2 Timothy 2. Yea, even among
them never so exact, yet shall ye see misapplication: I am persuaded there are
many think themselves Gods Children, who are not so; such as feel flitting
motions of Grace, and some Knowledge, and Faith, and outward Reformation; see
Heb. 6. Shall God be thought unfaithful, because to them the promises are not
performed? It was never intended to any, but to Nathaniels, to Israelites
indeed.

Secondly, in respect of Behavior; for I would suppose thee a child of God;
yet as David and Peter, in particulars oxorbitant; perhaps thou never had
comforts of spirit, Peace of Conscience, cheaerfull exercise of other gracious
gifts, etc. What then? is God therefore unfaithful? yea, Let God be Romans 3.4.
true, and every man a liar; he never meant those comforts, no, not to his own
servants, but whilst they demeaned themselves as servants; If therefore thou
have failed in thy behavior; either breaking out to scandalous sin; or
swelling with Pride, inclined to Presumption; or neglecting means to cherish
Grace, etc. say thou God is unfaithful? rather say, That thou thy self have
failed in the defect of thine own due qualification.

Build we our selves in firm expectation of all good things promised, so far
as they are promised, seem Nature and ordinary Course never so opposite; so did
Romans 4.18, 19
Abraham, etc. There are four degrees of confidence. First, When no means
competent, at least apparent, as in the case of Elisha. Secondly, When means
weak, as in Case of many. Thirdly, when no means, as in our Savior. Fourthly,
When means are opposite, as in Abraham: Give me that Faith that rests on naked
promise of God.

This is amongst those virtues, which admit resemblance in the Creature: The
faithful God ownes not perfidious Children. Man's fidelity has a Twofold
relation. First, To God; God not only binds himself to us by promise, but we
to God have covenanted our obedience; How ready are we failing of what we
desire, to charge God foolishly? when either we mistake the quality, or manner
of the Promise; or else, a thousand to one failed in our Restipulation.
Secondly, To man; and binds with Psalm. 15.4.
loss to support credit of Fidelity: Oh tell it not in Gath, that our
Christians are as Ier. 9.4, 5.
Ieremies Jews, every brother will deceive, and every neighbor deal
treacherously. When shall that golden age return, that the Argument may again
proceed? Sacerdos est, non fallet, Christianus est, non mentietur. Da Deus
verax, and fidelis in promissis. etc.

(...).
FINIS.

