ARTICLES AND ORDINANCES OF WAR; For the present expedition of the Army of
the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

BY HIS EXCELLENCE, the Lord General of the Army.

J.B.

printer's device of James Bryson

EDINBVRGH, Printed by James Bryson, 1640.

ARTICLES AND ordinances of War, etc.
THAT no man pretend ignorance; The publishing of the Articles andordinances of
war.
and that every one may know the duty of his place, that he may do it: The
Articles and Ordinances following, are to be published at the general
randezvous in every regiment apart, by the Marshals of the several Regiments,
and in the presence of all the Officers. The same shall afterward be openly
read to every Company of Horse and foot, and at such times as shall be thought
most convenient by the Lord General: and in like manner shall be made known
to so many as join themselves to be professed Soldiers in the Army. For
this end, every Colonel and Captain shall provide one of those Books, that
he may have it in readiness at all occasions, and every Soldier shall
solemnly swear this following oath,

The oath of Soldiers.
I N. N. promise and swear to be true and faithful in my service to the
Kingdom of Scotland, according to the heads sworn by me in the Covenant. To
honor and obey my Lord General, and all my Superior Officers and Commanders,
and by all means to hinder their dishonor and hurt: To observe carefully all
the Articles of war and Camp discipline: never to leave the defense of this
Cause, nor sly from my Colors so long as I can follow them: To be ready to
watching warding and working, so far as I have strength: To endure and suffer
all distresses, and to fight manfully to the uttermost, as I shall answer to
GOD, and as GOD shall help me.

I. Kirk discipline shall be exercised, and the poor cared for in every
Regiment, Kirk discipline.
by the particular Eldership, or Kirk Session to be appointed, even as uses
to be done in every parosh in the time of peace: And that there may be an
uniformitie throughout the whole Army in all matters Ecclesiastical; there
shall be a general Eldership, or common Ecclesiasticke judicatorie, made up
of all the Ministers of the Camp, and of one Elder direct from every
particular Regiment, who shall also judge of appellations, made unto them from
the particular Sessions or Elderships.

Councels of w^^.
II. For deciding of all questions, debats and quarrellings, that shall arise
betwixt Captains and their Soldiers, or any others of the Army, and for the
better observing of Camp Discipline, two courts of Justice, the one higher and
the other lower, are appointed, wherein all Judges are sworn to do Justice
equally: The higher also to judge of appellations to be made from the lower
court. And if any man shall by word or gesture show his contempt or mis-regard,
or shall fall out in boasting or braving, while Courts are sitting, he shall
be punished by death. And both these Judicatories as well of the Kirk matters
as of war, shall be subject to the council of Estate, and general Assembly
respective.

Duties to God.
III. Whosoever shall wilfully or carelessly absent himself from morning and
evening prayers, or from preaching before and afternoon on the Lords day, or
other days of the week, when the sign is given by sound of Trumpet, or Drum,
he shall be censured and punished for his neglect or contempt, by penalty,
imprisonment, or other punishment, as his fault deserves.

After the warning given, there shall be no Market, nor selling of commodities
whatsoever, till the Prayers or Preaching be ended, upon the pain of
fore-faulting the things so sold, and of the imprisoning of the offenders.

IIII. Common and ordinary swearing and cursing, open profaning of the Lords
day, wronging of his Ministers, and other acts of that kind, shall not only
be punished with loss of pay, and imprisonment, but the transgressors shall
make their public repentance, in the midst of the Congregation, and if they
will not be reclaimed, they shall with disgrace be openly casseered, and
discharged as unworthie of the meanest place in the Army.

V. If any man shall open his mouth against the Kings Majesty's person, or
Authority, Duty to King Country and General.
or shall presume to touch his sacred Person, he shall be punished as a
traitor. He that shall speak evil of the Cause which we defend, or of the
Kingdom and Country in the defense thereof, or shall use any words tending to
the dishonor of the Lord General, he shall be punished with death.

No man shall at his own hand, without warrant of my Lord General, have or
keep intelligence with the enemy, by speech, letters, signs, or any other
way, under the pain to be punished as a traitor. No man shall give over any
Strength, Magazin, victual, etc. Or make any such motion, but upon extremity,
under the same pain. No man shall give supply, or furnish money, victual, or
any commodities to the enemy, upon pain of death.

Whosoever shall be found to do violence against the Lord General his
Safe-guarde, or safe conduct, shall die for it.

Whosoever shall be found guilty of carelessness and negligence in his
service, although he be free of treachery and double dealing, shall bear his
own punishment.

VI. All Commanders and Officers shall be careful, Duties of Superiors.
both by their authority and example, that all under their charge, live in
godliness, soberness, and righteousness: and if they themselves shall be
common swearers, cursers, drunkards, or any of them at any time, shall come
drunk to his Guarde, or by quarrelling, or any other way shall commit any
notable disorder in his quarter, loss of place shall be his punishment: And
further, according to the sentence of the court of war.

The Captains that shall be negligent in training their Companies, or that
shall be found to withhold from their Soldiers any part of their pay, shall
be discharged of their place, and further censured by the court of war.

No Commander or Officer shall conceal dangerous and discontented humors,
inclined to mutinies, or grudging at the orders given them, but shall make them
known to the prime Leaders of the Army, upon the pain to be accounted
guilty of mutiny.

No Commander or Officer shall authorize or wittingly permit any Soldier to
go forth to a singular combat, under pain of death; But on the contrary, all
Officers shall be careful by all means to part quarrellings amongst
Soldiers, although they be of other Regiments, or Companies, and shall have
power to command them to prison, which if the Soldiers shall disobey or
resist by using any weapon, they shall die for it.

No Captain shall presume at his own hand, without warrant of the Lord
General, to casseere or give a Pass to any enroled Soldier, or Officer who
has appeared at the place of the general Randezvous; nor shall any Commander,
Officer, or Soldier depart without a Pass, or stay behind the time
appointed him in his Pass, and whosoever transgresses the one way or the
other, shall be punished at the discretion of the Court of Ware.

Duties of Soldiers.
VII. All Soldiers shall remember that it is their part to honor and obey
their Commanders and therefore shall receive their commands with reverence, and
shall make no noise, but be silent, when the Officers are commanding or giving
their directions, that they may be heard by all, and the better obeyed he that
fails against this, shall be imprisoned.

No Soldier shall leave his Captain, nor servant forsake his master, whether
he abide in the Army or not; but upon license granted and in an orderly way.

Whosoever shall presume to discredit any of the great Officers of the army,
by writ, word, or any other way, and be not able to make it good, and whosoever
shall lift his weapon against any of them shall be punished by death; and
whosoever shall lift his hand against any of them, shall loss his hand.

No Soldier nor inferior officer shall quarrel with, or offer any injury to
his Superior, nor refuse any duty commanded him upon pain of casseering, and
to be further censured by the court of war. And if any shall presume to
strike his Superior, he shall be punished with death. But if it shall happen
that any Officer shall command any thing to the evident and known prejudice of
the public, then shall he who is commanded modestly refuse to obey, and
presently give notice thereof to the Lord General.

If any man shall use any words or ways, tending to mutiny or sedition,
whither for demanding his pay, or upon any other cause, or if any man shall be
privy to such mutinous speeches, or ways, and shall conceal them; both shall
be punished with death.

All must show their valor against the enemy, and not by revenging their
private injuries, which upon their complaints to their superior Officers,
shall be repared to the full. And if any man presume to take his own
satisfaction, or challenge a combat, he shall be imprisoned, and have his
punishment decerned by the marshall court.

The Provost marshall must not be resisted, or hindered in apprehending, or
putting delinquents in prison, and all Officers must assist him to this end,
and if any man shall resist or break prison, he shall be censured by the court
of war.

Duties to others.
VIII. Murder is no less unlawful and intolerable in the time of war, then
in the time of peace, and is to be punished with death.

Whosoever shall be found to have forced any woman, whither he be Commander
or Soldier, shall die for it without mercy. And whosoever shall be found
guilty of adultery or fornication, shall be no less severly censured and
punished then in the time of peace.

Thieves and robbers shall be punished with the like severity. If any shall
spoil, or take any part of their goods that die in the Army, or are killed in
service he shall restore the double and be farther punished at discretion. It
is provided that all their goods be forth coming and be disposed of according
to their testament, and will declared by word or writ before witnesses, or if
they have made no testament, to their wives, children, or nearest kindred,
according to the laws of the Kingdom.

All shall live together as friends and brethren, abstaining from words of
disgrace, contempt, reproach, giving of lies, and all provocation by word or
gesture: He that fails, shall be imprisoned for the first fault, and if he
be incorrigible, he shall be with shame put out of the Army.

Concerning arms.
IX. All Soldiers shall come to their Colors, to watch, to be exercised, or
to muster, with their own Arms, and if any Soldier shall come with another
man's Arms, he shall be punished with rigor, and the lender shall loss his
Arms. All shall come also with complete and tight Arms in a decent manner,
otherwise to be severly punished.

If any man shall sell, or give in pawn his horse, his arms, or any part of
the ammunition committed to him, or any instruments, as Spades, Shovels, Pickes
used in the field, he shall for the first and second time be beaten, through
the quarter, and for the third time be punished as for other thift: And he
that buyeth them, or takes them to pawn, be he Soldier, or Victualler,
shall pay the double of the money, beside the want of the things bought or
impawned, and be further punished at discretion.

Whosoever in a debauched and lewd manner by Cards or Dyce, or by sloth, and
unexcusable neglect, shall loss his horse, and arms in whole, or in part to
the hinderance of the service; And whosoever shall wilfully spoil, or break
his Arms, or any instrument of war committed to him, by cutting down of
trees, or any other way, he shall serve as a pioner, till the loss be made
up, and he furnished upon his own charges.

Concerning marching.
X. No man on his march, or at his lodging within or without the country upon
whatsoever pretext, shall take by violence either horse, cattle, goods, money,
or any other thing, less, or more, but shall pay the usual pryces for his
meat and drink, or be furnished according to the order given by the Lord
General upon pain of death, without mercy.

If any man shall presume to pull down, or set on fire any dwelling house,
though a Cottage, or hew down any fruite-trees, or to waste, or deface any
part of the beauty of the country, he shall be punished most severly,
according to the importance of the fault.

In marching, no man shall stay behind without leave: No man shall straggle
from his Troup or Company. No man shall march out of his rank, and put others
out of order, under all highest pain.

Of musters
XI. If any Colonel of horse or foot shall keep back his Soldiers from the
appointed musters, or shall lend his Soldiers to make a false muster, upon
trial in the court Marshal, he shall be punished as a deceiver. And if any
Muster-master shall use any false Rols, shall have any hand in false Musters,
or by connivence, or any other way be tried, to be accessory to them, he shall
suffer the like punishment.

Victuallers.
XII. No man shall presume to do the smallest injury to any that bring
necessaries to the Leager, whither by stealing from them, or deceiving them, or
by violence in taking their horse or goods, under the pain to be accounted and
punished asenemies. No Victualler shall sell rotten victuals, upon pain of
imprisonment and confiscation, and futher as they shall be judged to deserve.

No Soldier shall provide and sell Victuals, unless he be authorized, nor
shall any that sells Victuals, keep in his Tent or Hutte, any Soldier at
unseasonable hours, and forbiden times, under pain at discretion, Like-as,
all the pryces thereof shall be set down by the general Marshall, and be given
to the Marshall of the several Regiments.

Duties in the Camp.
XIII. No man enrolled professing himself or pretending to be a soldier shall
abide in the Army, unless he enter in some Company, nor shall he that has
entered depart without license upon the pain of death. No man having license
shall stay beyond the time appointed him upon pain of loss of his pay during
the time of his absence, and further punishment at discretion. If any man in a
mutinous way show himself discontent with the quarter assigned him he shall be
punished as a mutiner. And if any man shall stay out of his quarter or go
without shot of cannon being intrinshed, but one night, without leave of his
superior officer he shall be casseerd.

All that shall be absent from the watch after the sign is given for the
setting thereof shall be severely punished. He that reveals or falsifieth the
watchword given by the officer, within the trinches, or before the colors: He
that is taken sleeping or drunken upon his watch: he that comes off the watch
before the time, every one of those shall be punished with death.

If any number of Soldiers shall assemble together, for taking mutinous
counsel upon whatsoever pretext: The Officers joining with them, shall suffer
death: The tenth man of the Soldiers shall be hanged, and the rest condemned
to be pioners, and to purge the Camp, till by some exploit they procure
pardon, and redeem their reputation.

Duties in Battle.
XIIII. Every man when the Alarm is given, shall repair speedily to his
Colors; no man shall forsake or slay from his Colors.

No man in the country shall receipt them that flee.

No man in the Battle shall throw away his Musket, Pick, or Bandileir, all
under the pain of death.

Whatsoever Regiment of horse or foot, having charged the enemy, shall draw
back, before they come to stroke of sword, shall answer for it before a
council of war: And if it be through default of any Officer, he shall be
censured by the Council of war. If the fault be in the Soldiers, the tenth
man shall be punished with death, and the rest put to base service, till by
their valor they prove themselves worthy of a better condition.

Duties after Battle.
XV. If it shall come to pass, that the enemy shall force us to Battle, and
the Lord shall give us victory, none shall kill a yielding enemy, nor save
him that still pursues, upon pain of death. Neither shall there be any
ransoming of persons, spoiling, pillaging, parting of the prey, or wasting and
burning by fire, or disbanding from their charges, or Officers, but as the Lord
General shall give order upon the same pain of death.

Rewards for the weldeserving.
XVI. Every man's carriage shall be diligently observed, and he according to
his merit rewarded or punished: And whatsoever Officer or Soldier shall
carry himself duetifully in his station, and does his part valiantly, in
Battle or fight, shall after the laudable example of the wisest, and worthiest
Kingdoms and Estates, have his honor and reward according to his worth and
deserving, whither hereafter we have peace or war.

Matters that are cleareby the light and law of Nature are presupposed: Things
unnecessarie, are past over in silence: and other things may be judged by the
common customs and constitutions of war, or may upon new emergents, be
expressed afterward.

FINIS.

