GOD and the KING, In a sermon preached at the Assizes holden at BURY S.
EDMONDS, June 13. 1631.

BY THOMAS SCOT Bachelour in Divinity, and Minister of the word at S. CLEMENTS
in Ipswich.

Printed by the Printers to the University of Cambridge, 1633.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr THOMAS JERMYN Knight, Vicechamberlain of his
Majesty's household, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
SIR, your renowned father was the first Patron of all my studies, whereby he
might justly have challenged the harvest of all mine endeavors: all his rights
are hereditarily descended to your self; among which, I humbly crave, my
duteous respect may be reckoned for one; as an evidence whereof, I do most
lowly present to your Honor this little piece, humbly praying it may be valued
not by it is own worth, but the mind of the giver; who professes himself bound
to live and die in duty to your house, and will not cease daily to pray for
your felicity temporal and eternal, nor to be

Your Honors most obliged and truly devoted, THOMAS SCOT.

blazon or coat of arms

EZRA 7.26. And whosoever will not do the law of thy God and the Kings law, let
him have judgment without delay.


WHat Almighty God is in his great monarchy of the world, that (in his
proportion) is every absolute King in his own dominion: for he is in Gods place
unto his people, to nourish and protect them. Now because no one man can do
Gods office (who is all eye and all ear, and all in every place) Kings are
enforced to use the ministry of inferior helps, to be eyes, ears, and hands
for them; that as the sun whose office it is to enlighten all the world
(which by it is own beams it cannot do at one instant) is therefore enforced to
communicate himself to other stars, who in his absence may give light and
influence: so Kings (it being impossible that they should be present at all
affairs of their kingdom) do lend some of their own authority to lesser
lights, who do hear and see, and do for them; among which lights the Judges of
a land, to whom sacred justice is committed, are not the least. This was not
unknown to that great King Artaxerxes, who intending the full restoration of
the people, city, and temple of the God of heaven, gave order in the verse
before for Judges to be set over them; and (though himself an heathen King)
made Ezra his Chancellor to give them this divine charge, that, Whosoever will
not, etc.

Out of which charge (that I may neither slovenly chop it into gobbits, nor
curiously mince it to a gallamafrie) these particulars (God assisting) shall be
insisted upon.

First, That in judgment there must be no partiality: Secondly, That obstinate
offenders are chiefly to be looked unto: Thirdly, That Gods honor is first to
be provided for: Fourthly, That the Kings law must also be freed from
violation: Fifthly, That judgment must in these cases take her due course. And
lastly, That execution must be speedy. And this is the treasure of the Text:
now see the mine where I dig it. Partiality is prevented, in that general,
Whosoever: Obstinacy noted in these words, Will not: Gods honor is first
provided for in the precedence of Gods law: The Kings in the next place, by
subjoyning the Law of the King: Justice is brought in for her part, Let him
have judgment: Speedy execution commanded, Without delay. WHOSOEVER WILL NOT
etc. Of all which while I speak, in my Masters name I boldly call for audience:
in mine own name I most lowly crave your Christian and favorable patience.

First, There must be no partiality in judgment; Whosoever: as if he should
have said, How great or mean soever, noble or ignoble, rich or poor, friend or
enemy; the one not to be feared, the other not to be pitied. I confess, all
offenders are not alike: but this difference arises not from the quality of
the offender, 2. Chron. 19.6.
but of the offense. Jehoshaphat told his Judges that their judgment was Gods
not man's, intimating that they ought to judge as God himself would, who accepts
no persons. And he whose Dixit was his Fecit, has said they are, Psalm. 82.6.
and therefore has made them to be, gods: wherefore as in other things, so in
impartiality their judgments must be little types of Gods great assizes, where
sin shall be judged in all persons alike, saving that the greatness of the
person shall add to the punishment: for the mighty shall be mightily
tormented, Wis. 6.6. Viri sublimis culpa grave peccatum est, says S. Austin.
The greater the man, the greater is the sin. Varnish is no color of it self;
but yet it adds luster to every color: so greatness and eminency of person
is of it self neither virtue nor vice; but yet it gives a great addition to
either. So then the cause, and not the person, must be judged: for Whosoever
etc.

I would willingly (before I leave this point) disgrace this sin of
partiality in judgment by showing the pedigree of it, and what house it comes
of; namely either from bribes, favor, rash anger, or cowardice: evil eggs
all; for neither barrel, better herring.

First from bribes; as is to be seen Exodus 23.8. as also Deuteronomy. 16.19. where we
hear that A reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the words of
the just* two dangerous effects upon two principal parts in doing justice,
making the receiver first to have a mist before his eyes, and to be stricken
with deceptio visus; and then, not discerning the cause, must of necessity
pervert his words, yea casts him into a fit of convulsion, and draws his mouth
clean awry; and then how can he give right judgment? Ah! fie upon this
stinking wages of unrighteousness; 2. Pet. 2.15.

2. Next from favor, procured by letters, friends, favorites, servants, and
the like: for all these will stickle now and then in bad causes, and Judges do
too often listen to such motions, thereby making others indebted to them
against such an occasion. But letters of this nature are best answered with
silence: as for friends and favorites, a Judge in his robes, upon the seat of
judgment, should be no man of this world; but like the Angels in heaven, where
they neither marry, Matt. 22.30.
nor are given in marriage; that is, all earthly relations do cease. As for
your servants, if they move in a cause, suspect those lesser wheels to be newly
oyled, or else they would not go so round: yea of all these say, Magis amica
veritas, I will lose you all for justice sake.

3. Sometime from anger: No passion but is an evil guide in execution of
justice, even too much compassion; for there is a cruel mercy: but there is
none so impetuous and dangerous, as this of anger: for if there be an angry
prejudice against the person, even slender probabilities will seem vehement
presumptions, and presumptions will appear pregnant evidence. Anger is the
drunkenness of the mind, which robs a man of himself: nay, it is a short
madness, differing from it only in duration: for if a man should ever be as
in his passion, with eyes staring, countenance red and inflate, teeth grating
and interfering, tongue stutting and stam^^^^ng, hands shaking and trembling,
and all actions thus irregular, showing laesum principium; who would not say,
this man were distracted? But if Socrates would not beat his boy when he was
angry, how much more should all ministers of justice banish this heady passion
from the judgment seat, lest they heat the oven seven times hotter in their
own cause then in Gods, proceeding in heat against the person, and not in zeal
against the sin?

4. Lastly, from fear or cowardice: this cast away Nabaoth; the Judges had
letters written in Achabs name, and sealed with his seal, and they durst not go
against the Kings Mandamus. With this the Jews brought on Pilate to give
sentence of death against the Lord of life, who adjudged him both to die and to
be guiltless of death, Ne non videretur amicus Caesari, Lest he should not be
Cesars friend, or rather, lest Caesar should not be his friend: But how much
better had it been, if these Judges had preferred the displeasure of the great
Judge of all the world? and said, Da veniam, Imperator; tu minaris carcerem,
Deus gehennam: I will forfeit mine head, or mine office, rather then my truth.
Thus they who be in scarlet should be valiant men. Nah. 2.3.
To betray a cause for want of courage, is worse then for want of
understanding: this is of ignorance, but that is voluntary; therefore not to be
expiated but by double sacrifice.

A minister of justice of the two had better be (...), then (...), without an
head of knowledge, then an heart of execution. But join head and heart together
in this sacred cause, wisdom going before like a (...), and courage coming
after like a puissant army. And this be said of the first point against this
base-born Partiality, descended either from reward, favor, passion, or
cowardice; only let me add, that, No error in justice does so directly fly
to the throat, as respect of persons does: other do but lame her, but this
gives her the deadly and mortal wound.

The second point is, Obstinate offenders are chiefly to be looked unto;
Whosoever will not, etc. This obstinacy is indeed an Alecto in another
likeness, a mere mock-vertue, walking under the habit of constancy or
fortitude, (as many other vices have their cloaks also) but we shall uncase him
presently. These obstinates be of two sorts, Dogmaticall, and Practical: the
one in opinion, the other in life and conversation.

The Dogmaticall obstinates are such as err in judgment: as Schismatics led
by a particular spirit, erring on the right hand; and Papists who are carried
with conceit of the religion of their fathers and forefathers, and these err
on the left hand: both of them thinking themselves constant, but are indeed
obstinate, as we know. To both I say with S. Paul, It is good to be zealous in
a good thing. Galat. 4.18.
But of these after in as fit a place.

The Practical obstinates are they we now have to deal withal. They who do
not obey must have judgment; but it is a great and unsufferable increase of
the fault, when men will not obey: for Non obedire shuts the door, but Nolle
obedire does bolt and rampiere it up against all duty to God and the King. Such
S. Romans 1.30.
Paul calls (...), haters of God, and hated of God: Acts 5.39.
these be (...), such as will not have God to reign over them; like Pharaoh,
who blusters at Gods message, Exodus 5.2.
saying, Who is the Lord? not unlike the Thracians, who in thunder and
lightning used by way of revenge to shoot shafts at Jupiter. They are described
in Scripture to have words, thoughts, and lives, all peremptorily wicked. For
their words, they are stout against the Lord, saying, Depart from us, etc. They
set their mouth against heaven, Job. 21.14. Psalm. 73.9.
and their tongue walks throughout the earth. Psalm. 12.4.
Our lips are our own; who is Lord over us? Their thoughts are no better, for
they are haughty in their own conceit, therein making a fool of the whole
world. As for their lives, they have a resolution quidlibet audendi: tell them
of death and hell; they are at a point for that, They have made a league with
death, See Isa. 28.18.
and with hell they are at agreement: And as for counsel (the medicine of
putrid minds) either they will not be charmed, like the adder which,
Cassiodorus says, stops one ear against the earth, the other with his tail;
or if in any fit they give it the hearing, they take it by whiffes as they do
tobacco, it is no sooner in, but it is out with a puff. In their soaring
presumptions they build Babels: but as they begin in pride, so they end in
confusion; for this obstinacy in sinning, is ever the punishment of custom in
sin, and is that which S. Paul calls the reprobate mind. Romans 1.^8.
These are in respect of Gods and the Kings laws, very outlaws and lords of
misrule in a Commonwealth. The character of this obstinate is this, or such
like; By birth he is a Gentleman, or at least an heir of one who lived poor
to leave him rich; he is brought up to nothing but to live upon his lands; for
the most part he comes to his lands at one and twenty, and by that time, though
young in years, yet is he old in wickedness; by four and twenty has spent
good part of his estate, and if possibly he can he will sell his land twice or
thrice over; he never names God but to swear by him; he is a coyner or minter
of new and execrable oaths; he fears not God, nor man, save Sergieants, and
Baliffes; he has already traveled through many prisons; he owes for clothes
of six or seven several fashions, yet he loses no rent, for he takes it all
aforehand: he undoes his tenants by suretiship; for the young master, if he
gets into an Inn, he comes not out till his horse pay the reckoning, and there
out of his window scoffs at those who go to church; his discourse is nothing
but railing upon, and disgracing the better minded Justices, and other
ministers of justice; in every quarrel he is either principal or second; he
is a night-walker, and if he should never be drunk, he would die for want of
sleep; where ever he comes he misuses the Constable, and beats the watch; he
never comes in any public assembly but a play, nor rides through a town
without smoke at his nose: but in process of time, his means spent, his credit
cracked, his hopes forlorn, having nothing left of a Gentleman, but his long
lock and his sword, he had rather lack life then living, and either kills a man
or takes a purse, and is brought to the assizes: Where if ye meet any such,
remember the charge, Whosoever will not etc.

The law of thy God etc. It Is true, the charge proceeded from an heathen King,
but not from an heathen spirit; and is recorded by the Spirit of God, to be a
moving president, and authentic copy for all Kings to write after. Blessed be
God, our King, when he gives this charge, alters the terms, and says for Thy
God, My God, and does so charge it upon his Judges, and all inferior ministers
of justice in their several orbs, that, Whosoever will not obey the law of My
God etc. Now if heathen Artaxerxes could stoop so low, as to let the law of
Ezra's God go before his own: how much more (by a binding argument from the
less to the greater) will it be expected from all Kings who own him for their
God? So that the naming Gods law before the Kings, is not bare complement, and
for manners sake only; but for the natural precedence thereof. And verily
when God made all this world, and brought man not to the bare walls of it, but
as the be to the hive, even ready stockt and stored with variety of
creatures, both for necessity and delight, and placed order therein by his
providence to keep the same in reparation, that as men have dominion over
creatures, so some men are made Gods deputies to rule over men: all this was
not to part with his glory to another, or to stand to the courtesy of others,
to be at their carving and allowance for his honor; but that all men, even
Kings, should hold all of him in Capite, and do him homage for his goodness,
the Lord granting us indeed the good and sweet of his favors, but as a rent or
tribute, by way of acknowledgement, reserving the honor of them to himself.
Hence it is, that in Scripture wheresoever the Kings power is spoken of, there
is also expressed, or at least intimated, Gods supremacy. If Paul says, Be
obedient to higher powers, he adds, Romans 13.1.
For they are of God. If Christ says, Matt. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar that which is Cesars, he also says, Give to God that which is
Gods. If Solomon says, Honor the King, Prove. 24.21.
he has first said, Fear God. And so here Artaxerxes premiseth the law of God
before the law of the King. Nay, if this be not so, what do ye here? do ye not
come to hear Gods charge before ye show the Kings commission; as if that could
not take place, till this had made way for it? Hence is it also that all good
Kings and Magistrates in Scripture began their reign and government with doing
something for God and religion, as is evident in Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon,
and the rest: and of famous memory was that of blessed Queen Elisabeth, who
first bound up that tender-babe the Church of England in the swathing band of
reformation, before she provided any thing for the establishment of her own
throne, by the subjects recognition of her title to the imperial Crown. And
for shame let not us give less to God, then the heathen to their Idols, with
whom A Jove princip^um was a perpetual rule, ever beginning all their solemn
actions with sacrifice to their gods. The Lord reserved in the Old law as
sacred to himself, the first fruits, and firstlings in every kind, teaching us
in all things to serve God of the first, and best. And what is the Kings law
without Gods? what is the Kings peace without Gods peace? outward prosperity
without religion? nay, peace is no peace without religion: unity without verity
breeds not peace, but conspiracy. Oh then let God be the Alpha and Omega of
this sacred action: let the beginning be with God, by his assistance, the
ending for God, by providing for his honor.

And the Kings law etc. There be two sorts offended with this clause. First the
Anabaptists, who cannot endure any law of magistracy: accounting all compelling
and restraining government, plain tyranny; showing thereby their mutinous
minds, desiring omnia complanare, to beat down all enclosure of magistracy,
and to lay all level and common: and then what could follow, but that every
one would do what seemed good in his eyes, if there were no law of the King in
Israel? Secondly the Papists, who though they can brook Kings and many of their
laws, yet they cannot endure them so near God and his law, but there must be
room left between God and the King for the Pope, whom his flatterers call
Vice-god, Monarch of the Christian world, Defender of the Papal omnipotency.
(oh blasphemy!) And as for Emperors and Kings, they be but as the Moon,
borrowing their light from him their Sun; and are nothing but his vassals, to
hold his stirrup, to lead his horse, to carry his canopie, to hold his basin
when he washes, and to be deposed or exalted at his pleasure. But then let him
take it with the appurtenances: He is Antichrist for his labor, exalting
himself, according to S. Paul's prophecy, 2. These. 2.4.
(...), above all that is called God, as Kings are by God himself, Psalm. 82.6.
But ask Tertullian; he tells us that Kings are homines a Deo secundi, and solo
Deo minores, Next to God, and second to none but God: and, as Chrysostom,
(...), Kings have no peer upon earth, but are the top and head of all men. And
so, for all Anabaptists and Papists, we affirm the fourth point, That next to
Gods the Kings law must also be freed from violation. Those whom God has
joined together let no man put asunder: such are every where God and the King,
God and Caesar, Gods law and the Kings law: and indeed they be twins, to laugh
and mourn, to live and (in some sense) to die together. The Kings law does clap
a shore to Gods law; not that Gods law is in it self weak and needs it, but
because men are not so well bred, as for conscience or love of goodness to
obey, but are much swayed by temporal reward or punishment by man's law
distributed or inflicted. If any ask whether the Kings law does bind
conscience as Gods law does; I answer, That Gods law is immediately seated upon
the conscience, man's law is seated upon the conscience too, but mediately, and
as it has authority from Gods law: for God does permit Kings to make laws as
Kings do Corporations, and Colleges to make Constitutions, provided always
that they contain in them nothing contrary to a statute law: So that though the
Kings law does challenge obedience, as Gods law does, and gives as it were the
same arms, yet (like a younger brother) it must be with distinction. If any ask
further in what things the law of man has power to command with strictest tie;
I answer, That as Merchants sometime suffer their servants in the time of their
apprentishood, to trade for themselves in some commodities, wherein they
themselves do not deal: So properly the law of man has his principal strength
in things of their own nature indifferent; for these be neither commanded nor
forbidden in Gods law: To conclude this point, The Kings law is the sinew of
all government, which to cut, is to ham-string Church and Commonwealth; for it
is better to live where nothing, then where every thing is lawful.

Let him have judgment etc. By this time Justice calls out to all her retinue,
Judges, Justices, Jurours, etc. Is there any who will not obey etc? I charge
you let him have judgment, whosoever he be; and says in Gods words, Thine eye
shall not spare in judgment. And hear your charge, O ye Ministers of justice:
she has made you executours of her will, and has bound you all by oath well
and truly to perform it, so far as Gods and the Kings law shall bind you:
See then ye discharge and not deceive the trust reposed in you, lest Church and
Commonwealth, the orphans whose guardians ye be, do lose religion and peace,
the legacies which she has bequeathed them. Judex, says Isidore, is
jus-dicens: for the Judge is a speaking law, and the law is a silent Judge.
Verily the law is a dead letter till the Judge breaths the breath of life into
it by execution, which is the edge and life of it. The law sees nothing but by
the eyes of the Judge, and Judges are the eyes of the Commonwealth: which if
they be by any means put out, a State, though never so potent, is but like
big-limbed Polyphemus, ready for ruin; or mighty Sampson, pulling down all
upon their heads, to their own and the ruin of all engaged with them in the
same condition. Cicero could say, that Impunitie is the greatest breeder and
nurse of transgression that may be: For to let malefactors go without
judgment, either not at all or condignly punishing them, is but to stroke the
offenders on the head, as Eli did with a Do no more so, my sons, and so to
give them and other after them a kind of commission to do the like. Take heed
of a weak affectation of merciful Judges, or merciful Juries; take heed (I
say) ye do not thereby encourage sin, and clap it on the back. Can that be
mercy, which is unjust? The greatest and most admired mercy that ever the world
saw, even that whereby we must all live for ever, was it with neglect of
justice? No: for Ecce benignitatem and severitatem Dei may also to this great
work be applied, it being hard to determine whether Gods adopted sons found
more mercy, or his natural son more severitie. Bonis nocet qui malis parcit,
says Seneca; By sparing one ye are injurious to many; for Chrysostom says
well, Dum parcebatur lupo, mactabatur grex, Spare the wolf, and the flock goes
to wrack. What though the vulgar account you hard Judges? remember the answer
of a King of Thrace to one telling him that (in regard of his severitie) he
played the madman and not the King, Oh, says the King, this my madness makes
my subjects sound and wise.

Without delay. Yet no more haste then good speed; mature deliberation must go
before execution: nothing must be judged before the time; for that were not
speedy but rash judgment, an evil in our private and petty carriages severely
forbidden, therefore much more in public and weighty affairs. But when the
way is made, and the offender convicted, then Judges must (like Almighty God)
be swift witnesses; for sin and punishment must ride both on one horse, let
him that has done the work have his wages; for in criminal causes it is as
crying a sin to detein it, as from the honest labourer: And this has no
less place in personal causes between man and man, which if they hang long
before a Judge, it is as a sore long under a chirurgians hand, or a quartane
ague, which is opprobrium medicorum.

Thus have I with your Honorable and Christian an patience passed through the
points propounded; I have washed and searched the wounds, and also prepared the
plaster: Now give me leave, I beseech you, to lay it on (as tenderly as I can)
in a few words of Application: wherein I intend healing, not exasperating; but
if any sore smart, it is because it is festred or ranckled, not by any corrosive
in the balm. And now what shall I do? shall I be silent and give in a verdict
of Omnia been? that is indeed the shortest cut, and safest way; but so should I
make all your sins mine own: No, we must review every piece of the Text, and
charge the same upon all the Ministers of justice, great and small, upon Judges
the Kings eyes in their circuits, upon Justices the Judges eyes in their
divisions, upon Jurours who are the scales of justice to weigh all actions, and
upon witnesses who put these weights into the scales. But oh hard task, to rake
in this kennell, to speak of the many-headed vice in all these particulars,
without dislike from you, or check from mine own conscience! so that I may say
in Persius his words, Oh, si fas dicere. Sed fas. Shall the stage in a play,
and the Poet in a peal of Satyrs deride your sins with a profane spirit?
and shall the Spirit of God in the pulpit be confined? or must the Preacher
stoop at pulpit-doore to take measure of his hearers feet? God forbid; I am
sent this day on Gods errand to you all; which if it should not please,
remember I beseech you that I am but a poor messenger, and must do my message
at mine own peril. First there must be no partiality in judgment. And give me
leave, most Honored Lords (lest I should commit a sin of partiality while I
speak against it) in the first place to address my self to your Honors. I
have an awful and reverend respect of your places and persons; yet remember, I
beseech you, that humility in eminency is a singular virtue, if (like the
soaring eagle or towering hawk) the higher ye be, the less ye seem: and I do
well know your labors and pains are great: for magna fortuna, magna servitus:
your difficulties also are more then we can imagine; you have the wind and
storms in your faces, when we be under the lee; and being fathers of the
Commonwealth, do wake for us when we do sleep. I meddle not with your
employments of state; they are out of my reach, I am no eaves-dreeper of state;
it is for me to observe the ground-winde, not the rack-winde; I keep me
therefore within the compass of my Text, and desire your Honors seriously to
ponder, that acceptance of persons in judgment is a stinking abomination in
the nostrils of the Almighty, whether it be for reward, favor, passion, or
cowardice. For the first, mine own breast does clear your selves, that ye be
not as those Judges in Plutarch, who ever came to the judgment seat, as to a
golden harvest, and I hope ye will as well look to the fingers of those about
you. Let it not be with you, as with many great ones, who are said to allot no
other wages or reward to their servants, but their avales of this nature:
partiality for favor finds easier entrance then the former: but I beseech you
remember, that public places afford not means of pleasuring private friends,
but follow that memorable example of Cleon, who being called to the government
of the Commonwealth, assembled all his intimate friends, and disclaimed all
inward amity with them. And most truly says Tully, He deprives himself of the
office of a friend, who takes upon him the person of a Judge. Yet also take
heed of the contrary, of being transported with anger: we use not troubled
water till it be settled, we bring not a rough and unmannaged horse to the
turney; no more should you unbridled affections to the judgment seat; but when
ye robe your bodies, ye should also apparel your minds with calmed
affections. I confess there is an anger becoming a Judge, for one says, Qui
caret ira, caret justitia, He who cannot be angry, cannot be just: but this is
to be understood of that anger which whets courage, not of that which blinds
wisdom.

As for fear, it is too base an humor to trapper justice, the over-fearfull man
is but a piece of a man. Claudius (the first of the Cesars) his mother was wont
to say of him for his faint-heartednesse, that nature had begun, but not
perfected him. The Egyptians had a law, that if great men should command Judges
against law, they should refuse it: and Trajan when he invested any Praetour by
giving him the sword, would command him to use it even against himself, in case
he violated law or equity. Plutarch worthily reproves Agesilaus for writing
thus to one of his Judges in favor of an offender; Si insons est, dimitte; sin
minus, mea causa dimitte: utcunque dimitte: If he be guiltless, good reason he
should be discharged; if he be guilty, for my sake discharge him: but guilty or
not guilty, see he be discharged. But let your judgement-seats be (like
Solomon's throne) supported on both sides with lions. Oh let Judges be absolute
and independent, not having their scantlings given them, and their sentences
molded to their hands: for this is to be an apprentise, and not a master in
the art.

In the next place I turn my speech to the worshipful Justices, who are also
Minores Dii, and the second sons of justice: Carry an even hand among your
neighbors, help not to smother drunkenness, basterdy, or any wickedness in
any, though allied or linked in any relation; prosecute not a small error over
eagerly in one, whereat ye connive in another: in a word, let there be no one
sit on our bench, in whom the country may observe that the baskets not
walking, not giving worship, cap and knee enough, not coming in upon your
carting days, not saluting you on Newyeares day morning, or any such mean
respect, or other disrespect will incense you to whet the sword of justice, and
so to avenge your private conceits.

Now a word to the Jurours and witnesses, and let it be spoken not only to
them who are so at this assizes, but to all that have been before, or that may
be hereafter: for I would fain for this short Christmas keep open house, and
give every one something. Let me therefore tell you Jurours, There must be no
partiality in judgment: but when ye have heard the case opened, counsel speak
on both sides, ye know the issue to be tried, ye have heard the proof on both
sides, then when ye go together ye have the scales of justice put into your
hands to weigh the evidence, ye cannot but see which carries most weight, which
scale goes up and which goes down: Now let not reward, liberal charges, or
expectation of future kindenesses; let not favor, alliance, or neighborhood,
or any such respect; let not anger or malice; let not fear or cowardice make
the verdict: but for love of God, for love of justice, for love of your
country, for love of your own souls do that is right without partiality. But
have all Jurours done thus? or will all do thus? Oh no; for how frequent is it
for a Jurour to be prepossessed of a cause, and to resolve not to go against
his neighbor, neighbors friend, his kinsman, his old masters son, his Lords
tenant, and the like; thinking it but a small courtesy and not to be denied,
to lend one another an oath in such cases; and so against all right do bring in
a verdict which makes the Judge amazed, the whole Court astonished, and justice
clean overturned; and all this by a Suffolk Jury, a place not civilized only,
but noted for religion. But what does such a Jury? First it tells a loud lie,
for it is before all the County: next, they call God to witness this lie by
falsifying their oath; and as much as lies in them they make him a party:
besides, they justify the wicked and condemn the just: fourthly, they rob and
perhaps undo the party against whom they go: lastly (without Gods wonderful
mercy) they cast away their own souls. Oh! what heart bleeds not to see souls
thus thronging to hell by the dozens?

As for witnesses, whose testimony makes the cause weighty or light, and who
also bind themselves solemnly by oath to speak the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, (here is no evasion) yet how common is it with some to be
Knights of the post, for a small reward to be able to frame an oath of any
size? yea some will do it for a meals meat, and thus deeply transgress for a
morsel of bread: yea, for a need a man may find some who will swear to things
done before they were born. Others for favor and their friends will
desperately stretch their consciences; but, if there be malice, one would
wonder at their sound tales against witches and other offenders, and how again
they will mince the truth for fear of greatness: but remember, a false
witness shall not go unpunisht: for God either pays them at the stub, by
showing some special judgment upon them; or, if it be deferred (without deep
repentance) they have it with interest in hell for ever.

Gods honor and the Kings must be freed from violation: for I find them
together in the Text, and so I Will keep them in the Application. The sturdy
sins and obstinate vices of the times against Gods law and the Kings, are
those for whom justice at all hands calls for judgment. I pitch only upon
four which I take to be the bleeding wounds and running sores of this
Kingdom; all forbidden by the law of God and the King: These are Superstitious
Popery, Blasphemous Swearing, Profane Sabbath-breaking, and Beastly
drunkenness. A word of each. First, Popery violates the honor of God; it
being inglorious to each Person in the Trinity: to the Father, by attempting
an Index expurgatorius upon the very Commandments of God, by rasing out the
second: to Christ, by setting up a company of miserable saints for mediators,
and joining works to his all-sufficient sacrifice: to the Holy Spirit, by
making the Popes lewd holiness to be Christ his unerring vicar upon earth, as
if Christ were Non-resident from his Church, when he has said he will be with
it to the end by his Spirit: It is also against the Kings law and honor; for
it reaches at his Crown, and (if the Catholic cause requires) at his life
too, by setting some base villain for an Assassinate, to change his miscreant
life, for the sacred life of Gods Anointed: and a King thus dead, by them dies
an excommunicate and accursed person; and the other an allowed and canonized
Martyr. Now the professors of this religion among us, be among the obstinate
offenders; for few of them will confer, to be informed; they who will
confer, will not be convicted; or if they be by Scriptures and arguments
convicted, yet will they not be convinced; and if I had them to speak too, I
should have little hope to do them good: yet they shall give me leave to bemone
their condition. Poor souls, (I speak of our common seduced ones) they have no
religion but that which is in Feofees hands: and in whose hands is it? The
Italian proverb tells us, The worst of Catholics are Priests, the worst of
Priests are made Cardinals, the worst of Cardinals made Pope. And the Pope thus
bred, is the Feoffee in whom they betrust all their religion: for they have no
Faith but that of the Church, to believe as the Church believes (a short cut to
heaven indeed.) And who is this Church? is it not the Pope vertually, and that
upon this conceit that he cannot err? and yet some, nay most of these Popes
have been Sodomites; and yet he cannot err: all of them have been ambitious
Symonists; and yet he cannot err: Some have mixed poison with the Sacrament;
(and so, if there were any such thing as transubstantiation, had poisoned
Christ himself) and yet he cannot err: Some have been Heretics condemned by
their successors; and yet he cannot err: Some have been Sorcerers and
Necromancers; and yet he cannot err: He must not be reproved, though he should
carry millions of souls to hell; and yet he cannot err: One was a woman; and
yet he cannot err: sometimes there have been Popes and Antipopes together; and
yet he cannot err: sometime none at all for diverse years together; and then
only he could not err. Behold your Religion, your Faith, your Church, your
God in this your Pope, O Catholics: Poor souls, who bear so great adventure
in so leaking a bottom! If these things be so (and many here present know them
undoubtedly to be so) may we not wonder that so many are seduced upon these
grounds? but more, that this heresy should daily gather strength and number,
and what the reason should be of the increase of Popery? We have good laws
against them, but they (like our arms) lie up and rust. What, do we not still
smell the gunpowder, beyond which is Terra incognita, no man knowing what is
between it and hell? do we not know that for these sixty years and more, they
have labored of nothing so much as the undoing of their dearest country,
which bred and bare them? Blessed be God, we have the law in our hands: for had
they it in theirs, their little finger would be heavier upon us, then our whole
body is upon them. Judges complain for want of information: what, have the
Justices none in their divisions? or do their lands lie too near together?
some others complain, they have promoted, and nothing done. Well, I beseech
you, all join to put those laws in execution: but (alas!) they are put rather
to execution, like those excellent proclamations against Priests and Jesuits;
which once proclaimed, no more is done, but to nail them to a post, and there
they hang like malefactors. But remember, I beseech you all, that Sarah and
her son can have no security, unless Hagar and her brat be beaten out of
doors. Superstitious Papists will not obey the law of God, nor the Kings law;
therefore Let them have judgment without delay.

Secondly, Gods law and the Kings is violated by blasphemous swearing. Our land
has mourned by plague, pestilence, and famine; and why not for oaths? is there
any thing dearer to God, then his name? has he not set a penalty upon the
breach of this commandment more then upon any other? and yet how savagely and
barbarously is it kicked, spurned, tossed, and blasphemed by all sorts, from
Nobles to Peasants! I see and observe that Noblemen and Gentlemen, give over
any fashion when it grows common: oh that they would give over swearing, seeing
every clown and carter, every hostler and tapster will swear completely. We
know also the Kings law against this sin; but men will not see it executed,
but will suffer that infamy put upon Gods name, that they will not endure in
their own. What, my good name, says every one? oh, you touch my freehold:
nay, men will not endure their Father, Master, or Friend to be touched in his
name, but will draw their swords in the quarrel: and is not Gods name as dear
to him, as thine to thee? or is not God more to thee, then Friend, Master, or
Father? Suffer not then so great dishonor done to his name; but carry every
oath to the Justice, and let him pay his twelve pence, a petty penalty indeed
for so great a sin, but yet if duly executed, I presume by this time many
great men had been reformed, or else sworn out of all their living. But alas
(say some) the Justices themselves will swear sometimes: Oh! say not so: what
the keepers of the vines not to keep their own vines? to be the guardians of
the Kings law, and themselves to be breakers of it? I dare not entertain such a
thought of many of them: but if any do break this law, I charge him upon his
oath to execute the law upon himself; seeing he never swears, but in the
hearing of a Justice of peace. To end this point, I can never sufficiently
bewail the misery of the present and succeeding generation, seeing now oaths do
even strive for number with words, and children in the streets can no sooner
speak then swear. To all swearers therefore I say, Why will ye hazard Gods
threatened displeasure for a sin so needless, and yet so dangerous? To others
I say, suffer none to vomit and belch out oaths in thy hearing, without
penalty of the Kings law. Blasphemous swearers do violate Gods law and the
Kings; therefore Let them have judgment without delay.

In the next place, Gods and the Kings law is broken by profane
sabbath-breaking: for God has placed this commandment between the first and
second table, like the common sense between the exterior and interior senses,
as being useful to both: for without it, piety to God and charity to man
cannot be such as they should. Hence it is that God accounts the profaning his
day, the eversion of all religion, as appears in many places. We may
conjecture what care man ought to have in the keeping, by the Lords care in the
deliverie of it, for he sent it not abroad naked, like many of the other
commandments; but clothed it (as Joseph) with a garment of diverse colors: it
is in words larger, in reasons fuller then any of the rest. First, there is a
Memento, for fear of forgetfullnesse; Remember. Next, the bounty of God, for
fear of repining; Six days shall thou etc. Thirdly, the sovereignty of it, for
fear of contemning; It is the sabbath of the Lord etc. Fourthly, the generality
of it, for fear of misapplication; Thou, and thy son etc. Fifthly, the Lords
example and benediction, for fear of exception. Thus you see it fortified with
an high fence, that it might be made strong for his own self, and like mount
Zion, not to be moved. We are not ignorant also of the Kings pious laws in
force for the observation of it; yet in despite of both, in many places, how do
people grudge to give God the seventh part of their life? at least they will
incroach a little, having some odd job or other to do on that day: nay, (alas)
what marketting, what drinking and bowsing, what fidling and dancing, and
generally what profaning this day almost every where is to be seen? in so much
that this day brings forth more sin then any, ( I think I may say) then all
the days of the week: and if any Turk or Pagan should come into many places
among us, and ask the reason why we leave our work, and wear our best clothes
on that day; and answer should be made, We keep this day holy to our God: it
were enough to make him forswear Christianity, or giving their names to that
God, who is content to be served on such a fashion. But ye know your charge,
Let then profane sabbath breakers also have judgment without delay.

Lastly, beastly drunkenness is also against Gods and the Kings law.

Gods law every where pronounces woes against this sin, denouncing ruin to
body, goods, and good name; yea by name excluding drunkards out of his
kingdom. The truth is, a drunkard puts himself in the ready way to break every
commandment; for when he cease to be himself, he is in a fair possibility to
be any thing; for drunkenness never goes alone, but is attended by the black
guard of other sins, as oaths, railings, mutinies, quarrels, fightings,
murders, chambering, wantonness, ribaldrie, adulteries, and what not? so that,
in mine opinion, a man must first hood-winck his charity, before it can lead
him to believe a drunkard not to be every way vicious: and is it not a common
plea with men of this rank, to excuse these and other great sins, by saying,
they were not themselves? Thus is it against Gods law.

The Kings law has also wholesomely provided against this overflowing sin,
as we know; but yet (maugre them both) with what a deluge of drunkenness is
this land overflown? It is grown a sickness Epidemicall in court and country,
city and town; yea our people are grown artificial and exquisite in this
sin, to drink the three Outs, to drink by the dozen, by the yard, and by the
bushel; oh monstrous, even in name! how much more in practice insomuch that it
seems to me, the Germans are like to lose their charter. In Rome there was a
street called vicus sobrius, because there was never an alehouse in it: I think
there is scarce such a street to be found in England. There is a story in
Athenaeus, which gives us a lively picture of the behavior of drunkards at
their meetings: The roaring boys, meeting at an alehouse, sat by it drinking
so long, till their brains were so steeped, that they imagined the room wherein
they were to be a ship tossed in the sea, the fancied storm still increasing as
the cups emptied; so that at last they begin to fear shipwreck; wherefore to
make the ship lighter they heave the pots, plate, furniture, and all that comes
to hand out at the windows, as if it were over board: And thus do good-fellows
at these meetings throw the house out at windows, and keep quarter, to the
dishonor of Gods and the Kings law; and yet the Justice is every where mild,
and the drunkard merry: I beseech your Honors therefore charge the Justices to
abridge the excessive number of alehouses, the shops of drunkenness, and that
they charge the Constables better to look to the demeanor of the rest.

And if I may not be heard, let Justice speak; she says thus, I have heard
Popery, swearing, sabbath-breaking, and drunkenness, all convicted as
dishonorable to Gods and the Kings law; I charge you then, Let them have
judgment; otherwise, I take you all guilty of the same offenses, though not by
committing, yet by conniving. It Is true indeed, Every fat shall stand on its
own bottom, that is, every one shall answer for his own sins; yet take heed,
lest we mistake the account of our own sins; seeing those are not to be
reckoned our own only, which are so by perpetration, but those also which are
ours by participation.

Justice calls also for expedition in judgment, and desires that poor men's
causes might first be heard, and not put off to the last, for they can worst
bear the charge of longer delay: but she complains that the poor man's cause
lies like the palsie-man at the pool of Bethesda, where the motion is not made
but by an Angel, and so the stronger step in before them.

I end with one word for my self; in the nineteenth of Deuteronomie, at the
fifth verse, the Lord appointing cities of refuge for such to flee unto, who
had unawares killed his neighbor, does instance in the hewer of wood: who (if
while he is felling the tree, the head of the ax slippeth from the helve, and
strikes his neighbor, so that he dies) shall flee to the next city of
refuge, and live: I have been hewing for the Lords sanctuary, and felling down
the huge trees of the sins forenamed: if the head has slipped from the helve,
and hurt any; my next city of refuge is your charitable construction and
favorable interpretation. And even so I commit you to God, to whose Majesty
let us all pray, that this Assizes may be much advantage; to the honor of Gods
law and the Kings, Amen.

FINIS.

