TREASON Pretended against THE KING OF SCOTS, by certain Lords and Gentlemen,
whose names hereafter follow.

WITH A DECLARATION OF the Kings Majesty's intention to his last Acts of
Parliament: which opens fully in effect all the said conspiracy. Out of
Skottish into English.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Nelson, and are to be sold at the West end of
Paul's. 1585.

The Coppie of a letter sent from a Gentleman in Scotland to a friend of his in
England, touching the conspiracy against the kings majesty.
MY approved friend T. S.
There has been lately secret practicing against the kings Majesty of
Scotland. But time serves not now to set down the manner of their proceeding
in the said attempt: I have here sent to you the Kings declaration to his last
Acts of Parliament, and for brevity have set down the names of the
conspirators, which are as follows. And thus in hope you will accept my good
will, I commit you to the Almighty:

From Edenbrough this 20. of February. 1585. Yours Christopher Studley.
These were apprehended at ye kings Court.
The Lord of Don Whasell. The Lord of Dunkrith. The Lord of Baythkicte. Robert
Hamelton of Ynchmacha^. M. James Sterling.


John Hoppingell of the Mores apprehended at his own house by the Captain of
the kings Guard.

The Lord Keir and Lord Maius apprehended with other Gentlemen about Sterling.

The Lord Blaketer and Georg Douglasse are sommoned to the Court upon suspicion.

The Lord Don Whasell. The Lord Maius
executed.

The treason discovered by Robert Hamelton.



THE KINGS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION OF his Acts confirmed in Parliament.
FORASMVCH as there is some evil affected men that goes about so far as in
them lies, to invent lies and tales to slander and impair the kings
majesty's fame and honor, and to raise reports as if his Majesty had
declined to Papistrie, and that he had made many Acts to abolish the free
passage of the Gospel, good order and discipline in the Church: Which bruites
are maintained by rebellious subjects who would gladly cover their seditious
enterprises under pretense of Religion (albeit there can be no godly religion
in such as raises rebellion to disquiet the state of their native sovereign,
and periuredly does stand against the oath, band, and obligation of their
faith, whereunto they have sworn and subscribed) therefore that his Majesty's
faithful subjects be not abused with such slanderous reports, and his highness
good affectionated friends in other countries may understand the verity of his
upright intention, his highness has commanded this brief declaration of
certain of his majesty's Acts of Parliament holden in May 1584. to be
published and imprinted, to the effect, that the indirect practices of such as
slander his majesty and his laws, may be detected and discovered.

IN the first Act his Majesty ratifies and approues the true profession of
the Gospel, sincere preaching of the Word, and administration of the
Sacraments presently by the goodness of God established within this Realm, and
aloweth of the confession of the Faith set down by Act of Parliament, the
first year of his majesty's reign. Likewise, his highness not only
professes the same in all sincerity, but praised be God is come to that
ripeness of judgment by reading and hearing the word of God, that his
highness is able to convince and overthrow by the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, the most learned of the contrary sect of the adversaries: So that as
Plato affirms, that common wealth to be most happy wherein a Philosopher
reigns, or he that reigns is a Philosopher. We may much more esteem this
country of Scotland to be fortunate wherein our king is a Divine, and whose
heart is replenished with the knowledge of the heavenly Philosophy, for the
comfort not only of his good subjects and friends in other countries, but of
them that professes the Gospel every where, he being a king of great
wisdom, and by his birthright borne to great possessions, but much more his
highness virtue, godliness and learning, and daily increase of all heavenly
sciences, does promise and assure him of the mighty protection of God, and
favor of all them that fear his holy name.

IN the second Act, his Majesty's royal authority over all estates both
spiritual and temporal, is confirmed. Which Act, some of malice and other
some of Ignorance, does traduce, as if his Majesty pretended to be called the
head of the Church: A name which his Majesty acknowledges to be proper and
peculiar to the son of God the Savior of the world, who is the head, and
bestows life spiritual upon the members of his mystical body, and he having
received the holy spirit in all abundance, makes every one of the faithful,
pertakers thereof, according to the measure of faith bestowed upon them. Of the
which number of the faithful under the head Christ, his Majesty acknowledges
himself to be a member, baptized in his name, pertaker of the mystery of the
cross and holy communion, and attending with the faithful for the coming of
the Lord, and the final restitution of Gods elect. And not withstanding, his
Majesty surely understands by the scriptures, that he is the chief and
principal member appointed by the law of God, to see God glorified, vice
punished, and virtue maintained within his Realm, and the sovereign judgment
for a godly quietness and order in the common wealth, to appertain to his
highness care and solicitude. Which power and authority of his highness,
certain ministers being called before his Majesty for their seditious and
factious sermons in stirring up of the people to rebellion against their native
king (by the instigation of sundry unquiet spirits) would in no wise
acknowledge but disclaim his Majesty's authority as an incompetent judge: and
specially one called M. Andrew Meluile an ambitious man, of a salt and fiery
humor, usurping the pulpit of Sandroyes, without any lawful calling, and
privy at that time to certain conspiracies attempted against his Majesty and
crown, went about in a Sermon upon a Sunday, to inflame the hearts of the
people, by odious comparisons of his Majesty's progenitors and counsel,
albeit the duty of a faithful preacher of the Gospel be rather to exhort
the people to the obedience of their native King, and not by popular Sermons
(which has been the euersion and decay of great cities and common wealths,
and has greatly in times past bred disquietnesse to the state thereby) to
trouble and perturbe the country. The said M. Andrew being called before his
highness, presumptuously answered that he would not be judged by the king and
counsel, because he had spoken the same in pulpit, which pulpit in effect he
alleged to be exempted from the judgment and correction of princes, as if that
holy place sanctified to the word of God, and to the breaking of the bread of
life, might be any color to any sedition in word or deed, against the
lawful authority without punishment. Always his Majesty (being of himself
a most gracious Prince) was not willing to have used any rigor against the
said Master Andrew, if he had humbly submitted himself, acknowledged his
offense, and craved pardon. Who notwithstanding afraid of his own guiltines,
being privy to diverse conspiracies before, fled out of the Realm, whose
naughty and presumptuous refusing of his Highness judgment was the occasion of
the making of this second Act: videlicet, that none should decline from his
highness authority, in respect that the common Proverb bears, Ex malis
moribus bonae leges natae sunt: that is, Of evil manners good laws proceed.
And in very deed it wants not any right intolerable arrogance in any
Subject called before his Prince, professing and ancthorising the same truth,
to disclaim his authority, neither do the Prophets, Apostles, nor others
(conducted by the spirit of God) minister y^ like example: for it is a great
error to affirm (as many do) that Princes and Magistrates have only power
to take order in civil affairs, and that Ecclesiastical matters does only
belong to the Ministry. By which means the Pope of Rome has exempt himself
and all his Clergy, from all judgments of Princes, and he made himself to be
Judge of Judges, and to be judged of no man: whereas by the contrary, not
only by the examples of the godly governors, Judges and Kings of the old
Testament, but also by the new Testament, and the whole history of the
primitive Church, in the which the Emperors being Judges over the bishop of
Rome, deposed them from their seats, appointed Judges to decide and determine
in causes Ecclesiastical, and challenge innocent men as Athanasius from the
determination of the Council holden at Tyrus, and by infinite good reasons
which shall be set down by the grace of God in an other several work shall
be sufficiently proved and verified. But this appears at this present to be
an untimely and unprofitable question, which has no ground upon their part,
but of the preposterous imitation of the pretended jurisdiction of the Pope of
Rome. For if there were any question in this land of heresy whereby the
profound mysteries of the Scriptures behooued to be searched forth, his
Majesty would use the same remedy (as most expedient) which ye most godly
Emperors has used: And his Majesty following their example, would allow the
council of learned Pastors, that by conference of Scriptures, the verity
might be opened and heresy repressed. But God be thanked we have no such
controversies in this land, neither has any heresy taken any deep root in
the country, but that certain of the ministry joining themselves to rebels,
has traueled to disquiet ye state with such questions that the people might
embrace any sinister opinion of his Majesty's upright proceedings, and factions
might be nourished and entertained in the country. Neither is it his majesty's
meaning nor intention in any sort to take away the lawful and ordinary
judgment in the Church, whereby discipline and good order might decay, but
rather to preserve, maintain, and increase the same. And as there is in the
realm Justices, Constables, Shirifes, Prouosts, Bailifes, and other judges in
temporal matters, so his Majesty aloweth that all things might be done in
order, and a godly quietness may be preserved in the whole estate, the Sinodal
assemblies by the Bishops or Commissioners where the place was used to be
convenient twice in the year, to have the ordinary trial of matters belonging
to the ministry and their estate. Always reserving to his highness, that if
they or any of them do amiss, neglect their duty, disquiet the estate, or
offend in any such manner and sort, that they in no ways pretend that immunitie
privilege and exemptio^, which only was invented by the Popes of Rome, to
tread under foot the scepters of Princes, and to establish an Ecclesiastical
tyranny within this country, under pretense of new invented Presbiters, which
neither should answer to the king, nor Bishop under his Ma. but should have
such infinite jurisdiction, as neither the law of God nor man can tolerate.
Which is only his Majesty's intention to repress, and not to take away any
godly or due order in the Church, as hereafter shall appear.

THe third Act of his Majesty's foresaid Parliament, discharges all judgments
Ecclesiastical, and all assemblies which are not allowed by his Majesty in
Parliament, which act specially concerns the removing and discharging of
that form invented in this land, called the presbytery: wherein a number of
Ministers of a certain precinct and bounds, accounting themselves to be
equal, without any difference, and gathering unto them certain Gentlemen, and
others of his Majesty's subjects, usurp all the whole Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and alters the laws at their own pleasure, without the
knowledge and approbation of the king or ye estate. A form of doing without
example of any nation. subject to a Christian Prince The peril whereof did so
increase that, in case it had not been repressed in due season, and forbidden
by his Majesty's laws, the same had troubled the whole country. And being
tried by his highness to be the overthrow of his Majesty's estate, the decay of
his Crown, and a ready introduction to Anababtistrie and popular confusion in
all estates, his majesty has given commandment against the same. And that
the Reader may understand the danger thereof by many inconveniences, which
thereby ensues in this land, I will not only set down one whereby they may
understand what peril was in the rest. The ambassador of France returning
home unto his own country, commanded the Provost, Baliffes and Counsel of
Edingbrough to make him a banquet, that he might be received honorably,
according to the amity of ancient times between the two Nations. This
command was given on the Saturday by his highness: and the banquet appointed to
be on the Monday. A number of the foresaid pretended presbytery un derstanding
thereof, assembled themselves on Sunday in the morning, and presumptuously
determined and agreed, that the Ministers of Edinbrough should proclaim a
fasting upon the same monday, where three several Ministers one after
another, made three several sermons inuectiues against the Provost, Bayliffes,
and Counsel for the time, and the noble men in the cuntry, who repaired to
the banquet at his Ma. command. The foresaid presbytery called and persuaded
them, and scarsly by his Majesty's authority could be witholden from
excommunicating the said Magistrates and noble men, for obeying only his
highness lawful command which the law of all countries, called Ius gentium,
requires toward Ambassadors of foreign countries. And not only in this, but
innumerable other things, their commandment was proclaimed directly, under
the pain of excommunication, to the kings Ma. and his laws. Which form of
proceeding, engendered nothing but disbut disquietnes, sedition, and trouble: as
may manifestly appear, in that, the special authors of the inuenting,
promoting and assisting of the foresaid pretended Presbyteries, has joined
themselves with his Majesty's Rebels: and fleing forth of the realm, in
respect of their giltines, has discovered what malicious practices was devised
amongst them, if God had not in time provided remedy. The other form of judge
meant which his Majesty has discharged, is the general assembly of the whole
Clergy in the Realm: under pretense whereof, a number of Ministers from
sundry presbyteries did assemble, with some Gentlemen of the country, whereof
some for that time malcontents of the estate, sought that color as favorers of
the Ministry, by the which they have practiced many enterprises in the
realm: where there was no certain law in Ecclesiastical affairs, but all
depended upon the said general conuention, where the laws of the church were
alterable after the number of voices, which for the most part succeeded unto
the most unlearned of the multitude. This general assembly amongst other
things did appoint and agree with his May. regentes in his highness minority,
y^ the estate of bishops which is one of the estates of Parliament, should be
maintained and authorized: As it is registered in ye books of counsel, and
subscribed by the commissioners for the time. Which order was observed many
years, and Bishops by their consentes, appointed to the diocese, until
within this late time, in assemblies holden at Dundie and Glasgow, respecting
the foresaid ministers and assemblies, took upon them, contrary to their
own hand writing, to discharge the estate, and to declare ye same to be
unlawful, in their pretended manner. And there commanded the Bishops of the
country to demit and leave their offices and jurisdictions, and that in no
wise they should pass to the kings Majesty's counsel, or Parliament without
commission obtained from their assembly: That they should confirm nothing in
parliament and counsel, but according to their acts and injunctions. And
further, they directed their Commissioners to the kings majesty, commanding
him and the council, under pain of ye censures of the Church (whereby they
understood excommunication) to appoint no Bishop in time to come, because they
had concluded that estate to be unlawful.

And notwithstanding, that which they would have dejected in the bishops, they
purposed to erect in themselves, desiring that such commissioners as they
should send to parliament and counsel, might be authorized in place of the
estate, whereby it should have come to pass, that where as now his Ma. may
select the most godly, learned, wise and experimented of the ministry, to be
on his Ma. estate, his highness should have been by that means compelled to
accept such as the multitude, by an odd consent of ye most unlearned should
have appointed, which could not tend but to the overthrow of the realm,
whereof that estate has been a special stop. After they had discharged
bishops, they agreed to have Superintendents, Commissioners, and Uisitours: but
in the end, they discerned that there should be no difference amongst the
ministers, and imagined that new form of Presbiterie, whereof we have spoken
before. Neither was there any other appearance that they should have staid from
such daily alterations in the common wealth, which could not but continually be
disquieted, where the law of conscience which they maintained by the sword of
cursing, was subject to such mutations, at the arbitrament of a number whereof
the most part had not greatly tasted of learning. At our the foresaid assembly
was accustomed not only to prescribe the law to the king and estate, but also
did at certain times appoint general fastings throughout the realm, specially
when some factioners in the country was to move any great enterprise. For at
the fast, all ye ministers was commanded by the assembly to sing one song, and
to cry out upon the abuses, as they termed it, of the court and estate for ye
time, whereby it is most certain great alterations to have ensued in this
land, while at the good pleasure of God, and his blessing toward his Ma. the
pretense of the last fast was discovered, and his highness delivered from such
attempts, whereby his Ma. has been justly moved to discharge such conuentions
which might import so preiudicially to his estate. But specially his Ma. had no
small occasion, whereas the same assembly being met at Edenbrough, did
authorize and auow the fact perpetrate at Ruthuen, in the taking of his highness
most noble person. The which deed, notwithstanding his Ma. with the advice of
his estates in Parliament accounted to be treason, the said assembly esteeming
their judgment to be the sovereign judgment of the realm, has not only
approved the same, but ordained all them to be excommunicate that would not
subscribe and allow the same. So the acts of this assembly, and the laws of
the estate directly weighed in civil matter, with the which the assembly should
not have meddled, it behooued his highness either to discharge himself of ye
crown, or the ministry of yt form of assembly, which in deed of it self,
without the kings Majesty's license and approbation, could not be lawful. Like
as general councels at no time could assemble without the commandment of the
Emperor for the time: and our king has no less power within his own realm,
then any of them had in the empire. Yea, the Bishop of S. Androis had not in
time of Popery, power to convent y^ Bishops and clergy out of their own
Diocese, with out license given before of his highness most noble progenitors
of good memory, and the causes thereof intimated and allowed. Notwithstanding
that his Majesty's intention and meaning may fully be understood, It is his
highness will, y^ the Bishop or Commissioners of any Diocese or Province, or
part thereof, shall at their Uisitation appointed in every parish, according to
the greatness thereof, some honest, virtuous and discrete men, to aid and
assist the Minister, and to have the oversight and censure of the manners and
behavior of the people of that parish. And if there be any notable offense
worthy of punish meant, that the Bishop and Commissioners be advertised
thereof, who shall have an Officer of arms to be assistant for the punishment
of vice, and executions to follow thereupon: that they who contemns the godly
and lawful order of the Church, may find by experience his majesty's
displeasure, and be punished according to their deseruings.

And further, his Majesty upon necessary occasions which may fall forth by
diverse manner of ways among the Clergy, upon humble supplication made unto his
highness, will not refuse to grant them license to assist the bishops,
Commissioners, and some of the most virtuous, learned, and godly, of their
Diocese, where such Ecclesiastical matters as appertains to the uniformity
of doctrine, and conservation of a godly order in the Church, may be entreated
and concluded in his majesty's own presence, or some of his Majesty's
honorable counsel, who shall assist for the time: Where, if necessity so
require, a public fast throughout the whole realm may be commanded, and by
his Majesty's authority proclaimed, to avoid the imminent displeasure and
danger of the wrath of the Lords judgments, which is the right end of
public humility, and not under pretense thereof, to cover such enterprises,
as has heretofore greatly disquieted and troubled the peace of this common
wealth.

THe xx. Act ratifieth and approoueth, and establishes the estate of the
Bishops within the realm, to have the oversight and jurisdiction, every one in
their own Dioces. Which form of government, and rule in Ecclesiastical
affairs, has not only continued in the church from the days of the
Apostles, by continual succession of time, and many Martyrs in that calling
shed their blood for the truth: but also, since this Realm embraced and
received the Christian religion, the same estate has been maintained to the
welfare of the Church, and quietness of the realm, without any interruption,
until within this few years, some curious and busy men have practiced to
induce in the ministry, an equality in all things, as well concerning the
preaching of the word, administration of the Sacraments, as likewise in
discipline, order and policy. The which confusion his Majesty finding by
most dangerous experience, to have been the mother and Nurse of great factions,
seditions and troubles within this Realm, has with advise of his highness
estates, advisedly concluded the said pretended party in discipline, orders
and policy in the Church, to be no longer tolerate in this Country: but the
solicitude and care of all churches in one diocese, to appertain to the
Bishop and commissioner thereof, who shall be aunswerable to God, and his
Majesty, and estates, for the right administration and discharge of the office
of particular Ministers, within the bounds of their jurisdiction. For as it
becomes his Majesty, as Eusebius writes of Constantinus the great, to be a
Bishop of Bishops, and universal Bishop within his Realm, in so far as his
majesty should appoint every one to discharge his duty: which his highness
cannot, his country being large and great, take him to every Minister that
shall offend, and transgress against duty, or quarrel with the whole number
of ye Ministry: but it behooves this Majesty to have Bishops and ouerseeers
under him, which may be aunswerable for such bounds, as the law and order of
the country has limited and appointed unto every one of them. And y^ they
having access to his Majesty's Parliament and counsel, may intercide for the
rest of the brethren of the Ministry, propone their grief unto his highness
and estates, and receive his majesty's favorable answer therein. The which
form does preserve a godly quietness, unity, concord, and peace in the
estate, and an uniform order in the Church. As contrariwise, the pretended
equality deuideth the same, and under the pretense of equality, makes some of
the most crafty and subtle dealers to be advanced and enriched: and in
pretending of party, to seek nothing but their own ambition, and
advancement above the rest of the simple sort. And notwithstanding that his
Majesty has restablished the said estate, it is not his highness will and
intent, yt the foresaid Bishop shall have such full power, as to do within his
diocese what he plea seth. For as his Ma. cannot allow of any popular
confusion, wherein as the proverb says, Nulla tyrannis aequiparanda est
tyrannidi multitudinis. That is, No tyrany can be compared to the tyranny of a
multitude, having commandment and power in his hands: so on the other part his
M. will is, yt the Bishops authority in any grave matter, be limited to the
council of 13. of y^ most ancient, wise, and godly pastors of his diocese,
selected out of ye whole synodal assembly of y^ province: by whose advise, or
at least the most part thereof, ye weighty affairs of the church may be
governed, to the glory of God, and quietness of the realm. Further, it is his
highness will and commandment, y^ their bishops or commissioners, twice in the
year, to wit, 10. days after Easter, and the 6. of September, hold their
synodall assemblies, in every diocese, for ye keeping of good order therein.
And if any be stubborn, or contemn within their bounds the good order of the
church, that it may be declared unto his Ma. and punished to the example of
others, according to their deseruings Neither is it his Ma. meaning or intent,
yt such bishops or commissioners as shall be appointed, shall receive their
only and full commission of his Ma without admission ordinary, by such as are
appointed to that effect in ye church: but having his highness nomination,
presentation, and commendation, as lawful and only patron, they to be tried
and examined, yt their qualities are such as they are able to discharge their
cure and office. And if it shall happen any of the said bishops or
commissioners, to be negligent iu their office, or to be slanderous and
offensive in their behavior, life, and manners, in time to come, it is not his
highness will, y^ they shall be exempted from correction, notwtstanding any
privilege of his highness estate, cou^ sell, or parliament, but their labors,
travels, diligence, and behavior, to be tried in the general assembly, not
consisting of a confused multitude, as it was before, but of such worshipful
persons, as is heretofore prescribed in his highness presence, or his deputies
to that effect. Lastly, his majesty gives commission to the said Bishops, or
commissioners at their visitatio^s to consider in what part of ye country, the
exercise, or interpretation of the scripture, by conference of a certain number
ber of ye Ministry within those bounds, may be most commodiously once in
every xv. days. For as his Ma. inhibits all unlawful meetings, that may
engender trouble and contention in the country: so his Ma. is well affected,
to see the Ministry increase in knowledge and understanding, and by all
means to fortify and advance the same. Wherein his highness commandment is,
that a grave, wise, and sage man, shall be appointed president, who may have ye
oversight of these bounds, and be answerable therefore to the bishop, his
counsel and synod, and he to be respected reasonably for his pains, at the
modification of stipends: y^ all things may be orderly done in the church,
peace and quietness maintained in the realm, and we delivered from apparent
plagues, and the blessing of God continued, to the comfort of our posterity.
And in the mean time his highness inhibits and expressly forbids, under the
pains contained in his Ma. acts of parliament, and al other pains arbitral,
at his Ma. sight and counsel, y^ no Minister take in hand to assemble
themselves for the foresaid cause, without the appointment and order taken by
the said bishops or commissioners: whereby his highness may be certainly
informed, that the foresaid Ministers assemble not, to meddle with any civil
matters, or affairs of estate, as was accustomed before, but only to profit
in the knowledge of the word, and to be comforted one by another, in the
administration of their spiritual office: which his highness wishes them
faithfully to discharge, and then to call to God, that his Majesty may in a
prosperous reign enjoy good and long life, and continue and increase into the
fear of the Almighty.

FINIS.
THE KINGS Majesty's Intention.
HIs Majesty's intention is, by the grace of God, to maintain the true and
sincere profession of the Gospel, and preaching thereof within this realm.

2 His Majesty's intention is, to correct, and punish such as seditiously
abuse the truth, and factiously apply or rather bewray the text of the
scripture, to the disquieting of the estate, and disturbing of the commonwealth, or impayring of his highness and counsels honor.

3 His Majesty's intention is, if any question of faith and doctrine arise, to
conuocate the most learned, godly, wise, and experimented pastors, that by
conference of scriptures, the verity may be tried, and all heresy, and
schism by that means repressed.

4 His Majesty's intention is, that for the keeping of good order in every
parish, certain ouersee ers to the good behauiours of the rest, be appointed
at the visitation of the Bishop, or visitour, who shall have his Majesty's
authority, and officers of arms concurring for the punishment of vice.

5 His Majesty's intention is, to maintain the exercise of prophecy, for the
increase and continuing of knowledge amongst the Ministry: In which, a wise
and grave man, selected by the bishop or co^missioner, at the synodall
assembly, shall render an account of the administration of those bounds, where
the exercise is holde^: for which cause, some respect of living shall be had
unto him, who sustaines that burden.

6 His Ma. intention is, not to derogate, unto the ordinary judgment of matters
of the church, by the ordinary Bishops, their councels, and synodes: but if any
of them do amiss, and abuse their calling, to take order for correcting,
amending, and punishing thereof.

7 His Majesty's intention is, not to hinder or stay any godly or solid order,
grounded upon the word of God, and order of the primitive Church: but that
the Ministers of the word meddle themselves only with their own calling, and
judge not fearfully of the estate.

8 It is his majesty's intention, that the presbyteries consisting of many
Ministers and Gentlemen, at landwart or other ways, be no further tolerate in
this his realm: but the excrcise of jurisdiction of all churches, to be in the
hands of the Bishop or commissioner, and their councels and synods.

9 It is his Majesty's intention, that the Bishops or commissioners assemble
not any general assembly out of the whole realm, without his majesty's
knowledge and license obtained thereunto: which upon supplication his highness
will not deny: that an uniform order may be observed in the whole realm, and
the Bishops and their diligences there tried and examined, and the complaints
of every pertituler heard and discussed.

10 It is his Majesty's intention, to assist this assembly himself, or by a
noble man of his counsel, his high nes deputy.

11 It is his Majesty's intention, that when any parish finds necessity of
any fast, they inform the occasion to the Bishop or commissioner their
counsel, that they may understand the cause to be lawful, as likewise the
Bishop of the diocese findiug lawful occasion way within the same with his
counsel prescribe any public humiliation.

12 It is his Majesty's intention, that a general fast throughout the whole
realm, shall not be proclaimed but by his Ma. commandment, or by a general
counsel, wherein his Ma. or his highness deputy is present.

13 It is his highness intention, that the Bishops in the realm in every
diocese with their counsel, proceed into the ecclesiastical government,
but as is said with a counsel, that both tyranny and confusion may be avoided
in the church.

14 It is his highness intention, that commissioners be directed universally
throughout the whole Realm to establish a godly order, and that his Majesty's
commissioners take order presently for the translation of such ministers, whose
travels they esteem may more conveniently and profitably serve in another
place.

FINIS.

