HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD King of Great Britain, FRANCE, and IRELAND,
Defender of the Faith etc.
To (...) Messingers our Shirreffes in that part, conjunctlie and severally,
specially constitute greeting,
For So Much as our Estates of our Kingdom of SCOTLAND conveened in our general
convension holden at Our Palace of Haly-rude-house, upon the 28 day of Iulij,
the year of GOD 1630 years upon very great considerations, moving them, and
for a testimony of their unfeigned affections toward our service, and for
supply of a part of the great charges which our repairing to Our said
Kingdom, for receiving of our imperial Crown of the same will necessarily
draw upon us, and for defraying of our debts which we have contracted for
buying of heritable Offices, Have made a free and willing offer of a yearly
extra-ordinarie Taxation of the twenty penny of all anwelrents, which any
person or persons within our said Kingdom, have freely due, and payable to
them yearlie or tearmlie: (Their own anwelrents wherein they are addebted to
others being first deduced). The first terms payment whereof is to be, and
begin at the feast and term of Mertimesse nextocome and so forth yearly
and tearmelie at Mertimesse and Whitsonday, until the said four years and
the eight terms payment thereof be full and compleatlie out-runnne. And
whereas Our Estates have by Act of the said convention authorized all and
sundry heritable Shirreffes, Stewarts, Ba^llies, and Baillies of Regalities,
and their Deputs, and the Prouest and Baillies of free Borrowes within the
bounds of their Jurisdictions. As likewise the Clerks within the Jurisdictions,
where these Offices are not heritable (which Clerks have their Offices advitam
To Colllect the said extra-ordinarie Taxation, and to make payment thereof to
the Collector general to be appointed by WS for receiving of the same.
Therefore and for inbringing of the (...) Terms payment of the said
extra-ordinarie Taxation, Our other letters are direct charging all and sundry
heitable Syrreffes, Stewarts, Baylies, and Baillies of Regalities their Deputs,
and Clerks, and the Prouest and Baillies of free Borrowes, and their Clerks, as
likewise the Clerks within the Jurisdictions, where these offices are not
heritable, That they and every one of them dwelling be North the River of Dee
within the space of fifteen days after the said Term of (...) in the year
of God, A thousand six hundredth thirty: (...) And that they and every one of
them dwelling be south the River of Dee within the space of Ten days, after
the said Term, Deliver to (...) Our Collector general appointed by WS for
receiving of the said extra-ordinarie Taxation, A true and just account and
inventar of the whole sums of money due to be paid by any person within the
bounds of their Jurisdictions for his part of the said extraordinary Taxation,
And that they give up the same account and inuentare upon their oaths
solemnedlie sworn, that the same is just and true, And make payment to Our said
Collector general, or to his Deputes in his Name, haueing his Power to receive
the same of the whole moneys due to be paid to Us conform to the said
account, and inventar for the said (...) Terms payment of the said
extra-ordinarie Taxation within Twenty days after the Term of (...) in the
year of God A a thousand six hundredth thirty and (...) under the pain of
rebellion, and putting of them to Our horn For whose relief.

OUR WILL is, and We charge you straightly and commands, that incontinent these
Our Letters, seen ye pass and in Our Name and authority command and charge
all and sundry the said anwelrenters dwelling within that Our (...) To make
payment to you Our said (...) and your Deputs of the said Twenty penny of all
anwelrents freely due and payable to them, As for the said (...) Terms
payment of the said extraordinary Taxation, within twenty days next after
they be charged by you thereto, Under the pain of rebellion and putting of
them to Our horn. And if they failyie the said twnetie days being bypast,
That ye incontinent thereafter denounce the Dissobeyers, Our Rebels, and put
them to Our horn, And escheit and inbring all their moveable goods to Our use
for their contemption. And if need be that ye Our said (...) poynd and
distrienyie therefore, As ye shall think most expedient. According to Justice
As ye will answer to Us thereupon. The Which to do We commit to you
conjunctlie and seueralie Our full power: By these our Letters delivering them
by you duly execute and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet, at Our Palace of Haly-rude-house the 28 day of Iulij
and of Our Reign the sixth year, 1630. Per Actum Conventionis.

