ARTICLES OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE.

When thou go out to battle against thine enemies, be not afraid of them,
and keep thee from every wicked thing.

Deuteronomy. 20.1. and 23.9. EDINBVRGH, Printed by James Bryson, ANNO DOM. 1639.

ARTICLES OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE.
Ecclesiastical Discipline.
I. THAT in every Regiment under a Collonell, there be an ecclesiastical
Eldership or Kirk Session, consisting of the Minister or Ministers of the
Regiment, and of Elders to be chosen to that effect; who shall sit at their
appointed times, and judge in all Kirk affairs, according to the word of GOD,
and the rules and order of Discipline used in the Kirk of SCOTLAND for
censuring of delinquents, as fornicatours, whooremongers, adulterers, swearers,
cursers, drunkards, profaners of the Sabbath, and all scandalous persons, that
they may be brought to repentance: or being found obstinat and incorrigible,
that the extreme censures of the Kirk pass against them. And that all things
be done herein, as in every parosh in the time of peace. Also, that tender
care may be had of the poor and needy, and of all such as are not able, or
may be disabled to help themselves: There be some Deacons appointed in every
Regiment according to the order used in particular paroshes and that in matter
of greatest weight, there be a general Eldership, or common ecclesiastic
judicatorie, made up of all the Ministers of the Camp, and of an Elder direct
from every particular Regiment, who shall choose their own Moderatour and
Clerk, have power to set down order in matters ecclesiastical for the whole
Army: that there may be an uniformitie of worship and of Discipline. To whom
appellation may be made from the inferior Sessions and elderships.

The Courts of justice.
II. It is ordained also for deciding of all controversies, and that the
following articles of war and camp Discipline may be the better observed and
obeyed. That there be in the Army two courts of justice: one higher and
another lower court: In every Regiment there shall be a lower court, where the
Collonell shall be president, and in his absence his Leive-tenant, with them are
two Captains to be joined, two Leivetenants, two Ensigns, four Serjants, and
two Quartermasters, that together with the President they may be to the number
of thirteen at least.

In the high martial court shall the general be President, and in his
absence the field Marschall, his associats shall be the General of the
ordinance, Sergeant-major General, General of the horses, Quartermaster
General, Muster Masters, and all the Colonels, or their Leivetenants in their
absence, all these shall sit together every man in his own place and rank,
whensover there is any matter of great importance in controversy both in the
higher Court and lower, there shall be one sworn Secretary or Clerk
appointed, who shall not only make note of the process and sentences, but
shall also make diligent record of all notable things that fall out in the
army, whither in any pitched battle, skirmish, leaguer, or any other piece of
service whatsoever, with all the circumstances of time, place, or persons; he
shall also set his hand to all sentences signed by the General, and keep a
true register of all interprises, that the General with his council of war,
shall give order to be done. It shall be lawful also in all civil and
criminal actions of great importance, to make appellation from the lower to
the higher Court: The sentence of the court shall be publicly read in the
hearing of all men, but not put in execution, till the General give command.
No superior officer, Collonell, or Captain, shall solicit for any man, that
is lawfully convicted by the Court, either for any crime, or for not observing
the articles of war, unless it be for his very near kinsman for whom
nature compels him to interceed; otherwise, the soliciter shall be holden
as odious as the Delinquent, at least shall be cashiered from his charge. The
foresaid judicatories as well of the Kirk matters, as of war, shall be subject to
the council of estate, and general Assemblies respective.

The oath of the Judges.
III. All the Judges both of the higher and lower Court shall solemnly swear
before GOD this following oath:

I N. N. Do here promise before God, that I both will and shall judge
uprightly, in all things that shall be presented before the Court, according to
the law of God, the laws of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the articles of war
agreed upon, so far as I have knowledge or understanding, neither will I for
favor or hatred, for good will or evil will, for fear, for revenge, or for any
gift or bribe whatsoever, judge wrongously, but judge him free that ought to ^e
free and doom him guilty that I find guilty, as the great God the Lord of
heaven and earth shall help me, and be my judge at the great day.

The oath of the officers and soulediers.
IIII. All the officers and Soldiers that shall be admitted, shall with lifted
up hands in all reverence swear this following oath.

I N. N. do here promise and swear, that unto the kingdom of Scotland I will
be a faithful servant according to the Covenant, and unto the General of the
army I will be a true and faithful Soldier, every manner of way doing my
best endeavors for the good of the Kingdom, and obedience of the General: to
my power, also, shall I hinder all actions prejudicial to the Kirk and
Kingdom; and if I have tidings of any thing of that kind I shall give notice
thereof to some one or other of the council of war. Moreover, I will do my
best to observe carefully all the Articles of war, and points of camp
Discipline: I shall behave my self manfully in battle, skirmishes, and every
piece of service in all times and places, when and where I shall be commanded:
I shall keep watch and ward, and do all other duties willingly, as I shall be
directed: I shall carry my self obediently toward my superior officers, in
all that they command me for the service of the Kirk and Kingdom: In like
manner, as I shall answer before God, and every honest man, I shall not flee
from my Colors, or token whatsoever that I am commanded to follow, nor absent
my self from them at any time, so long as I am able to go after them: I shall
bestow my life and goods for advancing of this service of the Kingdom, and to
the uttermost of my power endure all distresses, that can possibly fall out in
the wars, fighting manfully to the very last, so far forth as I am able, or
that any true soldier ought to do: Furthermore, if hereafter I be put into
any place or charge by the General, or called to any employment, I shall do
my best endeavor, valiantly and honestly to acquit my self according to my
place. This oath shall I well and truly keep, as the great God, the Lord of
heaven and earth shall help me at the last judgment.

Prayers and preaching.
V. For doing of service and worship to God Almighty, the Lord of hosts, for
whose Covenant this war is under taken, from whom we look for assistance, and
on whom the success of war depends; it is thought necessary that there be
public prayers, every day morning and evening throughout the whole Leaguer,
for which purpose, some token or warning shall be given by sound of trumpet or
drum. That on the Lords day there be public preaching, both before and
afternoon, and if the time permit, two days in the week also. If any Minister
shall neglect his time of prayer, or preaching, he shall for every absence
forfault an half months pay, or as much as may be accounted an half months
pay, to be taken up by the Deacons, and at the direction of the Eldership to be
distributed to the poor. And whatsoever soldier shall neglect the time of
prayer or preaching, shall forfault a days wage for every absence, and if
after admonition by his Captain he shall be found guilty of neglect or
contempt, he shall ly in prison for the space of twenty four hours, and be
further punished, as his fault deserves.

No market in time of divine service.
VI. There shall be no market nor selling of commodities whatsoever, after the
warning is given for divine service, till it be closed: and if any shall happen
to contraveine, they shall make forfault of all things so sold, whereof the one
half shall be disposed upon by the General, or such as shall be appointed by
him, and the other half to be given to the Deacons for the use of the poor.
Over and above which the offender shall for one whole day be put in prison.

VII. All Officers and Soldiers shall be obedient unto the General and
field-marshall with other officers next under them, in whatsoever they shall
command upon the pains following.

Whosoever behaveth not himself reverently and obediently unto the General of
the Army, shall be kept in yrons or prison, till he be brought to answer
before a council of war, where being found guilty, whatsoever his quality be,
he shall stand to the order of the council, to underly what punishment they
shall think convenient according to his merit.

Whosoever shall offer to discredit these great officers by word of mouth, or
otherwise, and be not able by proof to make it good; and whosoever shall lift
up any manner of arms against any of them, whither he do them hurt or not,
shall be punished by death. And if any officer do strick any of them with his
hand, whither he hit or miss, he shall loss his right hand.

If it shall hapen that the General, or any of the great and general officers
at any occasion shall offer injury to any noble man, knight, gentleman, or
other which stands not with their honor to put up, Then shall they give in
their complaint to the Council of war, where the offender shall answer, and be
censured according to the quality and importance of the fault.

If any Soldier or inferior officer serving on horse or foot, shall offer any
injury by word, or deed, to his Collonell, Leivetenant Collonell, Sergeant
majour, Quartermaster, Captain or any of his superiors, or shall refuse any
dewty commanded him, he shall be punished according to the importance of his
fault, and if it shall happen that any officer shall command any thing which
tends rather to the prejudice nor to the good of the public, then shall he
who is commanded modestly refuse to obey and presently give notice thereof.

If any inferior officer shall challenge any common Soldier to be guilty of
any dishonest action, he shall answer for it before the court as if he were his
equal.

If any Soldier horse or foot, shall offer to strike his officer that commands
him any dewty or piece of service, he shall lose his hand and be turned out of
the quarter, and if it be done in any fort or beleaguered place after the watch
is set, he shall lose his life for it; but if he not only offer but do hurt to
any of them, whether in the field, or not he shall be shot to death.

Whosoever in the presence of the General shall draw his sword to do mischief
with it, shall lose his hand: He who shall in anger draw his sword, while his
Colloures are fleeing, either in batell or in march, shall be shot to death: He
who shall presume to draw his sword in any court of justice, shall lose his
life: He that draws his sword in any strength or fort to do mischief therewith
after the watch is set, shall lose his life.

Obedience to the marshalls.
VIII. The Provest-marshall-general may apprehend any man by his own authority
and keep him in irones or in prison, but by no means may do execution upon him
although he be sentenced by the court of war, without first giving notice
thereof to the General and obtaining warrant for that effect.

The same is to be understood of the Provest-marshals of every regiment and
company: And if any shall be found to hinder the Provest-marshals when they
are to apprehend any man or when they are about to execute any thing that
becomes them, they shall not escape unpunished in the martial court.

Punishment of swearers, drunkards, etc.
IX Common and ordinary profainers of the sabbath, swearers and drunkards,
especially such as shall be found drinking in time of prayers or divine
service, shall not only be punished in their means, but shall also make their
public repentance in the midst of the congregation, and if they cannot be
reclaimed, they shall be casheired and discharged as unworthy to do service in
any place of the army.

Duells and combats forbiden.
X No duel or combat shall be permitted to be foughten; If any man offer
wrong to another, it shall be decided by the officers of the regiment, the
challenger shall answer it before the Martial court. And if any Captain,
Leivtenant or other inferior officer shall give leave or permission unto any
under their command to enter combat, and does not rather hinder them, he shall
be presently casheired from his charge and serve afterward as a common
Soldier: but if any harm be done he shall answer it as deeply as he that did
it.

No forceing of women, nor suffering of whoores.
XI He that forces any woman and the matter be proved, he shall die for it.

No whore shall be suffered in the leaguer, but if any will have his own wife
with him, he may.

If any man keep an unmaried woman, he shall either marry her or be
constrained to put her away, and make his repentance for his fault.

Of mustering.
XII All Soldiers shall dewly repair unto the general musters upon the day
and hour appointed, nor shall any Colonel or Captain of horse or foot keep
back his Soldiers from being mustered at the time when the muster masters
shall desire to view them, if any refuse, he shall be holden for a mutiner.

No Colonel or Captain shall lend any of their Soldiers unto another upon
the musterdays for the making up of their numbers complete: he that thus makes
a false muster, shall answer it at a martial court, where being found guilty he
shall be proclaimed a deceaver, after which being put out of the quarter his
Colors shall flee no more.

If any horsman borrowes either horse, armor, pistols, sadle, sword or harnise
to pass the muster withal, so much as is borrowed shall be eschited, and both
himself and he that lent it him, shall be turned out of the leaguer, the one
half of the arms forfaulted shall go unto the Captain, and the other half
unto the Perforce.

Of marching.
XIII. When any march is to be made, every man that is sworn shall follow his
colors, whosoever presumes without leave to stay behind, shall be punished.

If any upon mutiny be found to do it, be they many or be they few, they shall
die for it.

Every man is to keep his own rank and file upon the march, and not to put
others from their ordour, nor shall any man cast himself behind, or set
himself upon any wagon or horseback: The offenders to be punished according to
the time and place.

Of watching.
XIV. He that after warning is given by sound of Drum or Trumpet for setting of
the watch, does wilfully absent himself without some lawful excuse, shall be
disgraced and be put to bread and water, or some such punishment as the matter
is of importance.

He that is taken sleeping upon the watch to the indangering of the army,
shall be shot to death.

In like sort shall he be punished who drinks himself drunk upon his watch or
place of sentinel that he cannot do his dewty, or that comes off his watch
where he is commanded to keep his guaird.

Of unlawful reteiring.
XV. Whatsoever regiment shall once charge the enemy, and then retire
afterward from them before they come to dint of sword, shaIl answer it before
the high martial court: and if this be occasioned by any officer, he shall be
publicly disgraced, and turned out of the leaguer: If the fault shall be found
to be in the Soldiers, then shall every tenth man be hanged and the rest
condemned to carry all the filth out of the leaguer, till by some exploit they
procure their pardon and recover their reputation; provided always, if at the
first any man can by the testimony of sufficient witnesses prove himself not
guilty of the couarddice, he shall go free.

If any occasion be to enter any strength or sconce by assault or breach, he
who reteires from the place before he has been at handy blows with the enemy
and has used his sword so far as it is possible for him to do service with it
and before he be by maine strength beaten off by the enemy, shall be so
punished as the court shall find him to have deserved.

Of fleeing and couarddice.
XVI. Whosoever runs from his Colors and does not defend them to the
uttermost of his power so long as they be in danger, shall suffer death for it.

When any occasion of service is, he that first runs away, if any man kill him
he shall be free, and if at that time he escape and be apprehended afterward,
he shall be proclaimed traitor and put out of the quarter.

Whatsoever ensigne-bearer shall flee out of any place of Battrie, sconce or
redoubt before he has endured three assaults and receives no relieif, shall be
in like manner punished, providing always the place be defenceable.

If any regiment, troup or company shall flee out of the field or battle,
they shall answer for it before the high court, and if there it can be proved
to have broken their oath, they shall be proclaimed traitors.

Of treating with the enemy.
XVII. Whatsoever regiment, troupor company shall be found to treat with the
enemy or to enter in any conditions with them, without knowledge and leave of
the General or chief commander in his absence, the officer shall be put to
death for it and all his goods confiscated; of the Soldiers every tenth man
shall be hanged and the rest punished as is a foresaid.

But if any that then were in company of such can free themselves from being
partakers of the crime and can prove that they did their best to resist it,
then shall they be rewarded according to their truth and faithfulness.

Whosoever gives advice unto the enemy any manner of way or keeps any discourse
with him without leave of the General, or gives unto him any private
intelligence by letters or otherways or maks any sign unto him for his
advantage shall die for it.

Of giving up of strengths.
XVIII. They that give over any strength to the enemy, unless it be for
extremity of hunger or want of ammunition, the governor with all the officers
shall die for it: All the Soldiers be lodged without the quarter and be made to
carry all the filth out of the leaguer, till by some new proof of their worth
they blot away the former cowardice.

Of mutiny.
XIX. If any numbers of Soldiers shall without leave of their Captain assemble
together for raking mutinous counsel amongst themselves, so many inferior
officers as be in company with them shall suffer death, and the Soldiers be so
punished, as they that give up any strength: And whatsoever Captain shall
permit unto his Soldiers to hold any such meetings amongst themselves, shall
answer it before the high court of justice.

If any shall fall in quarrelling, and fighting and shall call for help of his
friends or familiars with intention to be revenged or to defend himself, he
shall suffer death for it, and they that come to help him shall be punished
like mutiners.

He also shall be reckned for a mutiner who shall not be content with that
quarter or place that shall be assigned him, whither in a town or in the
leaguer.

The keeping of arms.
XX Whosoever casts his arms from him either in the field or other where, shall
be scourged through the quarter and disgraced as before, til he redeem his
credit.

He that sels or enpawnes his arms or any kind of ammunition, or any spades,
shools, picks, and other the like necessary instruments used in the field, shall
be for the first and second time beaten through the quarter, and for the third
time, punished as for other thift: He also that buys or taks them upon pawn,
be he Soldier or be he victualer, he shall both loose his money and be
punished as he that sold them.

He that wilfully breaks any of his arms or instruments aforesaid, shall not
only pay for the mending of them, but shall be put to bread and water, and shall
be punished otherwise at the discretion of the court.

Against fire.
XXI. No man shall presume to set on fire any town or village in the land or
camp, if any does he shall be punished according as the judges shall find the
matter important.

XXII. Billets and lodgings in every place must be directed by the
quartermaster or quartermaster generally; No commander or common Soldier
shall exact or extort any thing besides what is appointed.

All must deal courteously with their host and his household servants: He that
beats any of them, for the first and second fault he shall be put in irones and
made to fast with bread and water, but if he do any of them greater hurt he
shall be punished at the discretion of the court.

None shall presume to do wrong to any that bring necessaries unto the leaguer,
whither by taking their goods or by taking away their horses; which who so
does shall be severely punished.

They that pillage or steal any thing, whither from them that furnish the
leaguer or from uther subjects of the kingdom, whither Covenanters or not
Covenanters, they shall be punished as for other thift.

Of the spoil and pillage.
XXIII. If it so please God that we beat the enemy either in the field or in
the leaguer, no man shall fall upon the pillage till the enemy be utterly put
to the rout; which done, every man may fall upon his own quarter and rest
contented with it, without plundering of others: If any man shall fall upon the
pillage before the time, and any evil to the army shall ensue upon their
greediness after the spoil, then shall all of them suffer death for it, and
although no damnage come thereby, yet must they be punished as their fault
deserves.

When any fort or place of strength is taken in, no man shall fall upon the
spoil before the enemy be beaten out of all his holds and the quarters be
dealt out and assigned.

If any be found drunk in the enemies leaguer before he has forsaken the same
and laid down his arms, he shall be severly punished according to the damnage
done by his drunkenness, and although there be no damnage, yet shall he be
punished for his drunkenness, especially at such a time.

Of pay.
XXIV. No Captain shall withold any off his Soldiers means from him, which
if he do, he shall be censured in the court of justice; And if any such evil
follow thereupon, as that the Soldiers mutine, be sick, endure hunger, or
give up any strength, then shall he be answerable for all these inconveniences.

If any Captain lend money unto his Soldiers which he will have paid again,
let it be repayed in parcels as the Soldier may spare it, that the common
service be no ways hindered or neglected thereby.

If upon necessity it come to pass, pay be not made at the due time, yet shall
every man be forward in his service all having victuals for the present and
certain expectation of the means so soon as may be.

No Captain shall presume to go out of his station to demand his pay without
leave of the General, providing he be entertained: who so does shall be
casheired from his place.

Of passes.
XXV. No Colonel or Captain shall give leave to his Soldiers to go home out
of the field, without leave of the General or chief commander, under the pain
of the loose of three Months pay, and to answer it before the court.

No Soldier shall desire his pass, whilst there is any present service to be
done against the enemy.

If any Soldier desire to be discharged from the wars because he is sick, or
maimed, or upon any such reasonable cause, he shall be discharged by warrant
from the General.

If any Soldier shall run away from his Colors, without a pass of his
officers, he shall be apprehended where ever he can be found and punished
according to the articles foresaid.

FINIS.

