HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
JAMES be the grace of GOD King of great Britane, France, and Ireland: Defender
of the Faith etc.
To the Prouest and ballies of our bourgh (...) of And to our Louits, (...)
Messingers, our Schireffes in that part Coniunctlie and seueralie specialie
constitute greiting.
Forsamcikle as the Three Estates of our Kingdom of Scotland, convenit in our
Parliament; haldin at our Bourgh of Perth upon the nynt day of Iulie The ear
of God, ane thousand sax hunderth and sax years. Upon good and wechtie
considerations moving them, hes freely and voluntarlie offered and granted
(unto us, for releif and payment of our debts, and reparation of our housses)
ane Taxation to be paid, in manner and at the Four terms following: That is
to say, for the Barons and Frichalders parts, of the same Taxation: Twenty
shillings money, to be vplifted of every pound land of auld extent within our
said Kingdom. pertening to Earls, Lords, Barons, Frie-halders, and Fewers of
our proper lands: and paid at every ane of the four several terms after
specified. That is to say, Twenty shillings, at the first day of februar
nixtocome In the year of God, ane thousand sax hundredth and seven years.
Twenty shillings, at the first day of februar In the year of God, ane
thousand sax hunderth and aucht years. Twenty shillings, at the first day of
februar In the year of God ane thousand sax hunderth and nine years. and
Twenty shillings, at the first day of februar In the year of God, ane
thousand sax hunderth and ten years. And for the Spiritual men, and our
Borrowes part, of the same Taxation: That there sall be vplifted of every
Arch-bishoprik Biscoprik, Abbacie, Priorie, and other inferior Benefice, within
our said Kingdom; And of every free Bourgh within the ^^me. At every ane of
the said four terms of payment, The just Taxation thairof and as they have
been accustumed to (...) taxed unto, in all time bygane; Whensoeur the
Temporal lands of our said Kingdom were extentit to Twe(...) (...)ound (...)ld
extent. And the same taxations to be paid at every ane of the four several
terms abour (...)ed (...) ^or inbring^^ of the third terms payment of the
Borrowes part of the same taxation, Our vthers letters ar direct charg^^ (...)
of the Prouest and Ballies of ilk Bourgh, to make payment of the Taxt and extent
thairof to our Trusty and Weil-belouit IAM^S HAY of Kingask. Our collector
general, appointed for receiving of the same haill taxation his Deputes and
officers in his name, hauand his power to receive the same: Betwix and the
first day of februar, The year of God, ane thousand sax hunderth and nine
years. Under the pain of rebellion and putting of them to our horn, for
whose relief. OVRE WILL IS and we charge ow strattlie and commands, That
incontinent their our letters seen; ee pass, and in our name and authority
command and charge, All and sindrie inhabitants within that our Bourgh of (...)
To convein and elect certane persons to extent their nichbours, And the said
election being made, That e charge the persons electit to accept the charge
upon them in setting of the said extent upon the inhabitants of ilk bourgh, and
to convein and set the samin and make ane extent roll thairupon as effeirs,
within Twenty four hours nixt after they be chargit be you thairto, Under
the pain of rebellion and putting of them to our horn; and gif they failee
thairin the said twenty four hours being bypast, That ee incontinent
thairefter denunce the dissobeyars our rebels and putt them to out horn; and
escheit and inbring all their moovable goods to our use for their contemption.
And siklyk the said extent roll being made and set as said is: That ee in our
name and authority command and charge the Bourgesses neichbours and
inhabitants of that our bourgh, To make payment of their parts of the said
extent, To ow our said Prouest and ballies; Conform to the taxt roll to be
made and given out thairvpon, within Threedayes nixt after they be charged be
ou thairto: Under the pain of rebellion and putting of them to our horn, and
gif they failee thairin the said three days being bypast, That ee incontinent
thairefter denunce the dissobeyars our rebels and putt them to our horn: And
escheit and inbring all their moovable goods to our use for their contemption;
And gif neid beis that ee poind and distrenie thairfoir, as ee sall think
expedient. as ee will answer to ws thairvpon, The whilk to do we commit to ow
coniunctlie and severally our full power, Be their our letters, delivering them
be ow dewlie execut and indorsate again to the bearer:

Given under our Signet, At Perth the nynt day of Iulie, And of our Regne the
ferd and threttie nine ears. 1606. Per actum Parliamenti.

