GOD save HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms the KING
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of great Britain, France and Ireland:
Defender of the Faith etc.
To Our Loveds (...) Messingers Our shirreffs in that part conjunctly and
severally specially constitute greeting,
Forsamekle as We being resolved to proceed in the matters reffered to US by
the Submissions concerning the few fearmes and few meals of Erections, Teynds
of other men's Lands, rate and ease of the same and price thereof, and others
mentioned in the said Submissions, with that aequitie Justice and indifferency
to particulate persouns, and care and respect to the public good and ease of
our Subjects, as might manifest Our royal care and Fatherly affection to satle
and establish the peace and tranquillity of this Our ancient Kingdom with
common and public applause and congratulation of all Our good Subjects. WE
were pleased to call to Us an^e number of our Nobility Privy Counsel and
others able expert and well ^ffected to give their advice to US in a matter of
so great importance. With whom We having at length conferred and ^eceive their
advise and opinions both privately and publicly We find the matter of so great
weight and consequence and to concern so nearely the private estate of the
most part of our Subjects in particular, and the public good of this Our
ancient Kingdom in general. That it deserves and merits Our serious
consideration, and greater leisure and time than the present effaires will
permite Us: And therefore We have resolved to prorogate like as We have
prorogate the said submissions and every one of them to the last day of
December 1629 years. And intends in the mean time as God shall give us the
oc^asion, to give out Our royal determination in the said whole matters
referred to US by the said submissions, And because in the conference had be Us
with such of the Nobility Privy Counsel and Gentry who are with us: It is
condescended with uniform consent of all, that Our Annuitie shall take
beginning in this instant year of God 1628 years. And that the same cannot
be vplifred until the Valuations of each persons Lands end constant rent
thereof in Stock and teynd be first determined by the Commissioners nominat
be Us for the surrendars. Therefore, and for the greater expedition of the
said Valuations It is thought fit and expedient that the Commissioners to whom
power is granted be the general Commission, shall direct particulare
commissions and warrands to such particulare persons in every shirefdome
Paroshine or other bounds and circuites of this Our Kingdom as the said
Commissioners shall think fit. With power to them to take trial by all
ways and means aggreable to the Laws of this our Kingdom, or to be set
down in there several Commissions anent the Valuations of the true Teynds of
the Lands within the bounds of their Commission, and what they are worth in
constant rent of Stock and Teynd. And to call and cite parties having
interesse to such particulare dyats as they shall think fit, and to report
their proceedings to the said general Commissioners, Reserving always to the
parties greeved liberty to appeal from the said particular commissions to the
general. And suchlike because it is provided in the said general Submissions,
that such of the Lords of Erections or others having right from them, as have
laices lawfully set before the date of their Erections, or absolute warrandice
of the same against their Authors, shall receive full and plenarie
satisfaction for their said laices and warrandice, And that also the
particulare satisfaction to be given to every one of the said Lords of
Erections cannot be determined without the knowledge and trial of the just
and true Rentall of the said few meals and few fearmes. Therefore it is our
pleasure likeas we have given direction to cause the said Lords of erections
and others having right as said is, to exhibit and produce to Our Advocate
their said laces and rights and securities containing warrandice, at such days
and times as the Commissioners forsaid shall appoint to them. With
certification to them that failyies, that they shall not be heard to claim
any satisfaction for the same hereafter. And suchlike We have given direction
to our Commissioners to take special trial of the just Rentalls and quantity
of the said few fearmes and few mealles, and what part thereof is presently
bruiked by the Lords of Erection, and what part by pensioners or liverentars,
and what will remain free of the same deducing the blenshe duties paid to
Us. And sickelike it is our will and pleasure that so soon as the said
Commissioners have finished the Valuarion of the Teyndes of like parishone,
That immediat^ly thereafter they proceed to the consideration of the Ministers
stipends and maintenance and establishing of schools hospitals and others
pious uses, where the same may be had according the tennour of their
Commission and Acts of the same past thereupon.

OUR WILL IS herefore, and We charge you straightly and commands that
incontinent these Our letters seen, Ye pass and in our Name and authority
make publication hereof by open Proclamation to the market croce of Our burgh
of Edinburgh, and others places needful, And that We and Our Comissioners
intend to proceed according to the grounds particularly aboue-exprest,
wherethrow nane pretend ignorance of the same. The which to do, We commit to
you conjunctly and severally Our full power by these Our Letters delyvering the
same by you duly execute and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Haly-rud-house the sixteen day of Iulij and of our
reign the fourth year. 1628. Per actum D. Commissionis praedict.
EDINBVRGH Printed by Thomas Finlason his M. printer


