THE REMONSTRANCE OF THE NOBILITY, BARRONES, BURGESSES, MINISTERS AND COMMONS
WITHIN THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, Vindicating them and their proceedings from
the crimes, wherewith they are charged by the late Proclamation in ENGLAND,
Feb. 27. 1639.

EDINBURGH Imprinted by James Bryson Anno Domini 1639.

ALthough the depthes of the Counsel of GOD, and the secrets of the ways of
the most high cannot be sounded nor found out by us, till they be discovered
and unsecreted by himself; yet so far as we can conceive and consider of the
course of divine providence in our present affairs, we begin to think, that
the LORD is about some great work in the earth. For the cup which has been
propined to other reformed Kirks is at this time presented unto us: We have
used all means by our earnest intercessions, by our true remonstrances and
humble supplications, to inform his Majesty, and to deprecate his wrath: but
find both his ears possessed by the false and spiteful misinformations of
the late pretended Prelates, and of such as hope to catch some great things in
our troubled waters: whereby his Majesty's wrath waxes hoter every day: as is
too sensible to us his Majesty's humble and loyal subjects, who were expecting
a gracious answer to our last supplication, and may be apparent to all men, by
the late Proclamation and Declaration in England Feb. 27. ordained to be read
in every Kirk within that kingdom.

We are indeed confident and comforted in this; that the gates of hell shall
not prevail against the cause mantained by us, and that in the end glory shall
be to GOD in the highest by the testimony which shall be given to the kingdom
of his son JESUS CHRIST now in question, that peace shall be on earth, and
good will and loving kindness shall be to the people of GOD. But in the mean
time it cannot but wound our hearts and grieve us sore; that we are brought to
this extremity, that we must either perish under the burden of so many foul
aspersions, or be constrained, to appear in terms of contradiction against
such pieces and Proclamations as the malice of our adversaries, prevailing with
his Majesty, does lybell and send out continaually against us.

Although the foresaid Proclamation and Declaration charge us with nothing
material, which we have not from the sincerity of our hearts and the manifest
truth and reasons of our proceedings abundantly answered before, in our
printed Protestations, information, and answers unto the Declaration made by
his Majesty's Commissioner, and unto the Bishops their Declinatour, yet lest by
our silence the cause of GOD and our innocence in defending thereof, receive
the smallest prejudice in the minds of the well affected, and that we may yet
more convince the consciences, if not close the mouths, of our self-condemned
enemies, we shall not weary to make a summarie repetition and true application
of what has been formerly written at large.

The title bears, 1. that the Proclamation is intended to inform the loving
subjects of England; which is the desire of our hearts, and for which we have
labored; being confident that all his Majesty's loving subjects of England,
after true and full information, will allow of our actions, as proceeding from
the love of CHRIST, and of our King and country, which to us are inseparably
joined, and wherein we are so emulous, that we are heartily grieved, and think
our selves heavily wronged, that in love and loyalty, we should be reckoned
second, or inferior, to any subjects in the Christian world. But what truth of
information may be expected from our Prelates, with their pages and parasites,
who can have no hope of rising again, but from our certain ruin, all the
judicious subjects of England may easily discern.

2. The title bears that by our seditious practices we are seeking to
overthrow his Majesty's regal power under the false pretenses of religion.
None of all our actions is more challenged of sedition, then our necessary
confession of Faith and national Covenant, wherein we are so far from
overturning regal authority, that we declared before God and men that we had
no intention or desire to attempt any thing that might turn to the diminution
of the Kings greatness and authority. We could not so much as imagine, that the
refusing of the service book, and the rejecting of Episcopal government, which
two over-turne the frame of Gods worship and the discipline of the Kirk, as
they were here established, should ever have been interpreted to be the
overthrowing of regal power; The pillars of true regal power are religion and
righteousness, which by our oath we have endeavored to establish, and are
confident, if we can have them in peace, shall be seen by all the world to be
strong supporters of his Majesty's throne. Our practices are called seditious,
our carriages tumultuous, our returns froward and perverse, our intentions
traitorous, our informations and declarations infamous lybels, our
protestations mutinous, our covenant aband or rather a conspiracy against the
Lords anointed, pretended to be with God, that we may with the better
countenance do the works of the devil, such as are treasons and rebellions,
our preparations for defense hostile, as if the King were our sworn enemy, our
aims to be the invasion of the good subjects of England, to make whole our
broken fortunes, our actions increasing and dareing insolences, our present
case a brainsick distemper, our selves evil and traitorously affected persons,
factious and turbulent spirits etc. To which we answer, 1. It may be that the
Lord will look on our affliction, 2. Sam. 16. 12. Mat. 5. 11.
and that the Lord will requite good for this cursing. Blessed are ye when men
shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you for my sake.

2. These railing accusations have proceeded from the unchristian hearts of our
Prelates, who are rageing waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, and
thereby give public proof, that by the sentence of excommunication from the
Kirk, they are indeed delivered unto Satan, the spirit which now works
mightily in them. All their revilings against us, shall not draw from us one
word, which may reflect upon the Kings Majesty. They have learned an art,
like unto that practiced of old, cunningly to insert the image of their
Hierarchy, into the Kings portract, that no man can do reverence to the one,
but he must adorethe other, no man speak, or do, against the one, but he must
speak, and do against the other. But we are not unacquainted with their craft,
and God has taught us the way to honor the King, and detest treason, sedition
and rebellion, without honor done to them, and without the perfidious
acknowledging of their abjured tyranny. 3. By two things all men may perceive,
that the Prelates would have their anger to come to a mischief: the one is, that
they use extreme bitterness of words. Yet in this they fail of their end;
that their words are rather common railings and flyting, then sharp, pointed
and proper, more laboring to speak all the evil they can devise against us,
then to speak any truth against our persons and cause. The other is, that they
would engage his Majesty so far in their business, that no place may be left
to a retreat. But in this also we trust they shall be disappointed, and that
they shall never induce his Majesty, to act any thing which is not revocable.
Princes who ought to be common parents, will not make themselves a party; for
that were to overthrow the boat by unequal weight on the one side, and make
not only the passengers, but him that sits at the helm to perish; which our
Prelates have desperately chosen, rather then to repent, or with Jonas to cast
themselves in the sea, that they may perish alone. Their maxim is old; when we
are dead and gone, let the earth be burnt up with fire.

In the narrative we are glad that they judge of our intentions (which are
directly known to GOD only) by our proceedings and actions before the world:
which against their obloquies and misconstructions we justify. 1. By our long
suffering the outrages and insolences of the Prelates; who against the unity of
hearts, authority of Assemblies, order of Ministry, purity of doctrine and
worship and whole reformation of religion in this Kirk (which was the
wonderful work of Gods greatest mercy to this kingdom, and the glory of our
land) for no other end, but for satisfying their ambition and avarice (which
are known to be the two great inchanters of natural men, and have proven
cruel Harpyes against religion) they did overturne all; bringing in for unity,
division, for authority of Assemblies, their own usurpation, for order of the
Ministry, episcopal tyranny, and for the purity of worship, first humane
inventions, and thereafter (being now grown by their rents and Lordly
dignities, by their power over the Ministers and other lieges, by their places
in Parliament, Council, Session, Exchequer, and high Commission to a
plenipotent dominion and greatness) they frame a book of Canons for ruling the
Kirk and disposing upon religion at their pleasure. And yet all this time the
greatest opposition was the zeal of some preachers in giving testimony to the
truth, and sealing the same by their sufferings, and the groaning of the
people, and their crying to God, that he would come down and deliver them from
these more then Egyptian taskmasters. 2. By the peaceablnesse of our
proceedings, ever since we begune to appear in a public way of opposition:
although their insolency ascended so high as without consent or knowledge of
the Kirk, they have framed a service book to be received in all the Kirks of
the kingdom, as the only form of Gods public worship, procured letters of
horning against Ministers for that effect, practiced it themselves, and not
only discharged some Readers and Ministers who refused the book, but also
obtained a charge, that no man under the pain of death should speak against
the Bishops or their service book: And yet although the book was brought in
without order, and known to be a change of the whole form of Gods worship; The
Noblemen, Barrones, Burgesses, Ministers and Commons conveening although in a
very great number, yet in most peaceable manner without any tumult, did only
supplicat most submisly the Lords of his Majesty's Council, and direct their
supplications to his Majesty for remeeding their just and important
grievances. Thirdly, when their supplications received no other answer, but
terrible Proclamations condemning all their meetings and proceedings, and
highly allowing the evils which were their grievances; their complaints against
the many heinous crimes of the Prelates were not heard, and their distresses
still pressing them more; The supplicants entering into a deeper search of the
causes of all their evils, and of the barring of their supplications; found
them to be from themselves and their former perfidious dealing against the
Covenant of God. And therefore resolved to renew their national oath and
Covenant with solemn humiliation and prayers to God for reconciliation, and
for better success afterward. They resolve also to renew their supplication to
the Kings Majesty for a general Assembly and Parliament, as the ordinary and
able means to redress their evils, and essayed all possible ways of
presenting it. They answered to the full all exceptions taken against the
Covenant, and left nothing undone, which beseemed Christian subjects, who
honor God and fear the King. Fourthly, after many petitions and long
exspectation when a general Assembly was conveened by his Majesty's special
indiction, and orderly constitute in all the members thereof, in the presence
of his Majesty's Commissioner; we were forbidden to proceed and commanded to
rise, without any just cause offered by us. In this extremity of the
precipitating of the Kirk and kingdom in a world of confusions upon the one
side, and of sitting after the interdiction, on the other part, we chosed that
course which was warranted by Christ, was most agreeable to his Majesty's will
formerly manifested, and to the public weal, as is contained in the
supplication of the general Assembly directed to his Majesty, whereof no
mention is made in the proclamation. Since that time we have been threatened
with armies and hostile invasion from England, against which we have been
preparing for our lawful and necessary defense, far from the least thought of
invading or harming our neighbors. Our ways then have been, after long
silence, no other but humble supplications to GOD and the King, necessary
Protestations, religious renewing of our national Covenant, sitting in a
general Assembly conveened by his Majesty's indiction, information and
preparation for necssarie defense against open hostility. The particular
evidences of our traitorous intentions are expressed in the Proclamation to be:
First, the multitude of infamous libels stuffed full of calumnies against the
Kings authority. If any piece coming from us had been here designed, our
answer might have been particulare; And therefore in general we are bold to
affirm, that what has passed from our hands of that kind, as it has been
meant to clear our intentions of disloyalty, so it carries nothing with it
which can merit so foul an aspersion, all being done both in matter and
expression with the highest respect we could conceive to his Majesty's sacred
person and royal authority, and with the best construction of his Majesty's
proceedings. Secondly, letters sent to private persons in London and sending
some Covenanters to private meetings at London to incite people against the King
and to pervert them from their duty; A traitorous intention we confess, which
will never be so happy as to harbor in a Loyal breast. And as we are assured
that such missives or messengers were never sent from the Covenanters in
common; So must it be, either cunning in the Prelates, to allege that which we
cannot prove to be false, or malice to attribute that unto us, which private
persons have done from their own motions without our knowledge: That in such a
time there should be found libels or licentious discourses, false news running
up and down, and letters carrying the names of such authors as never saw them,
should seem nothing strange. And whether the search of such things with too
great diligence, and the suppressing of them by too much severity, or the
neglect and despysing of them by authority, be the best remedy against them,
let statesmen judge. It is known when water is stopped one way it runs
asunder and breaks out many ways.

Thirdly, Our public contemning of all his Majesty's just commands, and our
mutinous protesting against them. It is our delight to obey his Majesty's just
commands, and is far from our hearts to contemn any of his Majesty's
commands, although unjust, or to protest mutinously against them: But to
protest in a fair way, and as beseems duetifull subjects, is a course
customeable, legal and ordinare, and in some cases so necessare for
preservation of right, and preventing of evil, that at sometimes it cannot be
omitted, and at no time can give just offense. Fourthly, The fourth evidence
bears three points, which require particulare answer. 1. That no Covenant or
band of that nature is warrantable without civil authority. This exception
has been so fully answered from warrands of divine and humane authority, both
ecclesiastical and civil, from the practice of the godly of old, from the
example of our Religious progenitors, from the continued subscription used in
this Kirk, and from the nature of the oath it self, which is national, that we
trust all men, who are not strangers to what we have written, are satisfied to
the full, except the Prelates and their adherents, who are endless in their
cavillations, and craftily labor to bring us back again to the beginning of
the controversy, that they may (if it were possible) undo what has been done
by us. 2. That we have rejected the Covenant commanded by authority, because
commanded by authority. The reasons not of our rejecting, but of our modest
withholding of our subscription commanded by authority are at length set down
in our public and printed Protestations, September 22. and December 18. in our
answer to the Declaration made by his Majesty's Commissioner, and in the acts
of the late Assembly, which properly owneth the public judgment and
interpretation of the confession of Faith. In all which it is found that the
confession commanded by authority according to the meaning put upon it, is in
matters of Religion, not only contrary to our subscription in February, but
also to the confession as it was meant and professed in the year 1580, and
therefore could not be subscribed by us, except we would by manifold perjurie
have made our selves transgressors, and have brought upon our selves a far
greater weight of the wrath of God, then the first was, which by our
subscription we labored to avert and prevent. Thirdly, That our Covenant is a
conspiracy against the King pretended to be with God, for doing the works of
the devil. This is a blasphemy, to which we are sure, neither the Kings
Majesty, nor any fearing God, can be accessory, and which adds much to our
confidence, that the Lord has ratified in heaven the curse pronounced upon the
Prelates, that he will reprove the words which he has heard uttered by them,
and that their work shall not prosper: And therefore comforting our selves in
the Lord our God, who has been pleased by so many signs and undeniable
evidences, to countenance and confirm our Covenant, we bring against them no
railing accusation, but say, The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke them,
and save the King. Lastly, Our hostile preparations to invade England: Against
which as much has been said and sworn by us in our late informations, as we
trust has given satisfaction to all good subjects there, although they had
been so uncharitable, which we will never believe, as hastily to have embraced
such reports. Our best actions, and which ought to give to that kingdom
greatest contentment, will never by them be wrested to that sense: And although
the Prelates in the mood of despair to recover their losses, except by our
ruin, traduce us to be desperate hypocrites, yet the event will bear witness,
that we have spoken, as men fearing the great name of our God, with whom we
have reneued our Covenant; and who, when his time comes, will be avenged,
whither upon our hypocrisy, or their calumny. Yet our enemies, seeking the
way to make suspicion, where no cause is, have given out, That many, and some
of the chiefest amongst us, are men of unquiet spirits, and broken fortunes,
etc. But in this they have been evil advised. For suspicions among thoughts,
are by wisemen compared with bates among birds, which flee not at the no
one-day, but in the time of twilight. It is known by all, who are acquainted
with this Country, that almost the whole Kingdom stands to the defense of
this cause, and that the chiefest of the Nobles, Barrons, and Burgesses, are
honored in the places where they live for Religion, wisdom, power, and
wealth answerable to the condition of this Kingdom; that the meanest of the
commons who have joined in this cause, are content of their mean estates, with
the enjoying of the Gospel; and no less known, that our adversaries are not
for number, any considerable part of the Kingdom, and that the chiefest
(setting aside some few statesmen, and such as draw their breath from court)
are known Athiests, or professed Papists, drowned in debt, denounced his
Majesty's Rebels, for a long time past, are under caption of their creditours,
and have already in their imaginations divided amongst them the lands of the
supplicants, which they hope to be possessed in, by the power of England. But
we hope that by this shift they may well be worse, but they shall be no better.
In the mean time against all these calumnies, the Lord from heaven has looked
upon the integrity of our hearts, and in his wisdom has found the way to
clear our innocence. For beside our supplication to the Council Ian. 13. for
this end, and our late information to England Feb. 4. we have the public
testimony of the council of the Kingdom to make it known. A letter sent to
England from one George Sterlin in Edinburgh, with the advice of John Sterlin
commissar of Wigtoun both in near relation to the late pretended B. of
Galloway, did come to our hands, bearing what the Prelates now say; this was
exhibited to the council, Feb. 22. and 28. with our complaint, supplication,
attestation of the great name of God, and our own consciences, and offer of our
subscription, or any other mean of purgation to the contrare, whereupon the
Lords of privy council, sent up our supplication to the Kings Majesty, with
their own, wherein they humbly supplicate, lest upon such informations, his
Majesty should be more easily moved to think upon harder courses, than he had
heretofore been pleased to keep with his Majesty's ancient and native kingdom
and subjects; that his Majesty in his accustomed fatherly care of the good and
preservation of this Kingdom, would be pleased, to resolve upon some such
course, as without force of arms, or showing of his Princely power, the estate
of this kingdom may be settled, as may be seen at greater length in the letter
it self. We are challenged here also as usurpers of regal power. First,
because we have taken upon us to command the print, and forebidden and
dismissed the printer, whom his Majesty established. This is the old complaint
of the Popish Prelates against our reformers in the year 1559. and very untruly
by their successors renewed against us: for we have neither dismissed nor
forbidden the printer, who still has his liberty, and residence in Edinburgh.
Nor does the act of the general Assembly, which we take to be here meant,
contain any thing that can be construed to be the usurpation of regal power,
or the smalest diminution of the privileges royal about printing. It only
forbideth under the pain of Kirk censure to print any piece that concerns
the Kirk, without warrant of the Kirk: A power belonging to the Kirk in all
kingdoms, and ordinarily used in this Kirk, not only in the times of Popery,
but since the reformation, as is manifest by diverse acts of Assemblies
censuring abuses of printing, appointing some treatises to be printed, and
naming some to revise what was to be put to the press. Neither must we think
that the national Kirk is shorter in her liberties of this sort, then our
Universities are, who without restraint, use their own liberty; nor will any
man think, that scholars shall have the liberty to print their propositions
yearly, without controlement, and liberty shall be denied to the general
Assembly to print their acts and constitutions. Particulare professors use to
publish their treatises with adjurations of printers (because they have no
further authority) that they print them not in another edition, nor in another
character: and shall not the Kirk make use of that authority which GOD has
granted her for her own peace and the good of Religion? Secondly, because we
have conveened the subjects, raised armies, blocked up and besieged his
Majesty's castles etc. So many of these heavy challenges as have any show of
truth, are so fully and plainly answered in our last protestation December. 18.
that as the Prelates needed not to make the objection, so need we to make no new
answer.

In our last information intended for England, besides that the true, honest
and loyal expressions of our hearts, are taken to be false, base and fawning
passages: we are particularly challenged of two scandalous and most notorious
untruths: First, that the armies now raised, are in the hands of Papists. So
indeed were we informed, and therefore spoke with this caution ( as we are
informed) and why shall not the captains and leaders of the army, be suitable
to the prime movers, the cause, and end of the work, all which smell of Rome
and of Popery? The other untruth is, that some of power in the Kirk of England
have been the cause of taking arms for invasion of this kingdom and of
meddling with our religion. This we offer to verify both by write, and by the
deposition of prime stats-men and Councillors, against some Kirk-men there,
namely against Canterbury himself, that he did negotiate with Rome, about the
frame of our service book and Canons, that with his own hand he altered, and
interlyned diverse passages thereof, tending to conformity with Rome: A plot so
perilous, that had not the Lord disappointed it, First, Scotland and then
England by him, and such as cooperate with him, had become, in their religion,
Romish. His reprinted conference with Mr. Fisher, will not serve to vindicate
his reputation. And therefore we earnestly entreat all in England, that affect
the truth of religion, and the Kings honor, and all true Patriots that love
the liberty, of the kingdom, to supplicate his Majesty for calling a
Parliament there, that this mystery of iniquity which has been in working
this time past may be discovered, and the prime agents therein, according to
their demerits may be tried and punished, and that this craft and treachery,
in joining both kingdoms in a bloody war, that by weakening both, Rome may be
built in the midst of us, and the Pope in end set over all, may be seen and
disappointed, that GOD may have his own glory, the King his honor, and his
subjects may be in safety, from foreign tyraine over their bodies, and souls.

Least the Prelates should pass any point true or false that may serve their
turn; This also is laid to our charge; that the Kings laws are in a manner
oppressed by us, in so much that the judges are so awed as they dare hardly
proceed according to law. The prime judges of the land remember, that by them
justice has been refused us, according to law; not from their own disposition,
but for fear to offend against missives procured against us: we must also now
remember, that having of late required letters of horning and caption, against
the excommunicate Prelates, conform to the act of Parliament: whereof they use
not to deny the common benefit to the meanest subject; The Lords of Session
resolved upon a letter to be sent to his Majesty March 2. wherein they bring
his Majesty's pleasure, signified by his Majesty's command, and otherwise, as
the only cause of refusing these letters, according to the act of Parliament,
and withal join their most ardent desires and humble wishes for such peace and
quietness to the kingdom, as it has enjoyed before. Which evidenceth that
not only the laws, but the judges are for us, and that from conscience of their
duty to GOD, the King and country, and not from fear and aw from us.

To make all that has been said the more credible, it is alleged that some of
us refuse both the oath of alledgeance and supremacy, and publicly mantaine
that we are not oblidged to take the same, and that three Scotishmen taken in
Wales, are at this day, imprisoned for denying these oaths. We can say nothing
of these taken in Walls, neither there persons nor their purposes being known
to us. It seems that the inquisition is hot there. But for our selves,
although there be a difference betwixt the oath of alledgeance, and supremacy,
and we cannot take the oath of supremacy as it is extended, and glossed by the
flattering Prelates, yet we heartily rander that to his Majesty which is due
and uses to be given by reformed and sound divines to the civil Magistrate,
knowing that the Fifth command containing the duty of subjects to their Princes
and rulers, is the First commandment of the second table, and that our
confession of faith, acknowledges his Majesty to be the Lordsvice-gerant on
earth: to whom the conservation and purgation of religion, does belong.

As this is the conception which our enemies have begotten in his Majesty's
mind against us, so may we learn by this declaration, what his Majesty's
intentions are against this Kirk and kingdom, and what birth may be looked
for, if divine providence by changing the heart of our King, or by some other
way known to himself, make not an abortion, or chock it in time. For first,
through the incurable superstition and inveterate malice of the Prelates against
the reformed religion, declaration is made, that by introducing the service
book, there was not the least thought of innovation of religion, but merely to
have a conformity with the worship of God which is observed in both the other
kingdoms; though evil minded men have wrested somethings in it to a sinistrous
sense. Thus the service book is still no innovation of religion, but by our
sinistrous sense, is made to seem so: conformity with the worship of GOD in
other kingdoms, is urged upon us, as if we were, tabularasa, and had not a
form of worship established by the acts of the Kirk and laws of the kingdom:
merely to have conformity is averred, although the manifold litures and
interlynings of the service book, used in both the other kingdoms testify the
contrare, by the hands of our own Prelates and of Canterbury himself. Hence
we must pay for abusing the book, and the book it self must in the own time be
received. Secondly, through the pride and greed of our Prelates, Episcopal
government must be retained as it is established by acts of Parliament; as
known to the whole world to be most Christian in it self, most peaceable for
the civil estate, most consonant to Monarchical government, and without which
the Parliament will not stand complete of three estates: Although the truth is,
there be no act of Assembly, nor of Parliament for that office in this
kingdom, that it is known to reformed Christendom, rather to be antichristian
in it self, most prejudicial to the peace of the civil estate, and has in
all nations proven the most pernicious enemy to Monarchs, and true Monarchical
government. And that the Parliament has been, may be, and is in the nature
thereof, complete and perfect without this excrescence. Hence Bishops we must
have jure divino to serve the will of the Prince in the worship of GOD, and
these as lordly as ever before. Thirdly, No Covenant must be endured to which
the Kings Majesty shall not consent, and our Covenant only pretended to be
with God, that we may with better countenance do the works of the devil, such
as are treasons and rebellions. Hence our Covenant can be no more endured then
treason and rebellion, and the Covenanters either renounce God, so solemnly
attested by them, or punished as rebels and traitors. Fourthly, the question
is conceived to be no more about the service book and Episcopal government:
But whether the Kings Majesty shall be our King or not: And is determined
that we have stricken at the very root of Kingly government, vilified the
regal power in his Majesty's person, and assumed it to our selves.

Fifthly, it is declared, that his Majesty is forced to take arms to
establish and set his Kingly authority right here, to make the best of us see,
that he will endure no such Covenant as we have made. Hence resolution is taken
and declared, that for establishing the service book and episcopal government,
for abolishing of our Covenant, and for being avenged on us, as rebels and
traitors, his Majesty comes in a hostile war, with all the power that can be
raised in England, by all other means and by this Proclamation, which is
ordained to be read in time of divine service, in every Kirk within the
kingdom, for that effect.

Our part in this case is to resolve, whither we will, with sin and shame lie
under the pressing weight of so many foul aspersions, as rarely in the worst
times have been laid upon Christians, receive the service book, as the only
form of divine worship, which is declared by the Assembly to be a mass of
errors, superstition, idolatry and antichristian tyranny, welcome home again
our Prelates and their abjured government, condemn our reformers and the
glorious work of reformation, renounce our Covenant and be so many times
perjured as we have sworn and subscribed the same, loss all our labors and
pains, bestowed for so large a time in so good a cause, open with our own
hands a wide door, and by our example show a broad way for the entering of
Popery and of all changes in religion hereafter, lay a stumbling block in the
Kings way to the kingdom of heaven, and hinder the Queens conversion, give
offense to all the reformed Kirks who have been praying for us, harden the
hearts and strengthen the hands of all the enemies of the truth at home and
abroad, make our selves an odious spectacle to men and angels, forget our
bygone slavery and our wishes for redemption, deny our own experience of the
mercy truth and power of GOD, so many times, and so many ways, to our
unspeakable comfort, manifested this time bypast, loss the posterity and the
children that shall come after us, who shall mourn in misery for our misdeeds,
make the faces of so many to blush and be ashamed, because of us, leave nothing
but laments to our friends and jubilees of joy to our enemies, interrupt the
march of the LORD of hosts upon the earth, and wrest his dis-played banner out
of his hands, pull the crown from the head of CHRIST our judge, our lawgiver
and our King, grieve and resist the holy Ghost, pull down the
golden-candlestick and put out the light, and bring all the plagues that are
written in the book of GOD upon us, so that all nations shall say, wherefore
has the Lord done this unto this land? What means the heat of this his
great anger? Then men shall say because they have forsaken the Covenant of the
Lord, therefore are these evils come upon them; A word of defection could no
sooner come from our mouths but the horror of hell should enter in our souls:
Or rather on the contrary use the power which GOD has put in our hands, not
for invading England, or doing the smalest harm to any of the people of GOD
who trouble not our peace; cursed be the breasts that harbor such intentions,
and the hands that execute them, but merely for our own defense and safety
against armed violence and unjust invasion. And therefore where it is demanded
in the Proclamation what we will defend; we answer; not our disobedience but
our religion, liberties and lives: And where it is asked against whom we will
defend; Least our intentions or actions should be mistaken, by such as are not
acquainted with our case, or misconstrued, as contrary to the doctrine of sound
divines, or to the laudable practices of Christians of old, or of late, we
desire that distinction may be made, and difference put between the King
resident in the Kingdom, and by opening his ears to both parties, rightly
informed, and the King far from us in another kingdom, hearing the one
party, and misinformed by our adversaries: Between the King as King,
proceeding royally according to the laws of the Kingdom against rebels, and
the King as a man coming down from his throne (at the foot where of the
humble supplication of his subjects lies unanswered) and marching furiously
against his loyal and weal-meaning people: Between a King who is a stranger to
Religion, and tied no further, but according to his own pleasure, to the
professors of Religion, living in his dominions, and our Kiug professing with
us the same religion, and obliged by his Fathers deed, and his own oath, to
desend us his own subjects, our lives, religion, liberties and laws: Again,
difference would be put, between some private persons taking arms for
resistance, and inferior Magistrates, Judges, Counselors, nobles, Peers of
the land, Parliament men, Barrons, Burgesses, and the whole body of the
Kingdom (except some few either Courteours, stats-men, Papists, or popishly
affected, and their adherents) standing to their own defense: Between subjects
rising, or standing out, against law and reason that they may be freed from
the yoke of their obedience, and a people holding fast their alledgeance to
their Sovereign, and in all humility supplicating for Religion and justice,
between a people laboring by arms to introduce novations in Religon contrary
to the laws, and a people seeking nothing so much as against all innovations,
to have the same Religion ratified, which has been professed since the
reformation, and has not only been solemnly sworn long since by the Kings
Majesty, and by the whole Kingdom both of old and of late, but also commanded
by the Kings Majesty to be sworn by his Counselors, and commanded by his
Council to be subscribed by all the people as it was professed at first:
Between a people pleading for their own fantasies and foolaries, or
inventions, and a people suspending their judgment and practice about things
controverted, till they should be determined by a national Assembly, the only
proper and competent judicatorie, and after determination, receiving and
standing for the conclusions of the Assembly. Whither in this case, and matters
so standing, we shall stand to our own defense, we are taught by the light and
law of nature, by the word of God in the old and new testament, by the Covenant
betwixt the people and God, by the end for which Magistrates are ordained of
God, by our standing in our order and line of subordination under God, the
great Superior, when our immediate Superiors go out of their line and order,
by the testimonies of the best divines and sound politicians and Lawyers, even
such as pleadmost contra Monarchomachos, by the mutual contract betwixt the
King and the people at the Coronation, by acts of Parliament, and by the
example of our own predicessours.

And now for our brethren and neighbors, in England, whose ears, we suppose,
have been filled with this Proclamation in their particular Kirks; From that
honor which we ow unto authority, as the ordinance of God, and from the
natural and loyal affection which we bear unto our King and dread Sovereign,
borne and baptized amongst us, we are unfainedly, and from our hearts grieved
that first his sacred ears should be so far possessed, and next his royal
Name so far abused by wicked men, as to receive and give way to so many
absurd and incredible false calumnies against a whole Nation, his own native
Country and Kingdom; It is too manifest how extremly pernicious, and
damnageable are calumnies, especially universal ones of this kind, and
therefore to repress them, ought not any law or ordinance be spared, that may
serve to the purpose; From that love which is due from us unto them, to whom in
very many respects, and by many strong bands natural, civil and spiritual,
we are sibber and more nearly joined, then to any other Nation or people on
earth, we are heartily sorry that their Kirks and hearing are taken up with
such discourses and would wonder at their credulity, if they should be
believed by them; yet because speeches may be the seminaries of sedition, even
amongst brethren, who are at greatest distance when they have once begun to
divide and discord, we must entreat (if with so wise a Nation there be any need
of entreaty) that they will not upon any declaration which they have heard, be
suddenly stirred to attempts against us to our mutual hurt, or with a golden
hook to catch so small commodities, as may be hoped for in such a war, and
by so doing, make both Nations a mocking to strangers, and this Yland which
has been blessed with so long a peace, to be a field of blood, and a prey to
our common enemies, who now for many years have been looking upon us with an
evil eye, and are still waiting for an evil hour: that when they hear of any
of our preparations for defense, or of any of our actions which to us are so
necessary, that without them our defense is impossible, and wherein there is
no wrong done, or intended against them; they will judge charitably of us, and
of our doings in such an exigent and extremity, as this is, and that they will
wisely and christianly, supposing our case to be their own, make use of that
common rule of equity, what soever ye would that others did to you, do ye even
so to them. That hereafter, reports and declarations made against us by our
enemies, be not suddenly believed; since the authors, from the conscience of
their own deceitful dealing, publish them amongst the English only, who cannot
control the untruth of them, and keep them up from the knowledge of this
kingdom, where they cannot abide the common light and trial, every one of the
commons knowing their forgerie and falsehood, And when any of them happen to
come to our hands, the difficulty and danger is so great in carrying our
answers, and the true information, as matters now stand, unto their knowledge.
And that they will at last, both pour forth their prayers to GOD and their
supplications to the King in our behalf; and if need be, use their power for
our lawful defense against merce-naries and wicked men the sons of Beliall.
Are we not their own brethren, their own flesh and bone? Are we not all under
one roof, in one and the same shipe, and members of one body? Their religious
progenitors at the time of reformation vouchsafed us their help and assistance
for establishing the reformed religion, neither have we so evil deserved, nor
are they so far degenerated, as that we have reason to fear, that we shall be
deserted by them at this time, the cause being the same, the case not much
different and the persons only changed, Our salvation is common. Let us
together earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, that mercy peace, and love may be multiplied unto us.

Considering also how far our late actions against the persons of our greatest
enemies and the chief strengths of the kingdom, as of the castle of Edinburgh,
etc. are subject to the obloquies of such, as have to the worst sense wrested
all our former counsels and necessary conclusions; and may be mistaken by our
friends, who looking at a great distance, cannot well perceive the ripeness of
the occasion and opportunity of our doing, we judged it necessary for silencing
the one, and for satisfying the other, to make known to all, how we were driven
to this by the present exigence of our affairs for our lawful and necessary
defense.

It cannot be unknown to all the subjects of this kingdom, what have been the
terrors and threatenings of diverse Proclamations at home, as of that, July 4.
and of the other December. 18. And to many it is known also what missives have
been directed to the Nobles and Gentlemen of England, for attending the royal
banner at York April 1. and what Proclamations have been made in England, both
that of the date Ianu. 29. and above all the last declaration Feb. 27.
condemning our loyal proceedings, our humble supplications, our legal
Protestations, our true and modest informations, and our very intentions (after
we have attested GOD so many times and so solemnly on the contrare) as false
and traitorous, our selves as rebels and traitors, and therefore denouncing
war in the most hostile manner against us. We are not ignorant what letters
have been sent to some of our cold-friends, to excite them, and some of our
professed enemies, to embolden and strengthen them against us, with moneys and
munition, and with directions and order for the ways of their combination and
running together with their forces; and on the other side, of the large
promises and bold undertakings, of our dis-natured contrymen, some at court
and others at home, to make up armies of so many thousa^ds in the North and
South parts of the kingdom, for environing us on all sides. The Scottish
Councelours, Nobles, and Gentlemen about court are made to subscribe the Kings
Covenant with this addition; That they shall not acknowledge the late general
Assembly, that they shall not adheare to the late Covenant and band sworn and
subscribed by us; And that they shall oppose against us to the best of their
power as they shall be directed by his Majesty's command; According to these
warnings and preparations, the Kings household has entered on their journey,
Monday last March 18. The King himself takes post Wednesday next March 27.
intending on the third day to be at York, or New Castle, to march forward with
his forces, The Scottish Noblemen appointed to come home, accompanied with
skilled commanders to draw together their friends and followers, to put them in
order, and under their general the Marquess of Hammilton to join with our
foreign enemies attending the Kings Majesty. The Earl of Lind-sey goes to
sea with 17. of the Kings great ships furnished with three thousand Soldiers,
to come in their expedition to such places of this kingdom, as their
commission, when it is unsealed, shall command them; Six hundredth hors-men are
to be sent presently toward Scotland, to infest the borders, our enemies at
home are waiting for their coming; our excommunicate Prelates and their
adhearents are fled to England; the lands and estates of Noblemen, of chief
Barrones and Burgesses, who have joined in this cause, are designed as a spoil
to be parted amongst our enemies. While matters stand thus, And the maine
confidence of our adverse party and pursuers is placed in our divisions, in
the power of some Papists and others of note amongst our selves, and in some
places which are appointed to be strengths for defense of the kingdom against
foreign invasion (as is at length cleared in our Protestation) especially the
castle of Edinburgh, a chief member of our incorporation and the place of our
meetings; There was no time for longer delay, but in this extremity we must
either do or die either defend our selves or come in the reverence of our
enemies, whose mercies are cruel. And therefore such dispatch, as ye have
heard, in matters necessarly serving for our defense, has been used in
Edinburgh and in other parts of the land.

Where this work will end, the Lord whose work it is, and who has led us so
far on, he knows; and as we resolve to stay where we find not his presence
going with us: So are we able to justify what we have now designed and done,
to the consciences of all men: Shall defense be necessary, and shall the
necessary means, without which there can be no defense, be judged unlawful?
May we not prevent the blow as lawfully, as repel it? is not the taking of the
weapons out of the hands of our boasting enemies and the apprehending of such
as draw the Kings Majesty to so hard courses against his subjects, as lawful,
as the defensive war it self, and is it not more safe both for the King and the
kingdom, then to take them in battle? The law both natural and civil
teaches, that ad defensionem sufficit, quod praecedat offensa vel justus timor
offensae, nec debet quis expectare primum ictum: melius enim juraintacta
servare, quam post vnlneratam causam remedium quaerere. Quando praecedunt signa
and actus manifestae offensionis, and quando aliter nos met tueri non possumus
tum inculpata ac necessaria dicitur tutela, a^ in dubio insultatus quicquid
facit in incontinenti praesumitur ad sui defensione^ facere. It is enough for
defense that offer of offense, or just fear of offense go before. All our
reasons for lawful defense and for guarding the castle of Edinburgh, militate
for us in the surprysall thereof in this case and at this time. This necessary
prevention was the practice of France, of Holland, of Germany, and of our own
nation, when for the defense of their religion or liberties they took arms,
which they offered always to lay down how soon they should be secured; Likeas
we declare at this time, that we take arms not for invasion, not for
alteration of the civil government, not for wronging any man's person, or to
possess what belongs to any man, but for the defense of our religion,
liberties and lives. That even when we hold our sword in the one hand, we will
present our humble supplication to his sacred Majestic with the other; that how
soon our supplication is granted, our selves secured, and the peace of the Kirk
and kingdom settled, we shall suffer our swords to fall from us, shall leave
nothing in our power unperformed for perfect pacification, and shall vow to
live and die in obedience to his Majesty's laws, and mantainance of his
Majesty's royal person and authority, which we heartily wish and earnestly
pray, that GOD would incline his Majesty to hear, before matters be
desperate, and the rupture become uncurable.

Revised according to the ordinance of the general Assembly, by me Mr. A.
Ihonston Clerk thereto:
Edinb. 22. of March 1639.
FINIS.

