THE WORTHY COMMUNICANT REWARDED LAID FORTH IN A SERMON, ON JOHN 6.54. PREACHED
IN THE Cathedral of St. PETER in Exeter, on Low-Sunday, being the 21. of
April, Anno 1639.

BY WILLIAM SCLATER, MASTER Of Arts, late Fellow of Kings College in
Cambridge, now Chaplain of the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop's
Baronry of Saint Stephens, and Preacher also at S. Martin, in the same City.

1 COR. 11.27. Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

Aug. apud P. Lumb. l. 4. did. 9. C. Non manducans manducat, and manducans non
manducat, quia non manducans sacramentaliter, aliquando manducat spiritualiter,
and e converso.

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for G. LATHUM at the Bishops head in Paul's
Churchyard.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Doctor PETERSON, Dean, and Canon residentiary of St.
Peter in Exeter, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, etc. my worthily
honored friend, the exuberancie of all blessings.
Reverend Sir,
THat which was graced with your audience, in preaching, with your thanks, when
preached, be pleased now to honor with your noble Patronage in print; which is
a kind of preaching too, that, as 2 Samuel 18.23.
Ahimaaz did Cushi, and Saint John 20.4.
John Saint Peter, does [out-run] the vocal, by so much farther, as it can
lengthen out its strides (as Procrustes stretched his guests, in Plutarch. in
vita Thesei.
Plutarch, that were for his bed otherwise too short) to reach it self unto the
hands, and eyes of those good Catholic Christians, unto whose ears my voice,
had it bin Stentorian, or as a Mar. 3.17.
Boanerges, could not come: To preach by the pen, which in the expression of
Clemens Alexandrinus is, (...), is as useful sometimes as to do so by the
tongue; and this instruction by the (...) --
hand, like to a wedge of gold beaten into a plate, spreads more abroad, and
often with as large emolument to the Church, as that which is by lively (...).
Clemens Alex. lib. prim. Strom.
speech, or sermocination. I may seem perchance by this to light a candle to
the Sun, and to cast my spoonful into that vast Ocean of knowledge, which we
(though sitting upon the very lees and dregs of time for Atheism and ill
practice, which with bleeding hearts we view abroad, and wonder at) have lived
to see make up that prophecy of great Daniel, who foretold it should [ Dan.
12.4.
abound]; and of the Kingly Prophet, whose prediction is now at its full
height, and (...) of accomplishment, God gave the word, and great are the
company of the Psalm. 68.11.
Preachers; when thus comparatively I lay me in the balance, I find most
others to preponderate; since I must on the general audit of my self,
confessedly, with Paul, bring in my account with 2 Cor. 12.11 I am nothing.
(...), and with good Calvin, mine empty Calvin. Inst. lib. 2. cap 5. sect. 13.
in fine.
(...), saying of all my best parts, and performances, as S. Andrew of the five
loaves and two fishes, (...); alas! John 6.9.
What are these? They reach not, as I read of David's later Worthies, unto the
dignity of the 2 Samuel 23.19.
former, who did not more outstrip in worth, then Saul did overgrow in 1 Samuel
9.2.
stature his under brethren, or Zacheus [ Luke 19.4.
climb'd] up on the Sycamore, o'relooke the company in the way below with
Christ: But when again I meditate, that even a pair of Luke 2.24.
Turtles, and the two Mar. 12.42, 43.
Mites, where there was no more to give, were valued by that God (who measures
more by quality, then by Non de patrimonio, sed de animo opus ejus examinans,
and considerans non quantum sed ex quanto dedisset. S. Cypr. lib. de opere and
cleemosyn. sect. 14.
quantity) as a rich oblation, and a large additament to the common corban, and
the treasury of the Church; and when I think that my little light, though but
as a candle, or a glimmering ray of that orient Mal. 4.2.
Sun of righteousness, is given, and derived to me, not to be hidden under the
Mat. 5.15.
bushel whether of covetousness, or obscurity, nor to be set under the Luke
8.16.
bed of laziness, or sluggish ease, much less to be dipped in the liquour of
what is [ Isa. 5.20.
called] good, but [is] the worst of fellowship, till it be quite extinct; but
as Saint Paul says even of the commonest gift of the Spirit, that its
bestowed, not for ostentation of the haver, but for to 1 Cor. 12.7.
profit withal the whole Church; Why should I be shie to pay, though but my
Eccles. 1.7.
rivulet, as in tribute to this Ocean; and to improve, though but my (one)
talent, to the best advantage of my Lord and Master Christ, who is wont to give
to him that Luke 8.18.
has (and having does employ) the Mat. 25.28.
more, by how much more the good already given spreads, and does become
diffusive to community. I would not therefore with the Spider weave this web
to thrust it to a corner, but with the Silk-worme rather spinne my thread so
that it might help to cloth at least some younger children of the Church. I
must confess the Press may now well begin to surfeit, and as Genesis 49.14.
Issachar to couch down under the burdens of those sons of Anak, those
Giant-like voluminous writers on this my subject: those are your bulky
Elephants that with whole 1 Mac. 6.37.
castles-full of paper on their backs, occasion the common Readers to keep
aloof; their purse-strings are too weak to tie and hold them, and the acies
of their eie-sight hebetated by so too-big objects: I have not written --
Tenuis mihi campus aratur.
such Iliades after Homer: Many before me have done worthily this Est illud
magnae fertilitatis opus, Ovid. Trist. lib. 2.
larger way in Ephratah, and for it are become, as the people in the gates told
Boaz, very Ruth 4.11.
famous in our Bethleem. I have chosen to present my Mother Church, as Saint
Austin did Laurentius, with an enchiridion only, as having limmed out what is
more copiously pourtraied by others, into a smaller draught, and so do offer
it, as were Homers Iliades to that mighty Monarch, in a Nutshell to her. I
must expect (having thus hoised up my sail to steare amain) some surges, some
whistlings of your windy spirits, that like to summer flies will blow
corruption on the sweetest of provision: We are fallen into those times
wherein all Sermons are most sure of censure, most of all unsure of practice;
so that when our Sermon is ended, we can hardly say our Sermon is done; we
hear more often of our own good voices, elocution, memory, then of our
hearers holy doings: My hope is not so high as to please all, nor my intention
so factiously sordid, as to displease any; yet I cannot but suspect the worst,
for that whereas I hitherto (mine Anno [tricessimo] carnis assumptae, Salvator
ad signa, and miracula, and doctrinam usus est potestate -- non antea, quia hac
aetate tempus doctrinae insinuatum est rationabile; and ante has metas perperam
invadi magisterium data est forma; quia non competit annis impubibus sedere in
cathedra, etc. Cypr. de jejun. and tentat. Christi, Sect. 1.
age not daring farther) have been only as a Standing in a Fair set up
before another door, and have been read but in a Preface to some books
published of my fathers by me; I must now stand alone upon my own bottom by
my self: and yet not all alone, but as the learners hand, though framing
characters, yet by direction of the Scrivener that holds and guides it, so I
have singly vented nothing, or at all steared the least point farther then as I
have been guided by the proper stars and cynosure of the worthiest in our
Church of England; whose names are now all noted in my margin, which I could
not mention in my preaching, lest I should have lost my Sermon in so large
quotations. Honored Sir, amidst the many dangers it is like to meet with,
vouchsafe to patronize this my first public Theological Essay by your
countenancing of it: I shall [so] less fear either the spleen or gall of any
Reader. One Plato, says Marcil. Ficin. in vita Platonis. Unus Plato plus est
quam Atheniensis populus.
Marcilius, is worth all Athens else; one pearl out-vies a thousand pebles;
one such Mecoenas, so acute an Aristarchus of all learning (who approves)
bears down before him, like an Indian Hurraca, all the sullen opposition of
the whole droves of Momus.

Should I here take occasion to blazon your so many excellent graces, which be
like the Spouses flock of sheep which came up from the washing, even-shorne,
each one being, not like the Pelican in the wilderness, alone, but every one
bearing Cant. 4.2.
twins, and none is barren among them: Should I pen-down in this Epistle that
those which are in others rare, and singular, are in you but ordinary and
common, I should but make that legible by your own, which has long since been
visible to the eyes of others that have truly known you. But though your
various graces (as being all links of one and the same chain) might well claim
as those in the Scholiast. in Thucyd.
Lacedaemonian army, a privilege all of them to be Captains, and to lead; yet
that which is, as David's Tachmonite, the 2 Samuel 23.8.
chief among these Captains, and which, as King Lemuels virtuous daughter,
does Pro. 31.29.
excel the rest, is your humble and admired Patience: This is that bulwark
which as a Mat. 7.25.
rock returns the billows of malevolence in froth, and makes the shafts of
the meagrest envy to be split in vain: This is that which does, and shall
preserve you, as Alpheus, still untainted by the washings of the bitterest Sic
tibi cum fluctus subterlabere Sicanos, Doris amara suam non intermisceat undam.
Virg. Eclog. 10.
Doris, till you salute at last the limpid Arethusa, and sweet fountain of all
bliss. I will assure you, noble Sir, as the great Doctor of the Gentiles told
his endeared Corinthians, my heart is much 2 Cor. 6.11.
enlarged toward you, and my respectfull thoughts be most voluminous, though
now my quill (much like mine oratorie, too jejune and dry) has thus epitomized
my expressions in a line or two.

But I perceive, as Jordan above his banks, the measure of my affection has
over-swoln the bounds of an Epistle: What remains now, but that I must implore
the favors of Heaven on you, and that you may still persist to beautify the
seat you sit in, to credit the West, and to adorn the Gospel: Me, both your
self, and your so rarely virtuous consort, (a genuine branch of a most holy,
and devout stock) shall ever have, though your meanest friend, yet one that
has resolved to print himself

Your most true honourer, in my faithful observances much devoted, WILLIAM
SCLATER.
Exon. May 11. 1639.
THE WORTHY COMMUNICANT REWARDED.
JOHN 6.54. Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life,
and I will raise him up at the last day.


AFTER some agitation of thoughts, what most opportunely I might this day
entertain your noble audience withal, at length I fastened on this Text;
which is that sacred Map, in which we have compendiated the sum of those
choice favors from above, that now this gladsome anniversary of our Saviors
all-glorious Resurrection has occasioned to his Church: For now we have more
solemnly, and more generally renewed our Covenant with our God, and received
the Seal of all our pardons in the blessed Sacrament: Now also has the
all-powerfull arising of our Head Christ Jesus, carrying away in triumph (as
Jud. 16.3.
Samson did the gates of Azzah on his shoulders) the bars of Death, Hell, and
the Grave (and all this to [assure] his members of their complete Romans 4.25.
justification before his offended Father, yea, of their sure possession of
eternal bliss) offered it self unto our meditations. We are (too many of us)
as Christ said unto the two Disciples, (whereof the one was named Cleophas, and
the other one Ammaon, as St. Ambrose; or Nathanael, as Epiphan. haer. 23. ad
finem.
Epiphanius; or else S. Luke himself, the Writer of the story, as Haymo,
Lyranus, and Theophylact opine) to these two (what ever was the others name)
going to Emmaus; we are, I say, (...), Luke 24.25.
slow of heart to believe, at least wise, through want of a more earnest
taking-heed unto the things we hear; so sieve-like are our memories, that they
do Heb. 2.1.
(...), as St. Paul's word is, let slip, and to run out as leaking vessels, what
should better be retained. Wherefore as the Manna, on the Jewish Sabbath, being
Exodus 16.24
laid up in a pot, was rendered sweet and fresh for use; so, that we may not, as
ungrateful Israel, so soon Psa. 106.13
forget the wonders of the Lord, so mavelous in our eyes, but rather on the
contrary; as Ophir, in the days of Solomon, was the place for gold, because
the most and best was there; so went I for a seasonable Text herefore, to this
golden and beaten chapter (as well traveled in this kind, as Ophir was for
gold) because here was the richest vein to furnish such an occasion: thence
have I extracted a small model for my building, the two chief Pillars of
which building, as 1 Kin. 7.21.
Jachin and Boaz in Solomon's Temple, are the two maine Articles of our
Christian faith, viz. the resurrection of the dead, and the life everlasting:
And that which, as John Baptist did to Christ, fore-runneth, and Mat. 3.3.
prepares the way to solid comfort in them both, is, to eat the flesh, and to
drink the blood of Christ; whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is
drink indeed, verse 55. (...) [indeed] because no food in shadow, or in type,
but truly, and in substance; [indeed] because not provant for the body, but
spiritual nourishment of the soul; [indeed] because not Col. 2.22.
perishing with the using, but an heavenly viond, a food 1 Cor. 8.8
commending us to God, and nourishing up for ever unto life eternal: These
four then, viz. The division.
1. The manducation of the flesh of Christ. 2. The compotation of the blood of
Christ. 3. The resurrection of the body: And lastly, 4. The possession of
eternal life; the certain issue of the other three.


These four, like the four rivers in the garden of Genesis 2.10.
Eden, do all spring from the pure fountain of this Scripture, and must now
flow abroad into so many several streams of discourse, which in their present
spreading shall make glad, I hope, this City of God: The same hand that gave
the opportunity, vouchsafe to give success to this business.

Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day.

I shall begin in that Singula quaeque locum teneant dicenda decenter. Horat.
de Art Poetica.
order which the Text presents the parts in, and in the former generals
observe, 1. The guest invited to this heavenly Feast [(...)] Whosoever, or, as the
Genevians render it, Whosoever, answering to that [(...)] in Saint 1 Cor. 11.27
Paul, the parallel Scripture unto this, 1 Cor. 11.27. 2. The provision made to
entertain these guests, the flesh and blood of Christ, for meat and drink. 3.
The two actions, with their relation to their several object, [eating] the
flesh, and [drinking] the blood of Christ. 4. And fourthly, the conjunction of
both these together (for which cause I called it a compotation) not flesh only
without blood, but blood also as equally as the flesh; and both respectively to
the [(...)] in the beginning. Of these in their order.

This [Whoso] is not either so universal, The first particular.
or indefinite, that pell mell promiscuously, by virtue of [it] all comers, or
intruders were to be admitted to this sacred soules-repast, (though it be true,
that every worthy and accomplished guest may take [ Isa. 55.1.2.
freely] of the heavenly Supper, and without cost; Come, says the Prophet, eat
ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness, and all
without money, and without price, Isa. 55.1.2.) -- Procul hinc, procul ite
profani: For if he that thrust himself in without his Mat. 22.11.13.
wedding garment to the Kings Feast, was shamefully bound hand and foot, and
cast into outer darkness, where there was weeping and gnashing of teeth; if
there be a Nolite sanctum canibus, Mat. 7.6.
holy things, and pearls be interdicted unto dogs, and swine, unto persons
of a currish, and swinish disposition, that still, as 2 Pet. 2.22.
Peter says, are turning back to their vomit, and to their wallowing in the
mire of all impenitency: -- Was a beast slain for touching the Heb. 12.20.
mount? and shall not a person that is embrutished, and sunk below his species
in vile affections, be punished for touching that Table, where the Lord is
present? Lo! He that eats Christ's flesh with a foul mouth, and receives him
into an uncleansed and sinful soul, does (as one says well) all one, as if
he should sop the bread he eats in dirt, or lay up his richest treasures in a
sink: No such unworthy and undressed guests are to touch here; yea, if they
should, all that they eat or drink, is but sure 1 Cor. 11.29
judgment, and damnation to themselves, by such a presumptuous impreparation
laying themselves open to the strokes of Gods displeasure; of which Nadab and
Abihu, in a parallel case, are exampled out for our warning, being suddenly
destroyed for offering Lev. 10.2.
strange fire at Gods Altar: and no less are those endangered, that present
strange souls, and a false faith at Christ's Table; for surely, as Moses said to
Aaron, God will be Ver. 3.
sanctified in them that come nigh him: Wherefore our Savior, whose essence
was Purity it self in abstracto, when he meant, though not to lay down any
thing which he had before, to wit, his Divinity (save only, as Pantolcon, tract.
de lumin. sanct. page 587. in patrum (...).
Pantoleon has it, (...), in the act, and time of his exinanition, he seemed
awhiles to shadow the manifestation, and as it were to hide the glorious
splendor of the same) yet to assume unto his divine Person another Nature, and
that not of Angels, for [some] of them stood, but of Man, whose [whole] species
was quite lost, as say the Schoolmen, in the fall of Adam: In this his
incarnation, or assumption of his humanity, he chose the womb of none but of a
pure Virgin to be lodged in; for as no unclean thing can enter into the
kingdom of Heaven, no more would the King of Heaven enter into any unclean
thing: he was a Lamb without 1 Pet. 1.19.
spot, or blemish, and could not therefore enter into a leprous soul; yea, his
very body, and his flesh so pure, that those two noble Converts of his, Joseph
of Arimathea, and his 1 John 7.50.
night-Disciple Nicodemus thought it fittest, as Primasius notes out of St.
John, to be wound up only in [linnen] clothes, and with sweet spices and
fragrant odours, to be interred in a [new] sepulcher, never soyled by a sinful
body, Joh. 19.40, 41. And when himself was now about to give this same body of
his in Sacrament, at the first institution of his last blessed Supper, unto his
Disciples, its noted by the same Evangelist, chap. 13.4, 5. that he rises from
supper, that is, if I misconceive not, from the second and common supper (now
begun) next to the eating of the Passover, which was the first and legal
supper, which the word [(...)] rising up, partly intimates: For the legal
Passover, as we may gather from Exodus 12.11. was to be eaten [standing] with
staves in their hands; and at which [common] supper it was, before it was
wholly ended, that Judas eat the sop, and had his traitorous hand with his
Master in the dish: after which sop (no Sacramental sop, as I believe, with a
Dr Kellet Canon Residentiary in his book entitled, Tricoenium Christi, not
more full of soliditie, then curiosity of all great learning: now pregnant, and
ready to be delivered from a well-furnished Library into public.
learned Professor of Divinity a member of this Church) immediately he went
out, Ver. 30. to do that work of darkness, for to serve his truest Master the
Prince of Darkness, in betraying the Matthew. 27.4.
innocent blood of the Prince of light, into the murtherous hands of the
Children of Darkness: He went out, and it was Night, that is, says Alcuinus,
He, Judas himself, was so personally, and in abstracto, he had a soul within
so foul and black with this deed of darkness: I say, from this second and
common supper (thus begun) and before the institution of the third, and last
holy supper, which was not till after he sat down again, upon the ablution of
his Disciples feet, and after too, that Judas was gone out for to betray him;
which Beza ad Joh. 13.20.
Beza notes from the adverb [(...)] ver. 30. [Immediately] he went forth,
that is, immediately after the sop, taken from the dish in that common supper,
(for where is the Sacramental bread called a sop? Joh. 6.26.
or at least, (...) a [dipped] sop, as this is said to be, ver. 26?) I say,
once more, from this second, and this common supper Jesus rises, and laid
aside his garments, and took a towell, and girded himself; after that, he
pours water into a basin, and began to wash the Disciples feet, and to wipe
them with the towell wherewith he was girded. The maine passage in this
Scripture that I mind for my present purpose, is the [washing of the Disciples
feet]: and yet because we cannot baulk that Theological Maxim here, which says,
that omnis Christi actio nostra est instructio, Every action of Christ (only
those excepted which were of Nos non tenemur Deum imitari in operibus
[potestatis] imo tenemur velle non imitari ipsum, quia debemus ei velle soli
omnipotentiam. Vide Alex. Hales par. 4. quaest. 33. mem. 1. Art. 1. p. 827.
edit. 1622.
miraculous and extraordinary dispensation, which by virtue of the union
hypostaticall were done alone by him, in which we cannot, nor ought to strive
to resemble) is our instruction, and calls for our observation and imitation,
at least, quantum ad substantiam actus, though not to be hoped, or attained by
us, quantum ad agendi modum, as Alex. Hales, par. 4 qu. 10. p. 298. edit. 1622.
Alexander Hales distinguishes: that is, for the substance, though not the
full manner, or measure of exact performance of the action; (for what
comparison?) Therefore I will first a little touch upon the depending Solet
[circumstantia] Scripturae illuminare sententiam, cum ea quae circa Scripturam
sunt praesentem quaestionem contingentia, diligenti discussione tractantur.
August. qu. 69. l. de diverse. quaest. -- Confer Primasium in 1 Cor. c. 15. p.
229 in 8o.
circumstances: First then, he rising from the second supper [laid aside his
garments.] For the better understanding of the mystery hereof, we may remember,
that the Scripture mentions a threefold glorious garment, that the Lord puts
on, as the King of glory, to whom the everlasting Psalm. 24.7.
doors stand open. 1. The first is a garment of strength, Psalm. 93.1. The Lord
reigns, he is clothed with Majesty, he is clothed with [strength]
wherewith he has girded himself. 2. The second is a garment of honor, and
beauty, Psalm. 104.1. Thou art clothed with [honour] and Majesty. 3. A third is
the garment of light; Who coverest thy self with [light] as with a garment,
Psalm. 104.2. All these garments our Savior laid aside, when he rose up, and
came down from heaven, and put on our Phil. 3.21.
vile flesh upon him, (not indeed as ever losing his first glory, but under the
veil of our nature covering the manifestation thereof) by that means
becoming, as Esaias has it, Deus absconditus, a God that Isa. 45.15.
hides himself; for in stead of strength, of beauty, and of light, lo! the
three contrary weeds of infirmity, of humility, of obscurity; He emptied, he
Phil. 2.7, 8.
humbled himself, says the Apostle; he has no form, nor comeliness, and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him, a man of
sorrows, and we hid, as it were, our faces from him; He was despised, and we
esteemed him not, Isa. 53.2, 3. So were all his [glorious] garments laid by,
represented now by his laying aside of these. 2. Having laid aside his
garments, he next took a towel, and girded himself, being so found in the form
of a servant, and in Phil. 2.8.
fashion of a man, that came not to be ministered unto, but to Mat. 20.28.
minister. 3. After this, he pours water into a basin; hereby signifying,
partly, the cooling of the heat of concupiscence, by the Ezekiel. 36.25.
water of his grace in the hearts of his servants, as Perer. disput. 15. ad
cap. 13. Johan.
Pererius; and partly showing, as Ludolph. de Saxon. part. 2. cap. 54. de vita
Christi.
Ludolphus out of St. Austin says, how now shortly he would pour out his
blood, and shed it on the ground, for the abstersion and cleansing of their
souls from the filthiness of sin, 1 John 1.7. 4. All this done, Then he began
[to wash the Disciples feet;] by which action he first showed the depth of his
abjection, and likeness even unto the vilest servant upon earth: therefore
when humble and discreet Abigail would abase her self even unto the meanest
offices, as Pet. Martyr. loc. commun. class. 4. c. 11. sect. 15. p. 887.
Peter Martyr has well noted, as thinking her self unworthy of any higher, in
David's Court, she says, Let thine handmaid be a servant to [wash the feet] of
the servants of my Lord, 1 Samuel 25.41. Set these two together, The King of
glory, the shame of men; the My Lord Jos. Hall the now peerlesse Bishop of
Exon. Passion Sermon. p. 505. edit. 1617.
more honor, the more abasement: In the third verse, St. John says of our
Savior, He came from God, and went to God; Lo! what a disparity is here; by
Nature, God clothed with Majesty, and eternal glory, Phil. 2.6.
equal to God the Father, consubstantiall with the holy Ghost, now a servant,
and employed in the lowest offices of the vilest servant: Who must not here cry
out with the Prophet, Isa. 45.8.
O drop down righteousness ye Heavens, and let the earth be astonished at
this? And in the use, thus must we apply it: When we address our selves to eat
that supper, which now was, in this fashion, about to be instituted by Christ,
we must lay by all thoughts of honor, of place, of all kind of
selfe-worthinesse, if we mind to eat with profit. Sulpit. Sever. lib. 1.
Sulpitius much magnifieth the humility of St. Martin, for that he sometimes
ministered unto his own servant; others, that Lewis King of France, who was
wont to serve the poor with his own hands; which thing likewise Niceph. l. 8.
c. 21.
Nicephorus reports of Helena the mother of Constantine the Great; and
Platin. in vita Leonis noni p. 171.
Platina notes it as a high point of piety in Pope Leo the ninth, that seeing
a Leper lying before his door, commanded him to be laid in his own bed: But
alas! as St. Andrew said of the five loaves, and two fishes, (...); Alas! Joh.
6.9.
what are these? when lo! the God of glory humbles himself, as 'twere unto
the very dust of scorn, of contempt, of shame; He refuses not to wash even
the very feet of his Disciples: But yet there is a farther mystery in this,
which I gather from Joh. 13.10. where our Savior tells Peter, He that is
washed needs not save to wash his [feet,] for by this action of his was not
meant only, in the letter, his conforming of himself unto a Jewish custom,
who in those hotter climates went discalceated, and without shoes, at least
See the Geneva note, at Joh. 13.23.
leaned so at their meals; but, in the mystery, because done at this [time] as
the ancients observe, it denoted the abstersion, and washing away, that should
be in us, by the waters of tears, and repentance, from the inward affections,
which be as the feet of the soul, of that predominant pollution, that as
Shechems soul did in a luxurious love to Dinah, Jacobs daughter, does [ Genesis
34.3.
cleave] too close unto them; so St. Bern. fol. 35. F. in sermon. de Coena Dom.
Bernard most expressly: summarily then thus, since as that noble Lord Du
Plessis, cap. 30. de vera Relig. in front.
Du Plessis tells us, that Christi tota vita salutis schola, Christ's whole life
was but the School from whence we must take out the lessons of our practice,
and our Savior himself, after these things thus done, says ver. 15. I have
given you an Joh. 13.15.
example, that ye should do, as I have done unto you; by laying aside his
garments, tutoureth us to put off the Jam. 1.21.
superfluities of naughtiness, our Isa. 64.6.
menstruous rags, our Jude 23.
garments spotted of the flesh, and with Bartimeus, cast Mar. 10.50.
away our sinful garments, when we rise up, and come to Christ; by girding of
himself with a towell, which had a respective correspondency to the posture
wherein the Jewish Passover was eaten, to wit, with their Exodus 12.11.
loins girded, to 1 Pet. 1.13. Luke 12.35.
gird up the loins of our minds, by curbing of our luxury, and lascivious
exorbitancies; and by washing of the feet, to teach us to 2 Cor. 7.1.
rinse, and scour our affections from all nasty defilements, that do bespot
and besweat the soul, rendering it loathsome to the eyes of the Hab. 1.13.
all-pure God: which was also typed in those 2 Chronicles. 4.6.
lavers set before the Temple, wherein the Priest was first to wash, before he
entered: And to what end served all those Leviticall Purifications in the
mystery, but to this same purpose? The superficies indeed of the ceremony lay
in the outward washings, but the moral intelligence, as the School calls it,
eyed the inward rinsing of the soul, and Heb. 9.14.
conscience from sinful impurity; and for this cause also some have thought
that amongst other wood the Lord chose out unto himself for an offering, Exodus
25.5.
Shittim wood, and thereof enjoined the Verse. 10.
Ark to be made up; Ligna Sethim sunt Vide Pet. Lumbard. l 4. did. 8 in sinc.
imputribilia, for that its thought to be a kind of Cedar, that admits not
easily of a rotting; no more must any soul allow himself in any sin, that
in the issue sokes, and rotteth out the soul: Christ owneth no such mouldring
guests, nor bids them well-come at his Table.

Wherefore this [(...)] or, Whosoever, or, Whosoever, do here stand as Abraham in
his Tent, in the Genesis 18.1.
door of this Text, seeming to invite all passengers, and to call in all
comers to this heavenly repast upon the flesh and blood of Christ; yet this
must be restrained only unto such as be found Mat. 22.8.
worthy, and, as the five wise virgins, have their lamps all Mat. 25.7.10.
ready-trimmed, and prepared for admission: I could here take occasion to
reckon up those fifteen kinds of persons, which (during their ill-disposed
state) are excluded by the Vide Raynerium de Pisis, tom. 1. Pantheolog. cap.
17. in Eucharistia.
Schoole-Divines; but I would gladly keep my self unto the rubric of my hour.

Its true, what Granatensis, tom. 2. concio de Temp. concio 4. in coena Dom.
Granatensis here observes, that the worthiness notwithstanding of these
guests of Christ, is not to be measured by the nobility of descent, nor
ignobility of condition, neither by pomp, nor poverty from without: Our King
Christ Jesus has a Kingdom indeed, but its not of this Joh. 18.36.
world; therefore the dignity of his guests is to be measured, as the Kings
daughter in the Psalm, by what nobility they have [ Psalm 45.13.
within,] by what luster of graces their souls are adorned with [there:] if
they have Mat. 6.22.
single eyes, that is, minds clearly informed with knowledge, enough to 1 Cor.
11.29
discern the Lords body from ordinary refections; else, as Mar. 10.46.
Bartimeus, they are deformed in their sight: if they have cleansed affections;
else, they are as Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 4.4.
lame in their feet: if they have Ephesians. 4.29.
edifying discourse; else, as that Stutterer in the Gospel, they have an Mar.
7.32.35.
impediment in their speech, and the strings must first be loosed: if they be
ready to Romans 12.13.
distribute; else, as Jeroboam, they be 1 Kin. 13.4.
shrunk up in their hands: if free from all sins mortal, wounding and
wasting the conscience; else, as those Lamesters at the poole of Joh. 5.3.
Bethesda, they are too ulcerous, and full of sores, to be entertained by this
King: Go, says the Lord by Malachi, Mal. 1.8, 13, 14.
offer the lame, and the sick, and the torn, offer these unto thy Governor,
will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? Lo! thus it is, when we
come with maimed souls, we pollute the Ver. 1^.
Table of the Lord, we cannot be accepted at his sacred board. Wherefore, to
close up this point, let me exhort you all, as S. Paul does his 1 Cor. 11.28
Corinthians, (...), let every particular man examine himself, and, as the
word imports, put himself upon the trial. Examination is the eye of the soul,
by which reflexively it sees it self, and knows what it has done: Other
meats, says St. Chrysostom, are, e're they be taken, to be first proved,
lest they hurt us; but here, lest this heavenly meat prove noxious to thee,
thou must first go prove [thy self:] Judge 1 Cor. 11.31
your selves therefore, Brethren, that ye be not judged of the Lord: let us be
impartial in the scrutiny of our hollow, and Jer. 17.9.
deceitful hearts; and, like the woman that sought her groat, in the Gospel,
light up the candle of our best faculties, and leave no corner of our souls
Luke 15.8.
unswept, till we have found out that sin of our souls, that does, as Paul
speaks, so Heb. 12.1.
easily beset us, and, as that Jebusite in Canaan, that will not out of our
coasts; and when we have discovered it, to Col. 3.5.
mortify it, and to Gal. 5.24.
crucify it, with the affections, and lusts thereof: And as the special
sacrifice that was offered upon the Altar in Jerusalem, was wont diligently to
be looked into by the high Priest, and his Ministers, to spy out the
blemishes, or otherwise, of it, before the actual oblation, so let us. S. S.
Clement. epist. ad Cor. page 53, 54.
Clement in his Epistle to the Corinthians (a late, and See Mr Mede Sermon. of
the reverence of Gods house, p. 14.
genuine monument of antiquity set forth) has expressed it to the life thus,
(...) which word is interpreted by Philo Judaeus (...).
Philo Judaeus thus, (...) it implies such a disquisition, so exact, as if
Momus himself with a Lincean eye, were to come after, he should not find a
thing to carpe at, in the very entrails of our sacrifices of our souls: The
same word is used by St. Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Romans
Chrysostom, upon this occasion of pre-examination, (...), etc. Thus we
[should] do from the bottom of our souls: wherefore Jam. 4 8.
cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded. Thus
if we do, at least in Tota vita boni Christiani est sanctum desiderium.
desire, and endeavor, we then come under this same [] Whosoever, in my Text, and
are the men, whosoever we be for external condition in state or place, that be
all invited hither to eat, and to drink, and that of no meaner cheer then the
very flesh and blood of Christ Jesus himself.

And thus I pass from the guests, unto the provision made ready for them, the
flesh and the blood of Christ: [Whoso] eats my [flesh] and drinks my
[bloud.]

The second particular.
(...), Flesh and blood! these are strange cates to make a banquet of. We read
in the Scripture, that 1 Cor. 15.50
flesh and blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, (but that is meant of
flesh corruption, not of flesh the substance, as the words ensuing show; for as
there is Iron, so the rust of Iron) how much less shall he that [feeds] upon
it for his food? Satia te sanguine, quem sitisti, says Tamyris, as I remember,
in Justin. hist. lib. 1.
Justins history, to Cyrus, when his head was off, and cast into a vessel full
of blood, Now surfeit on that blood which thou so much thirstedst after. It was
a law of Gods own enacting, He that sheds Genesis 9.6.
man's blood, by man also shall his blood be shed. My flesh, and my Blood!
Surely what the Israelites said of Manna, when first they saw, and tasted it,
crying out in admiration, Exodus 16.15
Man-hu, What is this portion, or meat prepared for us? for they wist not,
says Moses, what it was; so may many a man that knows not how to discern the
Lords Body: such an one is apt to think, with that monster Cacus in the Poet,
who from his wickedness in abstracto, had his name [(...),] says --
Foribusque affixa superbis ora [virum] tristi pendebant pallida tabo. Virg.
Aeneid. 8.
Servius, that naught but Servius ib. fol. 505.
man's flesh must be drawn into his den; and as some savage Cannibal professing
anthropophagie, as some (...), man-hating Miso, some Minotaure, or bloody Sen.
Tragaed. in Thyeste.
Atreus, or the like prodigies of nature, that man was made to be 2 Pet. 2.12.
taken, as St. Peter says of brute beasts, and to be destroyed, and as the
Judge. 19.
Levites concubine, to be chopped in pieces. Thus surely may your dull
Capernaites, and unilluminated men imagine; for so they strove among
themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? John 6.52. yea
more then so, ver. 60. many, even of Christ's own Disciples, when they heard
this, said, Durus est hic senno, this is a hard saying, who can bear it? And
the very truth is this, its that which poseth nature utterly, and makes her
stand, as he without his wedding garment, in the Gospel, upon conviction, Mat.
22.12.
speechless.

But though the words, as they are in the shell, be hard to pierce into, yet
when as our Savior has to our hands broken it for us, we may easily take out
the kernel of them.

The main scope of the Text.
The mind of our Savior in this Text, which is but repeated from the former
verses, is, to show us the sweet effect of the spiritual eating of his body,
and drinking of his blood by faith, above that other orall eating, and drinking
of the bread and wine, which are but the Sacraments thereof, and may be taken
as well by Hypocrites, as by True believers. This mystical partaking
instrumentally procures eternal life, after the resurrection, whereas the
other, which is merely outward, and no more, may yet engage to 1 Cor. 11.29
judgment, and damnation; the reason is, because the one partakes of the Lord
himself, who is the Bread of life, Joh. 6.35. whom to know, and with whom to
have communion aright, is life eternal, Joh. 17.3. The other, only of the
bread [of] the Lord, which has no virtue, without faith, at all, to procure
such endless bliss: yea more, Dum Sacramenta possunt obesse, as St. Austin
truly: when those elements of Bread and Wine once consecrated by the lawful
minister, and changed by that act of his, (duly, and as it ought, performed)
though not from their Neque enim id Christus egit, ut panis friticeus abjiceret
[naturam] suam, ac novam quandam divinitatem indueret, sed ut nos potius
immutarer, utque Theophylactus loquitur (in Joh. 6.) [transe lementaret] in
corpus suum. Juel. Apol. p. 41 vol. 16.
nature, yet in their use, which is now become no longer (...). Just. Mart.
Apol. 2.
ordinary, but holy, and Sacramental; when, I say, they be thus changed in
their use, then to partake them without faith, endangereth that worthless
receiver, as those lusted after quails did the faithless, and unruly
Israelites, unto a speedy and a sudden overthrow, even whiles betwixt their
Number. 11.33
teeth: And yet all this too, not through the least defect in Sacraments
themselves, for they have ap^^tude and fitness, in their designation natural,
not only to represent, to declare, and show as signs, and to confirm as Romans
4.11.
Seals, but even as sacred Instruments to 1 Pet. 3.21.
Save, and as effectual means, though not by virtue of any opus operatum, or
[ See my Lo. Grace, sect. 33. p. 271, 272, 273, etc. and p. 307. and sect. 38.
p. 327. number. 3.
intention] of the administrer, (both which, as Bel-shazzar in the balance,
may be found too Dan. 5.27.
light) yet of Gods own ordinance, to exhibit, and convey the very body and
blood of Christ unto the right receiver: for they be not empty pageants, or
naked shows; not theoricall, but practical signs, though our gross
Romanists would feign persuade the world that we teach otherwise: But all the
ill issue is in the defect of the good Tale cujusque sacrificium, qualis est is
qui accedit ut sumat; omnia munda mundis. Aug l. 2. cap. 52. cont. Petilian.
motion of the User: The better the meat, the worse the nourishment, yea the
more dangerous the humors, and the dropsy more deadly, if the liver fail in
making of good blood, occasioning the body, like some marish grounds in the
midst of a waterish bogge, to swell, and the spleen to puff, and not
dispersing proper spirits into the veins, which may, as 'twere embroyder the
whole body in native, and in azure beauty: Horat. lib. 1. ep. 2
Sincerum est nisi vas, quodcunque infundis acescit, says the Poet, the best
wines may sour, and become unsavory, if the But be not rinsed; and the
purest streams be corrupted through the muddinesse of the channel. Take a
seal, apply it to a stone, it makes no more impression of its own image, then
those afflictions did on Pharaohs heart, which was in judgment Exodus 9.35.
hardened; but stamp it on the wax, the yielding, melting, faithful heart,
lo! this seal of the Sacrament leaves there a Character as proper to the
Elect of Christ, as was to Cesars coin the Mat. 22.20, 21.
image of Caesar. Whence is this difference? not from the Scale, that is still
the same, but from the several hearts so severally disposed, that there is no
more agreement 'twixt them, then there is 'twixt faith and infidelity, then was
between an Egyptian and a Shepherd, between Christ and Belial; the one, says
Moses, is an Genesis 46.34.
abomination to the other, and between the other two, says 2 Cor. 6.15, 16.
Paul, there is no Communion: certainly its true, Sacramenta non prosunt sine
bono motu utentis.

And that this is the genuine purpose of our Savior, namely, under this
expression of flesh and blood, to acquaint us, that the provision he intends is
Cibus mentis, and not Cibus ventris, is clear, first in the general, as the
Centur. 1. l. 1 c. 4. p. 125. edit. 1624.
Magdeburgenses have observed, from that reply of Christ to his Disciples, to
whom this saying was so hard, ver. 63. It is the Spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and
they are life; not to be taken, as Capernaites apprehended it, in a gross and
carnal meaning; as likewise by those many equipollent phrases, tending all of
them to express the same thing, in the former verses: for that which he, in my
Text, calls [flesh and bloud] in the 51. verse, he calls the living [bread]
which came down from heaven; and, if any man eat of this [bread] he shall live
for ever, and, the [bread] that I will give, is my [flesh,] that is, my flesh
shall be [as] bread, to nourish the soul unto life eternal, even as the
Common bread does serve to feed the body unto this life corporal: and that the
[eating and drinking] is also spiritual, and of faith, is evident out of ver.
40. where the same effect that is here ascribed to eating, and drinking, viz.
eternal life, is given unto [beleeving:] so that these tropical speeches,
rightly taken, are convertible; for in this variety of expression, Christ does
but transpose the proposition, as Pet. Martyr. loc. com. class. 4. c. 10. sect.
34. p. 856.
P. Martyr notes; for as Verse. 51.
before, he said, that the bread that I will give is my flesh; so in the text,
his flesh having [eating] adjoined to it, is in stead of bread, and in
equipollency the very same, utque corpore editis pane^, ita mente vescamini
carne mea. And to clear it yet a little more, consider we, in the business of
the supper, two things, the outward and visible part, which the Schools call
properly Sacramentum (in a more strict acception of the word) and that which is
inward, and invisible, which they term rem Sacramenti, the principal thing
exhibited in the Sacrament. Thus in the Lords supper, the sacrament is bread
and wine, and in the outward part of this mystical action, we receive this
body and blood but sacramentally; the inward thing, which we apprehend by faith,
is, the body and blood of Christ; and in the inward part of this mystical
action, which contains rem, we receive them really, and consequently, the
presence in the one is Relative and symbolical, in the other, Real and
substantial; as that great light of the Church, the deeply-learned My Lord
Archbishop Ussher Sermon. on 1 Cor. 10.17. page 13. vol. 4.
Primate of Armagh, has shown us.

And now, would all good moderate Christians, baulking your wrangling
Ismaelites, being more shye of all that baggage which the Schoolmen soil
Divinity withal, out of the Philosophers puddles, and their own, (as Dr
Raynolds, p. 652. conclus. 5. added to the conference with Heart.
Dr Raynolds truly speaks;) would they poyse their judgments at this
balance of the Sanctuary, and pray for the illumination of that Spirit, whose
grace in the operation, is compared to Mat. 3.11.
fire, by John Baptist, the nature of which fire is, both congregare homogenea,
and segregare heterogenea, (as in Philosophy we use to speak) both to conjoyne
those things that be of the same, and to dis-joyne such as be of a differing
kind, and disposition; would they set faith to feed spiritually upon the very
flesh and blood of Christ, whose physical, and natural body is personally in
the eternal word, locally in Act. 3.21.
Heaven only (the first that taught otherwise, and brought in the local
presence, even still on earth, was Scotus, whom Occam followed, and both but of
yesterday, as our worthy Dr Field cap. 16. in append.
Field has shown us) Sacramentally in the Eucharist, and Mat. 28.20.
always with the Elect spiritually in the soul: and on the other side, set
their bodily mouths to feed upon the outward visible bread, but yet as clothed
too with a Sacramental relation to the flesh of Christ, symbolically signed
thereby: And secondly, if they would follow learned Hooker lib. 5. Eccles. pol.
p. 357.
Hookers counsel, a worthy instrument in our Church, who wished that men would
more give themselves to meditate with silence [what] we have by the Sacrament,
and less to dispute of the [manner] (how,) at least considering that success
which Truth has hitherto had by so bitter conflicts with error in this point:
Thus if we could be persuaded, oh what honey might we suck as Jud. 14.9.
Samson from his Lion, from this blessed Sacrament, for our peace and comfort,
which now those bitter waters of Meribah, and strife, running down so
violently in a flood, do, in a sort, wash off from many a seduced and
unballanced soul! But woe, and alas! how may our mother the Church, well typed
in the Arc of Noah, (she is so tossed on the working billows of windy, yet
boisterous spirits) speak out with Rebekkah, when she felt her Twins to
struggle together within her, If it be so, that I have conceived, Genesis 25.22.
Why am I thus? what means this strange, and this unnatural elbowing, and
shouldring, and justling together in the same womb between Brethren? Its a
lamentable thing to behold, how this holy Sacrament, which was ordained by
Christ to be a bond, by which we should be knit together in unity, as being
all members of the same one Catholic body the Church, of which none but Christ
alone is the mystical Ephesians. 1.22.
head; (and therefore it is called by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16
(...), a Communion) should yet from the inconsiderate confounding of those
things, which in their own nature are as different as may be, become as 'twere
the Samson to tear in pieces the strongest Jud. 16.9.
Wyths of union in the Church: and, which is yet the deafness of the aspe upon
the ears of misse-lead Christians in this divided party, men will not hear
the wisest charmings of the best charmer, at least, like those at Babel, they
will not, though they Pro. 8.9.
may, Genesis 11.7.
understand each other, and all by reason of the confusion of tongues and pens,
and those pens dipped often so low in vinegar and gall, that as a storme-driven
ship upon the rocks, the ribs of the common mother the Church be dashed almost
in sunder by the waves of implacable contention.

Behold, and wonder; here Manasses is against Ephraim, there Ephraim is against
Manasses, yonder both against Judah: the Papists against the Lutherans, the
Lutherans against them, and both against the Calvinists; as if Christ were to
be 1 Cor. 1.13.
divided, or the truth were more then Ephesians. 4.5.
one.

The Lutheran, The Luth^ran consubstantiation.
in as much as Christ's bumane Nature subsisteth not but in and with the
infiniteness of the second Person in the Trinity, by virtue of the ineffable
union hypostaticall, has given unto the same humane Nature of Christ a
participated Ubiquity with the Divinity, which is every where, at all times,
and as Philosophers say of the soul informing the body, its tota in toto, and
tota in qualibet part, wholly every where, and so with the Sacrament; by
means whereof Christ is corporally, by a kind of Consubstantiation (as their
word is) [in] or [under] the Sacramental elements: But this opinion first
seems to be injurious to the Divinity, as if it were confounded together with
it, contrary to the received Creed of One Christ, not by [confusion] of
substance, but by unity of Person.
Athanasius; and withal, it does indeed overthrow the truth of his humanity:
for first, though Christ's humane nature was for See the worthy Mr Edw. Reynolds
cap. 13. meditation on the Lo. last Supper.
production extraordinary, for the communication of glory from the Godhead on
it admirable; yet the Godhead glorifies that his humane Nature only to be the
head, that is, to be the most excellent, and firstborn of every Creature, but
not to make it share in the essential properties of the Divine Nature it
self, such as are Ubiquity or omnipresency, immensity, infiniteness, etc. for
if so, then the humane Nature were not only glorified, and exalted, but the
very same with the Divinity it self; for that Essence, or being to which the
intrinsecall, and originally essential attributes of any thing do belong, in
the same degree, that they are in it self, that thing must needs be of the
same nature with that from which it does receive those attributes. Now Gods
infinite Being every where, wholly, and always at the same time (for he is
that intellectual sphere whose center is every where, and circumference no
where) is an essential property incommunicable from the infinite divine
Nature, to the humane Nature, because the humane Nature is incapable of such an
attribute, in so infinite a degree; it being all out (in its own kind) as
essential to its self to be finite, to be circumscribed in a place, etc. as
it is to the Godhead to be most infinitely every where; and so according to
that Philosophical Maxim, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis,
there is too infinite a disproportion between the finite humane Nature, and
the Divine, that it is not capable of that infinite attribute of Ubiquity:
therefore though Totus Christus, whole Christ be every where, by means of the
union hypostaticall, yet not Totum Christi, the whole of Christ, by reason of
the confinednesse of his finite humane Nature to one place now in Heaven. In
short, Christ's Nature by the Union received an extraordinary exaltation, but
yet no destruction of its own essential properties, for so the Nature it self
were utterly overthrown: yea more, by this Gods own omnipotency is impaired;
for howbeit God can do all things Possible, yet they be such all things, quae
posse, perfectae potentiae est, say your greatest Vid. Halens. par. 1. quaest.
21. mem. 1. art. 1. p. 101. edit. 1622. item P. Lumb. l. 1. did. 42. E.
Schoolmen, and such as imply neither any contradiction to his own Nature in
himself, no nor to the nature of any Creature, as Zanch. lib. 3. de not. Dei
cap. 1. etc.
Zanchy says, [so] as it was created. If therefore it be the essential
property, as it is, of the humane Nature to be finite, and so to be confined to
heaven as one place, it were a contradiction to Gods all-mightinesse (according
to the ordinary economy and dispensation of his providence) to make it, being
circumscribed already, to be infinitely elsewhere at the same instant. Christ's
presence in the Sacrament then being intended of that Nature, wherein he was
our Redeemer, which was his humane, and not his divine only; by this that I
have said its clear, that this Consubstantiation of the Lutherans is unsolid.

Next comes in the Papist, The Papisticall Transubstantiation.
and with him brings in his (...) too, his sleevelesse tale of
Transubstantiation, (as a My L. Bish. of Exon. sect. 18. No peace with Rome.
profound Prelate calls it;) by others, its named commentum, a mere
fictitious, and feigned thing, so the Centur. 2. c. 4 p. 37. edit. 1624.
Centuriatours; by others, somnium, so he who was no more in name then nature
the Juel. Apol. p. 40. vol. 16.
Juel of his time, in his divine Apology: at the best, we may all style the
tales they have about it, as Amphilochius does those that the Poets tell of
their gods, Amphiloch. in Iambis, ad Selcucum.
(...).
Fables, of laughter worthy, and of tears:
yea, I had almost said, (...). And this was likewise brought both into the
world, and upon the stage by that other fable of the multi-presence of Christ's
body: and it sounds the better like a tale, because indeed they so much vary
among themselves in telling of it: firebrands they have in their Jud. 15.4.
tails to burn down the ripe cornfieldsd of Truth, but yet as Samsons foxes
they are divided in the heads. Once for all, Alphonsus a Castro, l. 8 adver.
haer. p. 578
Alphonsus a Castro (an ingenuous Romanist, in my opinion) down right
confesses, that the mention of Transubstantiation of the bread into the body
of Christ is rare in ancient Writers; and yet See Hooker, l. 5. p. 195. 196.
Antiquity, when Been [iundata] antiquitas, Vincent. Lyrin. cap 6. advers.
haeres. Confe^ cum ib. cap. 9.25, 26, 27, 29, 41, 42, 43.
True, is an admirable settler of Truth: so is the word in Tertullian, Quod
primum, verum; the nigher the Primitive, still the The more ancient things, the
more incorrupt. Bishop Bilson, preface to the perpet. government of the Church,
page 10. vol. 4. and in that book often these two are coupled together, viz.
The ancient and incorrupt Church and witnesses.
purer, and less corrupt: And who knows not the old word, (...); and the
Prophet Jer. 6.16.
Jeremies exhortation, Stand, and ask for the old way, that is the sure way to
find rest to your souls: And yet who such (...), and Thrasonicall
ostentatours of antiquity as these? But surely this their pleading for the My
Lord Bishop Morton, now of Duresme, Epist. Dedicat. to King Charles before the
Grand Impost.
New-oldnesse (as a worthy Prelate calls it) of it, is, as were the Gibeonites
pretenses of [ Josh 9.
torne] shoes, and [mouldy] bread, by which they fained themselves to have
come from [far.] This dream of Transubstantiation was broached, or hammered
out at first by one, who was, some say, a Magitian, and 'twas withstood by
Iren. l. 1. cap. 9.
Irenaeus, and Epiphan. haer. 34.
Epiphanius; after urged again by Pope Leo the ninth, but withstood by
Berengarius a Deacon, for which he was condemned as an Heretic in Concilio
Vercellensi: and this was between the years 1049. and 1055. if Platin. in
vita Leon. noni.
Platina, in the life of Leo the ninth, fail not in his Chronology: Here he
was condemned; after, urged by Nicholas the second, and one Albericus a Deacon,
to a gross and shameful recantation, as the same Idem in vita Nicolai secund.
author reports, out of Lanfrancus. Between this time, and the Council of
Lateran, which was under Innocentius the third ( Anno 1215.) that great learned
Physician and Philosopher Averroes lived, and took scandal at the whole body
of Christian religion for this, as Espencaeus, l. 4. c. 3. de Eucharist. adorat.
Espencaeus says: in the year 1215. it was decreed first, in the first Canon
of the Council of Carranza, p. 420 sum. Council. vol. 16.
Lateran; at what time the Greek Church had severed themselves from them, and
was withstood by Bertram, the Waldenses, See my Lord Bish. Morton, cap. 15.
sect. 19. these. 6. page 398. edit. 2. Grand Impostare.
Albigenses in multitudes; till at last it was foysted in among the twenty new
Articles, or above, of the Creed of the conventicle at Co^. Trident. sess. 13.
cap. 4.
Trent, and forced with an Anathema, as of absolute necessity to salvation to
be believed by the people. But yet this Doctrine was shortly after by Chemnit.
exam. part. 2. page 136, 137, etc. vol. 4.
Chemnitius, and since by many other of our own Worthies, discovered to be a
piece of Gal. 1.8.
another Gospel from S. Paul's; and therefore as the serpent of Exodus 7.12.
Aaron devoured the serpents of the Magitians of Egypt, even so that one Gal.
1.8, 9.
Anathema of S. Paul, must needs condemn all the Anathema's, which they from
that Deuteronomy. 27.13.
Ebal of theirs denounce in the defense of that, which is not the faith [ Jud.
ver. 3.
(...)] once delivered to the Saints, and but once for all, in the days of the
Apostles.

Now they snarle much among themselves for the best bone of their expressions
herein. The Master of the Sentences confesses in so great variety his P.
Lumbard, l. 4. did: 11. A. Si quaeritur, qualis sit illa conversio, definite
non sufficio.
insufficiency to define the right: Bellarm. l. 3. c. 18. de Eucharist.
Bellarmine; their great Champion, will not have by the pronouncing of these
four words [This is my body.] any productive, or conservative conversion of
the bread into the body of Christ, but by a new langled device, an adductive;
His reason is, because the body of Christ [was] before this conversion, but not
under the species of bread; which is mere Translocation, nor
Transubstantiation for if so, What Transubstantiation is.
there must be a change of one substance into another, and that Christ's real
and true body is made of the bread, and the bread changed into it, which is
properly Transubstantiation, as our most reverend My L. Grace against A.C.
sect. 38. number. 4. p. 327, 328.
Metropolitan has shown us: and if it be a Translocation, then not abique,
and if as a substance under the accidents of the color of bread and wine, then
being a [bodily] substance, it must be in loco, and circumscribed, either way
its contradiction.

Another of their graver Divines, is Cornelius a Lapide, comment. in Isa. 7.14.
Cornelius a Lapide, the Jesuit, who faith, that by the words of consecration,
Truly and really as the bread is transubstantiated, so Christ is produced, and
as it were generated upon the Altar in such a powerful and effectual manner,
ut si Christus ^ecdion esset incarnatus, per haec verba [Hoc est corpus meum]
incarnaretur, corpusque humanum assumeret, That if Christ had not yet been
incarnate, by these four words [This is my body] he should be incarnate, and
take an humane body. What is to be mad, if this be to be sober? yea, how does
this grate upon the foundation of the faith of the incarnation?

And surely much of this proceeds from their not allowing any Tropes, or
Figures, (which yet is contrary to the ancient Fathers, of whom notwithstanding
they brag so much) in Sacramental speeches, though the Scripture abounds
this way: so Circumcision is called the Covenant, because it was the Genesis
17.10, 11.
token of the Covenant, and the Romans 4.11.
Seal of the same; and in this very business of the Supper its most apparent,
besides others, in that one place of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16. [The cup of
blessing which we bless, Sacramental speeches are tropicall.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ?] In this passage, [The cup of
blessing which we blesse] there are three Tropes: 1. First, the cup,
metonymically put for the wine in the cup. 2. The wine, by a metonymie of the
subject, is put for the drinking of the wine. 3. Its called the cup of
blessing, by a metonymie of the adjunct, because it has blessing adjoined to
it; and that blessing is put for thanksgiving, Prayer, declaration of
Institution: as if he had said, The drinking of the wine consecrated, which we
bless, sanctify, and over which we give thanks, Is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? This interrogation affirms with more strength, Yes, it
is the communion, that is, say some, the sign; say others, the seal and
obsignation; say a third sort, the declaration; and some, the isntrumental
means of the communion which the true Believer has with Christ in his blood:
so that the sense amounts to this, The drinking of the wine consecrated, is a
sign of our communion with Christ; all which is couched under these Tropicall
expressions. Besides, our Savior, even [after] consecration calls it the
Mat. 26.29.
fruit of the vine; and Saint 1 Cor. 11.26
Paul [after] too, See my Lord Bish. of Du^^ f^^^ c. 15. sect. 24. these. 2 p.
403, 404. Grand Impost.
bread and cup. Moreover, if we mark it well, the subject of that Sacramental
proposition, that is, the demonstrative particle [This] can have reference to
no other substance, but that which our Savior held in his sacred hands, viz.
Pronomen [hoc] demonstravit panem materialem. Franciscus Mason noster, l. 5. de
minister. Anglic. cap. 6. p. 604.
panem materialem, to the material bread and wine, which are of so different a
nature from the body, and blood of Christ, that the one cannot possibly, in
proper sense, or but common reason, be said to be the other: and again, in the
predicate, or the latter part of the same propositions, there is not mention
made only of Christ's body and blood, but of his body [broken,] and his blood
[shed,] to show, that his body is to be considered here My Lo. Primate of
Armagh, cap. 4. of the Irish Relig.
apart, not as it was borne of the Virgin, or now is in Heaven, but as it was
[broken] and [crucified] for us; and his blood likewise apart, not as running
in his veins, but as [shed] out of his body; which the Rhemists have told us
to be conditions of his person, as he was in sacrifice, and oblation. Besides,
they are bid to do this, in [remembrance] of him: Now [ Luke 22.19. and 1 Cor.
11.24, 25.
remembrance] is of things [absent] at least; and if in remembrance, then
(which I note by the way) we may see whether the Roman Church did ever err,
or not, when for 600. years together it allowed (though since indeed it be
rejected) the sentence of Innocentius the first, who enjoined the Eucharist to
be administered even unto Maldonat. Jesuit. in Joh. 6.53. and Espencaeus de
adorat. eucharist. l. 2. c. 12. Idem probat Binius ex rescript. Innoc. Pap. tom
1. council. p. 585. edit. 1606.
Infants, who through want of discretion cannot possibly [Remember] what they
are not yet capable to Know. To conclude this point, to show that all this is
to be meant only in a [ Joh. 6.63.
spirituall] way, and that this is a Convivium tam [sublime] and tam
[spirituale.] Rabbi Samuel Israelita, ociundus de civitate regis Morochiani, ad
Rabbi Isaac, Magistr. Synagogae, cap. 20. p. 646. in Parr. (...).
sublime, and mystical banquet, as even a Jewish Rabbi 600. years ago
acknowledged, it is to be noted, that Christ says first, [Take, eat,] and
then, This is my body, to intimate unto us, as learned, Hooker lib. 5. 359.
Hooker observes, that the Sacrament, however changed by consecration from
common use, yet is never properly to be called the body of Christ, till [taken,
and eaten,] by means of which actions, (if they be actions of faith) that holy
bread and wine do as really (as means and instruments) convey whole Christ,
with the vital influences that proceed from him into the soul, as the hand
does them unto the mouth, or the mouth unto the stomach. Wherefore is then
this so great ado? Surely Chemnit. qua supra.
Chemnitius shows plainly to be, because the Sacrifice of the Mass may be
supported, asservation, circumgestation may be upheld, that the Romish My Lo.
of Puresm, quae supra p. 403, 404.
Moloch, Christ's substance corporally under the color, and species of bread
and wine may be adored, and that Christ by this dream, being corporally
present, might, though only as a sacrifice unbloudy, be continually offered up
upon their superstitious, I had almost said Idoll-Altars: when yet, the
Scripture tells us plainly, that as men dye but once for all, no more is Christ
offered up, (save only Eucharistically, and (...) Chrysostom. hom. 17 in Heb.
commemoratively, and by way of [Repraesentatio] very sacrificii. P. Lumb. l.
4, did. 12 G. confer Du Moulin, Art. 9. versus fin. defense of K. James.
Representation) but once for all, hylastically and in propitiation; the
iteration, and repeating of the sacrifice implying imperfection, and
insufficiency under the old law, Christ's own oblation of himself upon the
Cross, most complete perfection, because but once for all, Heb. 9.27, 28.

And as they are thus grossly out in this provision it self, viz. the flesh
and blood of Christ; so do they become injurious also to it in the usage of
it, They by oblation, asservation, circumgestation, and carrying about,
adoration, and the like, profane it; Whereas the actions enjoined to us
herein, are Sacramental only, expressed in the Text, by [eating and by
drinking;] which is the next particular, though but in a little mouthfull of
words only, to be discoursed of: Whosoever [eateth] my flesh, and [drinketh] my
blood.

These actions of [Eating, The third particular.
and of Drinkking] are both of Sacramental Institution, and signification,
symbolically representing the inward application of, and as it were the
mystical mastication, or feeding upon Christ's flesh and blood by faith, which
is the mouth of the soul, and her exercise, and acts about this mystery, as
'twere, the very eating and the drinking of Christ's flesh, and blood. Now this
eating is, as Christ's body, to which it does relate, twofold. 1. Sacramental.
2. Spiritual: both are required, but chiefly the spiritual, because the
wicked may equally share with us in the first; and if we have the second,
though necessity perchance bar us of the first, yet we are safe: (still
remembering the Rule, that Nuda carentia non damnat, but contemptus; because
that Christ does not universally, and always Deus gratiam Sacramentis non
alligavit, quasi absque illis neque possit, neque velit ullos servare. Pet.
Martyr. loc. com. class. 4. c. 5. sect. 16. p. 826.
tie, without any exception, his saving graces to the outward means:) Hence is
that of P. Lumb. l. 4. did. 4. and 9.
Lumbard, Some, says he, take both the Sacrament, and the thing signified with
it, so the Elect and faithful, in their health, or well-disposed; some the
Sacrament only, and no more, so the Hypocrite; a third sort, the thing only,
without the sign, which is indeed the principal eating: hence is that known
word of S. Aug. Tract. 25. in Joh.
Austin, Ut quid paras ventrem, and dentem? creed and manducasti: Why preparest
thou thy teeth, and belly? believe only, and thou have eaten Christ.

Now though I might here take occasion justly to exhort my self, and you, to a
frequent partaking of Christ, even Sacramentally too; and so Ephesians. 5.16.
redeem the time of our freedom herein, because the days are evil, so that
we may either be taken from the Sacrament, or it from us: we find that the
Primitive Church was [ (...) Act. 2.46.
daily] in it; which made Saint S. Cyprian. in orat. Dom. sect. 13.
Cyprian to interpret the [daily Bread,] in the Lords prayer, of the
Sacramental bread: And in Saint Chrysostomes days there was (...) [ Chrysostom.
hom. 3. ad Ephesians. (...), etc.
(...)] a [daily] sacrifice in use, and he in wonder cried out on the slack
coming unto the holy Altar, and blamed it as an ill custom: But though I urge
not such a frequency, lest the commonnesse might abate somewhat of the
reverence to it; yet at least, let not the moon pace over the Zodiac oftener
(since the spouse of Christ is likened to the Cant. 6.10.
moon) then we perform, if possible, our course this way. St. Paul is at his
[(...)] his [ 1 Cor. 11.26
oftennesse,] of which Thom. 3 qu. 66 art. 9. ad 5um in fine. Quia homo semel
nascitur, multoties autem cibatur; semel tantum datur baptismus, multotiens
autem Eucharistia.
Thomas gives a reason (though Baptism be but once for all administered)
because though man be but once borne, yet because he stands in need of often
feeding, and nourishment; therefore though the Sacrament of Initiation,
Baptism, be but once given, yet the Sacrament of farther confirmation, and
strengthening, the Lords Supper, or the Eucharist, is often administered. In
Concilio Agathensi, as I find in Isidores Councels, he was sentenced for an
unsound Christian, who did not at the three great Festivals of the year at
least communicate: Our own Church has pressed her children to Canon. Angl. 21.
Three times a year at the least, whereof one to be now at Certum habemus quia
Christus resurgens ex mortuis, jam non moritur, etc. tamen ne obliviscamur,
quod semel factum est, in memoria nostra omni anno fit, sc. quotiens [Pascha]
celebratur. August. praef. in 2. expos. Psalm. 21. de cons. did. 2. apud Lumb.
l 4. did. 12. G.
Easter: But as for our [spirituall] eating, that must be every day, for else
the soul would starve and dye, which lives not but by the Hab. 2.4. and Gal.
3.11. The fourth particular.
life of faith.

And as Christ's flesh must thus be [eaten] by us, so must every good Christian
[drink] his blood too; for which cause we find a Conjunction coupling them both
together in the Text: And both bread and wine too were prefigured in
Melchisedech his oblation of both bread and wine to Abraham, Genesis 14.18. as St.
S. Cyprian. sect. 2. de Coen. Dom.
Cyprian, Rabbi Samuel, qua supra cap. 19. p. 645.
Rabbi Samuel, Thom. 3. qu. 61. Act. 3. ad 3um.
Aquinas, Hales, par 4. qu. 10. mem. 1. Art. 2. p. 223. edit. 1622.
Hales, and many others have well observed. See yet if herein our Romanists be
not directly Antichristian, and both ways run themselves upon the rocks; the
dangerous Scylla of Apoc. 22.18, 19.
adding, on the one side, and the engulphing Charybdis of taking away, on the
other side; both pernicious. In the Council of Florence (for lo! a deep
silence of this, till that time, in all Antiquity) which was but in the year
1200. some 30. years after that Hugo de S. Victore, and P. Lumbard had vented
their conceits herein, (and they were the first that made any noise about it)
(as Dr Whitaker l. 8. sect. 59. de paradox. cont. Duraeum.
Dr Whitaker, sometimes Oracle of the chair in Cambridge, has showed us) Then
and There they decree for seven Sacraments, whereas our Savior appoints but
two: They might as well have settled 70. times 7. in the larger acception of
the word Sacrament, as it signifies the sign of an holy thing in general. And
now here, they mangle the use of these that our Savior appointed, allowing the
cup only unto the Clergy, pretending that Christ meant that only to the
Apostles, then present with him at the institution; but as well they may say
the same likewise for the bread. But besides the express institution of our
Savior himself, under both kinds, and not of the bread only in the maine,
the wine being by Pet. Martyr. loc. com. clas. 4. c 10 sect. 18. p. 849.
concomitancy alone consecrated, as some of them do tell us; not only the
Primitive, but even the whole Cassander consult. Art. 22. initio^.
Catholic Church of Christ, yea, even the purer Roman too, for a thousand
years continuance (which, had there bin no [expresse] appointment, was
notwithstanding of a very The approved practice of the Saints of God, is
equivalent to a precept. Dr Sclater, my father, s rm. on 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. p 34.
styled The Ministers portion, edit. Oxon 1612. -- Illa quae ubique observantur,
multum proculdubio valent; ubique, id est, toto terrarum orb semper observata,
etc. Dr Whitak. l. 1. cont. Duraeum sect. 16.
binding observation) did observe it so, as Cassander, (one of the chiefest
Divines of his time) confesses: Nor indeed can they themselves show us Quando
primum vigere coepit in aliquibus Ecclesiis minime constat. Valent. Jes. de
Eucharist. c. 10. p. 499. sect. Haec igitur.
when certainly the Communion only under [one] kind first began; yea, till
within these last 400. years, which is a very new-antiquity, it had no
spreading entertainment: for Aquinas confesses that [under both kindes] was in
use even to his times, and he was both My L. Grace against A.C. sect. 33. p.
275, 276. number. 13.
borne, and dead, during the reign of Henry the third of England; and the [one
kinde] was decreed but in the thirteenth Session of the Council of Constance,
which is very Id. ib. sect. 38 p. 340.
modern, at least far downwards from the Primitive and purest Church; so
that I have no other hopes to keep up your attention, with any further
discourse herein, then to tell you only as Demosthenes was wont to say to his
Athenian auditors, when they grew remiss under his Orations, Here is news for
you; which word [Newes] though it may spur your attention in the listening to
it, yet it should withal increase your abhorrence of that religion, which is
thus patched together with the fragments of I will sincerely promise, that when
ever any point of the Religion I profess shall be proved to be [new,] and not
ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic, I mean for matter of faith, I will
renounce it, etc. See K. James confess. of faith, Art. 23 in fine, exactly.
Novelty: for there is no faith, or religion True, but only That which is
Catholic Truly, and properly, which is, and was believed every where,
always, and by all; which has, as Vincentius Vincent. Lirin. cap. 3. cont.
haeres. -- Confer my Lo. Primate of Armagh, ser. on Ephesians. 4.13. p. 27, 28, 29.
edit. 1631.
Lirinensis says, both Universality, Antiquity, and unanime Consent of the Sea
Aug. epist. 18. c. 5. and l. 4. de Bapt. cont. Donatist. c. 24. -- Confer my L.
Grace, against A.C. sect. 21. p. 137, 138. number. 4. -- and sect. 38. p. 352.
number. 17. initio. -- and sect. 39. p. 378. number. 4. ib.
whole Church of Christ, which these late upstart devices and Mat. 15.9.
doctrines of men, undoing, by consequence, the ancient and pure worship of
God, have not.

Since then, my dear Brethren, these Romanists, the only [Catholikes] as they
cry themselves up, (by which one My L. of Durh. qua supra c. 15. sect. 1.
initio.
word, as by a Gorgon's, or a Medusa's head, painted in a shield, they think
at first sight to terrify and delude poor ignorant Protestants, as they count
most of them, and if they could) since I say, these be such 2 Samuel 10.4.
Hanuns, to shame us by cutting off at [halfes] the best of our spiritual
ornaments, as he did of David's servants in a mock; and fith they dare to be so
bold, as to take from you the Psalm. 116.13. Calix salutaris, sanguis est
Salvatoris. Bern. tract. de lib. arbit. and gratia, fol. 289 G. and Illyr p.
126. in verbo Calix.
cup of salvation, pray you for their conversion, if God 2 Timothy 2.25.
peradventure will give them repentance to the knowledging of the truth, and
then leave them and their This without all doubt is all the infallibility the
Pope has, to be sure to be infallible in whatsoever he [would] have
determined: chiefly remembering the Counsels of Constance, and Basil. See my L.
Grace; qua supra, sect. 29. number. 2. p. 219 and sect. 33 ib. p. 262, 263, etc.
infallible Head (if so they will not return) unto Gods cup of Trembling,
which shall make them reel, and stagger more with Terror, then excess: And
for your selves, listen to your dearly-loving Saviors invitation, who says,
Luc. 14.17.
Come unto me: If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink, Joh. 7.37.
What is this thirst, but a thirst of faith? for so verse 38. and what is this
drink, but the precious liquour of his own blood? for as he says, Joh.
6.55. in the next verse to my Text, My flesh is [meat] indeed, so also, My
blood is [drinke] indeed; whereof this Sacramental cup, (tendered unto every of
you by us, dear Christians, that be members by faith of Christ, according to
his own appointment and institution) is the sure sign, and seal, and pledge
unto your souls. For this cause, ye see clearly, in the Text, that by a
copulative, both Eating and Drinking are conjoined together: what therefore God
has thus joined together, let no man (much less the 2 These. 2.3.
man of sin, shortly to be consumed by the Verse. 8. ib.
spirit of Christ's mouth) dare to put Mat. 19.6.
asunder: and since both are so placed in the Text, that as the Exodus 25.20
Cherubims on the mercy seat, though they look each to other, yet still turning
with their faces to the mercy seat, so both these to the universal particle,
that is set in the door of my Text, to call in all worthy comers; Lo! every
one, all ye that hunger and thirst aright by faith, come in, and eat, and
drink your fill, says Christ; Behold, my own flesh and blood stand ready
fitted for your best provision: and to set an edge upon your spiritual
appetites, see, here is after Supper, eternal life to abide with you, and you
with it for ever, and this most fully to be given at the last act; for so we
read, (...), etc. Whosoever, Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood [hath
eternal life.]

Has eternal life.] See here, and note it, The third particular.
No man ever yet lost by his obedience to Christ; he is not Heb. 6.10.
unrighteous to forget it: he alone is worthy to lose, who when Christ
inviteth him, he puts him off with fond Luke 14.18.
excuses, and will not come: lo! here is [life] given, the sweetest
monosyllable in the world, and not so alone, but life [eternall:] Had he said
length of days, he had made good the first promise made to the obedience of
the moral law, Ephesians. 6.3. but in that he names eternal life, see here the
complement of all bliss. But I pray note the expression, it is in the present
tense, [(...)] not he [shall] have, but he [hath] it: and how so? because a
believer thus feeding upon Christ by faith, has Christ himself, who is styled
eternal life, Joh. 17.3. for Christ by faith Ephesians. 3.17.
dwells in such an one, and he in him, Joh. 6.56. yea Christ himself says
as much, Joh. 11.25. I am the life, and he that believes in me shall never
dye, for he has in him life eternal.

Again, if eternal life be here set, as I think it is, as the Reward of faith,
then how has the believer it already? Ans. In Spe, though not in Re; In hope
and expectation he has it, though not in actually complete fruition; and by
this hope they are Romans 8.24.
saved: Or else they have it, in arrhabone, in the Ephesians. 1.14.
earnest, and in sigillo, in the Ephesians. 4.30.
seal, and mark of the spirit, which mark is for ever indeleble; it is as a
foundation, 2 Timothy 2.19
sure, not to be shaken, no not by all the machinations, or Mat. 16.18.
policies of Hell it self.

But how so, since they that believe dye? Ans. What of that? since he that
believes in Christ, though he were Joh. 11.25.
dead, yet shall he live: Dye he must, because of the statute, Heb. 9.27. But
let not this trouble the believer; for as Christ is the life, so is he also the
resurrection too: and therefore, in the Text, it is added, by way of assurance,
that I will raise him up at the last day: and I like Beza ad locum.
Beza his guess well, that [(...)] here stands for [(...),] that the [and]
here is a causall note, serving by way of prolepsis, or of preoccupation to
remove that objection, likely to be raised by a weakling, though a Believer,
Thus: You promise life eternal, and lo! I die, where then is your promise?
Ans. Why? I will raise thee up again, at the last day: and if ye note it, at
your leisure, you shall find this speech of the Resurrection no less then
John 6, 39, 40, 44, 54.
four times, in this one Chapter, repeated, to double the observation, and
comfort.

The fourth general part.
And at this saying of a Resurrection at the last day, we may well resume that
of the Disciples, John. 6.60. Durus est hic sermo, This is a hard saying, who
can bear it? Surely no unbeleeving, merely natural man on earth: yea, more
then so, the very Apostles themselves were Luke 24.25.
slow of heart at the first to believe it; and the reports of those good
souls, the women that having seen Christ after his Resurrection, told it to
the Disciples, seemed to them as Luke 24.11.
idle tales, says S. Luke, cap. 24.11. yea, S. Thomas expressly protested, that
for his part he would John 20.25.
not believe it, till he felt him, John 20.25. The Philosophers at Athens
derided the doctrine, and made a mock of S. Paul, when he delivered it to
them, Act. 17.32. At other times, he was not only called in Act. 23.6.
question, but in danger almost to be torn in Ver. 10. ib.
pieces for the same: the Ver. 8. ib.
Sadducees, a certain sect in the Apostles days, yea rise also in our Math.
22.23.
Saviors own time, flatly denied that there was any Resurrection, or Angel,
or Spirit; for alas! the poring eye of To conceive of Divine things by
Philosophy, is no other then to take out a redhot Iron with our fingers, and
not with tongs. My L. of Exon, Sect. 18. No peace with Rome
Nature was too dim to discern so high a mystery as this was, so far
remote from her best-disposed Organs: The wisest Ethnic was no better at this
then S. Peter's 2 Pet. 1.9.
(...), one that was pur-blind, like to a Bat or Owl, or like S. Austins man
between sleeping and waking. That Common Principle of, a privatione ad habitum
non datur regressus, that from a total privation of life from the Body, there
was no possibility of a return, was so fastened in them, that like to a first
Principle, or a Mathematical Rule, it must be taken True for granted, and he
that should offer a disputation against it, he was, as S. Paul at Athens, to be
esteemed a Act. 17.18.
Babbler, or as a Natural Ignaro; the ground of all is, because this is a
business merely of Faith, to which all Carnal Thom. 1a qu. 1a Art. 8. ad 2um
Oportet quod naturalis ratio subserviat fidei.
Reasonings must give way: in the Natural man, both the medium, which is
Faith, is wanting, or unprepared, and the object, Christ risen, stood at too
great a distance to be kenned, no not so much as Moses did from mount Deuteronomy.
34.1.
Nebo the land of promise [a far off] by him; It Is the proper work of Gods
spirit only, as he did those Dead bones in Ezekiel. 37.14.
Ezekiel, (which were a figure of the Resurrection) to quicken and enliven his
first apprehension, and faith for this purpose. Some Heretics there were,
after the Apostles days, in Tertul. de praescript. adv. Haer. c. 46, 48, 49,
51 Saturn. Basilides, Carpocrates, Cerdon, etc.
Tertullians time, that were against the Bodily Resurrection: the Anabaptists,
and Libertines of late, were all for the Spiritual Resurrection of the soul
from sin unto the life of grace in this life; though that good Martyr
Polycarpus, S. John's Disciple, styles such, whether Epicures, or others,
Polycarpus Epist. ad Philip.
Primogenitos Satanae, the first-begotten of Satan; yea, even Tertul. lib. de
Monogam.
Tertullian himself, that ancient Father of the Church, after his infection by
the heresy of Montanus, whom he styled his Paraclete, and his Prophet;
Lactant. lib. 7. instit. Div. c. 21, 24, 26.
Lactantius also, and diverse other Doctors of the Church, having a tang of the
error of the Millenaries, these, though they granted a Resurrection to be,
yet were out in the understanding of it: for, misunderstanding that Prophecy
Rev. 20.5. where there is mention of a [first] Resurrection, imagined that
there should be a [first] Resurrection of the Just, that should reign here a
thousand years even upon [earth;] and after that, a second Resurrection of the
Wicked, at the day of the general judgment: Whereas we know, there shall be
but John. 11.24.
one [generall] Resurrection of the Bodies of the just, and unjust at the last
day; that first Resurrection in S. John being to be understood only of the
inward, and spiritual Resurrection of the soul out of the grave of sin,
which, as a body in the grave, lies too much rotting, and corrupting of the
soul; for which cause S. Paul has called it the Phil. 3.10. see Romans 6.
Power of Christ's Resurrection. These some then, and diverse more that might
happily be named, have either flatly denied, or else erroneously mistaken this
doctrine of the Resurrection: the more are we all, my beloved, from this
meditation bound to thank our good God, who has so blessed us, with Ephesians.
1.3.
spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, that he has given us better eyes, by
means of the veil of natural blindness removed, to see into this great
mystery of godliness, and has let this part of the 2 Cor. 4.4.
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, in the knowledge of his Resurrection,
to shine into our hearts.

My purpose was not, on this occasion, to dwell at large upon this Common place
of the Resurrection now: only Two things I note, as Principally here intended.
First, the Author of the Believers Resurrection, Christ himself, [(...)]
(...), I, Emphatically I, will raise him up, What stronger argument of the
Divine Nature of our Savior? Noe [man] (merely) such, has ever quickened his
2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
own soul, but Christ does this Potestative, by virtue of his own innate
Power, for so he says, I have John 10.18.
power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again; and
therefore says Bern. ser. 10. de Pasch.
Bernard, differencing Christ's from all others Resurrection, Reliqui
suscitantur, solus Christus Resurrexit: Well may others be [raised,] Christ
only [rose,] he only by [himselfe] could conquer death: Wherefore, though
the original word, in Mar. 16.6. [(...)] be passive, yet must it be
understood actively, as a Reverend Bp. Lake, on 1 Cor. 15.20. p. 157.
Prelate has observed: This power manifested in Christ's Resurrection was
prefigured, say Albinus quaest. in Genesis
Albinus, Julianus Pomerius, lib. 1. contr. Judaeos p. 556. in Patr. (...).
Julianus Pomerius, and others greatly learned, in that prophecy of old Jacob,
Genesis 49.9. where Juda is said to stoop down, and to couch as an old Lion, and
yet, says the same great Patriarch, as a Lions whelp from the prey, my son,
thou art gone up: this is a clear Type of our Lord and Savior, who by S. John
is called the Apoc. 5.5.
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who, during the Time of his passion, and his
humiliation, seemed to couch as it were, and to lie down in his grave, as an
old and weakened Lion; but as a Lion that is young, in much strength, he
rouzeth up himself again, having broken the bonds of Act. 2.24, 31.
Death, and Hell in his victorious Resurrection: so that this [taking up] of
his life again shows the Truth of his Divinity, and omnipotent
consubstantiality, Phil. 2.6.
equal with his eternal Father, and the holy Ghost; that he was not (...),
only [like] unto, but verily (...), of the [same] substance with his Father,
against that damnable heresy of Arrius, under which though the Haeresis Arrii
prorupit, totumque [orbem] invecto errore turbaverat. Sulpic. Severus l. 2.
sacr. hist. p. 144. in 8o. cum Drusio.
world seemed in the days of Athanasius the Great, in a sort, to [Ingemuit]
totus orbis, and Arrianum se esse miratus est. Hieron. cont. Luciferian. --
Confer Hooker, l. 5. p. 266. ad p. 274. Et Dr Field, l. 1. c. 10. in medio. My
L. of Duresme, c. 15 sect. 5. p. 368. qua supra. Et Mr Wotton, sermon. 2. in Joh.
p. 77, 78, etc.
groan, yet was it condemned in the first general Council at Nice, and
himself at last voyded with his Ruffin. l. 1. c. 13. hist. Eccles.
bowels, and entrals, as he was about to go to maintain his blasphemy, his
soul out of his body, being smitten by the immediate hand of Divine Justice
for his obstinacy herein.

Now as this shows the Divinity, so in that in the former part of the Text,
he mentions his flesh, and his blood, it is clear also that he had likewise
an humane nature too, even he took part likewise, says the Heb. 2.14.
Apostle, of the same flesh and blood with the rest of the children, and so
became Ephesians. 5.30.
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, and all this too, not in (...).
Ignat. ad Philip. p. 5.
opinion only, and fancy, as the old exploded Vide Estium ad cap. 2. in
Philip. ver. 7. p. 79.
Marcionites and Manichees conceited, (...), as Ignatius says, but Really, and
in Truth; for so the Scripture plainly, The word was [ Joh. 1.14.
made] flesh, Made, I say, and that not brought down along with him out of
heaven, as the Apollinarian Heretics imagined, but made out of the flesh of
the Virgin Mary: so Saint Paul expressly, Gal. 4.4. Factus [ex] muliere, made
[of] a woman; for that preposition [ex] or [of] notes the material cause of
his incarnation, and that our Lord and Savior was substantialiter factus, as
Theophyl. ad 1. Mat. ver. 23.
Theophylact notes, made of the very substance of the Virgin; which
overthrows also that Valentinian heresy, which taught that Christ passed
only as water through a conduit-pipe, through her womb, but took nothing
Really of her substance; for St. Paul elsewhere Romans 1.3. says expressly, that
he was made [(...)] (...), [of] the seed of David according to the flesh;
[Factum] propria significatione intellige, says Beza ad Romans 1. ver. 3.
Beza, the word [made] is there properly to be understood, as showing the very
substance of Christ's flesh to be made of the very substance of the Virgins: And
indeed, had it not been so, he could never have been capable of Heb. 2.14.
Death, or suffering, thereby to overcome him that had the power of Death, the
Devil, as St. Paul disputes most strongly; the Godhead being, as not
passionate (as the Vorstian blasphemy was) so neither passible, or subject
unto death, or shedding of blood, Heb. 9.22.
without which yet there was no remission of sins possible: Sometimes indeed
the Holy Ghost speaking in concreto of Christ's Person, which had united to it a
twofold Nature, by that which Divines call a Communication of properties, that
is given to the whole person which is proper only in abstracto, to the one
nature. So we read Act. 20.28. [God] is said to have purchased the Church with
his own [bloud,] Now God himself is a Joh. 4.24.
Spirit, says the Scripture, and a Spirit, says our Savior, has not flesh,
and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24.39. and if there be no flesh, nor veins
to hold and contain blood, which for the remission of sins Heb. 9.22.
must be shed, then surely there can be no purchase of the Church by blood:
therefore that speech and the like, in the language of the Scripture, is to be
understood in Trope, or sacred Figure, not strictly, and abstractively; no more
then that Text in St. John must be, Joh. 3.13. where Christ speaking of
himself, as the Son of Man, says that he [is] in Heaven, when yet he there
spoke upon the earth, as man, to Nicodemus: it must therefore be understood by
Communication of properties, and in concreto, it being True, that that divine
Person which by an admirable union had Two Natures united to its self, did,
and was thus, or thus, as Gods Spirit in the Scriptures, is pleased to express
so deep, and great a mystery.

Thus ye see, that if there were no other Texts to prove it, yet from this one
the (...), and Two Natures of Christ hypostatically united to his Divine
Person, would be sufficiently collected. But because this point is hence but
(...) only to be discoursed of, this being rather the hypothesis, then the
thesis of the Text directly; I rather come to show how, and by what sinews the
Resurrection of Believers is from hence deducible; and this is founded upon Two
maine grounds: First, because Christ himself being the Ephesians. 1.22.
Head of his Church, and every Believer a lively member of his body, by virtue
of the mystical, and effectual Union that is between the head and the
members, as the head is raised, so shall the members likewise. Besides, Christ
is as the Primitiae, the first fruits, as Saint 1 Cor. 15.20.
Paul says, we as the rest of the whole lump; look now, as the dedication
of the first fruits of their increase did unto the Jews consecrate, and in a
manner sanctify the whole other increase, even so our Savior by his
Resurrection, has consecrated unto all his members theirs, Cum eadem sit ratio
primitiarum, and totius cumuli, as Beza ad 1 Cor. 15.20.
Beza notes, there being the same reason, by this consequence, of the whole
lump, and of the first fruits. The wicked shall indeed be raised up too, but
unto everlasting shame, confusion, and contempt, as Dan. 12.2.
Daniel, and Saint Joh. 5.29.
John say, by the [power] of God, but the believer, and his True member only
by virtue of his effectual merit, and Communion: [I] will raise him up.

The other thing to be noted, is the Time mentioned for this raising up, (...)
(...), at the last Day; he means, the day of our common 2 Cor. 5.10.
appearance before him, wherein the heavens being on fire, shall be 2 Pet. 3.12.
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat: Saint Paul calls
it by an emphasis, [ 2 Timothy 1.18.
(...)] (...), [that] day, that so remarkable, that so Jud. ver. 6.
great, and dreadful day of Romans 14.12.
account: by Saint Peter it is called the day of the 2 Pet. 3.10.
Lord; Then it is that Christ will raise up the Believer, even at the [last]
day of the world, after which both day and time shall be no more.

This is a sentence, which like the miraculous wine in Cana of Galilee, is set
down as the best till Joh. 2.10.
last; and is indeed like to King David's wine, that which makes Psalm. 104.15.
glad the heart of every righteous man, who if in this life only he had hope,
he were of all men else most 1 Cor. 15.19.
miserable: For as the life of an unbeleever is like a Tragedy, which is
presented in with Music, and all expressions of jollity, but it goes off
usually in a dismal, and a sad catastrophe; so is the life of a Believer to a
Comedy, which though brought upon the stage in blackes, under sad looks, soft
paces, faint speeches, and such like emblemes of sorrow, yet stay a while, and
ye shall see all go off in mirth and music; the righteous, when the other
calls for the rocks, and mountains to fall upon him, and to shelter him from
the wrath of the Lamb in vain, shall at that [last] day, being raised up by
his head Christ Jesus, lift up his head with joy, because that his Redemption
Luke 21.28.
draws nigh.

I will raise him up at the last day: that is, as Rupertus ad cap. 6. Joh.
Rupertus glosseth, a congerie aeterna morte mortuorum, ex nomine eum vocans,
discernam, I will segregate him from the whole other mass, or drove, as it
were, of wicked men, that shall dye eternally for their impenitencie in sin,
and call him forth by name, and will not be Mat. 10.32, 33.
ashamed to own him then at that last day, who was not ashamed of his
reproach, in his warfare against the world, the flesh, and the Devil here
below. So True is that of King David, that if we mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, we shall find that the [end] of that man is peace; but
the Transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the [end] of the wicked
shall be cut off, Ps. 37. 37, 38. confer Eccl. 8.12, 13. Ps. 92.7. Mal. 3.17,
18. Wherefore, let us comfort one another with these words, as well knowing
that howsoever the righteous shall be recompensed by afflictions, yet it is but
on the [ Pro. 11.31.
earth] says Solomon, and no farther, the end of their days, is the day of
the end of all their sorrow, and misery, for ever and ever.

To conclude, let the Deuteronomy. 32.29.
thought then of our ends, be still the end of our thoughts: and that our end
may be good, let us be sure that we have good ends in all our projects, and
our Christian performances, or Ecclus. 7.36.
undertakings, before that last end of all comes, Then shall we indeed be
raised up with joy, and comfort most unspeakable, at that last Day.

The means to accomplish this, is, To propound our Saviors Resurrection as a
Pattern of ours, in our spiritual Ephesians. 5.14.
awaking out of the sleep of sin, by our spiritual, and as S. John has
phrased it, Our Rev. 20.6, 7.
first Resurrection: Now before Christ's, there was an Matthew. 28.2.
earthquake, so in our Regeneration there is a conquassation usually, and a
shaking of the soul, a Act. 24.25. and 16.29.
trembling of the conscience, through a sight of sin, and of our misery
thereby; the day of our second, must be like the day of our first birth, Dies
lachrymosa, a Day of Ingressus slebilis, progressus debilis, egressus
horribilis. Ber.
Tears, shed in contrition for our sins past; when we must, as Moses did
the Exodus 17.6.
rock in Horeb, strike the rocks of our too too obdurate hearts with a rod of
remorse, that from thence may flow out even rivers, and streams of sorrow for
our loose conversations before calling: The continual dropping of this water
hollowes the stone, mollifies and softens the heart, preparing it aright to
receive the seeds of grace. One sting of the fiery Serpent in the wilderness
drives the pained Israelite to look up for remedy to the Number. 21.9.
brazen Serpent, there set up: so when the Conscience is, as it were, stung
with the bitings of the Rev. 12.9.
old Serpent the Devil, by the sight, and smart for sin, Then flies the
Penitent, and sobbing soul for ease, and remedy to the True brazen John 3.14.
Serpent Christ Jesus, who has broken the teeth, and plucked out that 1 Cor.
15.55, 57.
sting which so much pained the good soul. The Initium salutis, notitia
peccati: qui peccare se nescit, corrigi non vult. Sen. -- Frustra medicantis
auxilium expectat, qui vulnus non detegit. Boctius.
sight, and sense of misery by sin is the sure preparatory means to seek,
and find a remedy by mercy; as when the powers of the jaylors soul were
shaken, with as strong an earthquake, as the Prison it self was, Then, but
not till then, he Act. 16.29. Non potest scire quo modo morbos curare
conveniat, qui unde hi sunt, ignorant. Cornel. Cells. de Re Med. lib. 1.
sprang in to Paul, and Silas, desiring both ease, and direction, from the
guilt of sin, unto the life of Christianity: The like to which we read of S.
Peter's Converts, when they were Act. 2.37.
A man were better feel wrath then nothing. D. Sclater, in sick souls salve.
pricked in their hearts, then they cry out, What shall we do to be saved? 2.
Secondly, Christ's Resurrection was Thom. 3a qu. 54a Art. 2.
Integrall, whole in every part, a most complete, and perfect Resurrection; he
had nothing wanting, or defective in his body, which now arose in
incorruptibilitate, as Primasius in 1. ad Corinth. c. 15. v. 20.
Primasius speaks, in an absolute incorruption, yea, and impossibility of
returning back again to Death, He being risen dies Romans 6.9.
no more, death has no more dominion over him; for he arose Immortalis
Totaliter, as Raymund. a Sabunde, in Theolog. Natural.
Raymundus a Sabunde says, Totally Immortal. Now his Resurrection being an
example of ours, from hence we are instructed to a Total, Integrall, and
Universal abrenunciation of all sin, unto the contrary reformation. A
Christian must be (...), whole in regard of sincerity, universal in regard of
the extent of his obedience, unto Psalm. 119.128.
all Gods Commandments; for he that allows himself in any one known sin,
cannot be said Truly to hate any sin; even as a loose adulterer that has
many curtisans, but some one above the rest, on whom he doates, on whom his
luxurious affections are more intensively enamoured, though he entertain the
rest but only in a general salute, and so goes them all by, to glut himself
with pleasure on that one: Though the manifestation of his carnal love be
greater to this one, then to all the other, yet he cannot properly be said to
hate any of the rest: But a Christian must not only, as Herod, be at his [
Mar. 6.20.
many] things, nor as Agrippa, at his [ Act. 26.28.
almost,] nor as Naaman, at his Rimmon, and his being pardoned in [ 2 King.
5.18.
This] though but an only minion: but he that is in Christ must be a new
Creature throughout, and Act. 26.29.
altogether; 2 Cor. 5.17.
all things must become New, in heart and affection, in life and conversation,
in body, in soul, in spirit, 1 These. 5.23.
Wholly, Integrally, Universally; for so was Christ's Resurrection. 3. Thirdly,
Christ arose speedily, the Luke 24.46.
Third day from his death; and that no sooner, nor no later: first, says Thom.
3a qu. 53. Art. 2. in corp.
Aquinas, to show the Truth of both his Natures; it behoved him to rise
quickly, least if his Resurrection had been deferred till the end of the
world, the Truth of his Divinity might, with his omnipotency, have been
suspected, as if he See John 10.18.
could not have raised up himself before; and it behoved him to lie till the
third day before he arose, least the Truth of his humanity, and his death
might have been questioned; now continuing in the grave until the Third Day,
(so that the grave to our Savior was not only Sheol, but also Bp. Lake, qua
supra. p. 152.
Shacath, not only a greedy swallower, but a ravenous digester also) it is
manifest, that his Death was True; No Apoplectick ecstasy being compatible with
life, (under favor) above three days. Secondly, He rose the third day, that
is, speedily, no long delay intervening between his Dissolution, and his
Resurrection; to be a Pattern to us herein of our speedy, and Luke 24.1.
early arising out of the grave of sin unto the life of grace; Ne differas de
die in diem, says Ecclus. 5.7.
Siracides, Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to
day. I love them that love me, says God, and they that seek me early shall
find me, Prove. 8.17. God loves such as be aurorantes ad se, that with the
first peeping of the day give up themselves to God: Let us with Abel offer up
the Genesis 4.4.
firstlings of our Time, in Sacrifice to God, we shall [so] be the first in his
acceptance: Let us die the wool of our infancy and youth, into the grain
color of sanctity, that when our days are woven into more years, we may
never after change color. Awake up my glory, says King David, awake Psaltery,
and Harp, I my self will awake right early, Psalm. 57.8. Or, as some render
it, Excitabo auroram, I will stir up the morning, non illam ut me a somno
excitet praestolabor, sed illam ego morantem excitabo, says Granatens. tom. 3.
concion. de temp. conc. 1. in die S. Pasch.
Granatensis. And surely, my Beloved Christians, would we, as now it is Romans
13.11.
high time, awake out of the sleep of our carnal security and sin; and as
Bildad advised Job, seek unto God [ Job 8.5, 6.
betimes,] surely now he would awake for us, and make the habitation of our
righteousness prosperous: Yea, if thus we would awake, and arise from the
dead, in the first Resurrection, Christ himself shall give us Ephesians. 5.14.
light; that is, himself: for so old Simeon calls him, The Luke 2.32. and
Joh. 1.9.
Light to lighten the Gentiles; and, in thy Psalm. 36.9.
light, O blessed and sweet Savior, we shall surely see light.

This was the way that a Dr Peterson, the reverend Dean of Exeter, in his
learned and elegant sermon upon Ephesians. 5.14 preached in the Cathedral of Saint
Peter there, upon Easter day 1639
bright star pointed out unto me lately, as ye all know, and the readiest
affections of mine heart, lending me wind and sails at will for present,
would now put me on to steare amayne in the same course: This was the Music
that so took our ears, and hearts, upon the solemn Festival it self: Oh
that as the voice and echo in the woods, that most divine Sermon, and our true
Practice, might make up one sound, and termination!

I confess, my meditations have, since that time, as Moses on the Mount, Exodus
32.1.
stayed long upon it; and were it not that I justly feared my jarring notes
would mar that taking harmony, I could yet wind up mine instrument a while
longer; but so divine an Orpheus could not but draw even the stony heart to
follow: Do then, what then you heard; I will assure you, it is that which
leads the way directly to the life eternal, in this my Text: Concerning which,
if ye would now enquire of me, and ask me what it is, I must needs tell you,
that its that, which sooner swallows up our thoughts in wonder, then it can
become capable of but a competent expression by our speech: its better known
indeed by True fruition, then discourse: Therefore leaving that, let us now
rather all pray, so to be enabled all to feed upon the flesh, and to drink
the blood of Christ by faith, that in the issue, we may make sure of the full
fruition of the same; and in the end of all things, obtain infallibly the 1
Pet. 1.9.
end of all our faith, even the salvation of our souls; and this through the
alone merits and mediation of the same Jesus Christ the 1 John 2.1.
righteous, who has risen from the dead, is Ephesians. 4.8, 9.
ascended up into Heaven, there to Joh. 14.3.
prepare those eternal mansions of bliss, promised to all that cleave unto
him by a true, effectual, and lively faith, even for ever and ever. Unto him,
with thee, O righteous Father, and thy blessed incomprehensible Spirit, our God
in Unity, our God in Trinity, be all honor, and praise, thanksgiving,
immortality, dominion, salvation, and glory in the Ephesians. 3.21.
Church, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

