CALDER WOODS RECANTATION: OR, A Tripartite Discourse.

DIRECTED TO SVCH OF the Ministry, and others in Scotland, that refuse
Conformity to the Ordinances of the Church.

Wherein the Causes and bad Effects of such Separation, the Legal Proceedings
against the Refractarie, and Nullitie of their Cause, are softly launced, and
they lovingly invited to the uniformity of the CHVRCH.

Epist. Iam. cap. 3. Vbi Zelus and Contentio, ibi Inconstantia and omne opus
pranum.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, at the Sign of
the Dolphin. 1622.

TO THE IMPARTIAL READER.
I Am not ignorant (impartial Reader) that to persuade or contend for Redress
without Authority, little preuailes, and often times exposes such Motions to
Contempt or Malice: yet the love I owe to the Peace of the Church, enforces me
to solicit Conformity in a matter of great consequence. If any challenge my
insufficiency, or interest; let them know, that I much more estimate the weak
endeavors of good meaning, then the more learned shows of Pharisaical
Ostentation; That I am as well liable to give account of my Talent, as the Arch
Pillars of most profound Learning; and that armed with these Reasons, I care
not what the most Censorious Critic or Thraso-like Braggadochio can degorge
against me. One favor I crave, That thou will not curiously enquire what I have
been, or pry into my former Errors (for which, I humbly beg pardon from the
Mercy-Master in Heaven, and from his Vicegerent, my dread Sovereign upon
Earth) but consider with judgment what now I am, and how affected to the
Truth. I have in this ensuing homespun Discourse freely expressed my self
touching the Controversies which have long troubled the Church of Scotland. In
it I neither wrong the dead, cast contempt upon the living; neither level I at
any man's person, further then, in the inquiry of Truth, may conduce to the
advancement thereof, and public good. In this pursuit, I have left all
extrauagant Wanders, and balk'd all circulating Complements (too common both to
Wits and Writs in this Age) and have run post in the high way; wherein if I
have stumbled, I expect less harm, or more pity. What I have written, is
without Art or Insinuation; perhaps it may prove the less graceful: yet I
hope it shall find correspondence in the minds of those that are not embarked
in partiality, and loves the whole better then a part.

Farewell. Amsterdam, this 29. of Nouemb. 1622.
CALDER WOODS RECANTATION: Or, A TRIPARTITE DISCOVRSE.
IT is foretold of Christ, That in the latter days it should be said, Lo
there, lo here is Christ; which by the Learned is understood, not as if the
Person of Christ should be assumed and counterfeited, but his Authority and
Pre-eminence, (which is to be Truth it self) that is to be challenged; Ecce
in deserto ecce in penetralibus: Some have sought the Truth in the Conuenticles
and Conciliables of Heretics and Sectaries; some, in the external form and
representation of the Church, some one way, some another: but the true Badge of
the Church, and finding of Christ, is in Unity, Peace, and Brotherly Love.

Whosoever then by contentious controversies in matters indifferent, vnswaddle
the Church of her Bonds of Peace, are in the right way of dividing the Unity
of Spirit, to open a Gap to all disorder and scandal, that thereby the weak
may be brought to an incertaintie of Religion, the perverse reject it, or that
the Enemies of the Church may make Music by their disorder. For this cause I
am in good hope, that whatsoever shall be spoken sincerely, and modestly, for
appeasing the Relikes of such controversies as disturb our Church of Great
Britain, but more specially of Scotland, will be taken in good part, and be
displeasant to none. If any be offended at this voice, Vos estis fratres, you
are Brethren, why strive you? He shall give a great presumption against
himself, that he is the party that does his Brother wrong. I will not enter
into the controversies themselves; they are so fore-stalled and determined by
many more Learned Pens, that whatsoever I might say, might seem borrowed, or
of less weight. All men know and confess, they are none of the high Mysteries
of Faith, which detayned the Church many years after her first Peace; neither
do they concern that great part of the worship of God, of which it is true,
Non seruatur vnitas in credendo, nisi eadem sit in colendo: but we contend
about Ceremonies, Policy, and things indifferent. Let the offending side
aggrauate their Grieuances as they please, yet are they but Ceremonies for
which they have so long contended, and wherein no Holiness is put, other then
Order, Decency, and Conueniencie; neither are these Ceremonies so much stood
upon, as due obedience to Superior Powers. If God tried Adam with an Apple, it
is enough; the sin is not valued, but the prohibition. Shimei was slain for
going out of the City; the Act was little, but the Bond was great.

I will then first take a sincere view and consideration of the accidents and
circumstances of Church-controuersies (at least such as concern our selves to
look unto) amongst which I find, that the imperfections in the conversation
of those who had the chief place in the Church, and their mis-gouernment, has
ever been the prime cause of Schisms, and Divisions: For whilst the
Governors of the Church continue full of Knowledge, and Good Works, according
to their Dignity, and the precious care of Souls imposed upon them; so long
the Church is situated (as it were) upon a Hill; no man makes question of it,
or seeks to depart from it: But when these Fathers and Leaders lose their
Light, and that they wax worldly lovers of themselves, or pleasers of men;
then do men begin to grope for the Church, as in the dark; they are in doubt,
whether they be the Successors of the Apostles, or Pharisees. Howsoever they
sit in Moses Chair, yet they never speak tanquam authoritatem habentes,
because they have lost their reputation in the Consciences of men, by declining
their steps from the way they trace out to others; so that nolite exire had
need continually to be beaten in the ears of men, so ready are they every
way to depart from the Church: For it is the policy of the spiritual Enemy,
either by counterfeit holiness of Life to establish and authorize Error, or by
the corruption of Manners draw in question Truth and lawful things. This
concerns certainly the Bishops to look unto; to whom I am witness unto my
self, that I stand affected as I ought: No contradiction has supplanted in
me, the reverence I owe to their Calling; neither has any detraction or
calumny imbeaseled my opinion of their Persons. I know some of them, who are
most pierced with these accusations, to be men of great virtue; and for the
rest, I can condemn none. I know it is truly said of Fame, Pariter facta
atque non facta canit; their taxations come not all from one Coast: they have
many different Enemies; some, ready to slander them, some more ready to
amplify such scandal, and some most ready to believe it: Magnes mendacij
credulitas, Credulity is the Lodestone of Lies, and Envy will creep, where
it dare not go. But if any have lost their first Love, if any be neither hot
nor cold, if any have stumbled at the Threshold in such sort, that they cannot
sit well that entered ill; it is time they return whence they are fallen, and
confirm the things that remain. Great is the weight of their fault, and eorum
causa abhorrebant a Sacrificio Domini. It is the weakness of humane frailty,
rather to take poysonable Receipts out of Gold-glistering Boxes, then wholesome
Medicines from course cleanely Vessels of Clay: But it were better we had
Elias Hunger, or Samsons Thirst, in taking our Meat from a Raven, or our Drink
from the Iaw-bone of an Ass, rather then to deface them, or cast contempt upon
their Calling. The holy Angel would give no sentence of Blasphemy against the
common Slanderer, but increpet te Dominus. It is noted in the Ecclesiastical
History, That the ancient Synods, when they deprived any Bishops, never
recorded the Offense, but buried it in perpetual silence. Cham purchased his
Fathers Curse, for revealing his Fathers disgrace. Many good Fathers spoke
severely against the unworthiness of Bishops: One says, Sacerdotes nominamur
and non sumus; another says, Nisi bonum opus amplectaris Episcopus esse non
potes: but these, nor no other, ever did put doubt of the lawfulness of the
Calling and Ordination of Bishops.

The second cause of Controversies, is in multiplying of them by men, whom the
Church never wants; and who loves the salutation of RABBI, not so much in
Ceremony and Complement, as in inward Authority, which they seek over men's
Minds, in drawing them to depend upon their Opinion, and to seek Knowledge at
their Lips: These are the true Successors of Diotrephes, Lovers of
Pre-eminence, and do delight upon another sort of Spirits, which do adhere to
them, Quorumque gloria in obsequio; stiff Fellows, who in zeal follow
mightily after those, upon whose Oracles they depend; and are, for the most
part, men of young Years, or superficial Understanding, or both, and carried
away with enticing apparencie of Singularity, Goodly Names, and Pretenses:
Pauci res ipsas sequuntur, plures nomina rerum, plurimi Magistrorum; the matter
controuerted, is least thought upon. Yet about these Controversies, are
wreathed and interlaced such accidental or private Emulations, and
Discontentments, as joined together, break forth into such contention, as
violates either Truth, Sobriety, or Peace: Some will be no longer ex numero;
others side themselves, before they know the right hand from the left;
Transeunt ab ignorantia ad preiudicium, they leap from Ignorance to a
preiudicate Opinion, and never take sound Judgment in their way: so that inter
iuuenile consilium and senile preiudicium omnis veritas corrumpitur, when such
are indifferent, and not partial, then is their Judgment weak and unripe
through want of years, and when it grows to strength, it is so forestalled
by preiudicat opinions, that it is made unprofitable. Between these two, the
Truth is encroached upon, Supreme Powers contemned, and the Honorable Names of
Purity, Reformation, and Discipline are trampled upon and made the subjects of
contention.

The third occasion (as I observe) of our Controversies, is an extreme unkind
detestation of some former Heresy or Corruption, already acknowledged or
convicted. Upon this Root, have most of the Heresies and Schisms of the Church
sprung, whilst men have grounded their Zeal, and measured the bonds of most
perfect Religion, by the furthest distance from the Errors last condemned: but
these be Posthumi Haeresium filij, Heresies or Schisms that arise from the
ashes of such as are already extinct. Some think it the true Lodestone, to
try which Doctrine is good and sound, by measuring which is more or less
opposite to the Church of Rome, be it Ceremony, Policy, or Matter of
Government: yea, if it be matter of greater moment, that is ever most perfect,
which is removed most degrees from that Church; and that ever polluted, or
blemished, that participateth in any apparencie with it. But is it reason, I
pray you? because we differ from the Roman Church in the adoration of the
Elements, and substance of the Eucharist; shall we also abandon the reverent,
modest, comely, and commendable receiving thereof upon our knees? No: we must
keep the good, and reject the bad. It is a consideration of much greater
wisdom and sobriety, to be well advised, Whether in the general demolition
of the Church of Rome in Scotland (all men's actions being imperfect) some good
was not purged with the bad? The Husbandman does not disclayme his heap of
Corn, because it is mixed with Chafe; neither does the Fisherman refuse his
Draught of Fish, because there is some Weeds in the Net; or does God separate
himself from the faithful Soul, because it is polluted with humane
corruptions? It was the ancient custom of the Fathers (says Augustine) to
approve rather then reject the good things which they did find in the very
Heresies and Schisms.

The fourth cause of our Controversies, I take to be the partial affectation
and imitation of Geneua and foreign Churches (a matter which in former times
has much troubled the Church:) for many of our Ministers, in the time of their
Persecution (as they call it) or rather Prodigals flight, having been
conversant with the Churches abroad, and received a great impression of the
Government there maintained, violently seek to intrude the like into our
Churches: But conueniamus in eo quod conuenit non in eo quod receptum est
alibi, let us not apishly imitate every new coined Custom; Non quod optimum,
sed e bonis quod proximum est eligendum; of good things, not that which is
best, but sometimes that which is readiest, is to be chosen. I wish we might
strive with other Churches, as the Vine with the Olive, which of us bears
best Fruit; not with the Thistle and Brier, which of us is most unprofitable.
Our Church in the I Will of Great Britain (praised be God) is not to plaint: it
is established and settled in the fullness of Peace, in the sincerity of
Doctrine, and in the Wisdom of Policy and Discipline: The Word is truly
preached, by many godly, learned, and famous Pastors, the Policy and
Discipline established by the Civil Magistrate in former times in most parts of
this I Will, and now confirmed by a Religious and Learned King, who from his
Cradle has labored to see the Church flourish in unity and peace. Shall then
the affected paritie of a few, transported with wrong ends, disturb this
Peace? God forbid: Or shall the Government of the Church be committed to the
confused Synods, Presbyteriall Meetings, and Parochial Sessions of those,
whose Voices are numbered, not weighed? Talia consilia non minuunt malum sed
augent potius.

The fifth cause of our continued fiery Contentions, is the passionate and
unbrotherly practices against the persons of others, for their discredit and
suppression. First, the Seperatist goes about to condemn the Government of
Bishops, as an Hierarchy remaining to us of the corruption of the Roman
Church: and then not finding footing in so sinking a ground, he desires
reformation of certain Ceremonies which he supposes to be superstitious; as
Kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament, Church-Liturgie, Music, the
wearing of Surplus, and the like.

Lastly, they dream unto themselves an only and perpetual Government of the
Church, which without consideration, possibility, or foresight of peril, must
be erected and planted by the Magistrate; and here some stay: Others go
further on, in following Knox his damnable Doctrine, and say, the same
Government must be reared up, maintained, and accepted by the people, at the
peril of their salvation, without attending the advancement thereof by other
Supreme Authority then their own: and from this Source flows the inordinate
zeal of some ignorant fantastical or singular and unquiet Spirits, amongst
the Gentry and Citizens, who in singular humors, for popular applause (with
Simon) will be baptized with company: But I wish such remember, that in
seeking Truth in Disobedience, without Peace, at once they lose Truth, Love,
Peace, their Adherents, and themselves. Such coals of Zeal are like the
Alchymists Elixar; about which much is spent, more talked, and it never brought
to pass: Let the Quintessence of your Wits be extracted, all your Observations
capitulate, all your Experiments abstracted, and all your Arguments united; all
will end with great loss, and vanish in smoke: You shall but by seeking such
Reformation, and bringing of Impossibilities into the Church, for matters
triuiall hazard the overthrow of those of greater weight and of peace for ever.
But perhaps you will say, that the Bishops maintain as well Abuses as good
Ordinances, and that your reasonable Demands are Vilipendit, or not answered:
but I answer (as they have formerly done to the like immodest Challenge) That
as there is no Element, which is not through many commixtions depraved from the
first simplicity, so no Church ever breathed in so pure an Air, as it might
not complain of some thick and unwholesome euaporations of Error, or Sin.
If you challenge Immunitie, it is rather presumption then true wisdom. If too
many sins of practice has thickened the Air of our Church, yet has not one
Heresy infected it: There is no Calves in our Dan and Bethel, none of
Ieroboams Idolatrye. They confess, that there be many Imperfections in the
Church, as Tares amongst the Corn; which, according to the Wisdom taught by
our Savior, are not with strife to be pulled up, but to grow together till the
Harvest. They grow not to an absolute defense of all the Orders of the Church,
or of the abuse of good Institutions; neither do they stiffely hold, that
nothing is to be innouated, as if it would make a breach upon the rest. They
know, that Leges nouis legibus non recreatae acceseunt, Laws not refreshed
with new Laws, wax sour. They are not ignorant, that taking away of Abuses,
supplanteth not good Orders, but confirms them; and that a contentious
retayning of a Custom, is as turbulent a thing as Innovation: Therefore, as
good Husbandmen, they are ever pruning and stirring in their Vineyard or Field,
not unskillfully or unseasonably; yet have they ever somewhat to do. But in the
ordering of these things, confused Paritie is not Judge: Private Profession is
one thing, and public Reformation another; every man must do that in the
main, none this but such of whom God says, I have said you are Gods: Quis sum
is the question of a good man; but Quis es, of an envious Eye, that can see
others, and not it self. Look to your own charge, in feeding Gods People
committed to you, and following your ordinary Callings. Do not like bad
Husbands, gadde abroad to other men's Houses, neither be busy Bishops in other
men's Diocesses: Set not your Teeth on edge with the sour Grapes of others. If
the Rulers of the Church cast not out Abuses, and unworthy Ordinances, the
sin is theirs; if a man unworthy, enter, the sin is his: But if you will
not enter, because such a one is entered, the sin is yours: You shall not
answer for other men's Faults, but for your own Neglects; other men's sins
cannot dispense with your duty. There is a concinnitie of Members, and
sympathy of Affections in Gods House: The Head must not despise the Hands, or
other inferior Members; neither these Members envy the Head: you are to obey.
Presume not then upon your own Worth, or contend by Malice to overrule;
neither upon your private Authority obtrude to the Church such Government,
which never had being, but in idle Speculation: Believe me, Brethren, too
much Presumption gnaweth the Bones of the Spirit even to the Marrow of
Ignorance; and when Malice and Envy are coupled with Presumption and Ignorance,
and are kindled against the Modesty of the Virtuous, the flame by reflection
burns those that kindle it, and lights those that are detracted, till they
attain to the path and possession of Honor.

To this former complaint you add, that you are charged as if you did deny
Tribute unto Caesar, and withdraw from the Civil Magistrate the Obedience
which is due, which you have ever performed, and taught: I wish from my heart,
you could clear your selves of these too true suggestions. But the
amplification of this Point falls to be in the second part of this
Discourse, to which I leave it.

You say further, That Inquisitions and Examinations have been too strictly
urged against you: That the Bishops are too sudden in silencing such numbers of
you: That they ought to keep one Eye open at the Good which you do, and not
to look with both Eyes upon the Evil which they suppose you do; where now
every inconsiderate Word or light Escape is a Forfeiter of your Voice and Gift
of Teaching.

These be the causeless Complaints, unjustly conceived against your Mother
the Church, and supreme Authority, who have never ceased by Motherly love and
Royal favors to reclayme you. But since fair means cannot prevail, and
that your Offenses are greater then your service, Justice may change the Bonds
of Recompense into due punishment: The Warrants of all former times has
allowed greater severity, then ever has been inflicted upon you. Wise
Generals punish mutinous persons more severely then Robbers or Adulterers.
Corah and his company were more fearfully plagued then the Idolatrous
Israelites. Who cannot rather suffer a lewd Servant, then an undutiful Son,
though he pretend a fair color for his Disobedience? When Nature offends
Law, there Law may be justly executed on Nature.

You accuse justly Apostasy and Separation in others; and shall the Church
suffer the least Seizure in you? But if you hated your Sins more, and Peace
less, Prelacie would trouble you less, and you not trouble the Church at all.
But it is against my purpose, to amplify Wrongs; I only point at them, to
move remorse and amendment on the offending side, and not to animate severity
on the other side, which is the stronger party; and who (I know) never (without
grief) did execute those Decrees against you, which Law and Justice did
enjoin: neither have they affected any contentious Motion, or intended any
Aspersions, as Sectaries, Schismatickes, and Puritanes, against you; but
contrariwise, in all courtesy and love have reputed you to be Brethren and
Sons of one Mother, the Church. Yet give me leave to tell you, that although
you have not altogether cut your selves from the Body and Communion of the
Church; yet do you affect certain Cognizances and Differences, wherein you
seek to correspond amongst your selves, and be separate from it: But I wish
you to understand, Tam sunt mores quidem Schismatici quam dogmata Schismatica.
Saint Jerome tells you, that Haeresis Greece dicitur ab electione, eo quod
sibi eligat disciplinam.

You have also impropried unto your selves the Names of Zealous, Sincere, and
Reformed; as if all others were Cold, Minglers of Holy Things, Profane, and
Friends to Abuses. You ingrosse Christ and his true Worship so to your selves,
that (as Cyprian said to Pupianus) you will go to Heaven alone. If a man be
endued with rare Virtues, and fruitful in Good Works; yet if you say not Amen
to your several Positions, you term him in derogation, a Civil, Moral, or
Politic man, if not worse: Whereas the Wisdom of the Scripture teaches us
the contrary, to denominate men Religious by the Works of the second Table,
because the Works of the first are often times counterfeit, and practiced in
Hypocrisy. S. John says, That a man does vainly boast, that he loves God,
whom he has not seen, if he love not his Neighbor, whom he has seen:
And S. James says, That it is true Religion, to visit the Fatherless and
Widow. So, that which with you is but Phylosophicall, is with the Apostles true
Religion; and contentious striving, which you do account Religion and Zeal,
is with the Apostle holden Wickedness: But remember, that there is a like Woe
to them that speak good of evil, as to those that speak evil of good.

If a Bishop or Preacher preach with care and meditation, ordering the matter
they handle, soundly and distinctly for memory, deducing and drawing it for
direction, and authorizing it with strong Warrants: Some of you have censured
such Doctrine as a form of speaking, not becoming the simplicity of the
Gospel, preferring it to the reprehension of S. Paul, speaking of the enticing
speeches of man's Wisdom. But be not deceived with such uncharitable censure:
woe were to all the World, if Christ should tie his presence only to your
fashions; or leave learned peaceable Spirits, and make his residence with
Raylers. As to reprehend justly, requires a due discretion; so to detract
injuriously, in a Great man is stayne of Honor, in a Learned man a note of
Irreligion, and in all sorts of men a plague of Nature, arising from the
thought of a corrupt, unbridled, and sinful heart. If such of you say, that
you exclayme against none, but against those that have deserved it, it is in
that I tax your indiscretion: for whosoever disgraceth publicly, before he
has reproved privately, may be a good Aristarchus, but no good Christian. If
your own manner of Preaching were exactly examined (I speak not of all, but
of most) what is it? You exhort well, work compunction of Mind, and bring Men
well to the question, Viri fratres quid agemus; Men and Brethren, what shall
we do? But that is not enough, except you resolve the question. The greatest
part of your time allotted for Sermon, or perhaps an hour or two more, is
spent upon Controversies, or railing upon particular persons for every
mis-conceited Discontent: but God knows you handle Controversies weakly, and
Obiter, as before a people that will accept of any thing as Oracles, that
comes from you. But the Word, the Bread of Life, must not be wrested,
neither tossed up and down: it must be broken, and Directions drawn ad casus
Conscientiae, that men may be warranted thereby in their particular Actions.
And this, many of you are not able to perform, through want of grounded
Knowledge, Study, and Time; your Labors, for the most part, being employed
upon needless Controversies, and upholding of Factious Courses.

Again, you carry not an equal hand in teaching the people their lawful
Liberty, as well as their Restraints and Prohibitions: You think a man cannot
go too far in that, which has a show of a Commandment; you forget, that
there be sins on the right hand, as well as on the left hand; and that the
Word is two-edged, and cutteth on both sides, as well the superstitious
Observance, as the profane Transgression. Who doubts, but it is as unlawful
to shut where God has opened, as to open where God has shut? To bind where
God has loosed, as to loose where God has bound? Amongst Men it is commonly
as ill taken, to return back Favors, as to disobey Commands.

Another Point of great inconvenience and peril is, That you entitle the
People to hear Controversies in all Points of Doctrine; alleging, That there
is no part of Gods Council ought to be suppressed, or the People defrauded:
so as the difference which the Apostle makes betwixt strong Meat and Milk, is
confounded, and the Precept that the weak are not to be admitted to
Controversies, takes no effect; and which is a greater Seminary of further
Evils (whilst you seek to express Scripture for every thing, and have
deprived your selves of a special help, by imbeazeling the Authority of the
Fathers) you resort to naked Examples, conceited Inferences, and forced
Allusions, which enure men to all uncertainty of Religion.

Another Extremity you use, in magnifying your Preaching; which I grant, is
an holy Institution, and powerful means to salvation: yet has it Limits, as
all things else have. Wheresoever you find in Scripture mention of the Word,
you expound it of Preaching, which you have made in a manner of the Essence of
the Lords Supper; as if it could not be effectual, without a Sermon going
before: and this has been specially grievous to many hungry Souls, who upon
their Death-Beddes, with groans, have desired so precious a Food.

The other holy Sacrament of Baptism you have sometimes tied to be ministered
only in the Church, and upon Sundays; sometimes you have restrained it for
the offense of the Fathers, they being brethren of your own Congregation: by
which rare uncharitable invention, thousands of children have dyed in your
default, without the Seal of their Salvation, prescribed by Christ.

You do annihilate Church-Liturgies and set forms of Divine Worship, and both
in your Sermons and Prayers only magnify your extemporarie Conceptions or
Revelations (as you sometimes name them) every day brings new Conceits, and
one day does not teach, but correct another. In the mean time, what Preaching
is, or who may be said to preach, you make no question: but sure I am, that
many of you that call hotely for a Preaching Minister, are the first that ought
to be sequestered from so holy a Function.

These Errors and mis-proceedings you do fortify and entrench, by being
addicted to your own Opinions, and impatient to hear contradiction, or
arguments, that applaud not your humors. I know some of you think it a
tempting of God, to hear or read that, which with good reason may be said or
written against you; as if there were a quod bonum est tenete, without omnia
probate going before.

This may suffice to offer unto you a view and consideration, whether in these
things you do well or not, and to assuage the partiality of your followers. I
know you have the gift of Exhortation, and I suppose charitably, that you have
Zeal, and hate of Sin; but take heed you want not Knowledge, and Love:
Where the noise of Contention is so great, that the Truth cannot be heard, it
is to be wished, the Preachers were dumb, or the Hearers deaf.

The last cause of such Controversies, is the undue publishing, and debating of
them; which Point needs no long Discourse: Only I say, That Characters of
Love are more proper for Debates of this nature, then Firebrarnds of Zeal;
That all direct or indirect Glances at men's persons, were ever, in the like
cases, dis-allowed; That whatsoever is pretended, the People are not fit
Judges, but rather the quiet private Assemblyes and Conferences of the Learned:
Qui apud in capacem loquitur non disseptat sed calumniatur, The Press and
Pulpit would be freed from these Contentions; neither Promotion on the one
part, or Hate on the other, should continue these Challenges, and unwarrantable
Cartells: That further, all Preachers ought to be of such good temper, that in
matters of Controversy, they may in Wisdom, and Conscience, daily inculcate
and beat upon Peace, Silence, and Cessation.

But because I shall have occasion to speak of this more fully hereafter, I
end the first Part of this Discourse.

THE SECOND PART.
IT is not unknown to you, how dangerous and hurtful the effects of the long
stirs about the Government of the Church of Scotland have been and had proved
in Church and State, if the sedulous Animaduersions of a wise and foreseeing
King had not prevented the same: I cease to speak of the scandal that has
been given to Religion thereby; how many wicked or ignorant people have been
confirmed in Atheism, how many weak Christians have been discouraged in the
progress of their Profession, what Sects and bad Opinions have grown up in
corners; these that should (and without doubt would) have repressed them, being
by Domestical Brawles thwarted and hindered. All of sound judgment may
perceive what advantage the common Enemy has taken, that by such preposterous
Anarchie, Learning was not only contemned, but the Rewards thereof diminished,
the ancient Discipline of the Church overthrown, the Ignorant made Iudgers of
the Rewards of Learning, and the Learned Fathers of the Church, Marks for
Licentious Youths, armed with Malice, to shoot at. The height of this Fury has
extended it self beyond Confusion, Tumult, and Scandal: how often have these
tumultuous Practices reached to the height of Lease-Maiesty, by intending to
confer your head-lesse Government on whom you pleased, and how you pleased,
without the Authority of any Supreme Power?

If I might instance this, by bringing those upon the Stage, whose Errors you
have followed, rather then their Goodness; I might ask you, what Fennor did
in his Book entitled Axiomata Coelestis Canaan? Beza in his Book de Iure
Magistratuum in subditos? Coppinger and his followers, in England? Or, to come
home to our selves, what did Knox in his Letter written from Diepe, or in his
four inuenomed Positions, blown out by the second blast of his foule-breathed
Trumpet?

To descend and come to our own Times; mine own Eyes did behold that bold
head-lesse Insurrection, known by the seventeenth of September: But praised be
God, that Fire was soon quenched, and that Fruit rotten, before it was ripe;
although some of the Prime Nobility were invited, or rather coniured (if it
had been possible) to take Arms in defense of your lame Cause. But let that
black prodigious Day be inuolued in dark Hieroglyphics, and buried in
perpetual silence, least future Ages hear of it, or Erostratus complain,
that he is robbed of his Fame, for burning Diana's Temple.

Lastly, and more lately, from the ashes of these combustible Practices, did
(Phoenix-like) arise that deformed wrested Pamphlet, maliciously dispersed, but
already learnedly confuted and defaced by that Reverend Father, Doctor
Lindsay, Bishop of Brighen.

But here I will stay my hand, and play no more at this Weapon, least I turn
the Point against my self, or by thrusting home, give the Vein to some of
your Vital parts. You know my meaning: they were not the greatest sinners,
upon whom the Tower of Siloah did fall, Vnus peccat alter plectitur; but I will
gently close with you in general terms, and only tell you, That these Ryots
of singular Insolency were sufficient to have exasperated the most merciful
Prince to have rooted out the memory of such Spirits, who (under pretext of
Reformation) never aimed at other end (in contempt of Regal Authority) then
Translation of Church-Gouernment to confused Paritie, orderlesse Synods, and to
Mechanicke Parochial Sessions. What this Reformation did profit, in building
of Gods house, or repayring of it (as you pretended) and what strange fruits it
had produced before this time, if God by his servant, our Sovereign, had not
wrung the Sword out of your hand, let sound Judgment give Verdict. If you will
go a little along with me, and survey upon what grounds these proceedings and
misdemeanors were builded, you shall find they had none at all, but imaginary
Speculation, unable to uphold a quiet mind, much less, both Church and State.
First, there can be nothing more absurd, more against all Law, Practice, and
Reason, then the paritie of Church-Gouernment, or Parochial Judicature, which
you have so long maintained, and which was upon false Grounds broached, to
overthrow the Bishops, and auert the ancient Discipline of the Church. To make
this clear, I ask you, if there can be any Government without Superiority
and Distinction of Places? Can Civil or Spiritual Estates be better
governed, then by one armed with Power and Eminency above others? Is not Gods
own City, Spiritual Jerusalem, a gathering and uniting of Saints into a
Divine Policy, whereof the form is Order; which, as in all actions, so in the
Government of the Church is most necessary? Hence Paul rejoices of the
Colossians Faith and Order. Look back again, and behold, when Almighty God
gave Magistrates and Laws to his Church, he appointed under the supreme
Magistrate one High Priest, to have the Superintendencie of the Affairs of the
Church, and under him diverse Heads and Divisions, that Decency and Order
might be preserved, and Confusion shunned. This superiority of Priesthood
continued till the new Covenant of Grace; in all which time, if equality of
Priests had been conducible to the Weal of the Church, without doubt the Lord
of the Church would have established it.

Secondly, after this Ceremonial Law, our Savior Christ ruled his Church as
chief Bishop of our Souls: he adjoined no Elders to himself; at his death
he gave command to his Disciples, to rule the Churches where they should
govern, throughout the World. We read, that they did excommunicate alone,
that they did ordain Ministers alone, and did by supreme Authority rule both
the Affairs and Goods of the Church. Beza confesses, that Peter alone struck
Ananias and Saphira, that Paul ordained Timothy and Titus, that he prescribed
Laws to them and their Churches; this plat-forme of Paritie was not so much as
heard of in the time of Persecution. Saint Paul did write to the Bishops of
Ephesus and Smyrna, and to several Bishops of other Churches; to them he
gives Directions, and them he reprooueth: which had been very unfitting, if
his Authority had not been above other Ministers. All Records witness, that
several Bishops succeeded the Apostles at Rome, Constantinople, Jerusalem,
Antioch, Alexandria, and other places: All the Counsels give pre-eminence to
Bishops; and to the Counsels, the Fathers consent.

To come to later times, they whom you magnify above all others, did protest
by their Writings, That if Bishops would leave Superstition, and embrace the
true Religion, they would most willingly submit themselves to their Episcopal
Jurisdiction, as most godly and expedient for the Church. Melancthon did
testify much to this purpose, saying, That if the Authority of Bishops were
rejected, a greater Tyranny would follow. Zancheus greatly extolled Bishops;
Bullinger, Glocer, and diverse other Learned Protestants in Swethland and
Germany, with Camerarius and Sturmius, did the like. Beza himself
complayneth, That his words against Roman Bishops were wrested against our
Bishops. But suppose, that Beza, Daneus, Carpenter, Golart, Perot, Tauergues,
Polan, Snecan, and the like, have written all which you would have maintained,
or do yet hold; shall the Church of Great Britain allow what they have
written, for Oracles? No; there is no reason they should: For who would not be
ashamed to oppose those, and their followers, to the practice of the Primitive
Church, of Jesus Christ, his Apostles, Fathers, Counsels, Canons, to all
Writings of Antiquity, and to the most part of our own Times? All these, by
Practice or Decrees, have annulled Paritie, and consequently, all kind of
Government grounded upon it: All Legal Courses have censured against you; the
Parliaments (the most Honorable Courts in the I Will of Great Britain, or
elsewhere) have declared against you; the Church Assemblyes, wherein as
Members you had Voices, have found the nullitie of your cause, and all these
joining in one, have enjoined you to obedience and conformity: There rests
nothing on your side, but exclayming, bragging, and libelling, which will never
be otherwise censured by the Wise, then the fumosities of idle Dreame-venting
Brains, who assuming to themselves an uncontrolled Liberty, leaves all Laws
without defense, and exposes Magistracy to Obloquie, at their pleasure. But
(as all Legists and Schoolmen determine) private, much less public Laws
are neither grossly to be ieasted at, carelessly disgraced, or fondly to be
dealt withal. Consider warily of this Point, least Justice correct such by
Rods, as will not be ruled by Reason. So I come to the Third Part of my
Task, and then to an end.

THE THIRD PART.
I Have shortly leuelled at, if not hit the most material Accidents and
Circumstances of the Controversies which long have troubled the Peace of our
Church of Scotland, with their bad Effects; and how contrary your opposition is
to the best Institutions of former times. Now, after I have run post through
the Favors of your gracious Sovereign, I will unfold my sincere Wishes, and
so close up all. His Majesty's provident care foreseeing, that your violent
Platformes would in the end procure the overthrow of your cause, did so long
give way to your inconsiderate proceedings, till without greater inconvenience
to the Church and State, he could not forbear to repress them: in which
course, I pray you consider with me, what Legal course has his Majesty
taken, what Lenity has he used, what mollifying Balmes of loving Admonition
has he applied to so long festred Sores: He has called many General and
Provincial Assemblyes, for settling or remoouing many needless Controversies
amongst you: He has in Royal Person been present with you, persuaded you by
many Learned Orations, grave Exhortations, and Princely Admonitions: He has
often times confuted your ungrounded Assertions with Reason, when he might have
repressed them by his Royal Authority. What unseemly misdemeanour we have
seen in the presence of such a King, my Pen without blushing is not able to
express: Yet these has his more then Humane Clemency ouerpast, and by the
Lodestone of infallible Demonstrations and invincible Arguments has drawn
the most Judicious and Learned amongst you to assent to the Truth, and leave
such factious courses; Witness hereof, were Learned Master Rollocke, Master
Nicholson, and Master Cooper (whose Works will plead their cause:) The first
of these, upon his Deathbed did expostulate with his dearest Friends, how much
your hard censure of his honest Labors in the Affairs of the Church, had
shortened his days: The last two, after they were preferred to the place of
Bishops, and ever before had painefully labored in the Lords Harvest, were so
detracted by your unjust Calumnies, and profited so little in their sincere
Intentions, that very Grief in the Autumn of their age did consummate their
days: But yet if I should insist upon his Majesty's Clemency toward you, I
should exceed my limited Task. He has spared the Lives of such of you, as
were guilty of High Treason; he has, upon submission, recalled such as were
banished, and either restored them to their own, or better Places. Finally,
he has left nothing undone, that may make his Kingly Wisdom admired, his
Mercy advanced, and you, in case of further Contumacie, incapable of the like
Royal Favor hereafter. I speak not this, to aggrauate your Faults, neither
fawningly to insinuate upon Majesty; but least any of you should surmise that
you have been wronged, that the Laws have been rigorously extended against
you, or that his Majesty's proceedings has been injurious toward you. But as
I am in good hope of you, so my earnest Wishes are, that my friendly counsel
may seize on your future actions. You know, or may know, that hitherto you have
only procured a fruitless Reformation, and in the end (without doubt) you
will be the cause of greater Evils, if by more wholesome advice you obuiate
not the Dangers to which your inconsiderate Zeal has subjected you; the Axe
of Justice threateneth the Root of the fruitless Tree of your disobedience,
and eminent punishment of your scandalous behavior hangs over your heads:
there rests nothing then, but that you lay aside all such deceiuable Opinions
and private Affections, as taints you either with Schism or Disloyalty; that
you say to the Church, You are our Mother, we owe you Honor; to the King, You
are our Sovereign and Gods Vicegerent, we owe you Allegiance. In so doing,
you shall find, that some few ensuing years shall produce more profitable and
plentiful Fruit in Church and Commonwealth, then all the Brawles and shows
of Purity have done these fifty years past. Examine well what I have said,
and my hopes are, that the most Factious amongst you will be reclaymed to the
right way, which is all that I desire, and that the peaceable maintenance of
the State enforces: But if you will paue your hearts with the insensibilitie
of what you ought to do, by seeking the disturbance of the Church, and
unquietness of the State, then judge impartially, and you will easily perceive
what must follow.

It is as clear as the Sun, that such insolency is not longer to be
suffered, That the chief Tenants of your Opinions are either wilfully blinded,
or naturally ignorant; That by maintayning these singular or fond conceptions,
you abandon the Truth, trouble the Peace of the Church, are offensive to the
State, and are liable to the severity of Justice. Remember, that the purity of
substance of our Religion consists in our Faith and Baptism, not in our
Ceremony or Policy, about which you have so long with loss contended. If you
will consider the slownesse to speak, so much commended by Saint James, our
long entertained Controversies would grow together; but more specially, if you
would leave the singular and ouer-weening Opinions of these Times, and renew
the blessed Proceedings of the Apostles and Fathers of the Church: which was,
in the like or greater Cases, not to enter into Assertions and Positions, but
to deliver Council and Advice; we should need no other remedy at all: Si
eadem consulis frater quae affirmas, debetur consulenti reuerentia, cum non
debeatur fides affirmanti. Heathen Pericles, when he intended to speak
publicly, entreated his Gods (not without reason) That no improvident Word
might escape his mouth; for the Lunacie of Wit is better purged, the
Inflammation of the Tongue better cured, and the Venom of the Heart more
exhaled with one Ounce of Good Thought, and a Scruple of Pythagoricum
Silentium, then with all the Turbith, Agaricke, Sarco colla, and Scammonie of
Dioscorides, Rheubarbe of Pontus, Manna of Calabria; yea, then with all the
contentious babbling of Babel. Wherefore my dear Countrymen and Brethren,
since the Accidents are the things that breed the Peril, and not the
Substance; That the Truth is scandalized, the long patience of a merciful and
Religious King abused; and that, in your former obstinacy, your wilfulness
has betrayed your Wits, and in the end will draw on your overthrow, upon your
Enemies Triumphs: it is time you yield your selves conformable to the
Ordinances of the Church, established by Supreme Power, that there were an end
of such uncharitable Censure and vnedifying Doctrine, wherewith the most part
of your Pulpits have been long laden; of such immodest and deformed manner of
Writing, wherewith idle Pamphlets have been daily so stuffed, that matters of
Religion have been handled with irreligious hands in the Style of Stage; all
reverent compassion toward Evils forgotten, and Religion turned into a Comedy
or Satyr. But alas, to lance wounds with a laughing countenance, to intermixe
Scripture and scurrility sometime in one sentence, is a thing far from the
devout reverence of a Christian, and scarce beseeming the regard of a sober
man; Non est mayor confusio quam se^ij and ioci, The Majesty of Religion, and
the contempt of things ridiculous, are things as far distant as may be.

Two special causes of Atheism have I ever observed to be curious;
Controversies, and Profane Scoffing: by the one, appears the Misery of the
Curious; and by the other, the Marks of the Foolish. What progression these
two, joined in one, will make, judge you? As I allow neither the one, nor the
other; so do I not commend such as fight with either of them at their own
Weapon: For I esteem it Wisdom and Religion, that a Fool is to be
answered, but not by becoming more foolish, and like unto him: That the Matter
which is handled, is to be valued, and not the Person; Dum de bonis contendimus
in malis consentimus. If Disgraces to your own Persons, jibbing at your own
Writings, so mightily move you; imagine that in others, which you feel in
your selves: and if you take felicity to hear well, remember how to speak
well. If I were asked of two contentious persons, who were most to be blamed?
I should perhaps remember the Proverb, That the second Blow makes the Fray;
or the saying of an obscure Fellow, Qui replicat multiplicat: But I would
determine the question with alter principium dedit, alter modum abstulit, by
the one we have a beginning, and by the other we shall never have an end. I
know the most part, or all the Bishops and Learned Clergy, neither allow of
such fiery Sermons and scandalous Libels, as have been too commonly vented; or
if any fawning person have mistaken the humors of men in Authority, they have
sacrificed Veneri suem, and have sought to gratify them with that which they
most dislike: As it had been good, that such Births had been choakt at first,
and never seen the Sun; so the next is, That such as hereafter be hatched in
corners, and put abroad, be censured by all of Understanding and Conscience,
as the extrauagant Councels of light Persons: That men be wary how they be
conversant in them, except they will deprive themselves of all sense of
Religion: That as sinister imitation, or other wrong ends, have brought them to
delight in that vain; so the loathsome sight and reproachful effects may move
shame and forbearance.

Lastly, I do exhort you to remove all Blocks that may encounter your
conformity, specially that reasonlesse Reason, That you are tied by Oath to
maintain your former Discipline in all controuerted Differences. You know (if
you would know) that all such Oaths were taken for the maintenance of the true
Religion, in the purity of Substance, and not in the indifferencies of Policy
and Ceremonies, which then, in regard of the time, were out of frame: for
accidental Ceremonies and external matters of Policy are not to be tied to
perpetuity, either in Ecclesiastical or Civil Estate, but may be promoued
or altered at all times from worse to better, according to the difference of
Times, and discretion of wise Governors. Besides, if you disclayme not that
Oath, you belie John Knox; who published by Writing to the Nobility and
Communalty of Scotland, That unlawful Oaths are not to be kept (as indeed
they are not.) If he by wresting that Text, did free subjects from their
Allegiance to their lawful Princes; why may not lawful Princes justly urge it
against you, in challenging your lawful Obedience? Be then no more stumbling
blocks to the weak, nor breakers of bruised Reeds; but Lanternes to the
Blind, and Feet to the Lame. Be careful how you instruct Gods People,
committed to your charge: Detaste truly all Badges of Anarchy, and Separation.
Have ever one eye fixed upon the indifferency of the things, for which you
have so long contended, and another upon Obedience to supreme Powers, that all
incendiarie Fuel of forbidden Zeal removed, Christ's seamelesse Coat be no
more divided. You that so long have furnished Advantage to common Enemies,
single now out of the Sheafe one of Seleucus Arrows, and the weakest Finger
will break it, whilst the whole Bundle fears no stresse. Let the cooling
Waters of Moderation and Reason quench and abate the fire of inordinate Zeal
and Contention.

It was the Imperial Decree of Theodosius, enacted by the Council of S.
Ambrose, That all public severe Sentences should be deferred for thirty
days, Vt ira decocta durior emendari possit sententia. Qualify the heat of
your passions by mature advice, and Gods presence will rather accompany your
Labors in such a gentle calm Gale, then in the Fire-flashing Thunder of
Reuealings, or passionate Debates. Separate Self-love, Self-will, and
Uncharitableness, and you will easily be reconciled: Prima sanitatis pars est
velle sanari. Snarle not like Curres, at those that gently stroke you on the
back, neither eat your own hearts with palefac't Envy, the Impostume of the
Soul. Remember what Saint Augustine says of such unbrotherly iarres, Quid
facit in cord Christiano Luporum feritas aut canum rabies, qualia solet
eructare turgens and indigesta discordia. Imitate no more either Molossean, or
Melitean Dogs, in barking or biting, but reduce all dis-tuned Strings of
Discord to the sweet concent of Christian Harmony. Julius Caesar gloryed in
nothing more, then in gratifying his Friends, and pardoning his Enemies: and
shall Christians be so far from parallelling so rare a President in a Pagan,
that they shall contentiously calumniate their Leaders or Brethren? Far be it
from them: The Mystical Body of Christ is all fair, and this Beauty consists
in the variety of Colors, and concinne disposition of Parts; no Member must
mutter against the Head or Fellow, or affect a Hotch-potch Paritie, least they
martyr or mar Christ's Body, which is fitly knit together in every Joint, that
ministers to another.

O then, my Brethren, season your Actions, Sermons, Papers, and Discourse, with
the Salt of Wisdom, in lieu of unbrotherly Practices, reasonlesse Railing,
unmannerly Writing, and bitter Language: the first is begotten of Peace,
entertaineth Peace, nourishes Virtue, instructs Error, and makes the Life
sauorie; but the second are the Gall of Wit, the Bloud-suckers of Charity, and
the Seminaries of all Evils: Habete in vobis Sal and pacem habebitis inter vos;
When Wisdom is your Guide, you shall read your own Infirmities in other
men's Falls; metamorphose the Fury of Ajax, into the Wit of Ulysses; exchange
Rebellious Mutinies into Filial Obedience: and then shall your advised
Experience and wary Circumspection arm you against all Assaults and Accidents;
that as we are the Sons of one spiritual Father and Mother, God and the
Church; Servants of one Master, our Sovereign here upon Earth, and hope to be
co-heires hereafter in Heaven: so we may be clothed with one Livery of
Unanimity, Peace, and Love; That like the Stars of Heaven, every one in his
own station and order may fight Gods Battles, in defense of our sacred Faith,
and observance of our Allegiance to God and his Vicegerents; That in case of
cessation of Foraine Christian Embrewments in others Blood (which God grant)
we, and all that will fight under Christ's Banner, may lay hold upon the happy
occasion of Mohammedan Scissure. And in this, and what I have written, I pray
unto the Lord of Life to second my good Wishes, and increase both in you and me
that Love, without which, all that we do, is unprofitable. Amen.

FINIS.

