THE SECOND PART OF PHILOMYTHIE, OR PHILOMYTHOLOGIE.

CONTAINING certain Tales OF True Liberty. False Friendship. Power United.
Faction and Ambition.


By THOMAS SCOT Gent.

Printed at London, for Francis Constable. 1616.

MONARCHIA.
Dedicated to all the worthy professors of the Law, who make not
priuate-wealth, but the good and peace of the Commonwealth the end of their
studies and practice.

Though you (perhaps) be Clyentlesse and few,
Friendlesse and poor, yet it is to you Isue
For kind acceptance. You alone are they
Who by example guide us in our way.
You look not on the fee, but on the cause,
And follow truth, as truth does lead the Laws.
The rest, with vice, and wealths ill-gotten load,
Pass on to death, in glories beaten road.
The Inhabitants of the I Will of Wight did bost,
No vermin used to harbor in their coast. Cambden de Insula vectis. This title
is given them by our worthy L. chief Justice of Eng.

For they no hooded Monks, nor Foxes had,
Nor Law Retriuers who make fools run mad.
With their strife-stirring tongues; but lived as free,
From these, as by them others combred be.
And though our whole land cannot boast so far,
That we from all such vermin quitted are:
Yet happy is our I Will, that is hemd about
With water-walles, to keep our enemies out;
Whilst we (as Adam did) in Eden dwell,
And scarce of famine in an age hear tell.
Where hills are clad with woods, and vales with corn,
Whose laden ears do listen to be shorn.
Where shepherds neither Lion doubt, nor Bear,
Nor ravening Wolf which sheep and shepherd tear;
But each in safety dwell, and silly sheep
From all but Man, do one the other keep.
O happy are we if we know our good,
And if our state be rightly understood:
To live thus free under so blessed a King,
Just Magistrates and Cleargy-men, that sing,
The songs of Syon in the holy tongue
Converting old men, and informing young.
No spirit-tyrant Pope, state-tyrant Turk,
Can here their bloody ends and proiects work;
Eut each in safety may his own possess,
More free then Kings, because our cares belesse.
But most unhappy are those neighbor lands,
Where Peace and Plenty, as two strangers stands;
Where bloody war, and bloodlesse famine ride
Upon the ruined top of thanklesse Pride:
Where Law destroies, Divinity deceiues,
And where the crown the care of kingdom leaves.
Where men eat men, as beast deuourd by beast,
The strong the weaker kill, the great the least.
Where tyranny in triumph mounted hie,
Makes truth and innocence in dungeons lie.
This tale the difference shows, that we may know
How much to God for our good king we owe.
An aged Heart, upon mount Carmel bred,
Having as Admiral the Navy led
From Syria through the Seas, to Cyprus shore,
Where all the I Will with green is covered over.
Hapt by a Park to travail, where he spide
A younger sad Heart, standing close beside
Th'imprisoning pale, and v^ng all his skill
To free himself from thence, to larger ill.
Good brother (quoth the stranger) let me know,
What heavy thoughts they are that vex you so.
Why do you sadly so your self bemone?
Why having friends within come you alone
To feed sad melancholy, and invent
To do a rash act, which you will soon repent?
The younger Dear made answer, Can ye muse
Why I am sad, and wherefore I do use
All means to free my self, from being thus
A slave to him that is foe to all of us?
Know brother, I endure more sorrows here,
In one half day, then you in one whole year.
For you have liberty to come and go,
Though forrester and woodman both say no.
But I by cruel man, imprisond keep,
Within this wooden walls, where none but sheep
Hares, Conyes, Cowes, and other of my kin
Are my associates, simple souls within.
I have no beast of worth, of birth, or wit,
With whom I may converse; but feign to fit
My lofty spirit to the lowly strain,
Of base companions, sluggish, fearful, vain.
No Wolves or dogs come here, whereby decaies
The exercise of valor and the praise.
The traps for vermin, are so thick beset,
That oftentimes they some of us do get.
The watchful keeper, every night and morn,
Commands me rise, and rest with his shrill horn,
He with his Lymehound rounds the pale about,
For fear least we be stolen or broken out.
He feeds us cheerfully, and does provide
Sufficient meat that is fit for every tide;
But being fat, he chooses which he likes,
And through our sides, deaths forked arrow strikes.
Thus all he does, is his own turn to serve,
And for his own life does our lives preserve.
Then gentle brother help to free me hence,
And my swift thanks shall yield you recompense.
Stay brother mad-brain stay, quoth Lightfoot the^
If you were out, you would wish you in again.
I was in Syria borne, and every year
A dangerous voyage make, for what you here
Enjoy with proud contempt. We cannot find
"Content on earth, without a thankful mind.
You slight your ease and plenty; we, alas!
With toil seek that which you with scorn let pass.
Our meat is grutchd, we like to robbers watched,
So what we feed on, here and there is snatched.
The pale you call your prison rather may,
Be tearmd your Castle, Garden, Closet, Stay,
To keep out others from those joys of yours,
Or to preserve you from these woes of ours.
Whilst we without by Lions, Leopards, Bears,
Wolves, Eagles, Serpents, and a thousand fears,
Are howrely vexed, beset, besieged so,
That as our shadows, death does next us go.
Yet none our deaths revenge, nor craves account,
How our neglected blood is lauisht out.
For even that Man (which is your guard) to us
Proclaims himself a foe, most dangerous.
He hunts for our destruction cheeres the hound,
Rides, runs, whoopes, hollowes, and at every sound,
Rings our shrill deaths bell with so fearful blast,
As charms our joints to hear, whilst hounds make have
To finish our desired death, and glut
With our sweet flesh, each vermins maw and gut.
Thus do we die abroad, for every man
Claims right in us, and labors all they can,
Our weary feet in toils, nets, snares t'inclose,
When you have friends, to guard you from your foes
If therefore you have told me truth that there
You do no creature but your keeper fear;
O bring me to this prison, show me how
I may obtain a blessed life with you.
Direct me to a leap, i will soon leap in.
"It Is happiness, unhappy to have been.
With that he mounts the pale, adue quoth he,
Vain, wide, wild world; who serves the law is free.
Epimythium.
There has been long disputation to find out the true freedom. The world
holds opinion that Libertines who do what they list, and lust whatsoever is
unlawful are only free men. Caine was founder of this brotherhood. He might
do what he list, he was a vagabond exempt from laws, he had a mark of
privilege set upon him to keep him from punishment here. Our Jesuits and
Kingkillers being exempt from the temporal sword are free of this company. But
the child of God whose affections are mortified, who obeis law for conscience
sake, who is a law unto himself, is the only freeman; for to him the
Magistrate bears the sword in vain. He would be honest without law, and will be
honest if the law should forbid him. Yet would he not resist, but submit
himself to power. He is free of that company whereof S. Paul professes
himself one when he says, I I have learned in all estates to be contented. How
much more happy are they who live under the protection of a good king, and
wholesome laws, then these are who living here like outlawes go without
contradiction out of momentany pleasure and liberty into eternal slavery and
punishment.

The Cony-burrow.
Dedicated to the lovers of worth, and friends of virtue, who follow truth with
a single heart, and speak it with a single tongue.

Be innocent, but circumspect withal,
The Turtles mate may be the Turtles stall.
Be wise yet trust not wit. The traps we make
For others, first do our false fingers take.
What we delight to use, take pride to wear,
Takes us; as Absalon hanged with his hair.
Then walk upright, to neither hand incline,
There Is naught frees innocence, but grace divine.
THe Polcat, Ferret, Lobstar,
Weasel, made
A secret match, the Cony to invade:
Which no way they could compass,
whilst he kept
Himself abroad, when as he fed or slept.
At last the Polcat to the Cony went,
With this smooth speech. Good cosen my intent
Has been long since t'acquaint you with our kin,
And tell ye how our cousenage came in.
Your Grandame was my careful fostermother,
To your kind sire, I was a fosterbrother;
My education, nurture, and my food,
I from my youth received from your sweet brood.
In recompense whereof, my thankful mind,
A fit requital long desired to find.
The time is come, for I have lately found,
A secret plot, wherein the cunning hound
The close dissembling Tumbler, Lurcher swift,
With Raynard that knows many a subtle shift.
The Eagle and the Goshauke, have agreed,
Their stomach with your dainty flesh to feed.
First they intend the hound shall hunt ye out,
And by your footing heat ye once about.
Then shall that hypocrite, the Tumbler try,
To cheer you of your life, with his false eye.
But if he fail, the Lurcher with his speed,
Will snatch ye up (they hope) and do the deed.
If not the Eagle, Fox, and Goshauke, swear,
To eat no meat, till on your lims they tear.
The harmless Cony, at this dire report,
Ready to sound, besought in humble sort
The wary Polcat him t'instruct and teach
A way, how he might escape his foes long reach.
Faith (quoth the Polcat) you perhaps might hide,
Your self among thick bushes vnespide,
But that the Hounds and Lurcher both are there,
Whose sents will quickly find ye out, I fear.
Again upon the rocks, you might remain,
But that the Eagle, Fox, and Goshauke saine
Thei'l watch ye there; so that no other way
Remains to escape with life, but night and day
To scrape and grate with your forefeet, a den,
Within the earth, where safe from beasts and men.
And foul, and every bloody foe you shall,
Your life securely lead in spite of all.
The simple Cony doubting no deceit,
Thought treason had not council for a bait.
And therefore thanks his foe, and (glad at heart)
To dig his own grave uses all his art.
A sandy place he seeks, and finding one,
Free from all clay, or flint, or other stone,
He with his forefeet grates, and makes a burrow,
As deep, as if he meant to travail through,
The body of the earth, and meet the Sun,
When it unto the Antipodes does run.
Which having finished, he prepares a feast,
And there the Polcat is the chiefest guest.
The Lobster, Ferret, Weasel too must go,
To joy him in his house, they love him so;
And their great friend, the siluer-suited Snake,
Must needs along with them, and merry make.
He welcomes them, and does before them set,
What iunckets he with purse or pains could get.
The Lions Court has not a dainty dish,
But he prouides it, even beyond their wish.
"Yet they that long for blood, till blood be shed,
"Cannot be satisfied, though fully fed.
Ingratitude! thou monster of the mind,
Art thou not only proper to mankind?
Is there a beast that can forget his friend,
And for his own ends, work his fellows end?
Is there a beast whose lust prouokes him kill
The beast that did him good, nere wished him ill?
Is there a beast who under kindness can
Dissemble hate? O then thrice happy man!
Thou art not only he that kilst thy brother,
Some beasts there are that murder one another.
Some fowls, some fishes, Serpents some there are
Who pray upon their kind in open war.
And some that under friendship falsely faind,
With fellows murder have their natures staind.
Nay there is one who can so cover evil,
That man may judge him Angel, find him devil.
He first with sweetmeats poysond Adams seed,
Since when of sweet meats wisest men take heed.
So need not these bold guests, they eat and drink
And then rise up to play; but never think
Ought fadgeth right, till they have brought to pass
The purposde plot for which this meeting was.
Therefore (dissemblingly) the Polcat gins,
To lick and catch the Cony, and so wins
Hold underneath his throat, which having fast,
The tragedy begins, the sport is past.
For all assault him then on every part,
Some at his sides, some at his head and heart.
Some at his belly, but the poisonous Snake,
Does at his tail a deadly issue make.
The helpless Cony sues, entreats, and strives,
But he must die had he ten thousand lives.
Each foe his greedy gorge with blood does glut
And with his fweet flesh cram each hollow gut.
"But blood that is sweet in taste, is not so sound,
"To feed upon, as milk that is easier found.
The Snake with poisonous touch had venom spread.
Through all the swelling veins, from tail to head.
And they had sucked the black infection in;
A fitting vengeance for their crying sin.
Straight they their stomachs find not well at ease,
And something feel, that does their minds displease.
The Weasel first suspects the Snake, for he
Can never with a Serpent well agree;
Says, they are poisond all by one base slave,
Whose company the Ferret needs would have.
The Snake replies, he did no more but what
He was appointed to perform by plot.
And if they foolishly had eat their last,
He could not mend with sorrow what was past.
They find it true, but find it now too late,
Each rauing dies, and yields constraind by fate.
Yet ere they die, all do their farewell take,
By shaking teeth together on the Snake.
Who deadly wounded, crawles but faintly thence,
Confounded with the guilt of his offense.
And heeding not his way, by good mishap,
Became a prisoner to the warriners trap.
This feast was ended thus, death took away,
And where they did not well we mend it may.
Epimythium.
Some are of opinion that wisdom consists in the ability to give good
counsel. But I think the knowledge how to take good counsel, and how to
discern the differencs of advise, is the principal part of wisdom. That
Frog in AEsope which in a great drought spying water in a deep pit advised his
fellow to leap down, that they might be satisfied and live there, gave good
counsel and seemed to be a pattern of the first wisdom spoken of. But the
other Frog that refused his advise, and diued deeper then the present time,
then the bottom of the pit with this question; But if the water fail us
there, how shall we then get out or how shall we live there? was a figure of
the second wisdom, and teaches us that it is harder to take good counsel
then to give it. Let us therefore beware in this point, and learn to look a
little beyond that good which is first and most apparent in every project, The
second and third good is that which we must rest on: for truth is often most
remote and nearest the bottom, all that swims uppermost is the froth and false
good and fraud.

The House of Fame.
Dedicated to all the noble attendants of Royalty in the Camp of Virtue, who
fight for the honor of the Church and Commonwealth.

Till now of late we feared that loud report,
Of Cressy field, Poicters, and Agincourt,
Fought by our Kings and Princes heretofore,
Had not been true, or should be told no more.
We wondered if those Nobles ever were
Whom fame for arms and bounty did prefer.
We doubted all our Countries had forgot,
The deed of Audely or beleeud it not.
We thought our Nation was of worth bereft,
When bows and arrows and brown bills were left.
But see, occasion now has turned our eyes,
To inward wars where greater wonders rise.
To see affection conquered, lust chastisd'e,
Pride humbled, Murder slain, all vice despisd'e.
And all old virtues freshly now reneude,
By fair examples as the Sun ere vewd.
In which brave war of wonders (passing far
All other conflicts that compounded are
Of love and hate) each Lord who lends a hand
To fight against vice for virtue, does this land
More honor then his Ancestors before
In conquering France, and shall be famd for it more.
Some for their Prudence who found out and led,
Others for zeal through whom the enemy fled.
Others for Art, whose skill the squadrons placed
Others for Justice who the enemy chased.
And some for Constancy, who held it out.
And still unwearied, not un wounded fought.
But none more fame attaind then mercies squire,
Who begd to give, all saving in desire.
He Audely-like taught Courtiers how to crave
What they might give away, and giving save,
Save free from fear of forfeiture or loss,
Or the re-begging or the next years cross.
Or enuies eyesore, or the Commons hate,
Or poores complaint, or gre uance of the state.
To him and to the rest, this tale is sent,
How soever taken with a good intent.
FAme that in Homers time a vagrant was,
Without a house and home, did after pass
In stately structures all the mixed race
Of Semdeities, and every place
Built her a Court, assisted by the Rages
Of sundry Poets in succeeding ages.
For every one did something ad, to frame
More space and room for their friends narrow fame.
Which as they purchased, still to her they gave
And that is the cause, themselves so little have.
This Fame has now her house glazde al with eyes,
The rafts, beams, balkes, nerves, sinews, arteries;
The doors wide open, ears; hanged round about
With nimble tongues, and couerd so without.
All things are seen and heard the wide world ore
Which touch that place, and farthest off the more.
The House of Fame built up four stories hie,
Stands in an open plain, in which does lie
Four sister twins, True fame, and good the first,
And eldest are; false and bad fame the worst.
And youngest pair, yet swiftest are in flight
And though last borne, yet often come first to light.
These last dwell in two darker rooms below,
Among the thick Crowdes where all errors grow.
There keep they Court, where Scandals, Libels, lies,
Rumors, Reports, Suspicions, calumnies,
Are favorites and Governors of State,
Whose practice it is true worth to ruinate.
False fame lives lowest, and true Fame above,
Bad Fame next false, good fame next, true does move:
Yet good fame sometime does with false fame stay,
And bad fame sometime does with true fame play.
But false and true (opposd) will never meet,
Nor bad and good fame, one the other greet.
It so fell out (as often strange things befall)
A gallant Knight, arrived at that fair Hall,
Attended on with such a noble sort,
Of warlike squires, as filled this spacious Court.
Who curiously enquiring o^ the rout,
Whose Court it was, could no ways find it out.
For contradictions crossed each other so,
As truth from falsehood he could no ways know.
Bad fame did call it hers, and said, she was
A guide to such as unto glory pass.
False Fame did call it hers; he saw they lide,
For above their heads, two brighter Queens he spide.
True fame spoke to him then, and let him know,
That she and good fame did the building owe,
Being eldest borne, to Titan and the Earth,
Before the Giants war: when the others birth
Long since was subject to their parents sin,
And heavens curse which now they lived in.
For as those Giants against the Gods did war,
So these to truth professed enemies are;
Had by strong hand, and fraud, vsurpd her state,
And to express to virtue utmost hate,
Had bard all passage to their houses hie,
That mortal men might in oblivion die
Or have their memories blasted, glories killed
By eating time, with lies and slanders filled.
She wished him then if he his good desired
To have repeated, or his spirit aspired
To worthy honor as old knights had wont,
(Whose swords not rust, but too much use did blunt)
That he would use some means to set them free,
Whereby his blessed name might eternizd be.
Good Fame then told him, that the only way,
How he this enterprise accomplish may,
Was by the help of mercy, prudence, art,
Justice and zeal, and Constancy of heart.
All their known friends to summon up in arms,
To force the place, and to disperse those swarms
Of idle vagabonds; who kept below
And hated good Fame, would not true fame know.
Then (since the stayres of fame were broken down,
And doors stopped up to glory and renown)
She wild him make an engine wherewithal,
He might her lodging and her sisters scale.
And so himself in spite of peril, raise
Above the reach of envy, or dispraise.
The Knight (in spirit ravished with delight
To hear their speech, to see their goodly sight)
Mounts his fierce Coursers back, with which at hand
His Squires attend upon his strict command.
Wills every one of them to take a dame,
Such as the Ladies of the house did name,
Who there attended that they might direct
This high attempt, with order and respect.
The Squires with willing minds the knight obaide,
And each behind them took a lovely maid.
Prudence directs her Squires to lead the way,
(Who follows her direction cannot stray.)
At length they come unto a fruitful wood,
Wherein a world of upright timber stood;
Tall Cedars, Cypres, Pine and royal Oaks,
With country Elmes, and Ash for plow and yokes.
The learned Laurel, and the weeping Mirrh,
The smarting Birch, and the sweet smelling Firr
Grew there in order, and all trees beside,
Wherein the thrifty Woodreeue takes pride.
The knight suruaies all this, yet finds not one
Fit to be feld; till Prudence lights upon
A proud straight Aspe, whose waueing top did lean
On a slight Poplar, with some shrubs between.
The cursed Eldar, and the fatal Yewe,
With Witch, and Nightshade in their shadows grew;
Whose saples tops, with mildewes often stood,
And grew self-seare, and ouertopt the wood.
The Raven and Shreikeowle there did build their neasts,
And at their roots did harbor harmefull beasts.
Which Prudence saw, but mercy would not see,
Till she perceived how every other ttee
Drooped underneath the height of these alone,
And could not thrive, or grow till these were gone.
She therefore (joined with Constancy and Zeal)
Besought sharp Justice, who does euenly deal
Her wary blows, to fell all these with speed;
Who soon consents, and soon performs the deed.
At every stroke she fetched, the trees did groan,
The rest did echo laughter to their moan.
And now they lie along, their branches topt,
Their bark pild off, their trunks asunder chopped.
Then Art with rule and line, these vselesse payer
Frames (engine-like) a straight clowd climing stayer
To mount Fames house; this ^uery Squire does rear
And bravely on their backs do thither bear.
But Mercy seeing all the other meant
To burn the Chips, to save them she is bent.
And, with her Squire, the knight prays, let them lie,
For he shall gain, and glory get thereby.
Since chips which cut from Aspe and Poplar be,
Do soon take root, each grows a goodly tree.
The knight consents, and fenceth round the spring.
Whose forward growth does hope of profit bring.
And now, together to the house of Fame
With speed they pass, where first the falsest Dame
Salutes them with a lie, and says she hears
Her Sisters are together by the ears,
And have destroyde each other; this she had
From her Twin-sister, who tells rumors bad.!
They slight her leasings, and with speed assay
To raise the lather, where bold Zeal makes way,
But false Fame and her Sister, lay about
To hinder her, with all their rascal route.
Slander, foole-hardines, and heartles fear,
With foolish Pity, and false Love was there,
Damnde Infidelity, and secret Hate,
And treason too, that close dissembling mate.
Who all with open mouth, and open lies,
All ways to stop this honored work devise.
They rail, and fight, entreat, and curse and ban.
The Knight proceeds, in scorn of what they can.
And mounts the ladder, with his sword in hand,
Which soon disparkles, such as dare withstand.
Zeal hales him up, and Prudence guides him right,
True Constancy encourages the fight,
Mercy saues all the innocent, who swarm
For company, not with intent of harm;
Art orders every act, the engine stays
And helps the Knight step after step, to praise
The lusty squires below, with sword and lance,
Withstand bad fame, whilst Justice does advance
Her heavy hatchet, and strikes off the head
Of both the leaders, and there leaves them dead.
Which when their troops discover, they forsake
Th'vsurped fortress, and themselves betake
To heady flight, into a marsh near hand,
Where many whispering reeds and Osiars stand.
There they like out-lawe, do themselves enclose,
In wilful banishment, with all the foes
Of this good knight, whose valor undertook
This high attempt, that Fame might rightly look
On all deseruers, and that man might find,
Like freedom for his tongue, as for his mind.
That virtue might be crowned by true fame,
And honest meaning live with honored name.
Which promise gladly both the sisters swore,
In solemn form; and now as heretofore
The freedom of their tongues they both possess;
And worth is known from base unworthiness.
The knight they humbly thank, and him they crown
The Sovereign of glory and renown.
Which style, Fames trumpetters the four winds blow
Through the earths four quarters, that the world may know
The Extent of virtuous actions, how no power
Can stop their passage, nor lanke Time devour
Their sweet remembrance; which shall live as long
As nature has an ear, or eye, or tongue.
To every Squire then they this favor give,
That after death their Fames shall ever live;
For still those Ladies, whose imploiment they
So well advanced, shall duly night and day
Repeat their labors, and prefer them far
Beyond Alcides works, as peace does war
Surpass in glory, or those works we do,
When others wills, and ours we conquer too.
Now'tis proclaimd that if we tell no lies,
We may with boldness speak and fear no spies.
That what this age has done, this age may hear,
As well repeated now as the next year.
That all our words our selves shall first expound,
And that no forced construction shall confound
Our honest meaning, but be it ill or well,
We may with freedom our opinions tell.
Since no man dares to do the thing which he.
Would not have all the world both hear and see.
These orders ratified, they fall to sport,
And fill with maskes and reuells all the Court.
The seqell refer to Fames relation,
Whose golden trumpe sounds us a blessed nation.
Satellitium.
Dedicated to all that stand Sentinel, that watch and ward in defense of this
kingdom, especially to the strength and guard of the State.

Be of one mind; Religion ties a knot,
Which none undoes, by practice or by plot.
But if in that we differ, be our breed
Within one house, or womb, of all one seed,
"It Is seuerd soon by hate, respect, or gold,
Which Law can never soulder, art make hold.
"Faith only ioynes, what nothing sunder can.
"Beasts love for benefits, for virtue Man.
WHo guarded round about with Parthian bows,
Or Spanish pikes; or hedged and dikt with rows
Of sturdie Ianisaries, or the shot
Of hardy Swizzars, or the valiant Scot.
And after these with walls of steel and brass,
Hemd in so close that scarce the air may pass
Betwixt the cliffes, is not so free from doubt,
As is that King whom love does guard about.
Whom subjects love does guard, because that he
Guards them from all oppression, and makes free
His noble favorers to desert and worth,
Spreading his radiant virtues frankly forth,
That both his own may find, and neighbors know,
What glorious fruit does from religion grow.
How sweet an odor Justice sends to heaven,
How rare example is to Princes given.
By virtuous deeds, to stop the mouths of those,
Who vnreform'd are reformations foes.
Such one sleeps safe within the arms of love,
Divine regard does all his subjects move
To due obedience; and with sacred awe
Binds conscience, with a stronger bond then law.
Such heaven informs, whilst hell does undermine,
And spite of darkest plots with grace divine
Does hedge about, that naked in the arms
Of enemies he is preserved from harms.
They sleep securely, feed on wholesome cates,
Angels their beds make, cooks their delicates
Gives Antidotes against poisons, does defend
Against damned witches, and their God the fiend,
No Jesuits at their elbowes can do hurt,
Nor troops of Papists that their courts ingirt.
For God does them in his blessed arms enclose,
Safe, though their chiefest favorites were foes.
O happy then good Kings proceed, Psalm. 45.
ride on,
Grow up in glory, as you have begun.
Ride on for truths sake, look on either band,
How you are guarded with a heavenly hand
Of blessed spirits, who shall lead you still
In holy paths, and guide your steps from ill.
These being with you, Psalm. 91.
you shall boldly tread
Upon the Lion, and the Dragons head,
And trample danger underneath your feet,
As men tread stones, or dirt within the street,
Which only spraids them; your heauen-garded state
Is safer far, then that of Mithridate,
The King of Pontus, unto whom befell,
What strange adventure in this tale I tell.
This King perceiving well there was no band,
Of duty, love, or nature, AElianus.
could withstand
The strong inticement of corrupting gold,
Or baser lust, or humor ouerbold,
Or fond ambition (which makes empty slaves
Swim bladder borne upon the floting waves
Of false Opinion, with the arm of pride,
Of borrowed power, and ignorance beside)
But that these would pervert the faith they had,
And cause them after farther hopes run mad;
Did to prevent all this, a guard provide
Of faithful beasts, whose strength had often been tried.
A Bull, a Horse, a Hare, the Captains were,
Of this strong guard, whose force did nothing fear
But falsehood, and Ingratitude, and Treason,
From which they were as free, as man from reason
Why knowing more then beasts, he should not hate
As they do, to be treacherous, and ingrate.
These three together being put to feed,
And sport themselves till there were farther need
Of their known faith, together long did dwell
In peace and love, till on a time it fell
That they with rest and ease full fed and fat,
Had time to play, to dally, and to chat.
Then did the wanton Heart propound a course,
Betwixt himself and the courageous Horse.
The warlike Horse did dare the horned Bull
To make one in the race, who straight way full
Of burning, choler, and adusted blood,
Bad cowards run, he for no footman stood.
It Was meet for them that durst not stand it out,
To use their heels, his heart was too too stout.
The angry Heart replies, there is none of you,
But may to me as to your better bow,
I swifter then the Horse, my feet can use,
And for my head, the Bull i will not refuse
To combat with, my courage I am sure
Is like my strength as able to endure,
And do, as either of you dare or can,
And more I am esteemd by royal man.
Those Serpents which you run from, I seek forth,
And tear them with my teeth as nothing worth.
And as my life to man is sweet and pleasing,
So is my death, each part some sorrow easing.
My horns all mortal poison can expel,
My marrow makes stiff ioynted misers well.
My fat yields strength and sweetness; that fierce lad
Achilles, never otherspoonemeat had.
Which made him such a Captain, every part
Is physical and comfort the heart.
Yea even my excrements the dropsy cures,
My tears, like precious lewels, man allures.
To seek them up, wheres'euer they be shed.
My skin great Captains wear when I am dead;
And boast that they have such a coat of proof,
Which wounds withstands, whence venom stands aloof.
Then why (O baser creatures) dare you brag
And match your selves with the long living Stag?
My life is long, cause I with cost am wrought,
But nature slights your lives, as good for naught.
The crested Horse, with fiery eyes did show,
What inward rage did in his hot blood flow
To hear this bold speech uttered, and with head
Tossed in the air his hardened hoofes does tread
The sc ornd earth with contempt, then thus breaks out;
O thou the fearefullest of all the rout
Of hunted beasts, how haps it that you dare
With me your master and your Lord compare?
Forget ye my pre-eminence? the love
Man bears me? how one spirit seems to move
Me and my rider? that we start and run,
Stop, turn, trot, amble, as we were but one?
Have you at any time been called to war,
Where none but Captains and great Soldiers are?
Trusted to hear their Councels? on your back
Borne the Commander of that royal pack?
I have done this and more, borne him about
Through worlds of danger, and then bornehim out.
He trusts me when his legs he dare not trust,
And when his hands fail then perform I must.
Nay when he fails himself in every part,
I add another life, another heart.
In war I thus befriend him, in his need,
And so in peace, I help his wants to feed.
I till his land that else would barren be,
Bear all his carriage, and am sildome free
From sum imploiment, but must near him stand
As being fit, and apt for his command.
If he to visit friends abroad does fare,
I must along with him, true friends we are.
If he intends to hunt such beasts as you,
For sport, or hate, or need, he lets me know
The time, the place, the end, and we agree,
I see the sport, and hunt as well as he.
How often have I seen some fearful Heart,
Perhaps your sire, at my dread presence start.
Fly hence with utmost speed, and never slack
His willing pace, when I upon my back
Bearing my noble master have at length
O'retane the lubber, having lost bis strength?
Whilst I still forming courage, breathing sprite,
Have sought another conquest long ere night;
And after that a third, unwearied yet,
Yet you your self as Parallel will set
To match and ouermatch my worth, my force;
As if weak Stags might brave the peerlesse Horse.
For physical receipts i will easily yield,
Alive I profit man, you being killed.
This makes him seek your death, my live to save,
Yet being dead my parts their virtues have.
Which I refer to others to relate,
As scorning Hog-like to do good so late.
This only I conclude, If man should choose
To save but one, he would both of you refuse.
The armed Bull sweld, puffed and roard alowd,
To hear the Heart so bold, the Horse so proud.
And all the while they spoke, he tossed about
With horns and hoofes the dust; then bellowed out
This bolder brave; What ignorance is this,
That causes both of you, so much amiss
To boast yourfalse worths, and neglect the true,
Which rests in me, belongs to none of you?
The Wolf, the Greyhound, and each questing cur,
Makes thee poor trembling Heart keep such a stir,
To shift thy layer, as if thy life were lost,
With every faint blast, that the leaves down tossed.
And this courageous Horse, that makes a quoile,
Of wounds in war, and tilling of the soil,
With many other uses fit for man.
(As they that least can do, best cavil can)
Let this his answer be, the spur and bit
Shows man trusts nor his courage, nor his wit.
For if he tire or faint, his spur prouokes,
And pricks him forward, with continual strokes.
And if with headstrong heat, he madly rides,
The bridle curbes him, and his folly guides.
"All voluntary acts the actors praise,
"Not such as others by constraint do raise.
"Out of our natures, whilst we easily are
"Made instruments either of peace, or war.
Else might our horned Herds, the rescue boast
Of Hannibal, Plutar. in vita Han.
and his distressed host,
When he with lights and torches tide to us,
Escapt the trap, of lingering Fabius.
But truth is far from such ostents, Cunctando restituit r(...). Enni^^
those deeds
We call our own, which from our choice proceeds.
The yoke we bear, and wherewithal we till
The earth for man, is by constraint, not will.
What comfort from our flesh, or from our Cowes,
By calves, or milk, or Cheese or Butter flows,
Or physical receipts, as they are more,
And vsefuller, then what you both before
Have mentioned, so freely I confess
Man has in them the glory more or less.
His wit and industry, in them is seen,
And the Authors goodness from whom first we been,
War is the good you glory in, which springs
From man's ambitious ignorance, and brings
Wants, woe, and death, with many ills beside,
To scourge us all, through our great masters pride.
Then at the best, you are but slaves to such,
As feeding you, food to their like do grutch.
And through your force, their own reuengements take,
Whilst you to stout men, cowards equal make.
For what from you they borrow, they must grant
They fear their foes enjoy, whilst they do want.
Thus therefore all the nobler nations use
To fight on foot, whilst coward^ rather choose
To share with beasts in glory, and to get
Themselves a name, through your fool hardy heat.
So you on them, and they on you depend,
Such service judgment never did commend.
And thus in sportiue war, and warlike sport,
You do your rider from himself transport.
Whilst you not manlike grow, but beastlike he
Resembles you, in all these sports we see.
Yea often to mischance you do betray
Your heedlesse rider, and in midst of play
Precipitate his soddaine fortune so,
That who has you afriend, shall need no foe;
But may himself, a happy man proclaim,
If by your means he scapes without a maime.
But now if either of you, think you can,
Out of your own worths, prove more fit for man,
And better able to defend, and guard,
Him whom we serve, from whom we have reward,
Then I can with my horns, and harnast hide,
Proceed to trial, I defy your pride;
And with bold challenge summon you to fight,
A triple combat, to decide the right.
They both with eager appetite accept
These wished conditions, and by this have stepped
Far from each other; all prepared do stand
At full carere, to join this trebble band.
The field triangle wise they euenly cast,
And each with rage expects, that dreadful blast,
Which warnes them charge. Each roreth out his wrath,
Nor other need of drums or trumpets has.
The Heart does bray, the bounding Steed does neight
The Bull does bellow, deep, and loud and high.
The earth does tremble, and the air does shun,
This dreadful thunder; as when laden gun
Spits forth its load, in scorn to be restraind,
The air gives way unto the bullets chaind,
As dreading to resist so mighty force,
Thus meet the valiant Bull, the Heart and Horse.
The Heart and Horse first touch tha'ppointed place
Being more swift, and apter for the race.
And let each other, with much danger feel
The force of horned head, and armed heel.
But ere a second bout they can perform,
In comes the boystrous Bull, like winters storm,
And seuers them with such a violent push,
That they amazde, turn giddy with the rush.
But (nimble both and active) they repay
The sturdie Bull, with all the speed they may.
The Heart with his broadhornes, does make him reele
But the kind Horse, vpholds him with his heel.
The Bull thanks neither, for the one did pearce
His hollow flank, the other much more fearce,
Did break a rib, and bruise his shoulder blade,
And taught him with less choler to invade.
Yet th'ods is soon recouer'd with his horn,
Which has the belly of the Courser torn.
And rent one weaker beam, from branched Heart,
As trees by thunder riuen, or cloven athwart.
The subtle Heart, then shuns those ruder blows,
And tho'ds of handistrokes too dearly knows.
The Horse taught by his wounds, does keep aloof,
And stands upon defense, with hardened hoof.
The Bull assaults them both with watchful eye,
And seeks how he advantages may spy.
The Horse and Heart upon their guard do stand,
In doubt and jealousy, on either hand.
The Bull assaults the Heart, but he gives way,
And slips his fury with what slight he may.
Yet turns not head, as fearful cowards will,
But wefes aside, to tire his foe with skill.
The Bull then strikes the Horse a deadly cuff,
But he requites him with a counterbuff.
The Heart strikes in betwixt, the Bull turns rownd,
The Horse leaps right up, does coruet, and bownd;
So at one instant, fatally they meet;
The Bull his doath meets from the Horses feet,
The Heart thaduantage takes, the Horse alost
Strikes his one horn into his belly soft,
Which there hangs fast; the Horse does with his fall.
Breaks the Hearts neck, this is the end of all
None has the conquest, all of them are slain.
Their deaths not doubted, long they there remain,
Till that the King their Master, having need
Of their attendance, goes his guard to feed,
For none might tend them else, least they acquainted
With others bribes, by treason should be tainted.
So enters he the place, and there he spies
What does affright him, all his comfort lies
Dead at his feet, then sadly going near
Their carrion corpse, he does a murmur hear,
As armed soldiers in a City sound,
Or fire in the air, or wind within the ground.
And doubting the success, three several swarms
He sees prepared for fight, and up in arms.
Bees from the Bull, Waspes from the Horse do start,
And Hornets from the melancholy Heart.
He motions peace, and hopes to part the fray,
They send three soldiers, who sends him away.
For each of them does fix his venomd sting,
Within the flesh of the amazed King.
He flies with speed from thence, they fight it out;
The conquest all expect, all fear and doubt.
But what befell I know not; this I know,
The King cride out aloud. Epimithiu^.
The evils that grow
From pride, ambition, and excess of grace,
"Like thanklesse curs, fly in their masters face.
"Beasts will be beasts, do bounty what it can,
"It Is cast away, that's given to worthless man.
O Princes banish faction from the Court,
It sowres all actions, leauens every sport.
And at the last, when it should sweetly close,
From one false friend rises a thousand foes.
FINIS.

