(...) to til the (...)ed

(...)d God of his infinite gudenes, be his michtie power, and na ways be the
arm o^ ^an, to

(...)till this his pretendit conquest, in case it succeedit (as God forbid)
micht carry with it to the estate Scottis-man, that is not blindit with his
buddis, how sa g^eit and

^^^sideration of this sa greit and imminent perrell moved us of laite, not
only by public ^^ocla(...) February nixt, but besides that, to have taken,
as we daily take (...)nair

(...)ure of all people is sik, and specially of the people of our awin Nation:
That although they ap(...) Indianis, whose unworthy particulers made the
(...)ay Spaneartis, and let us prease to resemble the worthy anc(...)ent pain
amongst his other politic devises, for advancing of this his interprise, hes
^it(...) OUR WILL IS (...) and commaundis: That incontinent their our Letter ^
seen ee pas, and in our (...) charge, first in general all our subjects,
Inhabitants of our bordours, not only (...)ity aganis the opposite bordours of
England, but farther to maintene, and in(...) towardis them, that happy amity
inuiolably continued betwixt us (...) our Reigns, as the neirnes of blude
betwixt our twa-Persons, The (...) of Amity that can bind true Christians)
and the likeness in lan(...) all the contrauenaris heirof, That they sall be
repute and haldin (...) the true Religioun and estate of their native King and
Cuntrie, and (...)cts. And in special, That ee command and charge the Wardens
and (...) England. To take diligent care and travel every ane within their
awin of(...) c^arge, that quietness and good neichtoorhed with England may
precisely be keipit (...)se and punish als carefully and rigorously the
insolence of the contrauenars heirof, as (...) upon our awin subjects: As they
will answer to us upon their offices and up(...) that heirupon may ensew: And
that they make the opposite Wardens and Offi^^^ ^^quainted with our order and
intention in the premisse, as ee will answer to us their(...) (...) commit to
you coniunctly and severally our full power be their our Letters, delivering
them (...)e again to the bearer.

Geuin under our signet, and subscriuit with our hand: (...) of Ianuare: And of
our Reign the 29. eir, 1595. SIC SVBSCRIBITVR. James R

Robert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kingis Majesty. 1596.


