Omnibus and singulis.

AFFORDING MATTER PROFITABLE FOR ALL men, necessary for every man; Alluding to
a Fathers advice or last Will to his son. Now published for the use of all
men, and particularly of those that do inhabit Great Britain and IRELAND.

GALAT. 10.6. While we have time, let us do good to all men, but especially to
those of the household of Faith. Hoc ab homine exigitur, vt profit hominibus; si
potest, multis; si minus, paucis; si minus, proximis; si minus, sibi; Seneca.
LONDON Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY. 1619.

portrait

To the most Sacred, Christian, truly Catholic and Mighty Prince, JAMES, King
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender, etc.
MOst dread Sovereign. As your Majesty (by due) have the first place inter
Omnes and Singulos, to whose Patrocinie this immature birth is dedicated, so by
the Law you have the chiefest interest in it.

I do confess, most Sacred SIR, I have borrowed from the ouer-flowing Source
of your Majesty's Princely and Learned (...), the best matter contained in it,
and for satisfaction do humbly offer restitution with some small interest
(although in a far more base coin.)

As your Majesty's known Clemency, puts me in some hope of pardon, for my
presumption, in borrowing the principal; so those eminent and Parum est optare
tantae Virtuti tantaeque Pietati quem longissimum habeat Vitae propressum: fac
Deus vt quod optimum human^ generi dedisti, permaneat in aeternum: nam neque
lauds eius refer Vires suppetunt, neque paruum Carmen recipit tanta
Maiestas, neque meus audet remtentare Pudor, quam Vires far recusant: hoc
tamen mihi asserere liceat prauum indignumque est, non admirari Princip^m omni
admiratione dignissimum.
admired Kingly Virtues, resident in your Royal Person, make me confident,
your Majesty will rather accept of this super-plus (being worse then nothing)
then reject the meanest offering that is consecrated (upon the Altar of a
dutiful and sincere affection) to your Majesty's service; if, what I have
added, can only yield unto your Majesty that Satifaction (whereof I much
doubt) that an David in Radic. Mercer.
Ignorant Arabian Woman did give unto the Learned Jews Rabbis, who (by
calling for a Broom or Besome) did bring them to the knowledge of an obscure
place in the Prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 14.23.
I shall think my Labors happy; and howsoever (as I and all your Majesty's
Subjects, by the Sunshine of your happy government, are dutifully bound) I
shall ever earnestly entreat the Almighty, that your Majesty may continue
long and prosperously to reign over us, and after Methusalems age, by a happy
end may change your Earthly Crown with another of endless Glory.

Your Majesty's Loyal Subject, PATRIK SCOT.

To the High and Mighty, CHARLES, Prince of Great Britain, etc.
SIR,
AS God has most abundantly blessed your Highness, in honoring you on both
sides with two Dos est Magna Parentum Virtus, Horat. Carm. l. 3. Ode. 24.
worthy Parents, whose Memory (as now) will be ever deservedly honored: so it
is justly expected, that their Royal Virtues (already Preciosa Principum
ingenia and Virtus quae ante annos viget. Cassiador.
happily begun) shall be renewed in your Highness (as in a more (...),
Euripid. Meleagr.
lively monument, then of Marble or Brass) and (if it were possible) in well
doing and Quod praestibilius aut pulchrius munus Deorum quam Sanctus and Dijs
similimus Princeps. Plin. in Paneg. Traian.
piety you shall not only parallel, but surpass them.

Your Kingly and Learned Father David has so broken the Ice to your Highness,
his beloved young Solomon, (by laying such foundations for the government of
your self and your Israel after him) that whatsoever can be added, is but
infer lumen mortale splendente sole.

By which only reason, I have presumed (with Phaeton, trusting to my borrowed
wings) to present unto your Highness this deformed Portraiture, drawn from the
Pattern (of the Vinci erubescens Apelles tertio color lineas secuit nullum
relinquens amplius subtilitati locum, Plinius l. 35. cap. 10.
Apelles like Picture) of (...), that by the view of such a dismembered Monster,
your Highness may prosecute the imitation of that Work, that no Man (except
unmatchable Pyrgotelis ita omnium sculptorum peritissimus, vt Alexander edixit
ne quis eum quam ille sculperer, Plin. l. 7. cap. 37. Appoli. lib. 1. Florid.
Cicero Epist. 12. ad Famil. Val. Max. c. 11. l. 8. and Horat. Epist. 1. l. 6.
Pyrgotelis, that has engraven it upon the Marble Nihil est accepta Virtute
quod (mortali animo aut manu) immortale queri potest, Val. Max.
of inobliterable Virtue) is able to equalize.

If it will please your Highness to Grace these my idle Labors with Laetissima
Principis facies and amabilis vultus in omnium subditorum ore oculis and animo
sedet, Plin. in Paneg. Traian.
a smiling countenance: (being all I desire) I shall think my Idleness
fortunate, and endeavor hereafter to find out some other subject, more Worthy
your Princely entertainment. Thus Sir (renewing the oath of my loyal service
to your Highness by my pen, that formerly I did solemnly swear by the
holding up of my hand in a steel Gantlet, now ashamed to be seen for rust) I
do humbly take my leave, and shall ever remain,

Your Highness dutiful and humble servant, PATRIK SCOT.

portrait

Libri ad Serenissimam Mag. Britanniae ANNAM Reginam defunctam, Prosopopeia.
QVid me purpureo circu^dedit author amictu?
Quid micat aurato margin ge^ma freque^s?
Quid iunat argutis sapientum floribus, omnes
Ornasse Aonidum, morte fremente choros?
Anna Iouis Proles, Regni decus Anna Britanni,
Spes mihi, spes Orbi, te morie^te cadit.
Tu multum, quaesita mihi virtutis imago,
Tu vitae columen, praesidiumque meae.
Cui meta^ propera moribundu^ sort remittis?
Cui me solicitum, deseris ante diem?
Illa tui splendens genij praesentia, saeuas
Inuidiae poterat sternere sola minas;
Nunc mihi deserto tutela incerta; carebit
Nulla dies lachrymis, vulnere nulla dies.
Serenissimae ANNAE Reginae, Responsio consolatoria.
COelestes animas tristi quid voce lacessis?
Ereptas Orbi, number reuocare potes?
Quid tibi spem quereris deiectam? quidue minaces,
Inuidiae rictus docte libelle times?
Ecce triumphator, morbos morte^que Monarcha
Qui vincit, thalamo pars viduata meo,
Contra letiferos sapiens te proteget hosts,
Mayor and inuidia; mayor and host tuo.
Exurgens tibi fautor erit mihi charus Iulus,
CAROLVS Imperij dextera chara mei;
Altera spes ELIZA tibi, spes altera totus
Nobilium coetus, qua tibi terra patet.
Nec sacra Progenies Regum te sola fouebit,
Sed sacra virtutum symbola quisquis amat.
THE EPISTLE Dedicatorie, OMNIBVS ET SINGVLIS.
I Do (in all dutiful obserua^ce) present unto the bar of your Mighty, High,
Gracious, Reverend, Honorable, Worshipful, and Favorable Censure, these ^ll
digested labors of some few idle hours:

In doing whereof (encouraged by the confidence I have in your powerful
Patrocinie) I have made choice rather to expose my Apprentice-like skill in the
structure of such an Architect, my presumption in the Title, and Dedication; to
base detracting Detractio est stultorum thesaurus, quem ^n lingua-gerunt, Auson.
Zoylus, or envious nu dia non in alio quam in degeneri, minuto and ieiuno
animo, sibi domicillum parat, Val. Max.
Momus; then either the Learned should want this Widows Symboll of my good
will, (more fit to enlarge their Libraries then knowledge) or the Ignorant be
defrauded of the benefit, that (with small pains) they may reap, by perusing
of so easy a task.

I have rather approved the Greek Proverb ((...)) by confining the Matter,
within so small precinct; then followed those that daily lose themselves in the
Wilderness of Books, that are sent abroad, Venialis fit apud aures vestras
veritatis asperitas, Sidon Apoll.
tending rather to show the Authors skill in refined and affected Phrases, in
light Subjects, their Spirit of Contention in indeterminable Controversies,
their unchristian disposition, in Worme-wood tasting Satyrisme, then to
prefer substance before shadow, love of truth before unprofitable
ambiguities, or charitable Judgment before accursed scandal.

Palaton Homerum, vomentem exprimebat, Poetas vero reuquos quae ille eieciss^t
absorbentes, Ciel Rhod. l. 11. cap. 44.
What I have borrowed ^n this Treatise, I have done ^t Lege talionis, (those
that I have made use of, having formerly been beholding to others;) and have
restored it again with the interes^ of thankfulness.

But lest I should do lik^ unto those, that (unadvisedly) did build the Gates
bigger then the City, I humbly take my leave; and shall eue^ remain

A Loyal Subject, A tr^ honourer of my Sup^riours, and of ve^tue in all men,
P. S.

A FATHER HIS EPISTLE (Or Introduction to the ensuing Treatise) to his SON.
I Do find (by the Law Falcidia) if the Child commits any fault, for want
of Education, the Father was punished.

That I should not be liable to that (and a more supreme) Law, I have (from
your Infancy) been careful to have you sufficiently grounded in these
Rudiments, that do concern both your Spiritual and Civil conversation.

But now in regard of your more riper Age, the time approaching, that you must
act those things (upon the stage of the World) that either has or shall now be
taught you, for discharge of the duty I owe you, and inabling you in those
services, your Maker, Prince, and Country challenges of you; J do send you
this MANVSCRIPT (which I did write for my own private use) and now bestow it
upon you, as the greatest (and without doubt the best) portion I am able to
give you; It does shortly contain the knowledge of God, as he has revealed
himself in the Scriptures.

The way to serve him aright (I mean in the highest perfection that the
Mortalis conditio non patitur hominem ab omni maculo purit, Lact. l. 6. de ve.
10 Cultu.
corrupt nature of the sons of Adam is able to undergo.)

And secondly, such Precepts and Counsels, as may (by the careful observation
of the first part) with great facility, bring you to the knowledge of your
self in the several duties that are required of a O terque quaterque beatus,
tu de cuius culmine datur amicis laetitia, posteris gloria, vegetis and
alacri^us exemplum, desidibus and pig^^s incitament^^, Sidon. Apol. lib. 4.
Epist. 4.
perfect man.

Receive it then with such an heart as I give it you, remember that there is
nothing more odious then fruitless old age, and that no tree bears fruit in
Autumn, but that which blossometh in the Spring: to the end your Age may be
profitable and laden with fruit, endeavor that your youth may be studious and
flowred with the blossoms of Learning and Observation.

Thus charging you (by the Vitiosi sunt oculi qui lucem reformidant, percaeci
qui non vident, and parentibus non obedire, impietas est; non agnoscere,
insania, Senec. lib. 3. de Benef.
Fatherly authority I have over you, you diligently peruse, in your life and
conversation carefully practice those things that are in this Treatise set
down; I commend you to his Grace, whose Mercies are never wanting to them that
put their trust in him.

Iunij, XVIIII M.D.C.XIX.
The Contents.
1. CLeobulus, Deum Consule. 2. Chilon, Nosce teipsum. 3. Thales, Vide cui
associaris. 4. Periander, Iram tempera. 5. Bias, Been vixit, qui paucis
contentus. 6. Pitacus, Ne quid nimis. 7. Solon, Respice finem.
OMNIBVS ET SINGVLIS: Affording matter profitable for all Men, and necessary
for every Man.
SECT. I.
FOr Stirpe sublata, aut non sunt reliqua, aut si sunt, sine emolumento sunt,
quia sine Capite nihil constat, Saluian l. 6. de Prouid.
laying the first foundation of Religion (without which al other grounds are to
no effect.)

Per visibiles visibilium formas peruenitur ad inuisibiles visibilium causas,
ascensus praestatur ad inuisibiles substa^tias, and ea^um dignoscendanaturas,
Coel. Rhod. lib. 25.
That there is a GOD Omnipotent, Merciful and Just, Gods Works do
sufficiently demonstrate.

Genesis 1.1.
If he build, it is a World: if he be angry for the sins of the World, Genesis
7.17.
he sends a Deluge. If he will show the love he bears to the World, Matt.
2.1.
he sends his Son, Matt. 27.57.
and suffers him to dye upon the Cross, to save the World: If he will reward
the godly, it is with Luke 23.43.
Paradise; when he arms, the 2. King. 6.17.
Angels march upon the head of his Troops, Exodus 17.6.
the Elements are the Marshals of his Camp, the Rocks remove from their
Center and follow to give it Water, Exodus 13.21.
the Clouds guide by day, and Pillars of fire by night, Exodus 14.19.
the Sea opens to give them passage, Josh. 10.12.
and the Sun stays to end their victories. To enlarge the wonderfulnesse of
his Works, Number. 22.28.
Balaams Ass shall speak, and reprove his Master: John 2.9.
Waters turn into Wine, the Matt. 9.22.
dead are raised to life, Matt. 20.24.
the Blind see, Matt. 9.29.
the Deaf bear, Mark 2.12.
the Lame go, Matt. 14.19.
and thousands of people are fed, with some few Loaves and Fish.

If he will show Mercy, Matt. 27.75.
Peter, after that he had denied Christ, shall weep bitterly, John 21.15.
and be made Pastor of his sheep. Act. 9.15.
Paul, of a Persecutor, become an Elect Vessel and faithful Preacher of the
Gospel; when he will exalt the humble, Sam. 16.11.
little David shall be taken from the sheep, and be made both King Sam. 16.13.
and Prophet: Genesis 41.24.
humble Joseph from the Prison, and preferred to be Pharoes High Steward: Dan.
5.26.
Daniel from the Lions Den, and clothed with Purple.

When he will execute Justice, Genesis 19.24.
Sodom is devoured with Fire and Brimstone: Matt. 27.45. Lento gradu ad
vindictam sui procedit Deus, tarditatemque supplicij grauitate compensat, Lips.
c. 13. lib. 15. and Proper. eleg. 25. lib. 2.
Judas hanging himself, confessed that he had betrayed the Innocent: Eusebius.
hist. Eccles.
Julian the Apostata, tearing out his bowels, (in the horror of his
Conscience) cries out, Vicisti tandem, Galilaee.

When he will humble the proud, Idolatrous Dan. 4.45.
Nabuchadnezar shall eat grass amongst the beasts of the field: the basest of
GODS Creatures shall make hard-hearted Pharao Exodus 9.27.
send for Moses, and confess the true God. Finally, in all his works of Power,
Mercy, and Justice, (out of the fiery Furnace) Dan. 3.25.
Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall proclayme his Glory.

Thus you see, that Gods Works declare that he is God, Powerful, Merciful,
and Just, and that the meanest of these Works are of force either (by the
least dram of Grace) to convert the most obstinate Atheist, to the true
knowledge of God, or in Justice to confound him.

SECT. II.
ALthough I do not allow the Diuina mysteria credenda, non curiose scrutanda,
Amor. de Diuinis Mist.
curious searching of divine Mysteries not revealed, for admitting that in
Natures school, we are taught to boult out the Truth by Logical reason;
Neque ad loquendum de Deo lingua sufficit, neque ad percipiendum intellectus
praeualet: magis ergo glorificare nos conuenit Deum quod talis est, qui and
intellectum transcendit and cognitionis initium superat, August.
yet in Gods School, it is quite contrary; he is the best Scholar that
reasons least, and assents most, conceiues so far as humane frailties will
permit, believes and admires the rest, God loving better a credulous heart,
then a curious head: yet because your duty toward God consists chiefly in
the ardent desire to know God (which is the surest testimony of your love
toward God, and of Gods love toward you) there is a more special knowledge
required of you, which is, that you endeavor your self ^o know him, so far
as he has revealed himself in ^he Scriptures called his Word, as proceeding
from ^is Spirit, to bring you to his knowledge: he has manifested himself in
the Scriptures by three sorts of Dionysius de Diuinis nominibus.
names.

The first, are these that ^ignifie his Essence.

The second, the persons ^n the Essence.

The third, his essential Works.

The names that denote Gods Essence, are five;

IEHOVACH, EHEIECH, ^ACH, KVRIOS, THEOS.

Non habet aetatem aeternita^ aut aliquando finem quae nescit originem,
Cyprian. Mart. Arnob. lib. 1. aduers. Gent. Tertul. lib. 2 de Car. Christ.
Iehouach, signifies eter^all, being of himself without beginning, and end,
Almighty, both in promising and performing.

The second name is Eheiech, of that same Root o^ Iehoua, signifying, that I
am that I am, or I will be that I will be Exodus 3.14.
Eheiech, Asher, Eheiech.

Psalm. 21.12, 15, 16, 17.
The third name Iach, which is Lord, is ascribed to God, when any notable
deliverance, or benefit comes to pass, according to his former promise.

The fourth name is John 21.7, 12, 15, 16, 17.
Kurios, used often in the New Testament: when it is absolutely given to God, it
answers the Hebrew name Jehovah; for God is so Lord, tha^ he is of himself
Lord, and of all others.

The fifth name is Theos (...) God; It is derived from, (...), because Deus est
intellectualis Sphera, cutus centru^ vbique, circumferentia vero nusquam, Aug.
he runs through and compasses all things: when it is properly taken, it
signifies the eternal Essence of God, being above all things, Prouida illa
men's, quae coelum hoc quotidie voluit, reuoluit, solemn ducit, reducit, fruges
promit, recondit, causas and vicis^itudines omnes rerum peperit, quas mirantur
homines aut quae sunt, nec quicquam in hoc grandi Machina geritur, turbatur
miscetur speccatum excipio) cuius non causa a prima illa causa, Lips. lib. 1.
de Constan. c. 4.
giving Life and Light to all Creatures, preserving and governing them in their
wonderful frame and order, God seeing all, and in all places.

The names that signify the persons in the Essence, are chiefly one.

Sacramentum hoc venera^dum, non scrutandum quomodo pluralitas sit in vnitate,
and vnitas in pluralitate, scrutare hoc, temeritas est; credere, pietas, nosc^
vero, vita aeterna, Ber.
Elohim, signifies the mighty Judges. It is a name of the plural number, to
express the Trinity of persons in the unity of Essence. To this purpose, the
Holy Ghost begins the Bible with this plural Name of God, joined with a Verb
of the singular Number, as Elohim bara dij creauit, the mighty Gods, or all
the three Persons in the Godhead created. When you hear of this Name Elohim,
consider that in one Divine Essence there are three distinct Persons, and that
God is Iehouach Elohim

The Names that signify Gods Essential Works, are five:

El, Schaddai, Adonai, Helion, Abba.

Exodus 24.6. Psalm. 24.8.
El, is as much to say, a^ the strong God, shows that God is not only strong
and strength it self, but tha^ it is he that gives al^ strength to his
Creatures.

By this Name Schaddai, which is Omnipotent, God styled himself usually to the
Patriarks, calling himself El Schaddai, the strong God, Almighty: this Name
belongs only to God, and to no other Creature.

Adonai, my Lord, is found one hundred, thirty four times in the old
Testament: by this Name we challenge God to be our God, and with Thomas, say,
Thou art my Lord, and my God.

Luke 1.32.
Helion, which signifies most High, was given unto God by Gabriel, telling the
Virgin Mary, that the Child that should be borne of her, should be the Son
of the most High.

Mar. 14.36. Romans 8.15.
Abba, a Syriake name, signifying Father: by it remember, what you receive from
God, proceeds from a fatherly love, and that you owe him again filial
obedience.

Sacra Dei nomina quasi pignora amoris, misericordiae, and omnipotentiae eius
sunt, Aug. de Dei Misericord. cap. 7.
All these sacred Names of God, are as pledges and remembrances of Gods
omnipotency, and love toward you, and of your duty toward him.

As the true knowledge of God, is the only inducement to the exercise of your
duty toward him, so the Religious practice of that duty, is the only rule
whereby you may live reposedly, and dye cheerfully.

In this Exercise, I do commend four things unto you, Hear, Pray, Meditate,
and Doc.

SECT. III.
THis hearing, whereof I speak, consists 1. Tim. 3.16.
in the reading of Gods sacred word contained in the Books of the old and new
Testament, and hearing it from Preachers: for the whole Scripture is the (...),
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be made
perfect in all good works. The Scriptures are divided in the old and new
Testament: Dicitur vetus testamentum, quia priore, hoc autem nouum, quia
posteriore tempore, reuelatum est, August. l. 3. ad Bonifac. Reuelationes eorum
considerantur in his nominibus, non institutiones, Idem ibidem.
the first is called old, because it was revealed in the former time; the other
new, because it was revealed in the latter time.

The difference betwixt the old and new Testament is only in certain Aliud
illi, aliud nos, sed specie visibili, quod tamen idem significaret virtute
spirituali, Aug. Tom. 3. de spirit. and lit. cap. 20.
accidents, Ceremonies, and dispensation of things, in external form, and
difference of time, but in substance all one, and tending to one effect in
virtue and efficacy.

In the old, the new is In veteri nouum latet, and in nouo vetus patet.
figured and shadowed; in the new, is the declaration and manifestation of the
old.

By Moses was the old Testament revealed, and the Law given, being holy, just,
and good, Propter veteris hominis noxia^ in qua per literam iubentem and
minitantem minime sanabatur, dicitur vetus testamentu^: nouum autem, propter
nouitatem spiritus, quae hominem nouum sanat a vitio vetustatis, August. Tom.
3. ad Marcell. cap. 20.
serving rather to bring us to the knowledge of our own insufficiency to
fulfill the same, then for laying upon the corrupted sons of Adam, that which
they were not able to undergo.

The new Testament was revealed by Christ, when he was manifested in the flesh,
in whom did appear the righteousness of God, or the goodness that comes from
God to us, witnessed by the Law and Prophets.

In the Euangelical dispensation of the Gospel, is the deliverance of Gods
people, not from an earthly, but from a spiritual bondage of sin and Satan.

Here is a triumph over the suppressed enemy, not Pharaoh, but Satan himself.

Here is an introduction to possess not earthly Canaan, but heavenly
Jerusalem.

Here is a Law given, not in Sina, but in Sion, not by Angelical ministry,
but by the presence of the Lord himself; not after a fearful sort, but with
wonderful lenity and gentleness; not graven in stony Tables, but
effectually printed in the hearts of the Elect.

In the old Testament was bondage, and fear: in the new, liberty and glad
tidings, the ministry not of death; but of life, not a rigorous exacter, but a
merciful Savior; not the sacraments of Circumcision, and the Passover, (the
administration whereof was bloody) but Baptism, and the Lords Supper, both
(...), unbloody.

In the new Testament is a Priesthood, not Aaronicall, not external, not tied
to any one Nation and Tribe, but spiritual, and common to all the faithful
throughout the world.

In it is a Sacrifice, and that bloody, but not of Beasts, but the sweet
smelling Sacrifice of the precious body and blood of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus; not iterated, but finished once for all upon the Cross.

In the new Testament are Ceremonies few and easy, to wit, the Word,
Sacraments, and Prayers.

(In one word) in the old Testament were figures, shadows, and promises: in
the new, the fulfilling and accomplishment of them all: this new Covenant of
Grace shall continue to the worlds end, and shall give place to no other, but to
the eternal fruition of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Hereby the excellency of the new Testament is manifest, and that both the
old and new, differing in accidents and circumstances, are in substance and
truth all one, and that the one is contained in the other, making up an
absolute body Cu^ credimus, nihil desideramus vltra credere.

Hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod vltra credere debemus, Tertull. lib. de
praescript. aduers. H^ret.

Scrut. mini Scripturas. Ioh. 5.39.


containing perfect sufficiency to salvation, and whereto we must neither add
nor diminish, neither seek for Christ and salvation elsewhere; for this cause
we are commanded to search the Scriptures.

Therefore would thou know what sin is, and the punishment thereof by the
Law? Genesis 50. Exodus 90. Leuit. 29. Numb. 36. Deuteronomy. 39.
The five Books of Moses shall teach thee the Historical parts of these:
Joshua 29. Judges 21.1. 2. Sam. 55.1. 2. Kings 97.1. 2. Chron. 65. Ezra. 10.
Nehem. 13. Ester 10. Job 42.
the Books of the Prophets, Proverbs of Solomon, and Ecclesiastes, will let you
see the Reward of the Godly, and punishment of the wicked, and furnish you with
a rich Storehouse of Golden sentences, and divine Moral Precepts.

Psalm. 150. Proverb. 31. Eccles. 12. Esai. 66. Iere. 2.52. Lam. 5. Eze. 48.
Daniel 11. Hos. 14. Joel 3. Amos 9. Obe. 1. Jonah. 4. Micah. 5. Nahum. 3.
Abacu^k. 3. Zephania 3. Hagaij 2. Zecha. 14. Mal. 4.
The Kingly Psalms of David shall plentifully administer unto you Heavenly
Physic for all Spiritual diseases.

Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Lu. 24. Ioh. 21.
The 4. Evangelists shall teach you the Life, Doctrine, and Death of our Savior.

Acts 28.
The Acts of the Apostles shall acquaint you with the practice of CHRIST'S
Doctrine in the Primitive Church.

Romans 16.1. 2. Corin. 2.9. Galat. 6. Ephesians. 6. Philip. 4. Col. 4.1. 2. These.
8.1. 2. Tim. 10. Tit. 3. Phile. 1. Heb. 13. James 5.1. 2. Peter 8.1. 2. John 5.
Jude 1. Revel. 22.
The Epistles of the Apostles shall train you up particularly in Christ his
School.

Make use of the rest of the Books called 3. Esdras 4. Esdras Tob. Judith.
Ester. Wisdom. Eccles. Bar. The Song of the three Children. S^sanna. The
History of Bell and the Dragon. The Prayer of Manastes. 1. Mac. 2. Mac.
Apocrypha, so far as they agree with the Scripture, and no further.

Read the Scriptures with a sanctified and chaste heart: for unless they be
read by the inspiration of GODS Spirit, (by the which they were written) with
humility, and desire to know, they remain as a dead letter in the efficacy
thereof (as I did advise you before.) Admire reverently such obscure places, as
by your weak capacity you cannot understand, never going further in the
curious search of divine Mysteries, then either by conferring some other place
of Scripture, or by conference with some learned Divine you may be informed:
for as the Scriptures have in them that height and depth to exercise the
Learned: so have they that easiness and plainness, that the simple maybe
comforted and taught; they are that admirable River (both shallow and deep)
wherein as the Lamb may wade, the Elephant may swim; and it is only the
dullness of our capacity that makes them hard to us, and the Vale of our
hearts that cannot be removed, except by him that has the Key of David, that
opens where no man shuts, and shuts where no man opens.

Delight most in such places of Scripture, as serve best for your instruction
in your own calling: for many men are too busy in other men's callings, Fides
per auditum, Romans 10.17. 1. Sam. 2.30. Esaias 28.14. 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.
and neglecters of their own.

The hearing of Gods Word by the Scriptures, and by Pastors, and the practice
thereof will give you knowledge, work Holiness in you, break down your
natural corruptions, and fill you with strength against all assaults.

SECT. IIII.
PRayer, is a simple, unfeigned, humble, and ardent opening of the heart before
God, wherein we either ask things needful for our selves and others, or give
thanks for benefits received: it is either public in the Congregation of the
faithful, or private, when we pray alone.

There be four chief reasons that ought to induce us to Prayer: first, the
commandment of God: secondly, our sins, which drive us of necessity to God
for life, succor, and help. Thirdly, our weak nature, (being of it self
unable to subsist) requires Prayer to strengthen it, as a house pillars to
uphold it.

Lastly, the subtlety of the enemy (who ever attends to overthrow us, even
in those things we think to be best done) ought to stir us up vehemently to
Prayer.

The excellency of Prayer is manifest by the dignity of the Commander, and
the admirable effects that follow it. The Commander is God, Lord of Heaven and
earth, of our life, and death, the Fountain of all goodness, the effects thereof
are such, that (Prayer proceeding from a faithful soul, and squared by Gods
Word) will stay the Sun to end our victories, the falling of the rain from
heaven, and at our desire again, send down plenty of it to increase the
fruits of the earth for our comfort, it will pierce the heavens for mercy, and
pardon for our sins, stay the wrath of God against us for the same, and
obtain whatsoever good thing is needful for us in this life, or in the life to
come.

In Oratione sedulo cura^dum est, ne intermissione aliqua repent facta, rursus
languascere incipiat anim^ alacritas, Barnard. de progress. relig. Mat. 7.7.
Luke 18.1. Romans 12.12. Ephesians 6.18. Col. 4.2. 1. Tim. 2.8.
Let your Prayers be daily, without intermission: for devotion that is
deferred upon conceit of present unfitness or worldly respects, at last
grows irksome and altogether neglected: suffer not your heart to entertayne
the least thought of lothnesse in the task of devotion, but violently break
through such motions, with a deep check to your self, for your backwardness.
And because holiness does not (like Jonah 3.6, 7.
Jonas Gourd) grow up in a day, it is better to go on safe and sure, then for
an hasty fit, (as many do) run out of wind, and then stand still. Go to
Prayer, as you would go to the water to swim; go not hot in, but take a
time to cool your self by Meditation, Homo in faciem, Deus in praecordia
contemplatur, Aug.
feeling that your words touch the very depth of your Soul.

Animaduerto Deum, non tam adorantium precibus, quam innocentia, and sanctitate
laetari, gratioremque eum qui delubris eius puram castamque mentem, quam qui
meditatum carmen intulerit existimare, Ambros l. b. 3. Prou. 30.12.
Frame not your Prayers (as some hypocritically do) according to the fantasies
of your own brain, neither (as others superstitiously) think to move God by
iterations and babbling, neither (with the proud Pharise) presuming upon your
own worth, but (like unto that poor Publican) humbly, with all reverence,
Exodus 3.5. Ad beatitudinem recte consequendam, omnia fugienda sunt corporis
corruptibilia, August. de Ciuit. Dei.
(throwing off the shoes of your corrupt affections) prostrate your self at
the footstool of Gods Throne of Grace, demanding nothing that is repugnant to
his will (lest you tempt him) Mat. 6.8.
who out of his insearchable Wisdom knows best what is good for you.

In your Prayers, have a special care, that you keep ever as a pattern
before you, that Prayer Mat. 6.9.
set down by the Mercy-Master Christ Jesus, called the Lords Prayer. It is the
pure Fountain, from whence the Rivers of Life must flow.

SECT. V.
MEditation is a careful consideration or a devout calling to mind, and
examination both of our spiritual, and temporal estate, by a serious
contemplation of Gods goodness toward us, what duty he requires of us toward
him, and for his sake to our neighbor, and how we have performed the same,
what reward remains for the godly, and punishment for the wicked, that we
have an account to render not only of every misspent day, but of every idle
word, in what estate, either spiritual or temporal, we stand for the present.

This holy Meditation stirs us up to a thankfulness for Gods goodness, to
sorrow, and repentance, for our bypast offenses, and to a settled resolution of
amendment of our lives in time to come. Psalm 49.3. Contemplante animo, nihil
altius sublimiusue esse potest, Ciel. Rhod. l. 25. c. 12
Meditation is the most sovereign cure of the soul: in it keep this course,
retire your self every day (at some fit time) to your Mat. 6.6.
chamber, Study, Field, or some secret place, and having prayed to God for a
recollected mind, enter into a consideration of your sinful estate, 1. Cor.
11.28.
examine your self, take notice of your passions, disposition and inclination,
whereby you may come to the knowledge of your self; and by calling for help
from God, resolve Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit moenia, Amb.
to conquer your self as a walled City.

Call to mind, if any unkindness has passed betwixt you and Romans 3.10. Mat.
5.22.
your neighbor, or any other; and if you remember any remnant, or the least
cole of Envy or Malice, (lurking under the Ashes of your perverse nature) wipe
away and extinguish them, by not Ephesians. 4.26. Mat. 6.14, 15.
letting the Sun go down upon your wrath: for he that craves pardon, and
will not forgive, is like unto him that breaks down a Bridge, that he must
pass over himself.

In your Meditation, inquire diligently Non potest praesentem diem recte
viuere, qui se non eum quasi vltimum victurum esse cogitat, Aug. de Mort.
after the day of your death, by setting it before your eyes, by examining your
self whether you be prepared, and 1. Cor. 15.54
ready, and by encouraging your cowardly soul, to look Death in the face,
flying ever in this point, to thy Savior for help.

Conclude thy meditation, by thinking upon thy worldly estate: if it prosper,
lay up humility in thy heart. If poor, Psalm 119.
pray for supply, and think upon some lawful and honest means.

SECT. VI.
THe fourth and most necessary part (belonging to a Christian) is Mat 7.21.
Psalm. 103.18.
doing (being the life of all) for it is nothing (and usual to Hypocrites)
Esaias 58.2.
to be religious in Ceremonies, join therefore (as indiuidui Comites) the
lively Romans 2.22.
Faith of Paul, Iam. 2.13, 14, 16, 17, 26.
with S. James, good Works: Faith without Works, makes but a Carnal Gospeller,
and Works without Faith, a Pharisaicall Hypocrite.

Ever in doing, beware of doing against thy Qui conscientiae curam obijciunt,
nec Deum nec homines reuerentur: Conscientia vna cadem in nobis singulis
accusator, testis, Iudex, Tortor, and Carcer, Bernard.
Conscience: for the treasure of a good Conscience, is the best store you can
provide for a quiet life here, and a blessed hereafter, when a dram of it shall
serve you to better use, then innumerable millions of Gold.

Omit neither time, place, nor person, if thou can do good: Mat. 25.35, 41.
Esaias 58 7, ^0. Phil. ^.18. Prou. 19.17.
remember Christ's last Judgment, wherein he shows that the best good in the
World is Compassion, Alms, and comforting in Distress, as in Sickness,
Poverty, Imprisonment, or Banishment; for although God accepts of good
thoughts, yet toward man, they are little better then good dreams: exercise
therefore thy charitable offices, (as Gods Steward) upon thy Brethren.
Remember, it is now the time, Viue memor qua^ sis aeui breuis. Mors senibus in
Ianuis ^uuenibus insidijs, Senec. de Mort. Psalm. 90.16. Iam. 4.14. Psalm. 103.15.
thy life is short, thy days evil, Heb. 9.27.
thy death certain, Mat. 25.19.
thy account most certain, thy joys unspeakable, if thou do well: for this
cause labor to husband the Talent that God has put into thy hands, that thou
may return thy soul better then thou did receive it. If that servant was
Mat. 25.30.
condemned as ill, that did give his Master no more but his own, what shall
become of him that robs God of his own?

SECT. VII.
SLoth Prou. 6.6 v. 15. Ignauia turmatim^n nos ruens, eligi facilis plana ad
eam, and expedita est via, at virtutem sudore dij obuallarunt, Zenoph. de dict.
Soc.
is the Mother of many evils, and the chief corrupter of Christian duty;
banish it by diligence, in all these former exercises, neither Non delinquenti,
sed poenitenti, and peccatarelinqucati condonat Deus, Aug.
deferring Repentance for thy bypast neglects, neither amendment of thy former
life. Quis est adolescens, cui exploratum sit, se ad vesperum esse victurum?
Cic. de Sen. (...), Basil. In denu^ciata sort rapimur, Fusc. Suasor. 2.
Who knows, but Death may shut up thy breath, at an unprovided time?
Repentance and Amendment, being the free Gifts of God, the Tree of Faith
(watered by Gods Grace) only produces (not common in every man's Garden:)
this Tree must be planted in the spring of thy Youth, and not in the Frosty
Winter, when the day shall come, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure. It
must be daily labored, hedged, and preserved from the annoya^ces,
Caterpillars, and choking Weeds of the World; by this means it shall produce
plentiful store of Fruit in thy life, and at thy Death prepare thee, (with old
Simeon in the peace of a good Conscience) to say, Luke 2.27.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
my Salvation.

I have shortly poynted at Gods wonderful Works, of Power, Mercy, and
Justice, at those Names, whereby chiefly he has revealed himself in his
Word; and at the duties that are required in his service.

That I may come (with the like brevity) to those things that may bring you to
the knowledge of your self, I will conclude this first part, subioyning this
ensuing Prayer, which by GODS Grace will enable you to attain to that
perfection, that is craved of you, in your Christian calling.

Genesis 1.17.
Almighty and Exodus 15.11.
glorious God, full of incomprehensible Power and Majesty, Psalm. 51.
whose glory the heaven (of heavens) is not able to contain, thou that art the
strong God that Exodus 12.13.
forgiuest offenses, and passest by iniquities, Psalm. 10.17.
that preparest the heart of the poor, and openest thine ear to hear their
prayers: Psalm. 17.
Incline, O Lord, thine ears, and hear me: open Dan. 9.5.
thine eyes, and see a poor and wretched sinner; O Lord, Psalm. 5.21.
I have done exceeding wickedly in thy sight: I do acknowledge and confess
it, and do humbly prostrate my self at the Act. 7.49.
foote-stoole of thy Throne of Grace for pardon, Ierem. 31.3, 4.
thou have promised, according to the riches of thy Mercies, to forgive my
offenses, yea, more to show the stabilitie of thy Council, thou have tied thy
self by an Luke 1.73.
oath thereunto, sealed the Covenant thereof with the Mat. 27.57.
blood of that immaculate Lamb, thy Son, the Lord Jesus, at his death upon
the Cross.

Exodus 33.19.
Regard, O Lord, thy gracious and free Mercy, the Oath of thy Holiness, the
Words of thy own Mouth: let me feel the accomplishment thereof in my soul:
Ierem. 31.33, 34.
write it in my heart by thy Spirit, and seal it in my Conscience by the
powerful applying of that same blood thereto, that it may Psalm. 51.2, 7.
wash away all my sins and transgresssions; Mat. 27.60.
bury them in Christ's burial, that they may never rise up against me, to
Dan. 9.7.
shame me in this life, Mat. 25.91.
neither to condemn me in the life to come; Create in me, O God, that peace
of Conscience that passes all understanding: Mat. 11.28.
Thy free promises in Jesus Christ, make me bold to come before thee; thou art
the very Truth, and able to perform; and as in all humility I crave this,
according to thy Exodus 33.19.
promise: so by the like promise I do earnestly beg thy Psalm.
grace, that I may hereafter lead a more holy and godly life; sanctify my
soul by the same grace, that it may be a fit Cor. 6.19.
receptacle for thy holy Spirit; and give command Mat. 18.10. Act. 12.7. Psalm.
39.7.
to thy good Angels, to attend both my soul and body, that in neither of them
I make defection from so gracious a God; Psalm.
remove all occasions that may stay me in this good course, and grant unto me
such necessaries, as may advance me in thy service. Genesis 28.20.
Grant unto me Competent means, that I may neither be puffed up with
deceitful pride, neither depressed with extreme poverty; Heb. 13.3.
Give me grace to use those means to thy glory, the supply of those things,
without the which I am not able to serve thee, Heb. 13.3.
and to the help of my distressed Brethren. 1. Reg. 8.30.
Look down from heaven in Mercy upon Can. 2.6.
thy whole Catholic Church and every Member thereof dispersed throughout the
World; be with them (O Lord) and keep those that John 17.9. Deuteronomy. 32.3.
are thine, under the Wings of thy Mercy; Math. 11.28
Remember likewise all distressed persons of this Church; Heb. 13.3.
(whether it be grief of body or mind:) mitigate so their pains, and
comfort their afflicted Consciences, that either in Psalm. 7^.
life or Act. 7.56.
death they may have a joyful deliverance.

Let thy merciful bounty be extended upon all those of this Church in great
Britain, Ireland, and specially Tim. 2.1.2.
upon our gracious and dread Sovereign King James, as it has pleased thee to
grant unto him Chro. 1.12. 1. Reg. 3.12.
( Salomon-like) Wisdom from heaven, in the true knowledge of thee, the
peaceable government of thy people, and 1. Reg. 2.28.
true administration of Justice: so by the like favor preserve him from all
dangers of soul and body, Genesis 27.
and after Methusalems age, crown him with an everlasting Crown of Glory.
Bless Psalm. 72.1.
that hopeful Prince Charles (next unto his Father) 1. Es. 17.19.
the very life of our hopes, and the rest of that Royal Issue: remember (O
Lord) thy promise made to David and his seed for ever, and Psalm. 18.50. Math.
24.29.
so long as the Sun gives light to the World, let us never want one of that
Royal Line to sway the Scepter over us: 1. Tim. 2.2. Heb. 13.18.
grant grace unto the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Council, and to
all inferior Magistrates either Ecclesiastical or Civil, Exodus 18.21.
that they may with a good Conscience and courage discharge their several
callings.

Finally, I do not only entreat thy Majesty's protection this day, but Psalm.
38.22, 71, 17.
all the days of my life, and in Psalm. 37.37.
the end thereof, that I being guarded under the defense of thy (All-sheelding)
Mercy, may in the end participate of Psalm. 16.11.
those inspeakeable joys prepared for all them that put their trust in thee.
Psalm. 9.9.26.12.32.10.
Now, yielding all humble and hearty thanks for all thy benefits from time to
time, and especially at this time, I conclude my Genesis 6.5.
imperfect Prayers with the pattern of all Prayers, and Mat. 5.9.
which the Lord JESUS has taught, saying, Our Father, etc.

SECT. VIII.
NExt unto the knowledge of God and your duty to him (having the approbatio^ of
a good Nil iuuat bonum nomen reclamante conscientia, Cass.
Conscience) seek for a good reputation among men, not by close carriage or
concealing your faults, but by eschewing all those vices that may justly
deserve reproach: for it is hard to do good, except a man be thought good:
therefore wisely Palpebrae praecedunt gressus, cum operationem consilia recte
praeu^niunt. Qui enim negligit considerando praeuidere quod facit, gressus
tendit, sed oculos claudit, pergendo iter con^cit, sed praeuidendo sibimetipsi,
non antecedit; atque idcirco citius corruit, quoniam vbi pedem operis ponere
debet, per consilij palpebram non attendit, Greg. Romans de past. par. 3. c. 1.
foresee and consider, that a good name and reputation (being the Manna and
Nepenthe of generous Spirits) is so delicate, that the least excess does
blemish, an unjust action does dishonor it, an act of in discretion,
negligence, or idleness, defaceth it, and a sinister success ruins it: and as
Glass cracked is easily broken, so is a Man's good name once justly tainted.

Observe diligently, that the Quid prauius? quid malignius? quidue aduersario
nostro nequius? qui posuit in Coelo bellum, in Paradiso fraudem, odium inter
primos fratres and in omni nostro opere, zizania seminauit, in comessatione
posuit gulam, in generatione luxuriam, in exercitatione ignauiam, in
conuersatione inuidiam, in gubernatione auaritiam, in correctione iram, in
dominatione superbiam: in cord posuit cogitationes malas, in or^ locutiones
falsas, in membris operationes iniquas, in vigilando mouet ad praua opera, in
dormiendo ad somnia turpia, laetos mouet ad dissolutionem, tristes ad
desperationem, and vt breuius loquar, omnia mala sunt ipsius prauitate
commissa, Aug. describens conatus Diab.
Arch-Enemie to Man, the World and your own corrupt affections (with whom you
are to enter Combat) are 3. dangerous enemies, and (so long as breath
entertaynes your Earthly Mansion) shall never leave to assault you: the first
is Cruel, Diligent, and Treacherous: the second, false and inconstant (being
rightly called Nihil tam contrarium rationi, and constantiae, quam mundi
inconstantia, Cic. lib. 2. de Divine. Quod ego fui ad tracimenu^, tu hodie ad
cannas es: verba Hannib. ad Scip.
Mundus, a mouendo, because it is in continual motion without any stabilitie)
and the third (being a Sua domestica vitia quisque fugiat, nam aliena non
nocebunt, Guig. Ca^th. Medit. cap. 2.
Domestical Enemy, or rather troops of inmate foes) will have their hands in
the Dish with you, and yet Iudas-like) ever ready to betray you with a kiss.

SECT. IX.
Have a special care to resist seven chief Champions that shall be sent out
against you.

First, Superbia, ^et. 2. Epist. est vitiu^ muliebre superbia, and arguit oris
duritiem, ac sensus qualis inest, Lapidi. Text.
Pride shall endeavor to make you, with Lucifer, be thrust out of Heaven.

Inuidia, Genesis 3.1. Squalida vipereas manducans foemina carnes; cuique dolent
oculi, quaeque suum cor edit; quam macies and p^llor habent; spinosaque gestat
tela manu; talis pingitur inuidia
Envy, with that old Serpent, shall persuade you to eat the forbidden fruit.

Ira, Gen 4.8. Irae affectus totus positus est in impetu doloris, armorum
sanguinis minime humana feruens cupiditate, Sen. de Ira. Pro. 15.19.
Wrath shall stir you up to kill innocent Abel.

Segnities species recte velata cucullo; Non se non alios, vtilitate iuvat.
Sloth, that lazy Sluggard, shall make your Vineyard be ouergrowne with
Thorns and Nettles.

Neuer-satisfied Auaritia, 2. Reg. 21.1. I^shua ^.2. Auarus tam fruitur quod
non habet, quam quod habet.
Covetousness shall move you to desire Naboths Vineyard, and with Achan, value
a Babylonish Garment, a few Shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of Gold, at an
higher price then thy own, or the blood of thy whole Family.

Sixthly, (without constant resistance) Ebrietas, Ge^. 9 33 per temulentia^
nesciens, miscet libidine incestum; and quem Sodoma non vicit, vicerunt v^na,
Cle. Alex. l. 2. c. 19.
Drunkenness is able to make thee commit Incest with thy own Daughters.

Lastly, (seeming sweet poisoned) Luxuria, 2. Sam. 11.4, 17. S^le satae Circes
tam magna potentia ^ertur, verterit, vt multos in noua monstra viros, June.
Lechery shall attempt to cause Vriah to be placed in the front of the
Battle, that thou may enjoy Bershebah.

SECT. X.
YOu see then the powerfulnes of your Enemies, against whose assaults, neither
multitude can resist, neither Army withstand, but the resolutions of a Sapiens
omnium horarum hon o est. Iuuenal. Sat. 10. Quid illa virtus quae prudentia
dicitur, nonne tota vigilantia sua, bona discernit a malis, vt in illis
appetendis, ipsisque vitandis nullus error obrepat? Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l. 10.
c 4.
wiseman, grounded upon the fear of his Maker, that this Armor may serve you
for Alia in alijs vitia principatum obtinent, t^rannidem exercent; Ideoque
oportet vnumquemque nostrum, secundu^ qualitatem belli quo principaliter
infestatur pugnam arripere, Cass. colla. 6. c 27. Quamuis res bellicae caecos
habea^t euentus, tu tamen dimicandi voluntatem pro victoriae pignore tene,
Nazian. Paneg. Constant.
undertaking the Combat, (maintayning it with courage) and making your retrait
(although by death) with the reputation of a wise and valorous Soldier; square
all your Actions by the Rules of Virtue and Reason; and continue always the
same, in things contrary and diverse, without change of your constancy and
virtue. For as Gold, wrought into diverse fashions, and transformed into sundry
kind of Ornaments, remains still the same in substance; so a Wiseman continues
always the same, what soever happens; he is fit for all chances; he is Governor
of the bad, Intertayner of the good, he exercises himself so, that he
shows his virtue as well in Gubernator in tempestate dignoscitur, miles in
acie pro atur, and Caesari semper in aduersis quam in prosperis mayor animus
fuit, Val. Max.
adverse as prosperous affairs; he will show it in Wealth, in Poverty, in
his Country, in Banishment, when he is a Commander, if not a Soldier, in
health, if not in sickness, or in death it Epaminon das cum Leuctrum and
mantineam, secundis praelijs contudisset; hasta traiectus, sanguine and spiritu
deficiens, recreare se conantem primum an clypeus suus saluus esset, deinde an
hosts penitus fusi orent, inter, ogauit, quae cum ex an mi sententia comper^t,
Non finis inquit comilitones vitae meae, sed meli ^^ and altius initium
aduenit, nunc enim vester dux Epaminondas nascitur, quia sic monitur, Valerius
Maximus.
self; he can subdue all evils whatsoever; having his chief pleasures in
those things that are neither subject to time, or corruption: Nunquam temeritas
cum consilio comm scetur, nec ad consilium casus admittitur, Cic. pro Mar.
Maximus bellum sic instruxit, vt esset omnium circumspectus quae contra cum
poterant excogitari, Treb. Pol. in Gall.
his valor is never without judgment, nor his designs without conduct; he
has Justice in his arms, Wisdom in his counsels, Vig^lancie and Fidelity in
his executions, Sufferance in pain, and patience at all occasions; he chooses
not friends by their greatness, neither is he luxurious after new
acquaintance; he maintayneth the strength of his body, not by Delicacies, but
by Temperance, and his mind by giving it preeminence over his body, he is
Servant of Virtue, and Friend of the most High; his resolutions are Multa nouit
Vul^es, Felis vnum magnum, ex Fab. Aesop. Nihil est accepta virtute quod
(mortali animo and manu) immortale queri potest, V. Max.
few and well settled; wandering resolutions (oft-times ending in confusion) are
none of his; he is thus, and will be thus. Clouds fly over the Sun,
Darkness follows Light, and Light Darkness; nothing under Heaven is at one
Credamus sextio monstranti^ter pulcherrimum, et clamanti, Hac i^ur ad astra,
Sen. Epist. 72.
stay and permanent, but the resolutions of a wise and virtuous mind, Virtue
being a proportion and uprightness of mind in points agreeable to reason,
making the Possessours happy, because whatsoever happens unto them, Virtue
turns it into good.

SECT. XI.
AS doing good is better the^ not doing evil, so (for the better exercising
your self in the practice of Virtues) I do rather recommend unto you, honest
society, then a Omnia mala nobis solitudo persuadet, Cen. Epist. 25. Solitudo
est, quae etiam virum fortem fortissime praecipitat, in reatum, Petr. Bles.
Epist. 9. Crates, cum vid^sset adolescentem, solum ambulantem, interrogauit
quid illic faceret? Mecum, inquit, loquor. Cave, inquit Crates, rogo, vt
diligenter attendas ne cum homine malo loquaris, Sen. Si de fatuis, congregatio
tibi necessaria est: si de prudentibus, tu congregationi, Ber. Epist. 115.
Melancholous and Heremitish life; but in the choice of your company, great
care is to be had, Res est contagiosa societas mala, and sicut grex totus,
vnius scabie cadit, and porrigine porci, vuaque conspectu liuore ducit ab vua,
Iuuenal. Valetudinem firmissimam laedit aer grauis, and aura pestilens; Ita
mentem optimam conuersatio cum malis.
that you converse with none, but such whose disposition is honest, and
virtuous; affect not multitude of friends, (remembering that ancient saying, He
that has many Friends, has eaten too much Salt at Meals) but (after good
advice) settle your friendship with such, who reverence Multi non amico sed
amicitia caruerunt, hoc non potest accidere, cum amicos, in societatem honesta
cupiendi par trahit voluntas, Sen. Ep^st. 6. Verae amicitiae causa vnica,
virtus, Plut.
friendship, as the habit of a continued love, proceeding from a true virtuous
disposition; uniting two souls in one will, and esteem the conuersing of
friends, their mutual participating, either private sorrows, or conceived
pleasures, to be the true end of friendship; for this cause did Theseus choose
Perithous, Orestes, Pilades.

Let your friend be such, who accounts beauty but a blaze, wealth a fickle
favor of Fortune; but friendship to be the precious chain of humane society,
and of such Virtue, that neither Tales nobis amicos quaerere dece^, qui extremo
^n periculo, veletiam ^ost mortem very amici permanca^t, Val. Max.
time nor fortune can corrupt.

In friendship abandon (as an infectiue poison) suspicious Jealousy, and Cum
amico omnes cogitation^^, omnes curas misce, S^n. Quibus est comm^nis amor,
annon necesse est, hos ipsos cum voluptate, se mutuo aspicere, beneuole
colloqui, fidem ^utuam habere? Xen in conui.
communicate not only your mind, but your most weighty affairs to your
friend; and if sometime you keep up any thing from him, let it be to avoid
suspicion of facility.

Use not your friends like Suits of Apparel, in wearing them threadbare, and
then call for new, but remember thou owe him four duties; Existimabam quo
enim magis in rebus aduersis iuuissem, tanto fore mihi in prosperis amiciorem
Xen Paeda. l 7. Sincerae fidei amici praecipue in aduersis co^noscuntur. V. Max.
with thy purse, with thy person, with thy comfort, and counsel.

In true friendship patience is specially required: for there is no man that
has not somewhat to be misliked, and shall not justly mislike something in
you; if your friends faults be few, swallow and digest them, if many, smother
them to others, but lovingly notify them to himself.

Let nothing but death and villainie divorce you from your friend, but still
follow him so far as is either possible or honest, and then Affabilitas and
comitas res sunt nullius impendij, amicitias tamen multas conglutinant
exhibitae, dissoluunt praetermissa, Cic.
leave him with sorrow.

In your gesture and words be Affabilitas and comitas res sunt nullius
impendij, amicitias tamen multas conglutinant exhibitae, dissoluunt
praetermissa, Cic.
courteous to all men, by this means you shall procure love, and keep friendship
fast.

SECT. XII.
FOr the better mayntayning this friendship, and attayning to that perfection,
that is demanded in the true use of society; you must have diligent care
Nescit poenitenda loqui, qui proferenda, suo tradidit examini, Quintilian.
what you speak, and how you discourse. I do confess, it is an excellent
thing to speak well, yet for avoiding of habitual Hypocrisy (I do advise
you) prefer good thoughts, before good words; speak what you think; and so
your thoughts being good, you cannot but speak well; and think it ever the
safest way, to In omnibus Timanthis operibus, plus intelligitur, quam pingitur,
and sapientis est suam celare sentenniam, Tynd.
speak little, and think more: we do see daily basest things most
plentiful.

In your silence avoid the censure of Affectatio^, of Sullenness, and
Ignorance, and then care not how little you speak, but how well: it was a good
saying, Not that which is much, is well, but that which is well, is much.

Essays Do. Fran. Ba. nunc Angliae Cancel.
All discourse ought to be like a Field, without coming home to any man; use
discourse of your self sparingly, of others as sparingly, neither speaking
evil of others, nor good of your self.

Affect better discretion in discourse then Eloquence; and to speak agreeable
to them you deal with, then in good words or good order.

Quintil. instit. Orac. l. 7.
Use not many circumstances before you come to the matter, for that begets
weariness, and for eschewing of bluntness, use some preamble.

Non est bonum ludere cum dijs, Ans.
Privilege ever from your Discourse, Religion, matter of State, great Persons,
any man's present business of importance, and all causes that deserve Crudelis
est animi a^^nis malis gaudere, and non miserere communem naturam, V. Max.
pity, ever putting difference betwixt Nemo videtur sibi tam vilis, vt
irrideri mereatur, Fast.
saltness and bitterness in your Discourse.

SECT. XIII.
SOmetimes lookers on see more then Players: submit thy self to others in what
thou art Omnis reprehensio, vel meliores, vel cautiores nos reddit, Sen. So
reprehendi ag^efers, reprehendenda ^e feceris, Aus.
reproved, but in what thou art praised, be thy own Judge, ever accounting
better of a sharp reproof, then a smooth deceit. When you reprove others,
observe that all reproof and admonition ought to be lovingly, mildly,
secretly, freely, and in a fit time, having no other end, then the love of our
Friend or Neighbor.

Before you reprove any man, know him well; some men are like thorns, which
easily touched, hurt not, but hardly and unwarily, draw blood from the hand;
others as Nettles, if they be nicely handled, sting and prick, but roughly
pressed, hurt not.

SECT. XIIII.
IT is not possible, but a selfe-conceyted man must be a Fool: Ingeniosi sumus
ad fallendum nosmetipsos, Plin. in Paneg. Ante omnia necesse est teipsum
existimare, quiae plus nobis videmur, posse quam possumus, Sen. de tranquil.
animi, l. 9.
for that ouerweaning opinion he has of himself, excludes all opportunity of
getting knowledge. Think thy self but so bare O quam contempta res est homo,
nisi supra humana se erexerit: putredo in exortu, bulla in omni vita, and esca
vermium in morte, Theoph. Alexand. in Pashal.
as thou art, and more thou need not; and rather confess thy ignorance,
then profess the knowledge thou have not: it is no shame not to know all
things, and more dangerous to surfeit upon wit, then want it.

SECT. XV.
ALl passions or perturbations of the Soul, (as Jealousy, Envy, Revenge,
Hopes, Fears, Joys, Sorrows, Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, etc.) are so
violent, that they drive the Soul from the Seat of Justice, and do proceed
either from Ignorance, Inconsiderateness, or from a false persuasion, that the
good or ill is greater then it is: therefore when any affection begins to
move, stay it, and compel it to give way to Reason; ever use your passions, as
Magni Imperatores, cum vident male parere milites, aliquo labor compescunt,
and expeditionibus detinent, V. Max.
wise Princes do those they misdoubt for faction; hold them down, and keep
them bare, that their impotencie and remissness may afford you security.

SECT. XVI.
AMong all the passions to which we are subject, there is none more hurtful
(and more to be eschewed) then Jealousy, from whence many other vehement
perturbations do proceed.

When we have once swilled in the Nectar of Love (either contracted by a
conceived favor to our friend, or Matrimonial Covenant) we are so chary, that
we can endure no Corriuall of our thoughts, neither admit partaker of our
favors.

From this fear proceeds the fury that men call Jealousy, which is a
secret suspicion that either our friend has not loyally discharged the
confidence we had in him, or that others should enjoy that excellency we have
chosen sole and singular to our selves.

This is the Vita quae tandem magis est iucunda? Vel viris doctis magis
expetenda? Mente quam pura sociam iugalem, semper amare. Vita quae tandem magis
est dolenda? Vel magis cunctis fugienda quam qua (Falsa suspecta probitate
amici) tollit amorem? Nulla eam tollit medicina pes^em, Nullamue emplastrum vel
imago sane, Astra nec curant magicae nec arts Zelotypiam, ex Solon. in l^^d.
sept. Sapi.
Canker that fretteth the quiet of the thoughts, the Moth that consumes the
life of man, and the Poison specially opposed against the perfection of love.

After the heart is once infected with Jealousy, the sleeps are broken and
converted in Dreams, and disquiet slumbers; the thoughts are cares and
sorrows; the life woe and misery; that living dies, and dying prolo^gs the
life in worse content then death.

This foul and disgraced stain of Jealousy, is as hurtful to the heart, as
a Cockatrice to the sight, or Hemlocke to the taste: and as true Love is Divine
with Loyalty, so is it Hellish with Jealousy, proceeding from the fearful
misdoubting of not correspondence, or excess of Love.

It shortneth not only the life, but oftentimes is the cause of most horrible
Massacres.

If Fortune frown in Love, we fly to patience; if there happen Iarres, loving
and friendly brawles, are but introductions to greater delight. If Poverty
intervene, we rely upon time, (knowing that all earthly things are subject to
vicissitude) the lowest ebb may have his flow, the deaddest neape his full
tides: but as the fire consumes Flax, so this infernal plague of Jealousy
rooteth and raceth out all true love from the heart.

I cannot omit the advice, that (long ago) a judicious (and Ex Relat. Flemin.
iouiall disposed) Gentleman did give to his friend, who was begun to be
distempered with the burning ague of Jealousy, and it was thus:

I perceive (said he) you are much perplexed with some deep conceived grief,
yet not so deep, but I have diued into it; and if you will answer me
directly to a question, that I will propose, I shall either cure your disease,
or confirm your folly; to whom the other replied, confessing that he was
somewhat disturbed, and as he would answer his question, so would he be glad
to have so skillful a Physician. Then said he, Put the case that Horns you
must have: whether will you make choice to have them in your head, or in your
pocket? The other answered, In my pocket. You have answered rightly, said his
friend, and I understand partly by the report of others, that have taken notice
(by your own disquietnes) of your discontent, and partly, that I see you
transported with that passion, that a wise man never admits further entrance,
then to his pocket.

My advice is, that you wade not where the Foord has no footing; bark not
with the Wolves of Syria, against the Moon; look not to climb to Olympus,
neither aim at impossibilities: but pacify that with patience, which you
cannot amend by being passionate, and rather carelessly pass over, or secretly
smother that which (without the hazard of your credit, and stayne of your
Posterity) cannot be proclaimed, then Vt ignis, vbi foenum v^l culmum
arripuerit sine mora, simulac materia^ at tigerit, flammam lucidam accendit:
Ita zelotypiae ignis, vbi animum attigit, amorem omnem penitus exurit, Author de
Sing.
add fire to such combustible matter, that (once kindled) you are never able
to quench.

SECT. XVII.
Envy is a base fretting grief, conceived against the weal, or good estate
of others, or a Hellish ioying at the fall, or adverse fortune of our
Neighbors; as it was the first weapon, wherewith man received his deadly blow,
in Paradise: so ever since has it been so charily preserved, by that
irreconciliable Enemy to man, that he never does impart it, but to his Inuidia
non in alio quam in minuto, degeneri and ieiuno animo sibi domicilium parat,
Cass.
dear friends, or inthrald Slaves, who once possessed with this infernal favor,
will rather like Aesops toad, by envying others greatness, thrust themselves out
of their own skins, then any other shall be either partaker of their good
thoughts, or good words, howsoever sometimes, (yet seldom) they
(hypocritically) smother the Detractio est stultorum thesaurus, quem in lingua
geru^t, Aug. in detr.
detracting smoke.

As I wish you never to entertayne the least coal of this selfe-consuming
fire; so because true virtue rests in it self, either for reward or censure,
if you find your self upright, In hoc flectendi sumus, vt omnia vulgi vitia
nobis ridicula videantur, nam vt virtus sualuce conspicua auxilium auersatur
alienae comme^dationis: Ita vulgi opiniones parui facit, Sym. and Claud.
let not false rumors, neither envy of the base vulgar daunt you: for as the
least fly has her spleen, the small Ant her gall, so no Vt vmbra hominem,
sic inuidia virtute^ eius sequitur, Tacit.
man virtuous, although never so mean, but has his envy.

SECT. XVIII.
Revenge (being an inhumane thirst for the blood of man, or to do harm to
others) is so offensive, that commonly it hurts both the O stolide feroces,
qui dum in vindictam ruitis, vitae huius and aeternae discrimen incurritis;
nonne videtis vos specioso honoris titulo ad carnificinam duci? nonne pudet vos
singularis dementiae? nonne poenitet vos alae, periculosi certaminis, vbi vigor
ille animi and praestantia ingenij, Christop. de cap. fon. in Monomachos.
Offrer and Suffrer; as in the Be, the pattern of fond spightfulnesse, who in
her anger inuenometh the flesh, and ever after lives a Drone.

This vindictiue passion, affecting revenge, Ille nefarius and sine gente,
nibuque mihi esto, qui cupit ferum, and execrabile bellum, Hom. Il. 2.
civil dissension, and private quarrels, has been the overthrow of many
ancient Estates, Families, and worthy Personages; if they had not been
tainted with the infamous note of barbarous Cruelty, Sedition, and foolish
maintenance of false reputation.

Alterius perditio, tua sit cautio, Isidor. folil. 1.
Therefore let others harms prevent your danger, and account Optima iniuria
vltio, est obliuto. Nobile vincendi genus est patientia, Iuue.
it a Virtue, to remit a wrong, and applaud it for true and Christian valor,
that you may hurt and will not, keeping that Golden Mean, in the remitting of
wrongs, that you neither encourage others to offer the^, nor induce God to
retain yours.

SECT. XIX.
Keep a mean in your Joys, Hopes, Fears, and Sorrows, and because every
man has his Quem dies videt veniens superbum, hunc dies videt fugiens
iacentem, Aus.
turn of sorrow, before it come, prepare for it, when it comes, Nihil mihi
videtur infoe^icius eo, cui nihil euenit aduersi, Senec. Ignotae tantum
foelicibus Arae, Stat. l. 12.
welcome it, when it goes, take but half a farewell, still expecting his
return (the greatest part of the life of man is consumed in hoping well,
being ill, and fearing worse:) Si fortuna inuat, caueto tolli, si fortuna
tonat, caueto mergi, Periand. Symbol.
when thou art ill, live in hope of better; when thou art well, in fear of
worse; neither do at any time hope without fear (lest thou be deceived, with
too much confidence) neither do thou fear without hope (lest thou be
overmuch dejected) and in all Fears, Hopes, and Sorrows, be careful that
you be ever provided with the true grounds of contentation.

SECT. XX.
TRue Contemptor ambitionis and infinitae potestatis Dominus ipsa vetustate
florescit, Democ.
Magnanimity is ever most settled and calm in greatness; eschew (as a
contagious poison) ambition, being a disordered, and insatiable desire of
glory, a neuer-satisfied greediness to rule and aspire: This violent passion,
carried away by the perturbations of Intemperance, has been, and is the
Septem illa mundi miracula (and si his quae mirabiliora) seque^tium annorum
extruxit ambitio, and aliquando solo equata visentur, Sen. ad Polib.
overthrow of many flourishing Estates, and worthy spirits. This Ambition is
still accompanied with like discontent in inioying, as in want; making men like
poisoned Rats, who when they have tasted their bane, cannot rest until they
drink, and then much less unto their death: It is Ambition that Plat. de Rep.
and 2. de lege.
kindles up the fire of Domestical Divisions, Civil Wars, making no other
reckoning of whatsoever damnable enterprises, then to further her devised
platformes.

Philip of Macedon had a Domestical Ex Carifi^j Histor. Athen. lib. 10.
Remembrancer, that did sing daily in his ear, before he did come out of his
Bedchamber, Remember, Philip, thou art mortal.

His son Alexander, after many Satis est vicisse Alexandro, quam mundo lucere
satis; ita est Alexander, rerum natura, post omnia Oceanus, post Oceanum nihil;
de siste, Alexander, orbis te tuus reuocat. Plut. de fort. Alex.
famous and Qui tam horridi montes, quorum non iuga Alexander calcauerit? vltra
liberi patris trophaea constitimus; non quaerimus orbem, sed amittimus, Sen.
Suas. 1.
indefatigable travels, (overcome with Ambition) although he had conceived in
his mind, a fond opinion of his own Deity, and did stiffely maintain it, yet
on a time, when he was wounded with a Dart, and did see his blood flow out in
abundance, he then plainly Omnes homines me deu^ esse existimant, sed vulnus
hoc, me hominem esse indicat, Quint. Curt. de gest. Alex.
did confess, that he was no more but a man.

Charles the Great fed thirteen Beggars, in his own dining Chamber every day,
that by this sad view of poverty, he might be moved to a more moderation of
his high fortune.

Hannibal, Hannibalem ferunt frendentem, gementemque, ac non sine lachrymis,
Legatorum verba audisse; raro quequam alium, patriam exilij causa relinquentem
magis moestum abisse, quam ^um ex hostili solo: respexisse saepe Italiae
littora, deos hominesque, accusantem; se quoque, ac suum ipsius caput
exceratum, quod non cruentum a Cannensi victoria militem Romam duxisset, ^iu.
Decad 3. lib. 10.
after the renowned overthrow of Cannas, (the Ambassadors of his Enemy lying
prostrate at his feet) deeply considering the instabilitie of worldly affairs,
did so check his ambitious Designs, that in lieu of Triumph, he crowned his
Victory with tears.

These Presidents, and the various Spectacles of Humane Misery, the cross
Casualties, which on every side present themselves to the eyes of the
ambitious, do advise rather to live in the Wisemans Stocks, Paruo contentus,
non aeget mendicitate, Plaut.
with moderate contentme^t, then in a Fools Paradise, to be vexed with
wilful Unquietness, and presumptuous Ambition. Wherein three thoughts may
curb the most aspiring minds; the cares that accompany them, how hard it is
to stand in so slipperie a place, and how dangerous or irrecouerable the fall
is.

SECT. XX.
Covetousness Auaritia est bellua fera, and immanis, intoleranda, quae
incendit oppida, agros, fana, domos vastat: diuina cum humanis miscet, neque
exercitus, neque moenia obstant, quo minus vi sua penetret; fama pudicitia,
cunctos mortales spoliat; veru^ si pecuniae and vsurae decus ademeris, magna
illa vis auaritiae facile bonis moribus vincetur, Val. Max.
is a capital vice of the Soul, tending to an insatiable desire, to have from
all men, and to withold unjustly that which belongs to another: it is
rightly compared to a Dropsy, the more it has, the more it desires; or to
Tantalus in Hell, who betwixt food and Water, dies with hunger and thirst:
others compare a covetous man to an Hog, that is good for nothing until
death; or to a Dog in a Wheel, that rosteth meat for other men's eating.

As in Quicke-siluer, all things swim but Gold, so nothing sinketh to the
heart of a covetous man, but gain: Piety, Honesty, and Charity swim on the
top, and descend not to the heart; a covetous man's Wisdom consists only
Insania damnandi sunt, qui tam multa anxiae co^gerunt, cum sit tam paucis opus,
Demo.
in gain, but in more requisite Knowledge he is a base Ignorant, and is to be
Pla. pol. 2. Arist. 2. oeco.
excluded from all wel-gouerned Commonwealths. From this Covetousness, as from
a Fountain of mis-hap, proceeds the subversion of Estates, the wrack of
Oeconomical Societies; from thence do issue Treasons, breach of Amity, and a
million of other mischiefs: Covetousness neither regards Justice, nor
Equity; it contemns all Laws, both Divine and Humane, condemns the
Innocent, iustifies the Guilty, finding ever some excuse for Corruption,
Extortion, and Usury. Finally, it makes young men Fools, Auaritia senilis quid
velit non intelligo: quid enim absurdius qua^ quo minus restat viae plus
viatici quaerere? Cic. Tusc.
old men mad and Atheists.

SECT. XXI.
HE that Cass. l. 7 c. 5.
did call riches, Bona Fortunae, did rather utter his auaricious inclination,
then show himself a good Philosopher, in ascribing false goods to a false
patron; for as there is no Fortune to give or guide riches, so there is no
goodness in the^; yet they are so necessary (even to good men) that Haud facile
emerguat quorum virtutibus obstat res angusta domi, Iuuc. Paupertatis vnicum
incommodum habere sapientem, dixit Architas Philosophus.
without the^ they can hardly put their goodness or virtue in practice, Virtue
in Poverty being like unto a goodly Ship ready rigged, but cannot sail for
want of wind.

After you have informed your self of the true causes that make Riches
necessary (the chief whereof are to supply your own wants, and to enable you
to do good to others) if Riches come in your way, refuse them not, neither
desire them to other end, but to make them Slaves; and if need be, without
grief (with Socrates) Eurip. in vita Socrat. Saepe mecum reputans,
quibusquisque rebus clarissimi viri magnitudinem inuenissent, quae res,
Populos, Nationes, Civitates auxissent; ac deinde, quibus causis amplissima
Regna, and Imperia corruissent; eadem semper bona, atque mala reperiebam: Omnes
victores diuitias contempsisse, and victos cupiuisse; neque aliter excellere se
quisquis, and diuina mortalis attingere potest, nisi amissis pecuniae and
corporis gaudijs; and animo indulgens, non assentando neque concupita
praebendo, sed in labor, patientia bonisque praeceptis and factis fortibus, se
exercitando, Val. Max.
throw them in the Sea. Persuade thy self, if thou make them once Master, thou
have condemned thy self to thy own Galleys. It is a great madness in a man, at
once to make himself both Slave and Fool: although thy Chains be of Gold,
thy bondage may be more glorious, but not less miserable.

Lay not up too much, and utter nothing, lest thou become covetous, and
miserable, neither spend all, and lay up nothing, lest thou become prodigal
and poor; ever framing rather your Vt foelicitatis est quantum velis, posse:
sic magnitudinis, velle quantum possis, Plin. in Panegyr. Constant.
mind to your estate, then your estate to your mind, and your charges rather
under it, then either level, or above; a man having means, may rise with
credit, but cannot fall without shame.

SECT. XXII.
ALl Voluptuousness (giving Per voluptatem vitia facilius surrepunt, Sen.
Epist. 7. Magnum Cicero audaxque concilium suscepisse Graeciam, quod voluptatum
and cupidinum simulachra in gymnasijs consecrasset, Lact. de falls. Relig.
entry to other Vices) is valiantly to be resisted, being a delight, which
tickleth our se^ses with false plesures, quickly flying away, leaving behind
the occasion of Repentance, the fruits of grief, dulling of the Spirits, the
weakening of the body, and innumerable Diseases.

Delight not in the company of Cum sapiens Solomon fueras, sapientia non te
eripuit, res est imperiosa Venus. Et tu Troia potens fueras, te nulla redemit
Nobilitas, non te Pergamus eripuit. Tu Samson robustus eras, nec te tua virtus
seruauit, frauds saepe ministrat amor; frangebas scilices, superabas castra,
domabas extremos quicquid erat crudele per agros: Te tamen exciso delusit
foemina crine, Text. discrib. mul. Non ita difficile est, ipsis captum retibus
exire, quam Veneris perrumpere nodos, Lucret. Vita foueam, in quam alios
cecidisse vides, Isidor. soliloq. l. 1.
strange Women, neither tie thy self to a Woman's beauty, which is like
Phidea's Pictures, showing most glorious to the eye, yet blemished with every
breath. Dalila will show, and speak fair, but in the end she will bereave
thee of thy strength and life: such Gnats will for a while make music about
thy ears, but be sure they will sting in the end; for Lechery is no other
thing then a furious Passion, Arist. Problem Theophrast. lib. 3.
shortning the life, hurting the Understanding, darkening the Memory, taking
away the Heart, spoiling Beauty, weakening the ioints, ingendring Sciatica,
Gouts, Giddiness in the Head, Leprosy, and Pox.

SECT. XXIII.
LEt the filial Timor Domini est ianitor animi, Bernard. and Johan. Roll: in
Quadrag Ser.
fear of your Creator, and Duo animi dati a Deo custodes domestici, pudor and
timor: qui pudorem amisit, bestiae par est; qui timorem, bestia peior; Bern. de
diverse. 22. 1.
shame to do evil, be the faithful Attendants, and Doore-keepers to hold out
whatsoever may beget either sorrow or disgrace. As the first is the beginning
and consummation of Wisdom: so good and approved Tu virorum ac mulierum
praecipuum firmamentum, pudicitia es: tu enim consecratos Vestaefocos incolis,
tuo praesidio, puerilis aetatis infignia munita suni, tui numinis respectu,
sincerus inuentae flos permanet, te custode, matronalis stola sancietur, Val.
Max.
shamefastness is the Mother of good Counsel, the Guardian of Duty, the
Mistress of Innocence, and preserver of Chastity, and shall ever be unto you,
as faithful a Quid beatius? quid securius, quam eiusmodi custodes habere,
quibus me totum refundam, quasi alteri mihi; qui deuiare non sinant, fraenent
praecipitem, dormitantem excitent, quorum reuerentia, excellentem reprimat,
excedentem corrigat, constantia and fortitudo, nutantem firmet, erigat
diffidentem, fides and sanctitas, ad honesta and sancta prouocet, Bernard. de
consid. l. 4.
Watch, as Cum Philippo (intempestiue ludenti) Antipatrum venire obnunciaretur,
(...), alueum qua ludebat in lectu^ reiecit, Athen. Dipnosop. lib. 10.
Antipater was to Philip of Macedon; and in the end crown all your actions with
the Crown, that is only due to In cassum bonum agitur, si ante vitae terminum
deseratur, quia frustra velociter currit, qui priusquam ad metas veniat
deficit, Greg. Mor. l. 2. c. 40. Non inchoantibus, siquidem praemium
promittitur, sed perseuerantibus, Isidor. de sum. bon. l. 2. c. 7.
Perseuerantia sola virtutum coronatur, Ber.
Perseverance. From this commendable shamefastness, many things are to be
privileged; as, not to be ashamed to displease the multitude against Reason
and Equity; not to be ashamed to reprove such as come of purpose to offend;
not to be ashamed to confess your Ignorance, that you may be instructed; or
if any man withold your due, be not ashamed to demand it with Reason.

SECT. XIIII.
EVer Apelli fuit perpetua consuetudo, nunquam tam occupatam diem agendi, vt
non lineam ducendo exerceret artem; and vsu pinxit Apelles quae pingi non
possunt, tonitrua, fulgura, Plin. l. 35. c. 10.
accustom your self to good things: for three things concur to make a man
perfect; Nature, Education, and Custom: the last two are of force to ouerrule
what is amiss in the first, and that which is called Habitus est altera
natura, Sim.
habit, (being a constant desire, and following or eschewing of things) is
acquired by custom, then which, there is nothing of greater force, either to
good, or ill; unless you attain to this habit of goodness, your soul
works in vain, or like an unskillful Apprentice; for when our actions and
affections are grown to a habit, then are they called, either Virtues or
Vices, as they are well or ill done.

This habit in bewitching Vices, is Vbi semel decratum est, in praeceps
peruenitur; adeo mature a rectis in praua, a prauis in praecipitia peruenitur,
Patere. lib. 2.
hardly, or Tunc consummata infoelicitas est, vbi turpia non solum delectant,
sed placent, Senec.
never removed: therefore the best remedy against so dangerous an evil, is to
resist the beginning of vicious motions, Nam turpius eijcitur, quam non
admittitur hospes.

SECT. XXV.
MY last advice unto you, concerning the right use of all the Cardinal
Virtues, and eschewing their contraries, shall be borrowed from the (...), l. 2.
Solomon of this Age; which is, that you make over all Virtues, Temperance
Queen; I do not mean the vulgar interpretation of Temperance, consisting in
gustu, and Tactu, or moderation of those two Senses; but of that wise
moderation, first, commanding your self, then as a Queen shall overrule all
the affections of your mind, and as a wise Physician, mix all your Actions
accordingly thereto.

Remember, that in all commendable Actions, In medio stat virtus; and that the
Pro bonis mala amplectimur, vitia nobis sub virtutis nomine obrepunt, sunt enim
vitia virtutibus vicina, Hier. lib. 3. de Vict.
two Vices, at either end of them, are but falsely colored under the borrowed
names of Virtue, having indeed no affinity therewith.

SECT. XXVI.
Be careful to frame all your outward Actions, (whether they be necessary; as
feeding, sleeping, speaking, gesture, etc. or not necessary, although
convenient, as gaming, and all sort of lawful recreation,) Cura vt habeas
mentem sanam in corpore sano, Aus. Animi imperio corporis seruitio magis
vtimur, Salust. Catil. lib. 1. Corpus, dum ministra animae deputatur, consors
and cohaeres inuenitur, Tert. lib. 2. cap. 7. Omnis nimietas vitium reputatur,
Tynd.
that they may serve, for the advancement of your inward Virtues, disposition
and health of your body; and as they that should eat some Dish deliciously
sweet, temper it with tarte sauce (lest they be cloyed,) and those that
receive bitter Pills, roll them in Sugar (that they may not be annoyed with
the unpleasant taste:) so, rather season all your exterior Actions with
Mediocritie, then with Delight or Excess.

But because all these sorts of outward Actions have been so fully entreated
of by many, and are (I do hope) known to all (that I come to an end) I will
only add a short advice, for reading of Books, for Apparel and Travel,
being three of the former indifferent Actions, whereof you may make much
profitable use.

SECT. XXVII.
THe chief use of Books, is to increase knowledge, confirm judgment, to
compare times past with the present; to draw profit from both for the future,
and to bring out the dead speaking with the living. Books are the most free
Reproouers of Vice, the most trusty and comfortable Friends, and faithful
Companions that are, ever ready with good counsel, when it is either required
or needful; they are the only Physic to purge the natural dullness of our
homebred ignorance, and weak capacity.

In reading of Books it is better (as in the use of Friends) to converse
seriously with few, then to wander amongst many without profit.

Make choice of the best Fastidientis stomachi est multa degustare, Plut. Vt
cibos dimittis quo facilius digerantur, ita lectio non cruda sed multa
iteratione mollita, memoriae imitationique tradatur, nec per parts scruta^da
omnia, sed perlectus liber vtique resumendus, Quint. instit. Orat. lib. 11.
cap. 2.
Authors that write upon the subject you most affect, or is most necessary for
you; (ever rejecting all such as are either repugnant to Godliness or good
Manners) read them with diligence, not in parcels (as many unprofitably do)
or slightly, and then cast them aside: but pervse them with diligent
observation orderly, from beginning to end; taking a strict account of your
self, of those things you read: so shall your labors (by exercise and daily
increase of your knowledge) at last produce the desired fruit of your studies.

SECT. XXVIII.
THere is nothing whereby the inward disposition of the mind may be sooner
discovered, then by lightness or stayednesse of apparel; a fantastical
attire being a confirmation of an unsettled mind. (...), l. 3. fol. 110. Dent
tibi Caesar, aetatem dij quam mereris, seruentque animum quem dederunt, Plin.
in Panegyr. Ampliora sunt merita Principum, quam nostrorum optatae votorum,
Naz. in Paneg. Constable.
I do advise you, not to follow the frantike humors of new Fashions, neither
to be superstitiously, basely, slightly clothed, nor artificially decked; but
to use your clothes in a cleanly, honest, comely, and careless form.

At such times as you converse with your Superiors, or Strangers, rather be
above, then under the rate, your means will allow you for apparel: although
it be a great folly in a man, to judge the preciousnesse of a Jewel, by the
Case wherein it is kept, and much greater to esteem it by the cover of the
Case; even so by the same reason, it is an equal indiscretion to estimate a
man's worth, either by his body or clothes; yet on the other side it is an
inevitable certainty, that not only the common people and strangers, but even
wisemen are moved, and stirred up with outward shows, and their mind
(according to those exterior things) prepared to receive a deep impression of
liking or disliking, favor, or disfavor, reverence, or careless
retchlessenesse.

SECT. XXIX.
I Do think verily, that all purpose of Travel undertaken, Non ad voluptatem
solum, sed ad vtilitatem, argues an industrious and generous mind, and that
their spirits are more base, that strive to houer about home, and these more
Noble and Divine, that imitate the heavens, and joy in motion.

At such time, therefore, as you travel out of your Country, resolve to travel
out of your Cou^trie-Fashions, and indeed out of your self, that is, out of all
former excess of intemperate feeding, disordinate drinking, thriftlesse
gaming, fruitless time-spending, violent exercising, and all irregular
mis-gouerning: determine that the end of your Travel, is the ripening of your
knowledge, and the end of your knowledge, is the Exomnibus rebus humanis nihil
est praeclarius, quam de Repub^ica been mereri, Cicero Epist. 10. ad Familiar.
service of your Country, which by right challenges a chief interest in you.

The first step to this knowledge, is to understand the Languages where you
Travel: the best way to attain to the knowledge of them, is by Book; for
speaking, practice, and conversation are more helpful. After some few Months
( Visus visu volatus, volatu, differt, haud enim M^lut, and Cicades, Aquilae,
and Perdices similiter volant, Plutarch.
as you find your self capable) leave the Book, and only use your Master to
talk with. In France, Orleance, and Bloyz, in Italy, Florence, or Sciena, in
Tuscanie, Prato, in Germany, Hiddleburgh and Lipswick, are the best places for
the Languages.

In your Travels diligently observe what you see in the parts you travel,
making choice of the best, and leaving the world behind you: for helping your
Memoria res est, ex omnibus partibus animi, maxim delicata and fragilis, Rhod.
l. 10. c. 18
Memory, let your chief Book be a Iournall, wherein write down the diverse
Provinces you pass by, their Commodities, Towns, manner of Buildings, the
names and benefit of the Rivers, the distance of Places, the condition of the
Soil, the Manners of the People, and whatsoever notable thing your eye
encountreth by the way.

In your Travel have special care of your company and friends; in that time
remember that Damon and Pitheas are dead; neither presume so much of your own
sufficiency, as to neglect the benefit of counsel, and although sometimes a
young man may prove a Lelius, being Rara auis in terris, yet take a young man
rather for your Companion then Friend: Pietas in Deum toto cordis timore (quasi
culmen and Corona Virtutum) seruetur, Theophil. Alex. de Constant.
serve God daily with great Devotion; he is the only Pillar to hold you up
amongst the dangers that shall inuiron you.

At your return, leave all strange foreign Manners, and fashion your self,
your Manners, Apparel, Carriage, Conference and Conversation to the best
pattern of the place from whence thou did begin thy Travels: Alij satis
vixisse te viso, te recepto, alij magis esse viuendum praedicabunt, Plin. in
Paneg.
so shall the remembrance of them be pleasant and profitable, and thy return
an Ornament to thy Country.

SECT. XXX.
NOw EPILOGVS.
to trusse Quod matres facere solent cum poma bellaria, vel tale quidpiam in
pucrilem sinum immiserint, nequid excidat contrahens vndique tuniculam cingulo
subijciunt: idem and nos faciamus orationem in longum protractam contrahamus,
and in memoriae custodiam deponamus, Chrysostom. de Ozia, Ser. 3.
up all in few words: in the first part of that which you have heard, is
contained a short way to heavenly Jerusalem.

Secondly, for setting you forward in this Journey, the necessity of a good
reputation amongst men is set down, and how it is obtained.

Thirdly, how dangerous a Quicquid praeter opinionem euenire in bello potest,
priusquam ingrediare cogita, Thucid. li. 3.
warrefare you are to undertake in the way, and with what enemies.

Fourthly, that the resolutio^s of a Wiseman forged upon the Anuill of Gods
Grace, are the only Weapons either to foil these enemies, or withstand their
^^^er ceasing assaults.

Fifthly, what Aci^^ ^^^t^^rum pariter pugnantium quae^enda, vbi tot s^^t
auxil^^ rij quot a^^^^^ Bonauent. diet. Salut.
auxiliarie Soldiers you shall choose, for maintenance of so longlasting Wars;
and how you shall keep them from mutiny.

Sixthly, a discovery of the^^ Ambuscadoes, and other impediments that may
obui^te you in so dangerous a March.

Seventhly, some few helps that will serve for necessary provision to your
Camp.

Tri-vni Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

