Scoggins Iestes. WHEREIN is declared his pleasant pastimes in France; and of
his meriments among the Friars: full of delight and honest mirth.

LONDON, Printed by Raph Blower dwelling on Lambert hill near old Fish street
1613.

Certain merry Iestes of Scoggin, translated out of French.
How Scoggin was banished out of England.
Upon a time there was a Goldsmith, of ye City of London, that had a faite
maid to his daughter with whom Scoggin fell in love, and did long time seek to
win her to his pleasure, whom he hunted in all places where she went: not
withstanding she slatly denied him, which bred the greater fire to his beastly
desire, and therefore in an evening as this maid went some two mile or, to a
house that her Father had, Scoggin met her by the way attired in blew Sarcenet,
set all over with little stars of gold having a lawne over his face, and
with a counterfeit voice showed her that he was some strange fortune teller:
declaring unto her that strange misery would shortly fall upon the people of the
City for their sins, with many other speeches touching the same purpose, and
further willed her to show it to the people that they might with fasting and
prayer pacify Gods anger, telling her withal how she had refused the love and
friendship of a good and virtuous man named Scoggin: who in the same place (a
little before) made suit unto her for that she denied him, and therefore if be
sought any thing a^ her hands hereafter, that she should obey him, and there
should great happiness follow her by it, and withal charging her that she
should not discover it to any creature living: the simple wench believed all
for truth, and delivered it as a Prophecy to her acquaintance to fore warn
them of that which should happen amongst them: for the which cause (many at the
first feared much, and in the mean time this poor wench yielded to his
wantonness, which was shortly after spied by the wenches great belly, and the
practice discovered, (...) which cause Scoggin was brought before the chief
Magistrates, and according to the law was for ever banished the land, as he was
well worthy.

How Scoggin made an Oration at Calis.
BEing thus banished England Scoggin clothed himself like a Scholar, and
crossed the Seas from Dover to Calis: whether being come and lacking money: he
laid a wager with one of the Burgomasters, that he would make an oration in
the middle of the market place, which should make one half of his auditors to
laugh, and the other half to weep, for the which purpose and for the winning
of his wager he put on a garment that was very short behind, without any
briches at al, he entered up to a high Scaffold wherein the midst of the
audience, he did so vehemently set forth the story of the woeful destruction
of Jerusalem, that the whole assistance wept tears at the pitiful remembrance
of it, which Scoggin perceived he then laid his hands a cross and seeming to
show a great devotion he bowed his head so low, and lifted up his tail so
high, as he discovered his back side, provoking all those that sat behind
him to laughter, which was in my mind a pleasant part to win a drunken wager
with all,

How Scoggin played the Phision.
SCoggin traveling further up into the Country of France he lodged in an old
Abbey of Nuns, where there was one of them named Isabel who being a sweet
smooth facst girl, had by chance a great grief in her thigh, and was greatly
troubled therewith for the space of five months (and in the end acknowleding
her unworthiness to pray unto God or to be heard of him,) she prayed to S
Dominick that he would be a mediator between God and her, that she might
recover her health: after which the devotions, Scoggin perceiving the matter
how it went, apparelled himself like to S. Dominicke, and came to her in her
sleep, and with annointment that he had be anointed her thigh, and made her
whole* and when she asked the nanie of so precious a remedy, he answered that
it was the ointment and balm of love for the further judgment thereof, I
leave it to the description of the Reader whose conceit therein, I suppose
will join with mine.

How Scoggin got himself an Office.
WIthin a while after this: Scoggin came into Pickardie where lived a Knight of
great livings and had many good offices in the house, of which Scoggin had
great desire to have one, whereby he might the better maintain himself:
whereupon he oftentimes made great suit to the Steward and other chief
officers in the knights house, and withal giving them still some one present
or other, desiring him evermore to remember him and they did answer him
always with one voice, saying, stay awhile and thou shall have the first place
that is voye. But still when it came to the pinch, there was always some excuse
or other, either that the office was too great, or that it was too little, and
he should have a better, or that they were constrained to give it to some of
their brethrens kinsmen and without fail he should have the next that did fall
and with these words they kept Scoggin still off, so that the time went away,
and he served in the Knights house without any reward: in the end Scoggin
perceived himself never the nearer, nor one whit the better but that he lost
his time, his money and his pains determined to make no longer suit but studied
how to flowt them for their ungratefulness: whereupon after this when he
espied convenient time, he came to the chiefest among them, and prayed them one
after another to dine with him the next Sunday following at a house of one of
his friends, for he could do no less then bestow a banquet of them in regard
of their good wills toward him: They promised him one after an other to come
together but yet fearing to have a slender dinner of Scoggins provision, giving
better credit to his words then his kitchen, each of them sent his several
dish of meat before hand, the which Scoggin took and put all together in a
great pot, but God knows in what order, for one had sent a Capon in stewd
broth, another Chickens in white broth, another powdered Beef and Lurnups,
another a leg of Mutton and such like some sent their meat sodden and some
roasted: when the steward and his fellows came to dinner and saw this kind of
service, they had no stomachs to eat, but carried each man to so when their
own meat should come in. Scoggin went to and fro very busy, as one that was
careful to see them all served, but at last one of them said, I pray thee
Scoggin take away these porridge and give us the meat that we sent hither, why
these are yours (quoth he) ours said they? that they are not yes truly quoth
he to one, here is your beef and turnups, to another he is your stewd broth,
to another here is your white broth and so forth, now truly said they we were
never thus used, now the devil take all, for I thought this fool would mock
us: now I pray thee quoth one, where did thou learn to put our meat thus
together for being by it self alone it had been good, but mixed thus together
it is quite spoiled and right naught: even so (quoth Scoggin) are you my
Masters, for when you be each alone by your selves* there is nothing better
then you are, for then you promise mountains, but when you are together, you
are naught like your postage, and will perform nothing. They all perceiving
well what he meant, said unto him, ha Scoggin, we know well to what end this thy
doing was, thou have good cause to be considered: But in the mean time shall
we not dine? Yes that you shall said he, better then you are worthy: then
brought he them forth other meat that he had provided, and set before them,
wherewith they were all pleased: thus when they had well dined, they went away
and concluded, from that time forth that he should be made an officer in ye
knights house, the which was done, for he was within few days made chief
warrenner of all the Knights Parkes and Forests: And thus his invention and
device of pottage did prevail more then all his importunate suites before time.

How Scoggin feasted the Knight his Master.
THis Knight was a batcheler and delighted much in Soggins merriments, for in
his lodge he would always keep good cheer, as commonly most warriners do
and withal a cup of good wine, and now and then a pretty wench to pleasure
the Knight his master, so upon a time this youthful knight sent him word that
he would come the next day to supper to him in his lodge, but he would have him
to provide nothing but light meats, because he found himself not well at
ease, Scoggin sent him word that he should be very welcome, and by and by he
provided good store of calves skins, and sheep skins, and put them all to
boil in a great pan minding therewith to feast the knight his master, when
supper time came and his Master set at table, at the first mess he set before
him, these ^odden calue skins: to whom the knight said: what meat is this thou
bring me? what do thou mean thus to mock me, Sir quoth Scoggin you sent
me word yesterday that I should prepare for your worship light meats, but
when it came to the dressing they went al to the bottom of the pan until at
the last I found these skins that swam above the water, and they are therefore
the lightest meat that I could find quoth. the knight thou wast never good in all
thy life, nor never will be: well sir for this knauish trick I will teach thee
with wham thou have to jest: Scoggin notwithstanding had provided other kind of
meat for his masters supper the which he caused to be brought forth and did
so well use the knight his master, that he was theerewith well pleased, and
forgave Scoggin for this time and so departed after supper again home to his
own house.

How the Knight was lodged in Scoggins house.
ANother time as the aforesaid K. had bin a hunting he grew belated, and
because he would not ride home in the night he and al his train intented to
lodge in Scoggins house for that night: whereupon after the Knight had supped
with that he found there made ready he withdrew himself to rest: but Scoggin
that knew his masters complexion provided him a tender pidgion to lie withal
at night the Knight going to bed well pleased with this his diet, had Scoggin
use his men no worse then he used himself, and likewise (quoth he) let my
Horses be as well used as myself too, for I do put my trust in thee: Scoggin
forgot not these words, but took his leave of his master till the next
morning, and as he helped him to a bedfellow, so had he for each of his men a
Gos^ip, that they might be used no worse then their Master: and likewise sent
straight unto the next town, to borrow good store of Mares, and within a short
time, he found enough to serve his turn, the which Mares he put amongst the
Knights great horses which began to fling, kick, and keep a soul stir,
insomuch that the Horsekeeper was feign to forsake his sweet heart. to appease
the broyle betwixt the horses and Mares. The next day in the morning the Knight
would needs know what ayled his Horses to keep such a coil in the night: The
horsekeeper thought to have excused the matter but could not: Sir quoth the
Horsekeeper, the occasion was because Scoggin had put Mares to your stond
Horses, whereupon the knight presently sent for him, and rebuked him with many
reproachful words, saying, wretch that thou art, will thou always play the
knave with me in this manner? thou have spoiled my horses and yet thou carest
not: why (quoth Scoggin) said you not yesternight to me, that your horses
should be as well used as your self: I have done the best that I could do to
them, they have had Day and Dates their belly full, and they have had straw
vpp^ to the hard belly, so that they wanted but each of them their female which
your worship had your self, and therefore I sought them the like in the next
town. Now a vengeance on thee thou ungracious varlet, said the Knight. do
thou tell me of such things, hold thy peace, we will reckon together, and then
I will reward thee according to thy beings and so went his way for that time
and left Scoggin there devising in his crafty mind, how to get his good will
and favor again, but so it happened that within two or three days upon a
further displeasure which Scoggin wrought by his too much rashness, that he was
put out of services, and sent away to seek himself a new Master, thus you
may see, how a man may loose that in an hour that was not got in a year.

How Scoggin was hired to be a Horse coursers servant with whom he dwelled.
AS Scoggin after this came into a country village, there came unto him a
certain horsecourser that hired him to be his man, who said unto Scoggin that
he should live merrily, and eat of the same meat and drink that he himself
and his wife did, and that he should do all things with half the labor that
other servants did, so Scoggin was content to serve him: within a while after
the Horsecourses wife dressed a couple of Chickens for her husbands dinner, and
had Scoggin turn the spit, and so he did, but when the Chickens were enough he
pulled one of them from the spit, and eat it up without any bread: of which
the good wife complained of to her husband, who presently came unto his man
Scoggin and said unto him? Sirrah what is become of the other Chicken? marry
quoth Scoggin I have eaten it; for you said that I should eat and drink of
the same that you and your wife did: therefore I have eaten one of them, and
the other I leave for you and your wife, for I was affraide, that you should
have offended God in breaking ye promise you promised me: wherefore I have
divided them betwixt us equally. Then said his Master, sir, I care not for
the Chickens, but I would have you please my wife and do after her
commandment, marry so I will quoth Scoggin, whereupon ever after this, when she
had him do anything he did but half, for when she had him fetch a bucket of
Water, he went and brought it but half full of Water, and when he should bring
two logs to the fire, he brought but one, and when he should give the beasts
two bottles of hay he gave them but one, and when he should fetch a pot full
of beer he brought it but half full, and so he did of many other things more.
Then complained she again to her husband of Scoggins knaueries, who came unto
him, and said, sir I badde you should do what she commanded you, Scoggin
answered, I have done as ye bad me, for you said to me when I was hired, that I
should do all things with half the labor that other servants did: with that
the horsecourer laughed, and then said his wife: If you keep this ungracious
knave any longer. I will not tarry with you, but depart away: then he turned
Scoggin out of his service for his wives sake.

How Scoggin set a whole town together by the cares.
AT Easter following Scoggin came to the same Village again, at which time the
Parson of the town (according to the order of the popish Clergy would needs
have a stage play,) and as in that age the whole earth was almost planted with
superstition and idolatry, so such like profane pastimes was greatly delighted
in, especially plays made of the Scripture at an Easter, as I said before) the
Parson of the Village would have a play of the resurrection of the Lord, and
for because the men were not learned, nor could not read, he took a lemman
that he kept (having but one eye) and put her in the grave of an Angel which
when Scoggin saw, he went to two of the simplest fellows in the town, that
played the three Mary's: and the Parson himself, played Christ with a banner in
his hand. Then said Scoggin to the simple fellows when the Angel asks you
whom you seek? you must say the Parsons lemman with one eye, so it fortuned
that the time was come that they must play. and the Angel asked them whom they
sought? Marry quoth they, as Scoggin had taught them, we seek the Priests
lemman with one eye, which when the woman heard, she arose out of the grave,
and all to be scratched one of the poor fellows by the face that played one of
the three Mary's: Whereupon he soundly buffeted her about the ears, the
priest seeing this threw down his banner and went to help his lemman, with
that the other two fell upon the Priest, the clearke likewise took the priests
part, and many other of the parishioners on ehe contrary side, so yt in short
time the whole town lay together by the ears in the middle of the Church,
which when Scoggin perceived he went his way out of the village and came no
more there.

How Scoggin made the country people offer their money to a dead man's head.
Upon a time when Scoggin lacked maintenance and had gotten the displeasure of
his former acquaintance by reason of his crafty deelings and unhappy tricks* he
bethought himself in what manner he might get money with a little labor, so
traveling up into Normandy, he got him a Priests gown and clothed himself
like a Scholar, and after went into a certain Churchyard, where he found the
scull of a dead man's head, the which he took up and made very clean, and
after bore it to a Goldsmith, and hired him to set it in a stud of silver,
which being done, he departed to a village thereby, and came to the Parson of
the Church, and saluted him, and then told him that he had a relic, and
desired him that he would do so much for him, as to show it unto the Parish,
that they may offer to it and withal promised the Parson that he should have
the one half of the offeringes: The Parson moved with covetousness granted
his request, and so upon the Sunday following told his Parishionars thereof,
saying that there was a certain religious scholar come to the town that had
brought with him a precious relic: and he that would offer thereunto, should
have a general pardon, for all his forepassed sins and that the Schotler,
was there present himself to show it them: with that Scoggin went up into the
pulpit, and showed the people the relic that he had, and said to them that
the Head spoke to him, and that it bad him that he should build a Church over
him, and that the money that the church should be builded withal should be well
gotten: But when the people came to offer so it Scoggin said unto them al you
women that have made your husbands cuckolds, I pray you sit still and come not
teoffer, for the head had me that I should not receive your offerings,
whereupon the poor men and their wives came thick and threesould to this
offering, and there was not a woman but she offered liberally, because that he
had said so, and he gave them the blessing with the head: and there was some
that had no money that offered their rings and some of them that offered twice
or thrice because they would be scene: Thus received he the offerings both of
the good and the bad, and by this practice got a great sum of money: After
this when they had all offered, and were departed home: Scoggin went to the
parson and divided the offering and gave him a part thereof, where with the
parson was well content: And the women there about made very much of Scoggin
and maintained him along time amongst them.

How Scoggin deceived a Vintner at Paris in France.
Upon a time after Scoggin was come unto Paris the chief city in France, he
heard tell of a wine, drawer that was so prond and arrogant in all his doings
that few men could endure his company, and it was reported that there was no
man that could deceive him or ouerreach him by wit, whereupon Scogin thought in
his mind how he might deceive him, and then he took 2. gallon bottles ye one
full of water, and the other quite empty, the bottle of water he hid under his
cloak that no man saw it, and so went with ye empty bottle in his hand and
gave it the Vintner to fill with Wine, the which he did, and when it was full
he brought it up to Scoggin and gave it him, and then in the mean time whilst
the Vintner looked aside, Scoggin took the bottle of water from under his
cloak and put the wine in the place, and then asked the price of it. Marry
quoth the vintner it comes to eighteen pence, then quoth Scoggin it is too dear
for me, for I have but twelve pence in my purse, and so gave him again the
bottle of water in steed of the wine, the which he took all in anger and bore
it down again into the seller, and powered out the water into the vessel
which he thought to be Wine, and then came and gave Scoggin the empty bottele
saying: make you me to fill wine, and have no money to pay for it, belike you
think to make me a fool, no quoth Scoggin you make a fool of your self, and
with that word he went away with the bottle of wine and drunk it merrily
amongst his companions

How Scoggin got a twelve months board of an Inne-keeper.
SCoggin remaining still in Paris, was greatly beloved for his subtle wit and
crafty deceites by which means he got such favor of an-Inkeeper there, that
he had meat drink, and lodging a whole year upon credit, at the years end,
the Inkeper demanded his money or a surety for the payment thereof, ye which
Scoggin promised to do, so gathering his wits together for the discharge of his
debt, Scoggin goes unto a certain doctor of Physic, and said unto him good
sir this it is, mine host where I lie, and have this 12. month, was taken this
night with an evil spirit, now I desire you if you can by physic to help
him thereof, and you shall be well rewarded master doctor, that would by the
help of God cure him thereof, and that very shortly: but (quoth Scoggin) you
must tarry two or three days before you take him in hand, for it may not be
done in have: therefore I will go fetch his wife, that she may hear your
promise, so Scoggin departed home to his boast, and told him that he had
found a surety for his debt, and it was master Doctor Dole a neighbor of
his, whereof the Innekeeper was joyful and sent his wife with Scoggin to
witness Master Doctors promise, and being both come to his house, Scoggin said
unto him, and please you M. Doctor hear is the man's wife that I told you of, I
pray you say unto her as you said unto me, marry that I will quoth. he, and help
her husband too, but I pray you good wife (quoth. the doctor) let your husband be
content for at 3. days end i will come to him and perform your request in all
things. Upon this promise away, went the woman with a merry heart to her
husband, and told him that Master Doctor at three days end would fulfill
your desire upon this, the Innekeeper reckoned with Scoggin, and so parted
friends. Now at the three days end he sent his wife to the Doctor for this
money, who came unto him and asked him for the debt he had promised to pay for
Scoggin. Why quoth the Doctor did your Husband bid you say these words to me?
he did (quoth she) then said the Doctor, that is the false devil within him
that would have the money: then said she what false Devil mean you? give me
my money: Then said the Doctor, it was told me that your husband was
possessed with a Devil, go, bring him to me and by the Grace of God I will
help him, whereupon the woman all in an anger hies her home, and tells her
husband of the Doctors speeches, who sitting then by the fire side, where meat
was roasting: in a fury up he gets, and takes spit and toast, and all, and
runs to the doctors house like a madman, thinking to run him through. The
Doctor seeing him, was afraid, and called to his neighbors to help him to
take the man that was so beset with the devil. The Inkeeper still cried knave
give me my money: the Doctor still answered, avoid satan: the neighbors they
can betwixt them, and kept the Inkeeper from spitting the doctor. The subtilty
of Scogin at last being brought to light, they held themselves satisfied, but
as long as the Inkeeper lived he asked still for his money, but the Doctor
answered him still, that he ought him naught, and naught he would pay him,
but always said, if you be taken with a devil, I shall help you thereof, but
never after loved they one another.

How Scoggin gave a Dutchman a Purgation.
SCoggin traveling between Paris and Orleance in France he happened to lodge
in a country Inn where many Hollanders likewise lodged, and Scoggin brought
with him two Eggs which he roasted for to eat, for he was sickely and weary
with travel, and could eat no flesh, which when one of the Hollanders
perceived, he said unto him is it even to my friend, will not your Hostesses
meat serve you, but you must bring meat with you? and with those word he
took the Eggs and roundly supped them up, and when he had so done, he gave
Scoggin the shells again, saying, hold here is thy box, but the relics be
gone whereat all the rest of the guests laughed heartily: and so did Scoggin
himself, who in revenge thereof, went presently into the next room, and
fetched a fair Apple and cut all the coat thereof, and put therein a strong
purgation, and after roasted it in the fire, which being done, he cut in pieces
upon his frencher, and strewed it all over with the powder of Ginger, and so
setting it upon the Table he went his way as though he would have fetched more:
but as soon as he had turned his back, the Hollander took the Apple and eat
it in as great haste as he did the Eggs before, and by and by, he fill to
parbraking, and cast up all in his belly, and was so sick thereof, that the
host, and all his guests thought that he would have died of the Apple. Then
said Scoggin to the guests, be not afraid of him, for it is but a little
purgation that I have given him, and the roasted apple I see is an enemy to the
Eggs, and will not let them rest in his maw, but that they must needs come
out again, whereat the guestes made good sport and laughed heartily, when the
purgation had wrought what it would the Hollander amended, and after said to
Scoggin, roast, eat what thou will, and for i will neue eat any more with thee
again.

How Sooggin frighted his host with the skin of a dead Bear.
THE heast of the aforesaid Inn was a merry disposed mocking fellow, and in a
vain glory still commended his own bolonesse, but so it fortuned the same
night whilst Scoggin remained there, there came riding late in the evening
three Merchants of Paris to the said Inn, but because it was very late ere
they came there, the host of the house angerly asked them where they had been
so late, for (quoth he) it is no time now to take up your Inn. Then the
Merchants answered, be not angry sir I pray you, for we have been hunted with
a wild Bear, and could not escape him till even now. Then quoth the
Innekeeper in mockage to them, what a shame Gentlemen is it for you three to
be hunted with one Bear: Now I tell you what, if there came ten Bears to
me (being but one) in the field, I would have slaike them every one, and thus
mocked he the Merchants all supper while.

Scoggin sitting by the fire side, and hearing all this, after supper concluded
with the Merchants, to ouer-reach the heast in his own scoffs: whereupon
Scoggin went into the town and brought a Bears skin, that was but newly dead,
and privily brought it into his chamber: and when the Innekeeper and all his
household were gone to bed, he stuffed the Bears skin with straw, and
dressed him with sticks, to make it stand stiff, and put two Childrens shoes
in his mouth: and after set him up in the Hall as though he had been alive:
This rested till the middle of the night, and then Scoggin bad the Merchants
call very earnestly for drink, the which they did* Whereupon the host called
up his maid to fetch them some, who lighted a Candle, and going into the hall*
she spyed the Bear with two childrens shoes in his mouth, wherewith she was
so frighted that she ran down into the Cale-house and hid her self,
thinking that he had eaten up both her masters children. Then called the
Merchants again for drink, whereat the host commanded him man to arise, who
likewise going into the Hall and seeing the Bear, for feere let fall his
Candle, and ran into the Seller, thinking the Bear had eaten up the maid.

Then called the Merchants the third time, and desired the host himself, to
fetch them some drink, for they said as yet that no body came or else to give
them a candle, and they would draw it themselves: with that the good man arose
himself, for he thought that both his man and his maid were fallen asleep
again, and then lighted he a candle, and went likewise down into the hall,
where he spyed the Bear and was so frighted therewith, that he fell unto the
ground, and cride out mainely to the Merchants for help, saying. that the
Bear had eaten both his man and his maid, who hearing their master call for
help, came up suddenly to help, so did the Merchants who exceedingly laughed
at this hardy man, that would have slain ten Bears, and yet was made affraide
of one dead Bears skin: when the Inne-keeper saw that it was done in mockery,
he was so ashamed that he wist not what to say, and so went to bed: and then
in the morning arose the Merchants and paid their charges, and so rode their
ways, and after this, never would the Inne-keeper boast of his manhood any
more.

How Scoggin answered to all manner of questions that was asked him.
AFter this Scoggin came unto the city of Cane in Normandy where William the
Conqueror King of England was buried, and there set up bills up and down the
town, upon every poast and Church door, that he would give a right answer
to every question that was put unto him: whereupon came many learned men unto
him: whereof there was one that asked him how many Gallons of water was in the
Sea? Then answered Scoggin, Stop all the Rivers that do run into it and then I
will measure it, and tell you justly how many gallons there he: then thought
the other that it was impossible to do, and so was content with that answer:
Then asked he Scoggin another Question, which was this. How many days were
past since Adams creation till this time? Marry quoth Scoggin there be but seven
days past: for when the week is done, begins still another seven days,
and so forth to the end of the world. Then said the other, now fell and the
third question, which is? Where is the middle of the world? then answered
Scoggin to him: That is here in the middle of this house: for if you will not
believe me, take a coard and measure it: whereat the proposer grew angry, and
asked him how far was the earth from heaven? Why quoth Scoggin that is
hereby, let me sing never so softly: here, but it is heard in heaven, and if
you will not believe me: take a Ladder and go up into heaven, and I will here
speak very softly: and then if you hear it not I will loose my credit. Then
quoth the other, how wide is heaven? and how broad is it? Why quoth Scoggin, it
is twelve thousand mile broad: and ten thousand mile wide, and if you will not
believe me then must you go take the Sun, the Moon, and all the stars,
and we measure them, and if you find it not as I say. I will give the maistery
to you: with that the learned man knew not what to say to Scoggin, but that he
was to crafty for them, and to gave him the victory and praise.

Of the merry talk a country-woman had with Scoggin.
AFter this Scoggin was esteemed in all places for a most wise and sencible
man, and the better beloved of the people, because he loved to sport and jest,
and would take it in good part to be iested withal: upon a time one came unto
him, and in this means said unto him, Sir this it is, you are a man of great
wisdom and therefore I come to crave your advise in a matter of great weight:
I have a son that is twenty year old and better, and has gone a year to
School in our Parish, therefore I would have your counsel how I might do to
have him made Priest, but I fear me the Pope will not suffer him by reason of
one thing that he has not, which will be great hinderance to him Scoggin
taking pleasure in the woman's simplicity, said unto her, what is it good
wife? Sir so it is that he has not: what is that he has not* said he, ha
good sic, said she, he has not. I dare not tell it, for you know well enough
what men carry? has he no long hose? no, (quoth she) it is not that I would
speak, sir he has nothing: you understand me well enough, yet in the end she
said unto him, and please you sir, when he was a little Boy, he fell of a
ladder and so brake them, that he was feign to be gelded and had it not been
for that mischance, I would have married him, for he is the tallest of my
children, (in faith) said Scoggin that is a small fault, and will be no
hinderance to him to be made a priest* but yet sir, there is another thing that
will be hie hinderance, which is, he can speak no latin: for that let me alone
is teach him, therefore good wife when you please send him to me and I will
provide him latin enough: whereupon the poor woman gave him great thanks and
so she departed away.

How Scoggin taught a Frenchman Latin to carry him to the Pope.
THis young clownish Frenchman being a Norman borne, by his mothers apointment
came unto Scoggin, and told him that he had a desire to become one of the
Church, but he could write and read very little, nevertheless having hard
say, that money made all, he break him mind unto master Scoggin asking his
counsel how to rule and govern himself in this matter, marry, quoth Scoggin
the Pope (when thou come to be admitted Priest) cannot understand thy
Natural speech, I will learn thee to speak so much Latin as shall serve thy
turn when thou art before him, which being well placed, he shall think thee
to be a profound Scholar. The Frenchman was very glad to hear these tidings,
so that in all have he would needs know these three words, Friend, says
Scoggin, so soon as thou art come before the Pope, thou shall fall down upon
thy knees* saying, Salve sancte Pater: Then he will ask thee in lattine, Vnde
es tu? that is to say, of whence art thou? Thou shall answer him, De Normania:
then he will ask thee, Vbi sunt litterae tuae thou shall say unto him, In
Mentica mea, and presently without any more ado thou shall be made a Priest:
whereupon the Frenchman being so merry and iocund that he remained fifteen
days with Scoggin to learn these three Latin words, and when he thought that
he had learned them well, he took his journey toward Rome, and by the way he
did nothing but repeat his Lattine, but in repeating it so often he forgot the
first word, Salve sancte Pater: And knew not how to learn it again, nor where
to find a man could do it: But see the luck of it: he chanced upon a
Saturday morning to come into a church to pray, where* as he heard them sing
the Mass of our Lady, which was salve sancte parens, whereunto the Frenchman
gave ear: now God be praised and our blessed Lady, said he, I have found my
Latin again, and so set forward with his Latin, salve sacte parens, thinking
it to be the right. And at length he came to Rome, before the Pope, and did his
reverence upon his knees, saying unto him, Salve sancte parens, the pope said
unto him Ego non sum matter Christi: The Frenchman answered: De Normania: The
Pope grew angry, and said Daemonium habes? in manica mea, answered the
Frenchman: and therewithal he put his hand into his sleeue to pull out his
lettrrs, the Pope began to be afraid, thinking he would have pulled the devil
out of his sleeue, and ran away as fast as his legs would bear him. Thus was
our poor ge^^ed Frenchman disappointed of his priesthood, who for very grief
within a while after died and was buried by a company of Friars of the holy
order.

How Scoggin cousoned the Friars in Rome.
PResently upon the Frenchmans journey to Rome, Scoggin left France, and
likewise went to see Rome: where he was no sooner come, but inquiring of the
Frenchmans proceedings, who had intelligence that he was dead for grief,
whereupon Scoggin in a mockery, went to a certain company of gray Friars, who
made them believe that the Frenchmans soul was in Purgatory, and if he would
give them ten Ducats they, would redeem him from thence, the which he
earnestly promised: Whereupon the Friars fell all to their charms and solemn
masses, to redeem as they relieved the poor Frenchmans soul out of
purgatory: which being done as they thought, they came to demand their ten
Ducats of Scoggin, who asked them if there was any danger of his return
again to purgatory, being once by their good prayers delivered from thence:
They answered no? Why then quoth Scoggin, it were a needless charity to give
any thing to him, that is already in safety, and therefore I think it good
policy to keep my money in store to pleasure some other poor soul not yet
delivered, and so sent them away fasting without their money.

How Scoggin sat at the Popes table.
Within a month after Scoggins arrival in Rome, he got so much favor that he
was upon a time bidden to supper by the Pope himself, and being in the midst
of their Iunkets, the Pope asked his seruitors for the peacocke that was
dressed for his dinner, which he commanded to be kept for his supper, which
not being done according he grew into a great rage for it. Scoggin sitting then
by him at board persuaded his holiness not to be angry: To whom the Pope
replied, saying: If God were so highly offended in Paradise, for casting out
our old father Adam from thence, and only for eating an Apple: why should not
I, being his vicar on earth be more furious for a peacocke, knowing how far
it is in value above a rotten Apple.

How Scoggin used a Tailor in Rome.
Upon a time there was a simple Tailor dwelling in Rome, that upon a day came
into a church where the image of Saint John Baptist was honored, who falling
on both his knees, he humbly desired to know whether his wife (at any time)
had wantonly abused him, and what fortune should follow his young son,
Scoggin standing by, (and well practist in such knauish toys) happened to
ouer-hears his petition? who secretly stepped behind the alter and faining the
voice of Saint John, answered him, my dear friend and faithful follower for
thy long reverent worshipping, and devotion thou have done unto me. I will
truly tell thee: Thy wife has many times borned thy head, and thy young child
within few years shall be hanged: wherefore depart in peace since thy prayers
be heard? Whereat the Tailor rising up in a rage, took his leave without a
farewell but when he was a little past from him, without any reverence, he
turned back and said, what art thou for a Saint? Scoggin answered. I am thy
good Saint John Baptist: My Saint, (quoth the Tailor) thou art the devil, a
liar a slanderer, and a foul mouthed slave, as thou have been since thy
beginning: for that babbling tongue of thine, caused Herod worthily to cut off
thy head. I have prayed to thee this twenty years, and have offered more
candles before thee then I am worth: wherefore I will see thee hanged as thou
wast headed before I will come to thee again.

How Scoggin took a Friar tardie.
IN Rome there was one Friar Thomas, who to observe the straigt laws of their
religion, had his concubine close in his bed to help him say his mattens at
midnight now Scoggin being well acquainted with this Friar, made bold of his
company at all times, so coming up of a sudden into the chamber in the
^^rning (by chance they both a sleep) he saw four naked feet hang out of the
bed, whereat he seems greatly to wonder, and suddenly put his hand out of the
window and mainely cried, what ho, come see a miracle, come see a miracle, for
Friar Thomas has four legs: Whereupon they were so ashamed that they knew
not how to excuse the matter.

How Scoggin coniured a walking Ghost.
Whilst Scoggin remained at Rome, he lodged in the house of a widow that had
great store of money, which a certain young gentleman of the town perceived
and to the end to get some of it from her, in the euenings he came into her
house and lapped himself in a white sheet, counterfetting a spirit, thinking
that she would run her ways, and lean her money to his disposing: The woman
that was wise perceived the mystery, and therefore caused her guest master
Scoggin the next day to come and lie secretly in the chamber by her, who in the
place of a coniuring book, brought a good cudgel, and withal filling his
head with drink to be the hardier: but at last about midnight the spirit
appeared as before, and began with fearful noise pitifully to cry: whereupon
the Coniurer, (who had not disgested his liquor) suddenly set upon him, and so
basted him on both sides with a cudgel saying, if thou be the devil, I am his
damme: and he had utterly spoiled him, if he had not the sooner discovered
himself.

How Scoggin put a Country Gentleman out of his Dream.
Upon a time there was a Gentleman of the Country which greatly loved hunting
and took therein so much delight in the day time, that in the night he would
rise up in his sleep, and begin to cry, hollow, and whoop after his hounds,
as if he had been abroad in the day time. This Gentleman on a time came unto
Rome, and lodged in the same Inno where Scoggin did: and in the same Chamber,
but in going to bed, this Gentleman said unto Scoggin, friend I pray thee be
not offended with me for this one night for I have an impediment, which is to
cry in the night after my hounds for I love hunting so well that every night I
think I am at the game, Scoggin having heard before time of his humor, said
unto him: Oh Sir (quoth he it takes me after the same manner, for I am a
Carter, and think every night that I am always whipping of my horses, and
driving of my Cart, and by no means can I leave it, well said the Gentleman we
will therefore bear one with the other, he goes to bed, and was no sooner
entered into his first sleep, but be started out of his bed, and went crying
about the Chamber so how, so how, so how, at this cry Scoggin awaked, and went
down into the stable and fetched a Carters whip, and perked, the gentleman too
and fro about the chamber, crying haw ree brown bayrd, dun go, what brown I
say: and withal so yerked the Gentleman up and down, who awaked with the
yearkes of the whip, and in stead of crying after his hounds, he changed his
tune, and cried out for help, saying I am slain, I am slain, but still
Scoggin with his whip fetched him too and fro about the chamber: Until at the
last the poor gentleman was feign to get him under a table, and there hid
himself without speaking a word, which Scoggin perceived, he set down his
whip and went to bed, and began to snort like on that had bin in his dead
sleep. The good wife of the house arose, lighted a candle, and found the
Gentleman hidden underneath the board, in such a little corner as would scant
serve a Cat to go in, and all his body and legs were so grievously be
painted with lashes, as if it had been the picture of Christ: the which surely
was a great miracle, (...), as before he was wont to do in his sleep: whereat
his friends and kindred did much marvel, that knew his quality: never was one
man more bound to another then was the Gentleman to Scoggin, who had healed him
of such an infirmity as that was.

How Scoggin asked a Friar a question.
Upon a time after a Friar had said Mass, he invited Scoggin home with him to
dinner, being set amongst their delicates, the Friar most highly commended his
own devotion, affirming that he had the same day with the Memento of one make
(and at one instant) delivered ninety and nine souls out of purgatory:
whereupon Scoggin asked him merely, why he left an odd one behind, and made
them not an hundred, marry quoth the Friar if the clap of the Church window had
not so suddenly started me, I would have performed the just number of an
hundred.

Of the Friar and the Cobblers man.
Whilst the friar and Scoggin sat thus at dinner, there came a Cobblers man unto
(...) be a means to the Pope that he might be made a Priest: now this Friar
first to prove his sufficiency in latin said unto him es tu dignus? the poor
fellow answered, no sir I thank you, I will dine with your servants, believing
that dignus had been to dine.

How Scoggin counseled the Friar to forsake swearing.
THE aforesaid Friar used very much to swear and for every slender cause
would take the name of God in vain, but so it chanced that as the Friar walked
along the streets of Rome. to be sore hurt with the stroke of a horse, Scoggin
being in his company, and knowing his blaspheming humor, said unto him, sir
this will make you leave your swearing: who suddenly answered, now by the body
of God I will take heed hereafter how I swear.

How Scoggin lay all night with a Glouers wife
SCoggin being still a batchler, and a very lusty youngman, he fell in love with
a glouers wife (whose husband was somewhat ancient and always when her husband
was at any laire with his ware to stay al night Scoggin would be sure still to
lie with her, but it so fortuned one night above the rest, as he was in bed
with her, that one of her little Children felt one in the bed with his mother,
to whom the little child said, mother I pray you who lies with you now my
father is away, why no body quoth she, but God a mighty and thou and I this
rested secret for a time, but within a while after his father being at home,
and sitting at his door playing with the said little child Scoggin by chance
came by, whom the child espying, said unto him, oh father see yonder goes God a
mighty that lay with my mother all night: thinking he said well because his
mother had told him so.

How Scoggin deceived a Doctor of Physic.
SCoggin to satisfy the humor of certain Gentlemen, his familiar
acquaintance most commonly approved the skill of a simple Doctor of Physic
that dwelt not far from Rome, and thus it was he took a fair Vrinall, and
filled it half full of good Wine, and bore it to this doctor, saying it was a
sickemans water, who viewing it and tossing it up and down as though he had
great knowledge: quoth he, the Patient whose water it is* is full of gross
humors, and has need of purging, and to be let some ten ounces of blood: No
you Dunce replied Scoggin, it is good piss, and with that drunk it off, and
threw the Vrinall at his head.

How Scoggin proved the Doctor, a fool by Nature.
NOt long after Scoggin to make the Doctor amends, gave him a book to his Newy
fares gift, called, The secrets of Nature, the which Master Doctor received
with great kindness, and to show how kindly he accepted of it: he presently
before Scoggin began to peruse it: where amongst other things he read, that a
broad and a long bearded man argued the man to be a fool, for trial whereof
he took a candle in one hand, and a glass in the other, viewing whether he
was included with it, but holding the Candle so near his beard that it finged
it close to his chin: at which the Doctor in a rage threw down the glass, and
ran away all ashamed into the chamber, whereupon Scoggin took pen and ink,
and in the margent writ, Probatum est.

How Scoggin the third time made a fool of M. Doctor.
NOtwithstanding for all these iniurice done by Scoggin against the Doctor, yet
above all other he delighted in his company, as thus: the Doctor having
occasion to ride from Rome to Venice, requested Scoggin to ride with him, who
willingly promised him: where riding by a wood near unto Rome, the Doctor
began to be afraid of thieves, who being in bodily fear, by chance he saw a
far off a troop of people coming toward him, but he desired Scoggin to ride
before to discover what they were, mean while he did himself behind a bush,
Scoggin coming unto them, understood that they conducted a murderer to
execution. He being in a merry humor, straight set spurs to his horse, and
galloped back again toward M. Doctor beckoned all the way unto the Doctor as
he posted toward him to be gone and shift for himself: which the doctor
perceiving, away he rides toward Rome, as though he had rid upon life and
death: and being alighted at his own door he there attended Scogging coming,
who immediately alighted there also, panting and blowing, saying unto him, M.
Doctor you are happy that have so well escaped their hands for if he be hanged
for killing one man, what would they have done with you, that have killed and
poisoned so many? the Doctor seeing himself so flouted, in a fury thrust
Scoggin out of his house, and never after would abide him.

How Scoggin answered a Popish Priest.
IT was Scoggins chance upon a time to be in a Church in Rome, whilst a holy
Friar was casting about his holy water, whereupon there came a priest unto
Scoggin and reproved him because he did not put off his Cap, when the Friar
sprinkled him with holy water, who answered, if it have power (as you say) to
pass to purgatory, surely it must have easier passage through my Cap.

Of a Jesuit that spoke against Scoggin.
AFter this Scoggin grew in hate among the Friars, because he many times made
Ieffes upon them, whereupon there was a Jesuit that would always speak
mightily against Protestants, thinking Scoggin to be one, affirming that he
would prove a Protestant worse then a Devil, for (said he) if I meet with a
Devil, and bless my self but with the sign of the cross, he will straight
fly from me: but if I make the sign of the cross to a Protestant, by God he
will fly upon me, and be ready to strangle me.

How Scoggin questioned with the aforesaid Jesuit.
SCoggin having heard of the simplicity of this Jesuit, came unto him, and
asked him the reason why God gave unto the good thief paradise, and the cause
that he went straight thither without passing first into the purgatory: marry
sir quoth the Jesuit, I have read, that when Christ was carried into Egypt,
(with his mother by Joseph) the same these would not suffer his companions to
rob Christ, nor any that were with him: and withal saying to Christ, remember
this good turn I have done thee, which was then promised him and performed,
when they met both at execution, this was the simplicity of the Jesuit.

Of anorher question propounded to this Jesuit.
SCoggin meaning yet to make this Jesuit a more Fool, asked him how Christ
lived whilst he was a Boy? whereupon the Jesuit shamed not to say, that after
Christ grew to some strength, Joseph began to teach him his occupation, and one
day amongst others, he set him to saw a piece of timber, but Christ not
regarding* the mark that he should have sawed by, cut it too short: whereat
Joseph was very angry, and would have beaten him, if he had not hastily taken
up the one end and craving his fathers help to hold the other, drew it out of
the same length that Joseph would have it. The which blasphemy the Jesuit
justified for a truth.

How Scoggin proved Mustard to have wit.
SCoggin keeping an Ordinary in Rome, and sitting with Gentleman, to make them
merry, would approve Mustard (standing before them) to have wit, how so says
one? It is like a witty scould: meeting another scoulde, knowing that scould
will scould, begins to scould first: so says he, the Mustard being lickt up,
and knowing that you will bite it, begins to bite you first: I Will try that says
a Gull by, and the Mustard so tickled him that his eyes watered: How now says
Scoggin, does my lest savor? I says the Gull, and bite too: If you had had
better wit says Scoggin you would have bit first: so then to conclude with
me, that dumb unfeeling Mustard, has more wit then a talking unfeeling fool
as you are. Some were pleased, and some were not: But all Scoggins care was
taken (for his resolution was such ever) before he talked of any jest.

How Scoggin cousned a Friar of twenty ducats.
SCoggin before time having borrowed ten ducats of a Friar, and now lacking
more money, went again to the said Friar to borrow ten more, why quoth he, you
owe me ten already, how shall I be paid that? why thus quoth Scoggin lend me
ten more to the ten I have had already, and I will make you a bond to pay you
twenty at the feast of S. Peter next coming, the Friar thinking to have
somewhat to show for his money, sent him the other ten ducats whereupon
Scoggin made him a bond the money to be paid upon the feast of S. Peter in the
year of our Lord 1490. which figure of 4 he turned into 5. very cunningly
whilst the Friar was drawing out his money: which was done in this manner, 1490.
he changed into 1590 the friar thinking ye bond so he rightly written went his
way: and at the time appointed came to Scoggin and demanded his money, your
money quoth Scoggin, why it is not yet due almost these 100. years* therefore
look in your (...) and there you shall find it in: the Friar seeing the figure
of 4 turned into 5. knew himself deciued. and went his (...) with a flea in
his ear.

Of Scoggins wrongful accusation.
Upon a time Scoggin was wrongfully accused for getting of a Gentleman's Maid
with Child, and for the same brought before a Justice in Rome, which justice
said as follows. It is a marvel ( Scoggin) that you being now a gentleman
of good quality, and one of good ruputation, would venture thus to get maids
with child, nay rather quoth Scoggin were it a marvel, if a maid had gotten me
with child,

Scoggin deceived by a country wench.
SCoggin as he traveled abroad, was in a town where in ye In was a pretty
maid, whose favor was placed in a corner of Scoggins affection, and talking
with her appointed to meet him at the bottom of a pair of stairs: when
night and the hour came, and the maid subtly sent down her mistress, who
Scoggin catching in his arms art come wench sates he, out alas says the
mistress (not knowing who it was) Scoggin hearing it was the mistress, start a
side, and the maid came down with the candle, she espied a glimse of Scoggin,
in the dark, who slept into another room: how now mistress said the maid,
something said she affrighted me, some man sure for I heard him speak: no,
no, mistress said the maid, it was no man, it was a Bull calfe, that I shut into
a room till John our pounder came to have pounded him for a stray: had I
thought that said she, I would have hit him such a knock on his forehead, that
his horns should never have graft his coxecombe, and departs up again
afraid: but how Scoggin took this jest think you.

How Scoggin deceived a Drapers maid.
SScoggin another time lacked money, and being a fair young man without any
hair on his face got him on an ancient Gentlewomans gown putting a Cushion
under his aporne, and a French-hood upon his head, and so upon a Sunday in
service time, went to a Drapers house, the master and all his house being at
Church, except a maid servant that dressed dinner so coming like an old
Gentlewoman to the door where knocking very orderly the maid comes and asked
what he would have, taking him to be some substantial Gentlewoman, marry
(quoth Scoggin) after I pray you stand a gentlewomans friend so much as to let
her make water in your kitchen, for I am ashamed to do it in the street, and am
so near beset that I can go no further: the honest simple maid deeming all
to be true, let him go into the kitchen wherein being no sooner come but he
bound the maid hand and foot, and put a gagge into her mouth, and after took
what he pleased and so left the maid there gaping on the ground with a gag in
her mouth: at last comes the good wife home from the Church, where entering into
the kitchen as her manner was, and finding her maid in this pitiful taking
was so amazed that she stood senseless till her husband came home. who
likewise finding his Maid upon the ground gaping for breath, vngagd her and
asked her how she came into that extremity: marry master quoth she, here came
the devil in a French: hood and gagd me and robbed you for I am sure it was no
woman she was so strong but she draper, could never neither get the thief nor
his goods again, but contented himself with that loss, and ever after left
more company at home.

Of Scoggins short answer at dinner while.
Upon a time there was an old priest and Scoggin dined together in Rome, where
there was but little store of meat, but Scoggin having a good stomach, and
being a jolly fat man, put off his dublet the better to fill his belly, and
began to lay an load with his teeth as though he had eaten no meat in two or
three days before: the which being perceived by the other old man that sat at
the table, he began to ask Scoggin many questions, thinking thereby to hinder
the busy filling of his belly, but Scoggin because he would not loose much
time, answered the old man very briefly altogether in sillables: the questions
and aunsweres were these. What Garment do ye wear? Strange. What wine do ye
drink? Red. What flesh do you eat? Beef. Now like you this Wine? Good. You
drink none such at home? No. What eat you upon Fridaies? Eggs, and such
like: but all this while he lost not one mouthfull of meat, for his month was
still going, and yet answered readily to all his questions. By this means the
oldman went half hungry away.

How Scoggin for one day, served in a Priests room.
SCoggin being at Rome, and lodged in a Priests house there, where an old
churchman that on a Sunday could not perform his duty to the parish:
Whereupon Scoggin taking upon him the Priests office, and as though he had
been another Curate dwelling hard by, went to the Church and said service both
forenoone and afternoon: but as the order was then, the parishioners came
before Service and confessed them to the priest, but amongst the rest there
came to Scoggin a poor Blacksmith to be confessed, to whom he said. How says
thou friend, art thou not a fornicator? The poor man said no. Quoth Scoggin
again, art thou not a glutton? Art thou not supethious? he said still no,
Scoggin perceiving he said still no, to every thing began to wonder, asking
again: Art thou not concupicent? No sir, said he, Why what art thou then
quoth Scoggin: I am said he, a poor Blacksmith, for behold here is my hammer.

There was also another that answered in like manner to this confessor, the
which is some what in better order, it was Sheepeheard, whom Scoggin did ask
friend how say thou? Have thou kept the commandments of the Church? No,
neither, then said Scoggin unto him what have thou then kept? I never kept any
thing but sheep in all my life quoth the shepherd.

Yet there was another who after he had declared all his faults, was asked if
any thing else stuck in his conscience? He answered nothing: but that upon a
time he had stolen a Halter. Well (said Scoggin) to steal a Halter is no
great matter. Yea but (said the man) there was a horse tied at the end thereof,
I marry (quoth Scoggin) that is another manner of matter: there is difference
between a horse and a halter, you must therefore restore back the horse, and
the next time that he come again, I will absolve you for the halter.

How Scoggin and three or four more deceived a Tapster in Rome.
ON a night Scoggin and three or four of the Popes servants being merrily
disposed, consulted how they might have good cheer and pay no money, and every
one invented away as they thought best, at last Scoggin said. I have invented a
cleanely shift at the sign of the Rose against Saint Peter's Church is a new
Tayster, which ere this has not seen any of us, and he is also pourblinde, so
that if he see us hereafter he cannot know us. Therefore we will go thither
and make good cheer, and when we have a reckoning, we will contend who shall
pay all, then will I say to avoid the contention, that the Tayster shall be
blinded, and we will run round about him, and whosoever he catches first let
him pay for all, and so we may escape away. Every man liked Scoggins devise?
best, so in conclusion they came thither and had good cheer, for they spared
no coast so that in the end their reckoning grew to ten shillings. Then as
Scoggin had devised before, so they did. The Tapster was blinded so that they
ran round about him, and first Scoggin got out, and then another, so that at
the last they got all away, and left the Tapster groping in every place about
the house for them that should pay the shot. The master of the house being in
a chamber next to the place where they were, and hearing the stamping that they
made, came to see what they did, whom the Tapster caught in his arms saying:
sir you must pay the reckoning. Marry said his Master so I think I must
indeed, for here is no body else to pay it. Then the Tapster and his Master
sought and enquired for them but they could not find them.

The talk which Scoggin had with a pretty woman.
GEntlewoman said Scoggin, and the rest as you sit, I can tell you strange
things: now many gallants at supper noted one woman, who being little and
pretty, to unfit her pretinesse had a great wine mouth which she seeming to
hide would, pinch in her speeches and speak small but was desirous to hear the
news. Scoggin going from Rome to Venice, told that there was a Proclamation
made that every man should have two wives, now Jesus quoth she, is it
possible? I Gentlewoman, and otherwise able too, for contrarily, women must
have three Husbands, now Iaw^us said the Gentlewoman, and with wonder shows
the full wideness of her Mouth, at which all the Table smiled: which she
perceiving, would answer no more. Now mistress said Scoggin your mouth is less
then ever it was for now it is able to say nothing: thou art a cogging knave
says she: Mass, and that is something, yet said Scoggin, your mouth shall
be as wide as ear it was for that test.

Of Scoggin and an Usurer.
A Usurer sometime there was dwelling at Rome, that ever (by report) made many
desperate debts but what he delivered out came still with profit back again:
Scoggin hearing hereof, laid a wager with a friend of his, that he would by his
wit deceive him therein, So coming to this rich churie, he demanded of him
how he should prevent desperate debts and keep himself from trusting
banckeroutes: This Usurer kept himself a loofe off, and would not be known of
the secret to him till a conclusion was made, that Scoggin should bestow a
supper of this Money master at the tavern to learn the secret. The supper was
prepared, where Scoggin and the Usurer supped merrily: but during supper time,
they fell in conference touching the matter, where the Usurer told Scoggin
that if he dealt as he used to do he could make no evil debts: and that
was, that he should not take any man's bill, bond, or word, but ever be sure of
a good pawn worth double or treble his money in vsance with a good bill of
sale in open market. The Supper being almost ended, this old Usurer having
well liquored himself, and old vessels must needs leake, would needs be gone
to make water: nay then (said Scoggin) you mean to leave me Not so (quoth the
Usurer) if you think that here keep my gown, he went forth to make water,
who having no sooner turned his back, but Scoggin took his gown, and laid
it to pawn in the Bar for the shot, and so went his way. Thus Fraud was
deceived with Deceit.

How Scoggin got away the Abbots Horse fram him.
ON a time Scoggin was sent for to an Abbot in Rome, to pastime with him, where
he fell sick and like to die, whereupon he was shriuen and would have been
housed and he durst not for fear of casting. The Abbot said Creed and
manducasti, that is to say, believe and thou have received. When Scoggin
recovered, the Abbot lent him his own horse to ride home on, Scoggin sent not
home the Abbots horse, wherefore the Abbot sent for his horse, but Scoggin
answered the messenger, and said, when I was sick at home with your master, I
would have received the holy Sacrament of the Alter, and he bad me believe,
and I had received the sacrament of the Alter: so in like manner, let him
believe that he had received his horse and it is sufficient, and tell him his
horse he shall never have. By this a man may perceive that a man should not
lend his horse nor his weapon, nor his wife to no man if he love himself or
his own profit, for by it never comes gains.

How Scoggin was made Priest. at Rome.
SCoggin being noted throughout all Rome for a shifting companion could not
well tell how to live any longer there, unless he became one of the Church:
and considering with himself that he was a master of Art, and sufficient
enough to perform any office of the Church, whereupon he made suit to the Pope
to be made a Priest, the which was done immediately. Within a while after he
made an Oration before the Pope, and many of his Clergy, and considering their
Pomp and pride, he said nothing in the Pulpit, but sie Saint Peter, and sie
Saint Paul, and when he had many times recited these words, spitting first on
the one side, then on the other, he suddenly departed the Pulpit, leaving his
auditors wonderfully amazed, wherefore some thought he was not well in his
wild, and other some imagined he was not sound in religion, so as they meant
to commit him to prison: But one Friar amongst the rest that partly knew his
humor, caused him to be called before the Pope, who commanded him to show
some reason for that he had done: he answereed that in troth he was
determined to entreat of another matter. But considering (said Scoggin) that
you possess all the pleasures of the World at will, and that there is no state
comparable to yours: and weighing again with my self, in what poverty, pain
and misery, the Apostle lived in: I thought that either they were great fools
to choose so sharp a life to go to heaven or you, that having the keys of
heaven in your hands, were in the high way to hell: this for that time proved a
sufficient answer to the Pope, so blinded was he with ambition and Idolatry,
that he did not perceive when he was iested at.

How Sccoggin saved his head from cutting off.
SCoggin upon a time traveling a little from Rome, and lodging in an homely
Inn, during which time there was a Gentleman dwelling in the same town,
somewhat frantic and distrauct of his wits: which madman of a sudden rusht
into Scoggins bed Chamber, with his sword drawn and finding him there in bed,
would have slain him, saying: villain were it not valiantly done to strike
off thy knaves head at one blow, Scoggin answered, tut sir, that's nothing with
worship to do, you can as easily strike off two heads at one blow as one,
wherefore if you please, i will go down and call up another, and so you may
strike off both our heads at once: the mad man believed him, and so let him
slip away.

How Scoggin iested with a Boy in the street.
A Wag-halter boy met Scoggin in the street, and said: Master Scoggin who
lives longest? Marry, boy, says Scoggin, he that dies latest: and why die men
so fast said the Boy? because they want breath said Scoggin: no, rather said
the Boy, because their time is come, they die: Then thy time is come said
Scoggin, see who comes yonder? Who said the Boy? Marry, said Scoggin, Swag the
hangman: nay hang me then, if I employ him at this time, says the Boy: well
said Scoggin, then thou will be hanged another time by the own confession, and
so they departed.

How Scoggin escaped imprisonment.
SCoggin having been domineering very late one night with two of his friends,
and coming homewards, the watch was set, and M. Constable asked who goes there?
tkree merry men quoth Scoggin: that is not sufficient, what art thou quoth M.
Constable? Why says Scoggin one of us is an eye-maker, and the other a
light-maker: What say thou knave? do mock me, the one is an eiemaker, the
other a light-maker, which two properties belong unto God only. Commit these
blasphemers quoth the Constable: Nay, I pray you good M. Constable be good in
your office, I will approve what I have said to be true, if thou can said the
Constable, you shall pass otherwise you shall all three be punished. Why quoth
Scoggin, this fellow is an eye-maker, because a spectacle maker, and this other
a light-maker, because a Chandler that makes the darkest night as light as
your lantern. The Constable seeing them so pleasant was well contended, the
rest of the Watchmen laughed, and Scoggin with his companions, went home
quietly.

How Scoggin served an old woman at Rome.
THere was dwelling sometime in Rome a widow woman that was so miserable in
housekeeping, that no servant would devil with her any long time: of which
woman Scoggin heard tell of, and being desirous to play the jesting companion
with her, he went unto her, and hired himself with her to work for a month:
the bargain being thus agreed upon betwixt them, upon a morning betime he came
to her house to begin his work: but (quoth be) Dame before I begin, I must
have my breakfast. Why that thou shall have for this time (said she) but use it
not: so she set him a miserable breakfast upon the table, which he eat up
every crum. Now Dame, quoth he, let me have my dinner to, and I will have none
at noone* the which she likewise gave him, but he eat up all that in like
manner as before: The which being done, he said again, Dame to save a labor,
I pray you let me have my supper too, and then I Will trouble you no more till
tomorrow: she thinking to save some victuals thereby, gave him his supper
also, the which he likewise eat up as before being done, he arises from the
table and said: Dame I have now eaten my breakefast, my dinner, and my supper:
but I pray you tell me one thing: What do folks use to do when they have supt?
Marry fellow (quoth she) go to bed and sleep. Even so (quoth Scoggin) will I
do, for I have now supt, and therefore Dame good night. By these words she
knew well that she was slouted, and never after would meddle with Scoggin
again.

Of Scoggin and a country Milk maid.
SCoggin upon a time being in a country village, came to Rome in the company
of a merry conceited Milk maid, carrying upon her head a palie of Milk to
the Market, thinking to sell it: to pass the time away, to Master Scoggin,
she made her reckoning aforehane in this manner. First (quoth the Maid) I
will sell my Milk for two pence, and then with this two pence, buy eight
Eggs, which I will set a brood under a hen, and she will have eight Chickens:
which Chickens being grown up, I will cramme them and by that means they will
be Capons: these Capons being young, will be worth twelve peace a piece that
is just eight shillings, with the which I will buy two pigs, a sow pig, and a
Boar pig, and they growing great, will bring forth twelve others, the which I
will sell (after I have kept them a while) for half a crown piece, that is
just thirty shillings. Then I will buy a Mare that will bring forth a fair
Foale: the which will grow up and be gentle and fair, that she will play,
skip, leap and fling, and cry weehes after every Beast that shall pass by.
But now for the joy this Milke-maide took of her supposed Foale. and in her
iollity counterfetting to show her Foales lustiness, her paile of Milk fell
down from her head, and was all spilt. Then Scoggin laughing, said, unto her:
There now lies all your Eggs, your Chickens, your Capons, your Pigges, your
Mare, her Colt and all, upon the ground, so by this means, was she deprived of
all her purposes.

How Scoggin deceived an Inneholder at Venice.
Upon a certain time, Scoggin and his man traveled to Venice, and other
places of Italy, and making merry there so long till all their money was gone,
and being a great way to Rome, they knew not what to do, but as want is the
what stone of wit, Scoggin gathered his conceits together, and practiced a
trick to bear him up to Rome, without money, and this it was: unto an Inn in
Venice they went, and there lay for two or three days of great charge,
although no money he had to pay for the same, the third morning he had his
man go down and male content, himself before his Host and his Hoastis and
mumbblingly said to himself: Lord, Lord, what a scald master serve I, this it
is to serve a Jesuit or Athist, now even as I am an honest man, I Will leave him
in the lurch and shift for my self: heeres ado about penance and
mortification, as though (forsooth) Christ had not died enough for all: His man
mumbling out those his instructions so dissemblingly, that it stroke such a
jealousy in the Inkolders heart, that out of doubt his master was a Jesuit or
Athiest: whereupon he presently sent for the Constable, and told him all the
aforesaid matter, and so went up both together, to attache Scoggin in his
chamber, who purposely had shut himself in close, and betaken him to his
knees, and to his cross to make the matter seem more suspicious: which they
espying through the keyhole, made no more ado but in they rushed, and
arrested him for a Jesuit or Athiest, discharged his score, bore his own, and
his boys charges up to Rome, and there in hope to have rich rewards, presented
him to the Cardinal, but now mark the jest, when the Cardinal saw Scoggin,
and knew him passing well, entertained him most courteously, and all to be
fooled the Inholder and his mate, and sent them away with a flea in their ear:
but when Scoggin saw himself discharged out of their hands, he stood jesting
and pointing at their folly, and so taught them by cunning both more wit, and
thrift, against another time.

Scoggins description of a pot of Ale.
Upon a time Scoggin came unto a great Person in Rome, and made such merry
pastime before him, that in recompense thereof he was bidden to demand any
reasonable request, and he should have it. Marry my request (quoth Scoggin)
shall be reasonable enough, for I came nothing at your hands, but every day
whilst I live a pot of Ale, and the appurtenances belonging to the same, the
which he had given him under an assurance. Now by this gift (quoth Scoggin)
you have given me six pence a day whilst I live, for the appurtenances are
far more costlier then the pot it self, which I will prove in this manner:
First, I must every day have a penny for a pot of Ale, a penny for a loaf to
make a toast, a penny for a faggot to toast it, a penny for Sinnamon and
Ginger, a penny for Nutmegs and Sugar, and a penny for mine Hostice to bear me
company: without the which, a pot of Ale is like a blew coat without a Badge.
For a blew Coat without a Badge, is like an Ale house without a sign.

How Scoggin gave a reckoning Pot.
SCoggin upon a time dwelt at Rome upon the Cardinale rents, in which house
keeping an Alehouse, there came certain Scholars and other, to drink, but
being set down one of the Scholars said, be merry my good fellows, for
none shall spend a penny but my self, at which words the whole company
thinking that he would pay for all, called in a reckoning of some twelu^ pence,
which when they came to pay, there was no more money amongst them all but the
Scholars penny, the which Scoggin hearing them sitting by the fire, and
knowing them to be honest men's sons, for that time, took the penny for the
whole reckoning, and after sat him down again by the fire in the Chair, the
Scholars sat still looking one upon another, and at last one of them said:
What mine Host, is the reckoning all paid? It is my guests (quoth Scoggin)
since I can get no more. Why then (quoth the Scholar again) I hope we shall
have a reckoning Pot given us? A reckoning Pot my voyes (quoth Scoggin) and but
a penny paid for all, I faith that you shall, though I buy it dearly my Lads:
so starting up fetched them a reckoning Pot. But it fell out that at Christmas
following when Scoggin came to pay his rent, he was bid to dinner, where for
want of table talk, he told the Cardinal of this pleasant jest that happened
amongst these scholars: the which so highly pleased and contented the
Cardinal, that he gave him a lease of the same house for one and twenty
years following for just nothing: which afterward was worth to Scoggin better
then an hundred pound.

How Scoggin made a Cobbler believe that he was dead.
SCoggin being still about Rome, he grew acquainted with a poor
handy-craftsman, a mender of old shoes: in wit very simple: and as I may term
him a very fool. Scoggin meaning to make some sport with this simple fellow,
upon a time came unto him, and gazed very earnestly in his face, saying: I
marvel my friend, how thou art able to walk abroad for I see that thou art
very sick, death himself appears in thy face. After this, another of Scoggins
acquaintance come unto the Cobbler, and in like manner uses the same words,
and after him another, all by Scoggins devising: By which means, the poor
fellow was brought into such a conceit, that he thought himself sick in
deed, and so to bed he went: where after he had layne a while, he would
needs die: being dead in conceit, he was wound in his winding sheet, and
laid on the Beer, as the country order is, and on four men's backs borne
toward the Church, but by the way meeting with an unhappy Boy, who asked the
bearers who was going to be buried? Who answered, poor Jacob the honest
Cobbler. Quoth the Boy again. What is Jacob the Cobbler dead? Nay it is no
matter, for he may be well spared, for he was the veriest knave in all the town.
With that the Cobbler started up, and said, Oh thou unhappy Gallows boy: if I
were alive as I am dead, I would soundly be labor thee for slaundring thus a
poor dead man going to be buried. The people hearing the dead man thus speak,
thought it a miracle, and so bore him home to his house again.

Of Scoggins most strange and monstrous beast.
ON a time Scoggin being in Rome grew very merrily disposed, and meaning for to
make his acquaintance somewhat pleasant, he want to a Painter and made him to
draw the picture of a most strange Horse, with his head standing where his
tail should stand, and his tail where his head should stand, the picture
being thus strangely painted, he hang it forth at a window: by which many
simple people repaired thither, and gave him pence a piece to behold this
strange monster: so gathering a number of them together in a yard, at last he
let them all into a stable to see this aforesaid monster, but being entered into
the stable, they saw no other monster but a horse with his tail tied up to the
cratch to a bottle of hay, and his head to the groope where* the tail should
stand. Thus were the simple people flouted. and Scoggins acquintance made very
merry thereby

How Scoggin bestowed upon his friends excellent good Sammon.
Upon a time Scoggin bad many of his friends come home to make merry with him,
who was to go to a banquet of all other meats, requested at his hands some
excellent good Sammon, which as then was not to be had for any money in all
Rome, but yet to satisfy his friends desires, he promised to send for some,
the which he did: so sitting down to dinner, in the midst whereof, came in
three of his honest neighbors and sat them down likewise at the table: but
his friends expected still the Sammon, at last demanded for the same. Why
(quoth Scoggin) here it is. They seeing nothing, asked where? Marry here (quoth
he) pointing to his 3. neighbors: you requested excellent good Sammon, here is
excellent, here is good, and there is Sammon, for so were his three neighbors
called. Being thus by this pleasant jest deceived of their longing, they passed
away dinner time with great delight and iollity.

Scoggins opinion of Oysters.
Certain Noble men and Ladies of the Court, being eating Oysters, one of them
seeing Scoggin, called him, and asked if he loved Oysters? No, quoth Scoggin,
for they be ungodly meat, uncharitable meat, and unprofitable meat: why
quoth the courtier? they are ungodly, because they are eaten without grace,
uncharitable because they leave naught but shells, and unprofitable, because
they must swim in wine. Thou say true, quoth one of them, and so they all
fell on laughing at him.

Scoggins resolution of a question,
ONe of the company, taking the Gentleman's part, asked Scoggin, at what time he
thought the devil to be most busied? When the Pope dies quoth he, why says
the courtier? marry (answered he) then all the Devils are troubled and busied
to plague him, for that he has sent many a soul before him thither, that now
exclaim against him.

How Scoggin, by his wit got a suite of apparel by a Courtier.
A Gallant Gentleman lying in the Court, bought himself a suite of Satin, the
which Scoggin had a great desire to get, and thinking to purchase it by his
wit, said unto the Gentleman, and it please your worship I have had a great
desire to have such a suite of apparel, and of the same fashion that yours is
of: quoth the Gentleman, when I leave it of, I will give it thee: so the next
morning Scoggin gets the suite of apparel: the Gentleman missing it called his
man, whereupon in comes Scoggin with it upon his back, which the Gentleman
perceiving, called him knave, and asked his reason? Why, (quoth Scoggin) you
gave it me when you left it off, so yesternight you put it off: the Gentleman
seeing himself ouer-reacht, was content against his will.

How Scoggin excused a painters fault.
THus it fell out, that upon a time when Scoggin was in the presence of a great
Cardinal, there came in a Painter of Rome, with the Images of Saint Peter and
S. Paul, the which he had newly painted. The Cardinal himself taking them at
his hand, found fault that he had painted them with too high a color, for
their faces (said he) are too red, marry (quoth Scoggin then standing by) in
the painters behalf, this redness comes of shame, for they blush to see the
proud state and trains that you have, in respect of the low and poor
counternances they carried: for this his dout he had a great check of the
Cardinal for his labor.

How Scoggin deceived a Butcher in a market town.
AS Scoggin rid through a market town about ten miles from Rome, it was his
chance to bait at a Butchers house being an Inn, which Butcher having great
store of meat in his shop, he meant to deceive him of a good joint thereof:
but not knowing how to obtain his desire because of the Butchers continual
presence, this pretty shift he devised. Quoth he to the Butcher, mine Host
they say in our country that he is a fool that cannot snap with his finger and
thumb as I now do, and therewithal did as Berbars use to do with their hands
when they wash a man's face: The Butcher being very loath to be counted a fool,
proffered to make his fingers snap, but through the greatinesse thereof, he
could not do it frr his heart: whereupon he presently ran forth to wash off
the fat, and in the mean time before his return Scoggin had sent away a good
joint of meat by his Boy, standing at the door: but when the Butcher
returned, having made clean his fingers, he said, Now sir, I can do it as
well as your self. I but quoth Scoggin, now it is too late, you should have
done it before. By this jest the Butcher perceived himself made a fool, and
so set him down all ashamed.

How Scoggin deceived the Butcher another way.
SCoggin having received such great kindness in the Butchers house, that at
his return from Rome he lodged in the same Inn again: But the Butcher
himself mistrusting some false tricks, would not be out of his shop but yet
through the wiliness of Scoggins wit, he was deceived: for as the butchers
boy (being directed by master Scoggin) went down into the Sellar to draw a
pot of drink, where pulling out of the fauset, he put it in his pocket, and
called to his master for his help to stop in the drink who for sauegard
thereof, ran down and held his finger in the hole until the boy went up for
another tap: and whilst the poor silly witted Bu^cher stood holding his
finger in the taphole, Scoggin like a crafty companion, ran into the shop, and
stole another joint of meat and made merry with his friends at the next Inn
they came too.

How Scoggin excommunicated his parishioners.
WIthin a while after this, Scoggin received a certain scroule from the
Cardinal and a Bishop, wherein was written the names of sundry men and women,
that he should excomunicate, the which scroule by chance he let fall into a
little hole of his pocket, for remedy whereof he helped himself in this order,
for with the loss of the paper, he had lost the remembrance of all the names
he should have then excommunicated, and therefore thus he said, I
excommunicate all those that are within that hole, whereupon remembering
himself better of the matter, he except the Cardinal and Bishop who had
thereunto set their hands and seals, else had the Bishop and Cardinal bin
both of them excommunicated.

How Scoggin ouer-tooke a Priest and kept company with him, and how he and the
priest prayed for money.
Upon a time when Scoggin and his man had ridden eight or ten miles on their
way, he ouertooke a Priest that was riding to Rome to pay his first fruits,
with whom he kept company withal until he be come within twenty mile of Rome,
and all that way as they rod, Scoggin made the priest very good cheer and would
let him pay no money, so that Scoggin had but two shillings left, and riding a
little on this side Rome, Scoggin complained to the Parson in this sort: I
marvel master Parson (quoth he) how men do when they want money to get it? For
when I want money I know not how to get any, except I should steal. No no,
said the Priest, do you not know that they that serve God well do not want:
and how that God promises, that if you call upon him in your afflictions, that
he will help you: You say well master Parson said Scoggin, and road before,
and when he saw a fair place he kneeled down, and lifted up his hands and
prayed to God till master Parson and his man did overtake him, but nothing he
could get. When they were come, he roulde them he prayed, but could get
nothing. But (quoth he) I will try once again, and then if I get nothing,
both you master Parson and niy man shall help me to pray, for I do not
doubt but God will help semething, when he hears all our prayers. And then
Scoggin did ride before again, and when he saw his place convenient, he
alighted from his Horse and tied him fast to a tree, and kneeled down and
prayed as he had done before: until such time as they came to him: Then said
the Parson, how do you now Master Scoggin. By my troth said he, I can get
nothing, wherefore alight sir, quoth he unto his man, and tie up your
Horse to yonder tree, and then he went to the Parson and took his Horse by
the bridle, and told him he must needs help him to pray. The Parson for
fear durst not say him nay, but alighted and took his Capcase from the saddle
bow, wherein was fifty pounds, Then Scoggin asked his man how much money had
in his purse. He said twenty pence. Be my troth said Scoggin, and I have but
two shillings: and how much have you master Parson said he: The Parson
thought that if he had told him all, he would surely have borrowed a good
part of it, and he said five pounds, Well let us pray heartily said Scoggin,
and then they kneeled down and prayed the space of half an hour: and Scoggin
said, let us see whether God has heard our request or no. And then he looked
in his own purse, where was but two shillings, and then he looked in his man's
purse where was but twenty pence, Then Scoggin came to the Parson, and said:
now master Parson let us see what you have, for I do not doubt but God has
heard your prayers, and took the priests capcase, and opened it, wherein was a
bag with fifty pounnds in it, which the Parson should have paid for his
first fruits. Then Scoggin spread his Clooke abroad and powered out the money,
and when he had told it, he said, by Lady master Parson God has heard your
prayer: and then he gave him five pounds, and said master Parson, here is the
five pounds that you had before we began to pray and the rest we will have:
for I see that you are so well acquainted with God that with praying half an
hour, you can get as much more: and this will do us great pleasure, and it is
but a small matter for you to pray half an hour. The Parson desired Scoggin
to let him have the rest of the money, for he said that he did ride to London
to pay the first fruits. Well said Scoggin then you must pray again for we
will have this, and so they rode away and left the Priest behind them, and the
Priest was feign to ride home again for more money.

How the Pope came to hear Scoggin say Service.
SCoggin of himself being merry conceited would always say service quite
contrary to all others, and would rea^ and sing them after his own manner: and
above all the rest he could not abide the order of the Passion, as it is
commonly said in Churches for when Jesus spoke any thing to the Jews or to
Pilate: then would he speak aloude that every one might hear and understand.
And if it were the Jews or any other that spoke, then would he read it so
softly and with such a low voice, that none could hear nor understand: but it
so happened, that the Pope upon a good Friday went through the parish where
Scoggin dwelled, and being about ten of the clock in the forenoone, he minded
to hear service, and so came into the Church where Scoggin was in saying
service: which when he came to the Passion he read on this manner, and when he
said, Whom seek ye? he made all the Church to ring again with his voice, but
when he read Jesus of Nazareth, he spoke so softly that none could hear him:
and in this order went foreward with his service. The Pope who was very devout
noted well these ceremonies, and was greatly grieved at this order of reading,
and wished that he had not come to the Church. But after service he sent for
Scoggin that he should come and speak with him, who being come, he said unto
him: I cannot tell Sir where you have learned to behave your self so
irreverently as you have done this day: for the people to hear your service,
had no devotion at all, and why so said Scoggin, marry quoth the Pope, you have
read the Passion to day like a mad man, for when Christ speaks, then you
read like the common crier, and if Pilate or any of the Jews speak, then you
speak softly to your self that no body can here you: Is it well done think
you? are you worthy to have a cure: therefore I will take away your Benefice
and make you acknowledge your fault: when Scoggin had long given care unto him,
he answered: Is this all you have to say to me? now by my soul it is true that
is commonly said, there are many folk that speak of that wherein they have no
skill, And please your Holiness, I think I know what belongs to my office so
well as another, and I would that all the world should know that God is well
served in my parish according to my degree, as in any place within this hundred
miles, I know there be other Priests read the passion after another manner,
the which I can do, I thank God, as well as they if I would, but it should
appear that they understood not what they read, for does it become the knave
Jew, to speak so low as Jesus? No, no, I warrant you: be ye sure that in my
parish God shall be master so long as I do live, and let others do in their
parish according to their knowledge. When the Pope heard this proper reply, he
said: Now truly Sir priest, you are a man of good spirit, yet for all this
shall you not keep your benefice any longer, whereupon he was discharged, and
an other put in his place.

How Soggin served a country Squire.
SCoggin being thus disgraste and turned from his benefice, he attired himself
like a country serving man, and went into the country to dwell, where he was
hired of a certain squire that took great delight to travel into strange
countries to see fashions, the which pleased Scoggin wondrous well: so it
happened that this squire with his man Scoggin read upon a time to see the
City of Venice where the old Gentleman had not long soiourned, but in an
evening after he had well supped, and filled his head with store of good Wine,
yet being not thus satisfied, his mind longed for some further pleasure, as
old men are apt to such wantonness when their wits are ever charged with
wine: wherefore after his delicate he had a desire to taste a small modicum of
last mutton, whereupon he sent his man forth for a dainty morsel: So
Scoggin going almost a whole day up and down, and could not find any fitting
to his purpose, whereupon he turned back to his master and told him he could
find none that would please him, why villain, quoth the old leacher:* go
fetch me one or never come to me again: upon this command away goes Scoggin
and to satisfy his masters mind, went all about the streets, and at the
last agrees with an old rustie kitchin-stuffe, as foul and as black as the
back side of a chimney, who was very glad to go to so good a bargain: So
late in the Evening, because his master should not be suspected, he brought
her in at a backe-doore secretly without a candle, to his masters bed, who put
off but filthy foul clothes, and went into bed to him, who took great
pleasure and delight in her company all the night, till it drew toward the
morning: and then she having had all the sport and pleasure that my old
master could do unto her, she about day break prepared herself to be gone,
whereat for his own credit and honesty he was likewise well content, she was
no sooner ready and out of doors, but up he gets, and looked out of the
window after her, to see what a beautiful bedfellow he had had all night, but
when he saw such an il-fauoured raine-beaten and withered piece of stuff, up
he called his man Scoggin, and in a great rage for that offense turns him out
of his service. Scoggin poor fellow being thus maisterlesse, home he goes to
his old mistress, and tells her how that his master has turned him out of
his service She being very desirous to know the cause, he says, I faith
mistress for nothing but this, he sent me to buy him a young Pullet and I
brought him a very old benne, which he liked well both in the spitting and in
the roasting, but in the morning when he beheld the feathers that she move,
it so broyled in his stomach that he almost became sick even with a conceit,
whereupon, for this offense only has he turned me away. If this be all
(quoth his mistress) take no care, I Will pacify thy master I warrant thee. So
Scoggin remained with his mistress till her husband came home, who said to
him, I much marvel husband that you will turn away your man for so small a
matter but only for buying you an old Hen instead of a young pullet, now I pray
you husband take him again, and I will be his warrant he shall never be the
like offense more, the old man perceived how his man had excused the matter to
re-obtained his favor, he took him again into his service.

FINIS.

