A TRUE REPRESENTATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND; Since
the late pacification: BY THE ESTATES OF THE KINGDOM: Against mistakings in
the late DECLARATION, 1640.

Printed in the year of God, 1640.

A true representation of the proceedings of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, since
the late Pacification; By the Estates of the Kingdom, against mistakings in
the late DECLARATION, 1640.
ALTHOUGH our adversaries should not only whet their tongues and swords, but
also dippe their pens in the gall of bitterness, and every day write a book
against us in this cause, yet will it be accounted of us, as an ornament to
our head, and a chain to our neck; for not we so much as truth it self does
suffer by them; It being their aim and design to make Antichristian error
triumph above that truth, which is coaeval with time it self, and their Art and
suitable cunning not only to conceal and deprave verities, which will prove the
daughters of time, but also to forge such lies, as may serve most for their
wicked ends; But it wounds us sore, that they are permitted to prefixe the
sacred face and name of authority, ordained of God to defend and vindicate
truth, to their base and crooked ways, and that by their Sophistications, as
the goings of the Serpent, the world should be obfirmed in error, and the
simple and ignorant pitifully seduced and snared, to be made the instruments of
the execution of their malice and cruelty. We may truly say, if forgeries,
depravations, and misconstructions were taken out of the minds and libells of
our adversaries in this cause, they would be but poor and shrunken things,
unpleasing to themselves, when they look upon them, and of small power to work
upon others that hear them; but they find that this miserable mixture
although agrosse embasement, makes their metal the more pliant and flexible,
and to work the better for making up their Idol.

That book which carried the name and title of His Majesty's large Declaration,
has yet received no public and particular answer. So many as are acquainted
with our proceedings since the beginning of this work, as have taken diligent
heed to such pieces of ours, as it has engrossed, which alone may be an
antidote against all the venom of it, and as have perused what beside came
from us, to the view of the world, do find that it has nothing against the
cause, or against the persons of men, but what they are able to confute from
their own knowledge. Before that Declaration was seen of us, (for it was not
intended to open our eyes, but to dazell the sight of our neighbors, and
therefore a long time kept without our borders) we had given unto his Majesty
and the Nobility of England satisfaction concerning our proceedings which were
perverted by the author of that Declaration, the pacification was concluded,
and an Assembly and Parliament promised and appointed: Like as at the time of
the pacification, diverse of his Majesty's gracious expressions were found
contrary to the aspersions and blotts which had fallen from that foul pen. And
this at that time was told his Majesty by some of our Commissioners, and did
teach us how impudent the forger was, and how injurious to the King, from whose
justice we hoped he should receive his deserved censure and punishment, at the
desire and supplication of the Assembly and Parliament, which was judged to be
a more generous way and more honorable for the King, the Kingdom, and many
particular persons, who were known to be wronged, then to trifle with such a
party in a reply about things that were past, and to make the wounds green,
which were begun to close; Neither in this was it our desire, so much to do
the party hurt, as to make him repent and palinode, without which we cannot
yet see, how either his Majesty can be restored to his honor, or the Kirk and
Kingdom, and many of his Majesty's subjects repaired in their credit;
Although we know that this our plain and open profession of our judgment and
desire will make him (except God touch his heart) the more desperately wicked;
and if he have any power, to abuse it, that he be not called to that reckoning
which he is not able to make.

The case is now changed, It was time then to keep silence, and now it is time
to speak, when our just exceptions against this late Declaration, and our
presenting of the naked and open truth, as in day light without maskes and
mummeries, may (if the Lord will) prevent the mischief now intended the second
time, which was by other means in the mercy of God turned away at first. And
if this our endeavor shall prove uneffectuall to our wished ends of
tranquillity and peace, we must rest upon the determination of the Supreme
providence, and upon this testimony, that we have delivered our own souls. The
steps of the Declaration shall be trod by us, In the relation of our
proceedings from the pacification to the Parliament, In the time of the sitting
of the Parliament, and after the Parliament to this day: In all which, when the
Declaration wandereth out of the way, we shall modestly, and with that respect
which we owe to authority, which shall never be vilified, but ever be in high
esteem with us, keep the way of truth, and shall note the wilful aberrations
of our adversaries, whose delight is to walk in wanderings and bypath.

The question proponed in the beginning: who they are that have been the
disturbers of the peace, is that which we desire to be debated, and may be the
more easily and clearly defined, upon this threefold consideration. First, that
Innovation in Religion, and the infringing of fundamental Liberties and Laws,
which are universally acknowledged to be the maine causes of commotions, have
been the first motives and means of our Tempests and troubles: When Religion
and Justice, which are the pillars of government begin to be shaken or
under-myned, no marvel there be disturbance in the house of the Commonwealth,
which yet is not to be imputed to all who are under the roof, but to such as
have a hand, and are workers in the mischief. Secondly, our ways of redress
and deliverance from common ruin, were no other, but humble and frequent
supplications to the Council of the Kingdom first, and not being heard, in
all reverence to the King himself, as the great Master of the house fair and
legal protestations against the threatening and pressing evils, every one of
the^ bearing the testimonies of our loyalty, and of our high honoring of
Monarchical government in the Royal person of our native King: And when our
supplications and protestations proved nothing but fuel to that fire, which
was burning in the breasts of those Incendiaries our enemies, and had inflamed
our King to take arms against us, and to put all in a common combustion; We
did still present in the one hand our humble supplications, most earnestly
begging to enjoy our Religion and Liberties, in peace, under his Majesty's
happy government: And did hold in the other hand, the sword of just and
innocent defense, against the oppression and violence of the Enemies of the
Kings honor, and of our peace; Which we are confident by no Law of God or
Nations, can be judged to be rebellion or laes-Majesty. Our petition, at that
time when we are said to have been in the hight of rebellion, we have here set
down whole, the Declaration containing but a part thereof. We did then write
our mind, whereof we never did repent, and which we desire may be known to all
men.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty: The supplication of his Majesty's
Subjects of SCOTLAND. humbly showing,
THat where the former means used by us, have not been effectual for
recovering your Majesty's favor, and the peace of this your Majesty's native
Kingdom, we fall down again at your Majesty's feet, most humbly supplicating,
that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to appoint some few, of the many
worthy men of your Majesty's Kingdom of England, who are well-affected to the
true Religon, and to our common peace, To hear by some of us, of the same
disposition, our humble desires, and to make known to us your Majesty's
gracious pleasure, That as by the providence of God we are joined in one Island,
under one King, so by your Majesty's great wisdom, and tender care, all
mistakings may be speedily removed, and the two Kingdoms may be kept in peace
and happiness, under your Majesty's long and prosperous reign: For which we
shall never cease to pray, as it be comes your Majesty's most humble Subjects.

With the Supplication sent to his Majesty by the hand of the Earl of
Dumfermling, a Letter was sent to the Earl of Holland, and others of the
Council of England about his Majesty, In these words.

MOST NOBLE LORDS,
ALthough we have been laboring this long time past by our Supplications,
Informations, and Missives, to some of your Lordships to make known to his
Majesty and the whole Kingdom of England, the loyalty and peaceablenesse of
our intentions and desires, and that we never meaned to deny to his Majesty,
our dread Sovereign, and native King, any point of temporal and civil
obedience; yet contrary to our expectation and hopes, matters to this day
growing worse and worse, both Kingdoms are brought to the dangerous and
deplorable condition wherein they now stand in the sight of the world. In this
extreamitie we have sent to his Majesty our humble supplication (beside which
we know no other mean of pacification) and do most earnestly entreat, that it
may be assisted by your Lordships, that if it be possible by a meeting in
some convenient place, of some prime and well-affected men to the reformed
Religion, and our common peace, matters may be accommodate in a fair and
peaceable way, and that so speedily, and with such expedition, as that through
farther delays, which we see not how they can be longer endured, our evils
become not incurable: we take God and the world to witness, that we have left
no means unassayed, to give his Majesty and the whole Kingdom of England,
all just satisfaction: And that we desire nothing, but the preservation of our
Religion and Laws. If the fearful consequents shall ensue, which must be
very near, except they be wisely and speedily prevented, we trust they shall
not be imputed unto us, who till this time have been following after peace,
and who do in every duty most ardently desire to show our selves his
Majesty's faithful Subjects, and

Your Lordships humble servants.

His Majesty being pleased to admit some of us to repair to the Camp near
Barwick, and granting unto them a safe conduct under his Majesty's hand, our
Commissioners presented our humble desires, the last words whereof are
expressed in the Declaration, but we have set them down entire, that both the
reasonableness of our petitions, and the loyalty of our hearts may be known
to all men.

First, it is our humble desire, that his Majesty would be graciously pleased
to assure us, that the acts of the late Assembly at Glasgow shall be ratified
by his Majesty in the ensuing Parliament to be holden at Edinburgh July 23.
since the peace of the Kirk and Kingdom cannot endure further prorogation.
Secondly, that his Majesty from his tender care of the preservation of our
Religion and Laws, will be graciously pleased to declare and assure, that it
is his Royal will, that all matters Ecclesiastical be determined by the
Assemblies of the Kirk, and matters civil by Parliament, which will be for his
Majesty's honor, and keeping peace and order amongst the subjects, in the time
of his Majesty's personal absence. Thirdly, that a blessed pacification may
be speedily brought about, and his Majesty's Subjects may be secured, our
humble desire is, that his Majesty's ships and forces by land be recalled; that
all persons, ships, and goods arrested may be restored, the losses which we
have sustained by the stopping of our trade and negotiating be repaired, and we
made safe from violence and invasion; And that all excommunicat persons, all
Incendiaries and Informers against the Kingdom who have out of malice caused
these commotions for their own private ends, may be returned to suffer their
deserved punishment: And the Proclamations and Manifestoes sent abroad by them,
under his Majesty's name, to the dishonouring of the King, and defaming of the
Kingdom, may be suppressed. As these are our humble desires, so is it our
grief, that his Majesty should have been provoked to wrath, against us his
most humble and loving subjects; and shall be our delight upon his Majesty's
assurance of the preservation of our Religion and Laws, to give example to
others, of all civil and temporal obedience, which can be required or
expected of loyal subjects.

Of those our desires, the grounds and reasons following were given in writ at
his Majesty's command.

REASONS AND GROUNDS of our humble desires.
WE do first humbly desire a ratification of the acts of the late Assembly in
the ensuing Parliament. 1. Because the civil power is the keeper of both
Tables, and whereas the Kirk and Kingdom are one body, consisting of the same
members, there can be no firm peace nor stabilitie of order, unless the
Ministers of the Kirk in their way press the obedience of the civil Laws and
Magistrate, and the civil power add their sanction and authority to the
constitutions of the Kirk. 2. Because the late General Assembly, indicted by
his Majesty, was lawfully constitute in all the members thereof, according to
the constitutions and order prescribed by acts of former Assemblies. Thirdly,
because no particular is enacted in the late Assembly, which is not grounded
upon the act of preceding Assemblies: And is either expressly contained in
them, or by necessary consequence may be deduced from them, That the Parliament
be kept without prorogation, his Majesty knows how necessary it is, since
the peace of the Kirk and Kingdom call for it without longer delay.


We did secondly desire, that his Majesty would be pleased to declare and
assure, That it is his Royal will, that all matters Ecclesiastical be
determined by the Assemblies of the Kirk, and matters civil by the Parliament,
and other inferior Judicatories established by Law; because we know no other
way for preservation of our Religion and Laws; and because matters so
different in their nature, ought to be treated respective in their own proper
Judicatories. It was also desired, that Parliaments might be holden at set
times, as once in two or three years, by reason of his Majesty's personal
absence, which hinders the Subjects in their complaints and grievances, to
have immediate access unto his Majesty's presence. And where his Majesty
requires us to limite our desires to the enjoying of our Religion and
Liberties, according to the Ecclesiastical and civil Laws respective. We
are heartily content to have the occasion to declare, That we never intended
further then the enjoying of our Religion and Liberties: And that all this time
past, it was far from our thoughts and desires to diminish the Royal
authority of our native King and dread Sovereign, or to make any invasion
upon the Kingdom of England, which are the calumnies forged and spread against
us, by the malice of our adversaries: and for which we humbly desire, That in
his Majesty's justice they may have their own censure and punishment. Thirdly,
we desired a blessed pacification, and did express the most ready and
powerful means which we could conceive for bringing the same speedily to
pass, leaving other means serving for that end, to his Majesty's Royal
consideration and great wisdom.

Before his Majesty gave an answer to our above written desires, Three Querees
were read out of a paper by his Majesty to our Commissioners: Unto which they
gave a present answer by word, and at his Majesty's instance prepared their
answers to be exhibit in writ, but they were not called for.

THE QUEREES.
1. WHether we acknowledge the Kings Majesty to have the sole indiction of
Assemblies? 2. Whether his Majesty has a negative voice in Assemblies? 3.
Whether his Majesty has the power of raising Assemblies?


ANSWERS.
1. THat it is proper for the General Assembly it self to determine
questions of this kind, and it were usurpation in us, which might bring upon us
the just censure of the General Assembly, to give out a determination. 2. The
answering of one of those three demands, is the answering of all; for if the
sole indiction belong to his Majesty, there needs no question about the
negative voice, and dissolving of Assemblies: Next, if his Majesty has a
negative voice, there needs no question anent the indiction and dissolving,
and if his Majesty may discharge the Assembly, there needs no question about
the other two.


For our parts we humbly acknowledge, that the Kings Majesty has power to
indict the Assemblies of the Kirk, and when in his wisdom he thinks
convenient, he may use his authority in conveening Assemblies of all sorts,
whether general or particular: We acknowledge also that the solemn and
public indiction by way of Proclamation and compulsion, belongs properly to
the Magistrate, and can neither be given to the Pope, nor to any foreign
power, nor can it without usurpation be claymed by any of his Majesty's
subjects: But we will never think that his Majesty means, that in the case
of extreme or urgent necessity, the Kirk may not by her self conveene,
continue, and give out her own constitutions for the preservation of Religion.

1. Because God has given power to the Kirk to conveene: The Son of God has
promised his assistance to them being conveened, and the Christian Kirk has in
all ages used this as the ordinary and necessary mean for uniforme
establishing of Religion and Piety, and for removing of the evils of heresy,
scandals, and others of that kind, which must be, and would bring the Kirk to
be no more, if by this powerful remedy they were not cured and prevented. 2.
According to this divine right, the Kirk of Scotland has kept her General
Assemblies with a blessing from Heaven; for while our Assemblies continued in
strength, the doctrine, worship, and discipline, the unity and peace of the
Kirk continued in vigor; Piety, and Learning were advanced; and profanitie
and idleness censured. 3. The Kirk of Scotland has declared, that all
Ecclesiastical Assemblies have power to conveene lawfully together for
treating of things concerning the Kirk, and pertaining to their charge, and to
appoint times and places to that effect. 4. The liberty of this Kirk for
holding Assemblies, is also acknowledged by Parliament, and ratified by acts
thereof, which is manifest by the act of Parliament holden in anno 1592. and
that upon the ground of perpetual reason. 5. Because there is no ground either
by act of Assembly or Parliament, or any preceding practice, whether in the
Christian Kirk of old, or in our Kirk since the reformation, whereby the Kings
Majesty may dissolve the General assembly, or assume unto himself a negative
voice: but upon the contrary, his Majesty's prerogative is declared by act of
Parliament, to be nowayes prejudicial to the privileges and Liberties which
God has granted to the spiritual office-bearers of his Kirk, which are most
frequently ratified in Parliament, and especially in the Parliament last holden
by his Majesty. 6. By this mean, the whole frame of Religion and Kirk
Jurisdiction, shall depend absolutely upon the pleasure of the Prince, whereas
his Majesty has declared by public Proclamation in England, that the
Jurisdiction of Kirk men, in their meetings and courts holden by them, does
not flow from his Majesty's authority, notwithstanding any act of Parliament,
which has been made to the contrary, but from themselves, and their own power,
and that they hold their courts and meetings is their own name.
After much agitation, and many consultations, his Majesty's Declaration
touching the intended pacification was read to our Commissioners; who upon
their dislike and exceptions taken both at matter and expressions, as contrary
to our minds, and prejudicial to our cause, did humbly remonstrat, that the
Declaration as it was conceived, could not give satisfaction to us from whom
they were sent; His Majesty was graciously pleased to command some words to be
deleted, other words to be changed, and many parts thereof were by verbal
promises and interpretation from his Majesty's own mouth mitigated, which in
our estimation were equal to that which was written, some of the Counselors
of England, assuring our Commissioners, that what was spoken and promised
before men of honor, and in the face of two Armies, was no less certain, and
would (no doubt) be as really performed, as if it had been written in capital
Letters; which therefore were diligently observed, carefully remembered, and
punctually related by our Commissioners at their delivering of his Majesty's
Declaration to us: And without which, we nor could nor would have condescended
and consented to the articles of the Declaration, more then we could or would
against the light of our minds and consciences have sinned against God, and
condemned our own deed. Thus, way was made to the pacification, and for
praeoccupying all mistakes whether wilful possibly by some, or through
weakness of memory by others: These vocal interpretations and expressions
were collected, kept by our selves, and in papers delivered to some of the
Counselors of England in the words follow-ing.

Some conditions of his Majesty's Treaty with his Subjects of Scotland, before
the English Nobility are set down here for remembrance.
AS for the preface and conclusion of his Majesty's last Declaration, although
it contained hard expressions of the Subjects in Scotland, yet his Majesty
declared that he had no such opinion of them, but required the paper to stand
for his credit, and for a point of honor with foreign Nations, and required
they should not stand with him for words and expressions, so they obtained the
matter.

2. As for calling the late Assembly pretended; seeing the Subjects of Scotland
professed they would never pass from the said Assembly, and decrees thereof;
His Majesty professed, as he did not acknowledge that Assembly, further then
as it had registrat his Declaration: so would he not desire the Subjects to
pass from the samine.

3. Concerning the constitution of the Assembly, It was shown his Majesty
that none could be members of the Assembly, but such as had a Commission, viz.
two or three Ministers from every Presbytery, with a ruling Elder, one from
each Burgh and University, and his Majesty's Commissioner. His Majesty
contended; that his Assessours had vote, and upon an expression in his
Majesty's Declaration, that referred to some reasons contained in former
Proclamations, which were totally against the lawfulnes of ruling Elders: It
was desired that according to the custom of this Kirk, all contraversies
arising, should be remitted to the Assembly it self, His Majesty had some
expressions craving these to be remitted to himself, but being told that it was
against the constitutions of the Kirk, to have any other Judge, but the voycer
of the assembly, where his Majesty, or his Commissioner should be present, and
give the first voice; It was concluded, that the word Free Assembly in his
Majesty's Declaration, did import the freedom in judging all questions arising
there, concerning constitution, members or matter.

4. Concerning the restitution of the Castles, as the subjects did it freely,
so did they express that what might concern the safety of the country, they
referred to the time of the Parliament, at which time they should signify
their desires by Petition to his Majesty. As also they told it had cost much
charges in fortifying and keeping thereof: The representation whereof to his
Majesty, they referred to that time.

5. Concerning the restitution of persons goods and houses required by his
Majesty, It was promised, provyding the great sums contracted for the
public, were repayed in an equal way by all, which behoved to be done either
by commission from his Majesty, or by Parliament. And when it was objected,
that much goods were already spent: The King answered, That as for goods or
ammunition that was spent, they could not be restored; but these that are
extant, must be.

6. His Majesty not allowing of the late assembly, for the reasons contained
in his several Proclamations, being excepted against, as a declaration of his
Majesty's judgment against ruling Elders, which prejudged the right
constitution of a free assembly: His Majesty after full hearing deleted that
clause.

7. That part of his Majesty's Declaration, which bears, that no other oath be
exacted of Intrants, then that which is contained in the act of Parliament, as
also that clause bearing, that the pretended bishops etc. shall be censurable by
the general assembly, being excepted against, as presupponing and importing
the continuance of episcopacie, which we could not acknowledge, as being
incompatible with the Confession of faith, and constitution of the Kirk: His
Majesty was pleased to delete both these clauses.

8. And it being with all instancie and humility pressed Saturday June 15. That
his Majesty would satisfy that main desire of the Subjects, by declaring,
that his Majesty would quite episcopacie, did answer, that it was not sought
in our desires: And when it was replied, that our first desire to have the acts
of the general assembly ratified, imported the same, his Majesty acknowledged
it to be so, and averred that he did not refuse it, but would advyse till
monday the 17. At which time his Majesty being pressed to give some
signification of his quyt^ng episcopacie: and it being plainly shown to his
Majesty, that if he would labor to maintain episcopacie, it would breed a
miserable schism in this Kirk, and make such a rupture and division in this
Kingdom, as would prove uncurable: and if his Majesty would let the Kirk and
Country be fred of them, his Majesty would receive as hearty and duetifull
obedience as ever Prince received of a people. His Majesty answered, that he
could not prelimite and fore-stall his voice, but had appointed a free
assembly, which might judge of all Ecclesiastical matters. The constitutions
whereof he promised to ratify in the ensuing Parliament.

It were against duty for us to doubt of his Majesty's intention to be
personally present in the Assembly, as it is expressed in the foresaid
Declaration. And we are no less assured, that if it had pleased God so to
dispose, matters this day might have been in a better and more peaceable
posture, through giving and receiving in presence, mutual contentment betwixt
the King and his Subjects: But the penner of the Declaration has been evil
advised, in rendering the reasons of his Majesty's diversion, from any disorders
in Edinburgh, or from the refusal of some Noblemen and others to go to
Barwick. For that stir of some of the people did arise upon a rumor, that the
Lord Aboynd who had lately come from the troubles in the North, where some of
Edinburgh had lost their friends and acquaintance: And that the late pretended
bishop of Edinburgh, (the more odious to the people, that in the recent
Proclaclamation the prelates were called to be members of the Assembly) that
they both were at that time in the Coach, about which the multitude made the
concurse: But no sooner were the persons discerned, and the Lord Thesaurer seen
and known, but the tumult incontinent ceased. All which being made known to his
Majesty by Commissioners sent from Edinburgh, and seconded by the Lord
Thesaurer his own relation, his Majesty seemed to rest satisfied.

Neither was the refusing of the Lords and others sent for, the true cause of
his Majesty's going away: What means have been used by some bad instruments to
disturb and cut off a treaty of peace, is too manifest from the records of
times past; when men simulat and make a show to do that of a free mind, which
indeed necessity constrains them to do for the time, there can be no firm
peace expected. Wicked men also who find themselves prejudged by a treaty of
peace, have found no way more certain against it, then to go about to commit
some foul act against them, with whom they would not have the accord to stand:
And it has rarely come to pass, that the best Princes have been suffered by
malcontents to keep the conditions of peace, which they have made with their
own subjects; For here it is no great difficulty, to foment division, and to
make an exulceration in the mind of Soveraignitie. We will not express what by
relation, and not by conjecture, but by indicative signs we learned at that
time; But will only give the causes why the fourteen select persons called for
by his Majesty, were not suffered to go to Barwick.

Some few of the many reasons given for staying the Noblemen and others named
by his Majesty from repairing at this time to the Court at Barwicke.
1. HIs Majesty has not been in use at any time of the greatest security to
call any of his Majesty's Subjects out of the Kingdom after this sort: At this
time then which is so full of fears, to call for so many of such Noblemen,
without any warrant or command sent to themselves, it seems to us strange, and
may we not say, was ever his Majesty, or his Royal Father wont to do so unto
us, since their going to England unto this day? Although his Majesty's
Declaration at Dunce, contrair to our mind and merit, did call the late
Assembly, a pretended Assembly, our humble and loyal proceedings, disorders;
our courses, disagreeable to Monarchical government; and did threaten us with
the terrors of his Majesty's wrath; yet our desire is to live a quiet and
peaceable life under his Majesty's government, and our zeal to his Majesty's
honor, although with some aspersion put upon our selves before the world,
moved us to receive them, because of diverse gracious expressions related from
his Majesty's mouth by our Commissioners, which we did gladly hear, and did
note diligently for our own content, and that we might be able to satisfy
others, and without which, the articles of pacification had never served for
the beginning of peace; yet we now understand, that all, or the greater part of
these verbal expressions are denied, which makes our hopes to waver, gives us
great cause of Jealousy and suspicion, and moves us to call in question all
other reports made to us from his Majesty.

2. His Majesty knows, that what is so instantly pressed at this time, was
none of the articles agreed upon at that time. And if beside the restitution of
goods, the rendering of the Castles, the dissolving of the Army; It had then
been required that those fourteen should be sent to the Camp, or to Barwicke,
the condition had been harder then that we could have yielded unto it.

3. Because we cannot judge the intentions of minds, and disposition of hearts,
but by that which we hear with our ears, and does appear in action. We
desire to be considered, that all expressions of favor are put upon our
adversaries, they esteemed and called his Majesty's good Subjects; and their
practices, his Majesty's service; Upon the contrair, whole volumes are spread,
and even since the treaty put in all hands against us, not only stuffed with
such reproaches against almost the whole Kingdom, and particularly against the
persons now sent for: That it were a dishonor to the King to have such a
Kingdom, and a shame to be set over such subjects as we are descryved to be;
But also containing threatenings and vows of exemplar punishment upon such as
they are reported to be: That the troubles of the Northern parts of the
Kingdom are not as yet ceased: That Garrisons are kept at Barwick: and other
places of the borders: That the Castle of Edinburgh is fortified, and furnished
above any thing that has been heard of at any time before: That some cruel
and bloody words against the Scottish Lords have been overheard in Barwick:
and, which we could not have believed, but that it is testified by so many
Letters sent hither; That our friends and Countrymen not only in Ireland, but
even now in England, are not only stopped in their trade, but casten in prison
for the modest refusing to take oaths contrair to their oath and Covenant,
which they have sworn in their own Country: a violence not used before the
treaty of peace, contrair to the Law of Nations, to the rule of common
equity, of doing that to others, which we would they should do unto us, and
to the articles of pacification agreed upon with his Majesty.

These and other the like considerations do so work upon us, that for the
present except we do against our own hearts, and deny our own sense, we
cannot give way to so eminent persons to repair to Barwick, which we trust his
Majesty neither will interpret to be disobedience, nor diffidencie, since we
have been all careful to see all the conditions performed to the uttermost on
our part. and there is not one of that number, nor of us all, but shall be
ready for our own parts, to give the most ample testimony of our obedience to
his Majesty's commandments, and of our confidence in his Majesty's Justice and
goodness, as his Majesty shall really find, and experience at his coming, and
during his abode in the Kingdom: For we are assured what has been committed
by any since the begun pacification, contrair to any of the articles thereof,
has proceeded from the disposition of wicked instruments about his Majesty,
who are enemies of his Majesty's honor, and our peace, and have been the
authors of all our woeful divisions, which we beseech the Lord to put to an
end, by an happy and everlasting peace.

The darkness of those clouds which than threatened the storm now like to fall
upon this Island, had been easily scattered by the brightness of his Majesty's
presence in his Royal person, which would have been so far from danger (as
the Lord is witness, never any such treacherous intention or motion entered in
our hearts) that never was there a King more heartily welcomed, more cheerfully
entertained, and more universally accompanied with congratulations, and
acclamations of joy; then his Majesty would have been, if he had come and
stayed in this his native Kingdom, till that had been performed in Assembly
and Parliament, which was promised in the articles of pacification; But God
would not have it so: And his Majesty show to our Commissioners, That weighty
affairs of the Kingdom of England, did call for his Majesty's presence,
whereof he had received advertisement from the Council of that Kingdom: But
that he would appoint a Commissioner in his place, fully instructed for the
Assembly and Parliament. By all which it is apparent, that neither any tumult
in Edinburgh, nor the not coming of the Noblemen and others called for, was so
much as pretended at that time, to be the change of his Majesty's resolution.

Having now represented, that the Innovation of our Religion, and the
infringing of our Liberties, were the first causes and motives of our troubles.
Secondly, that we did humbly and frequently supplicat and protest for remedy,
and that in a most quiet and peaceable way; that never ceasing from our humble
supplications, we did take Arms merely for our own defense, whereof we divested
our selves how soon any tolerable pacification could be obtained, resolving
upon the hope of enjoying of our Religion and Liberties, by the help of our God
to bear our own burdens. We come to our third consideration to vindicat our
selves from the breach of peace, which we trust will be a work very easy for
us in the minds of so many as will be pleased to judge unpartially, and without
prejudice to hear the plain truth: For nothing is now after so many days,
and so hard dealing laid to our charge, which was not before his Majesty's
parting from Barwick, both objected by our adversaries, and so fully answered
by our Commissioners sent from us, that his Majesty was pleased to continue in
his purpose, and to renew his Royal promise of holding the Assembly and
Parliament: If his Majesty was not then satisfied without answers, how was it
that the Assembly and Parliament, the sum of all our desires were still
granted: and if his Majesty was then satisfied with our answers, how comes it
that we should be charged with the same aspersions which were purged before.
This Sophistical wrangling, and gross wronging of the truth, may perhaps
gain some ground upon the credulity of strangers, who are not acquainted with
the order of our proceedings, but can have no power with us, or with others who
were witnesses to our ways, but to make us the more affectionat to the cause,
and them more affectionat to us, whom they know to be borne down, not only by
violence, but by calumnies and contradiction. We present therefore in this
place both the articles where with we were charged 1639. July 18. and the
answers given unto them.

Articles wherewith we were charged July 18. 1639. after the pacification.
1. ENglish skippers abused at Leith. 2. Ammunition not all restored. 3. Forces
not dismissed, and in particular Munro his Regiment yet kept afoot. 4.
General Leslies commission not yet given up. 5. Fortifications not so much as
begun to be demolished. 6. Their unlawful meetings still kept afoot,
whereby our good subjects are day lie pressed to adhere both to their unlawful
Covenant, and pretended Assembly at Glasgow. 7. Protesting against our gracious
Declaration of the Act of pacification, published in your Camp at Dunce. 8.
Protestation made publicly at the time of the Indiction of the Assembly. 9.
Protestation made against our command of the down-sitting of the Session. 10.
Why seditious Ministers, who in their Sermons preach seditiously, are not taken
order with. 11. Why our good subjects are deterred and threatened if they shall
come home to their own native country, and their houses. 12. Our subjects are
required to subscribe the acts of the late pretended Assembly, or the Covenant
with the addition. 13. Order is not taken with the persons who have committed
insolences upon our officers, and other our good subjects. 14. None are
admitted or allowed to be chosen members of the ensuing Assembly, except such
as do subscribe and swear to the ratification of the former Assembly. 15. Our
good subjects, who have stuck by us and our service, are publicly railed upon
in the streets, and pulpits, by the name of traitors, and betrayers of the
Country. 16. Ministers are daily deposed, for not subscribing to the
ordinance, anent the pretended Assembly and Covenant. 17. Why Balmerinoch and
his associates did stop our good subjects from coming to us, when they were
ready and willing to have obeyed us, and our commands. 18. The paper divulged,
and if they avow the same.
Our answers at that time to those articles.
TO the first, It is answered, That the process led before the Baillies of
Leith, and the parties and witnesses depositions taken before Captain Fieldoun
22. of July instant, will clear this, and witness against them, that they
have contradicted themselves, and so are not worthy to be believed.

To the second, The Cannon which were at Leith are delivered unto the Castle
already, and the rest shall be delivered in with all possible diligence at
farthest before Saturday next at night: As for the Muskets, all those which we
conceive were taken, are already delivered. And if the Lord Thesaurer can
prove, that any of our society did receive any more, the same shall be
restored, or the price thereof. And the 54. barrells of powder shall be paid
for: The ball was not made use of, but all lying still where they were.

To the third, Since his Majesty will have that Regiment disbanded, the same
shall be done presently; But we humbly beg, that his Majesty would be pleased
to dismiss the Garrisons in Barwick, Carlill, and the rest of the borders.

The fourth is obeyed by the General his surrender, which he had pressed many
times before.

To the fifth. The Town of Edinburgh pretends by their Rights and Charters
granted from his Majesty's Predecessors, a power to fortify Leith, which must
be discussed before it be taken away. And yet for to show their readiness to
give his Majesty all contentment, they shall before the Parliament, cause make
a slope or two in the Fortifications, which if his Majesty and Parliament find
that they shall be casten down, It must be at the Kings Majesty's, and not upon
their charges.

To the sixth, It is denied that any meetings are kept, but such as are
agreeable to the acts of Parliment: and although we must adhere to our most
necessar and lawful Covenant, yet (to our knowledge) none has been urged to
subscribe it.

To the seventh, It is denied that any Protestation was made against his
Majesty's gracious declaration of the pacification; but by the contrair, both
at Dunce and Edinburgh public thansgiving was given, with a Declaration that
we adhere to the Assembly.

To the eighth, it is answered, that we could not pass by the citation of
Bishops to the Assembly without protestation, seeing our silence might have
inferred us to have acknowledged them to be members of the Assembly.

To the ninth, there was nothing protested against the Session to infer any
claim, that any Subject, or all the Subjects has power to hinder or discharge
them: but only in respect of the times, when neither the Liedges could attend,
neither had they their writs in readiness to pursue or defend, they behoved to
protest for remeed of law, in case any thing should be done to their prejudice.

To the tenth, we know no such seditious Ministers: and when any Ministers
alleged seditious, shall be called before the Judge ordinar, they shall be
punished according to justice.

To the eleventh, we know none of his Majesty's good Subjects, who are now
deterred or threatened, nor do we allow that any should be troubled, otherwise
then by order of law, and if any fear themselves, there is an ordinar way in
justice, which they may use: And if under the name of good subjects, be meaned
excommunicat persons, who by the Laws of this Country should be rebels, and
caption used against them, which has been desired by the Kirk and Country,
and refused, and who also are the authors of all the evils have come upon this
Kingdom, none can give assurance for their indemnity, who stands thus guilty
and odious to the whole people.

To the twelfth, it is answered in the answer to the sixth.

To the thirteenth, the reason that the Magistrates of Edinburgh did not go on
in the strictest way of justice in that business, was, because the Lord
Thesaurer thought that the too strict going on in that matter, might hinder his
Majesty's better service. Likeas the Magistrates used all possible diligence to
try who were the actours; and having examined diverse of them, who were
alleged to have been of that number, they all denied, and no proof could be
had against them: One whereof was the wife at the nether Bow, and one Little a
Harbor.

To the fourteenth, this is denied, because to our knowledge no such exception
has been at any of these elections.

To the fifteenth, there are none who are alleged to have railed either in
streets, or in the Pulpits, who shall not be made answerable and liable to the
law, for what they have spoken, when they shall be accused before the judge
ordinar.

To the sixteenth, it is denied.

The seventeenth, Balmerinoch was already cleared, that he was not the cause of
their stay; and those that did stop them, did it for the reasons contained in
the paper herewith given in.

To the last, as we are most unwilling to fall upon any question, which may
seem to import the least contradiction with his Majesty, so if it had not
been the trust which we gave to the relation of our Commissioners, who did
report to us his Majesty's gracious expressions related daily to us at Dunce,
and put in note by many of our number, which were a great deal more
satisfactorie to us then the written Declaration; the same would not have been
acceptable, which did call the Assembly pretended, our humble and loyal
proceedings, disorders, our courses disagreeable to Monarchical government:
nor the castle of Edinburgh randred (which was only taken for the safety of
the town of Edinburgh) simply, without assurance by writ, of their indemnitie,
except for the trust we reposed in their relation, and confidence in his
Majesty's royal word, which we believe they did not forget, but will bring
those who did hear the treaty to a right remembrance thereof, which paper was
only written for that cause, lest either his Majesty or his Subjects should
aver that they spoke any thing without warrant.

After these answers were received by his Majesty, and our petition of an
Assembly and Parliament granted, we never did fear or imagine, that we should
be challenged any more of not performing on our part the articles of
pacification, yet is the accusation now renewed more odiously then before, and
our answers suppressed, as if they never had been made or received; which
lays a necessity on us to take a second view of both, that our fidelity in
performing what in the integrity of our hearts was promised, and our
detestation of the wickedness of falsehood and breach of faith; as contrary to
the clear and round dealing of our progenitors, to the nature of the cause, and
truth, for which we have run the hazard of all that we are and have in the
world, and to the duty of faithful Subjects, may be known to all men, who
will not turn their back upon the Sun, and love not darkness more then light.

How far we were from any scandalous protestation, tending to his Majesty's
dishonor, or to encourage the Subjects to mutiny (with which we are burdened
at the publishing of his Majesty's will at the Camp, before the disbanding of
our forces) and how unjustly this is laid to our charge, will appear by the
naked representation of what passed at that time: First, we witnessed our
thankfulness for his Majesty's justice and goodness, and next our care to
keep our selves from perfidiousnesse against God, which cannot be dishonorable
to the civil government, and whereofour Commissioners made open profession
before his Majesty: Nothing was done at this time, which was not done before
at his Majesty's Camp; and which was not very many times acknowledged after by
his Majesty's Commissioner in the Assembly: But the Paper will best speak truth.

Information against all mistaking of his Majesty's Declaration.
LEst his Majesty's Declaration of the date 18 June, containing the answer to
our humble desires presented by our Commissioners, should be either mistaken
by the well affected, or wilfully misconstrued by the malicious, whereby his
Majesty's justice and goodness may be concealed, or his Majesty's good
Subjects may appear to have done or admitted any point contrair to their
solemn oath and Covenant. The General, Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses,
Ministers, and Officers, conveened at Dunce before the dissolving of the Army,
have thought necessary to put in writ, what was related to them by the
Commissioners from his Majesty: To wit, that as his Majesty declared that he
could not acknowledge nor approve the late general Assembly at Glasgow; for
which cause it is called in his Majesty's Declaration, A pretended Assembly: So
was it not his Majesty's mind, that any of the petitioners by their acceptance
of the said Declaration should be thought to disapprove or part from the same,
or condemn their own proceedings as disorders and disobedient courses; And
therefore as they do entreat all his Majesty's good Subjects, with most
submissive and hearty thanksgiving, to acknowledge and confess his Majesty's
favor, in indicting a free Assembly to be kept August 6. and a Parliament
August 20. for ratifying of what shall be concluded in the Assembly, as the
proper and most powerful means to settle this Kirk and Kingdom: So would they
have all his Majesty's Subjects to know, that by accepting the said
Declaration, and articles of pacification joined therewith, they did not in any
sort or degree disclaim or disavow the said Assembly, but that they still
stand oblidged to adhere thereunto, and to obey and maintain the same; and for
preventing all mistaking and misconstruction, that so much be made known to all
persons, and in all places, where his Majesty's declaration shall be published,
which as it is his Majesty's own mind expressed diverse times to our
Commissioners; so are we assured, that it will serve much for his Majesty's
honor, for the satisfaction of the godly, and for the promoving of this
blessed pacification, for which all of us ought earnestly to pray to God, to
remember also our late oath, and Covenant, and to walk worthy of it: And to
beseech the Lord that by the approaching Assembly and Parliament, Religion and
righteousness may be established in the land.

2. The paper containing some of his Majesty's expressions in the time of the
Treaty, which were put in the hands of the English and others, and which we
have remembered before in the own place, has suffered innocently. For first, it
was the mean that brought about the pacification, and gave some satisfaction to
his Majesty's Subjects, against certain words and clauses of the Declaration,
which without that mitigation they would never have been able to digest. 2. It
did bear nothing contrary to the articles of pacification, but was a
mollifying of his Majesty's Declaration, that it might be the more ready
received by the Subject. 3. It had been extreme and more then imaginable
impudency, to put in the hands of the English Nobility, a paper professing
what was openly spoken a little before in their own hearing, that it might be
remembered afterward, as occasion should serve, and yet containing untruths, and
seditious positions contrary to all that was done for peace. 4. When there was
great murmuring, and many exceptions taken at the words of the Declaration, our
Commissioners were careful to remember every lenifying sentence and word,
which proceeded from his Majesty's mouth, and the hearers were no less
careful to note all with their pens, which was by them related, every man
according as he was able to conceive.
And thus at first there were relations somewhat different one from another
both in word and writ (an evil very ordinary at such times;) till our
Commissioners joining, did bring all to their remembrance, that neither more
nor less might be written, then was spoken, and what was written, might be
delivered to some of the English, ad futuram rei memoriam: One thing, it may
be, has fallen further contrary to his Majesty's desire, that the paper has
come to the knowledge of strangers, which we may aver has not been done by
us, and which was impossible for us to avoid: for our Commissioners to bring
about the desired peace, could not in their relations conceal his Majesty's
favorable expressions, and those intended for our own tranquillity coming in so
many hands at home, have possibly been divulged, and unnecessarily carried
abroad, contrary to our intentions and desires. This in the simplicity of our
hearts, we declare to be the plain truth of that which has been before, and is
now so much noised. And it is very likely that the smoke of the fire, and the
hand of the hangman, have carried it to the knowledge of many, who would never
have heard of it by the breaths or hands of others.

3. As in gathering our forces, our design was for our own defense, and for
his Majesty's honor, which would be speedily discerned if the enemies of this
Kingdom, who are taken for friends to the King, were put to the trial with us
in another cause, that did touch his Majesty's honor: So did we within the
space of 48 hours, the time appointed by his Majesty, dissolve our army, and
upon his Majesty's advertisment, did also disband that one Regiment spoken of
before in our first answers. Concerning the Officers we were careful, both to
observe that article of the pacification to his Majesty, and also to keep
promise to them, which did bind us, not to hold them in military pay, but to
vouchsafe them entertainment, till they should be restored to their own, or
called to other service, which ought not to be taken for any breach, contempt,
or disobedience, but for an observation of the law of nature, and common
equity; they being our own natives, and having forsaken their places and means
for defense of us, and their native Country. Less then this neither could
they expect nor we perform, although the peace had been most firmly settled.

4. All Forts and Castles were speedily restored, and more strong and in better
condition then before, although they be now used for a terror and for invasion
against us: the whole Ordinance put in the own place, with the ammunition,
except a few Muskets, and a little not considerable quantity of powder, which
was spent, and yet remitted to count and reckoning. All fortifications did
desist: Some part of the fortification of Leith was demolished for his
Majesty's satisfaction, and the whole remitted by his Majesty to the town of
Edinburgh, as having right to the same.

5 The nature and necessity of our meetings was represented to his Majesty at
the pacification, we had neither kept any before nor have kept since, but
such as are warranted by the acts of Parliament, law of nations, and by his
Majesty's own permission for mutual relief of our burdens, which by this
threatened invasion grow greater every day, wherein nothing is done which either
belongs to the ordinary judicatours of Council or Session, or which tends
to the vexation of any of his Majesty's Subjects, but consultations had for our
necessary defense, and such admitted to join with us, as willingly offer
themselves, after their straying from us, and from the cause, which they now
acknowledge they ought from the beginning to have maintained with us.

6 We remember of no other fortification mentioned in the Treaty to be
demolished, but that of Leith; neither do we understand what is meaned by this
sixth accusation; having given obedience in the greater, we would not have
failed in the lesser to give all content.

7. Some of the non-covenanters have not indeed entered in the possession of the
houses and lands of his Majesty's good Subjects, which in the beginning they
projected for themselves in the fancies of their heads, and earthlines of their
hearts, yet none (to our knowledge) have been impeded after the pacification,
to return to their own houses, and to live in peace, although their
provocations by secret dealing and writing against us, and by their daily
boasting and raylings have been many, whereof they will then repent themselves,
as others have done, when they shall see their own follies and wanderings, as
birds from their nests.

8. It is manifest by the eight article of this Manifesto, that the Kings
Majesty is highly wronged in his honor, by such perverse instruments, as have
their hand in works of this kind against his loyal and loving Subjects: For
where his Majesty at the Camp was graciously pleased upon good reason, and at
the desire of our Commissioners to command the blotting of a clause out of the
Declaration, in these words, For the Reasons contained in our former
Proclamations; which how material and important it was, so many as are
acquainted with those Proclamations, can easily judge. And likowise the
Declaration was signed without it by his Majesty's hand, and now page 7. is
printed without that clause, for there it had been palpable yet in this our
accusation, this contentious pen, has dared against his Majesty's mind to
foyst and stuff in these words again, that he may make matters worse then they
were at the beginning: It would appear that he has not been well pleased with
the blurring of the first draught, and that either the malice of his heart, or
the conceptions of his brain swey him more then the Kings will, or the good of
the King and Kingdom. It is here laid to our charge, that the Subjects have
been pressed by us, to swear and subscribe the acts of the Assembly at
Glasgow, but the truth is, whatsoever was the power of the Kirk to press that
oath and subscription in an Ecclesiastical way, yet no man de facto was urged
unto it: Some prevaricators who would have cheated us, have been refused, but
none have been pressed. What is objected concerning that tumult of some people
in Edinburgh against the Lord Thesaurer, and others, is answered before.

9. Concerning the freedom of the Assembly at Edinburgh, called by his
Majesty's authority: It was acknowledged by his Majesty, that what questions
might arise about the matters, members, or manner of the Assembly, should be
determined by the Assemby it self, as the only proper judicature; and his
Majesty's Commissioner in his name did openly consent to the constitution of
the Assembly, in all the members thereof upon the sight of their Commissions.
All which were publicly read, and to all the acts of the Assembly, from the
first to the last, and particularly to the act August 17. Declaring the
government of the Kirk by bishops, to be contrair to the Confession of Faith
and constitutions of this Kirk, and to the act which declared some former
Assemblies to be null amongst many other reasons; upon this ground, that
Prelates without any warrant from the Kirk, were admitted to be members thereof:
Yet there be here two pretexts alleged against the freedom of the Assembly
at Edinburgh, the one untrue de facto, for no such ways were used before the
Assembly, nor any such thing objected by his Majesty's Commissioner in the
Assembly; the other unjust de jure, that the prelates were not admitted to be
members of the Assembly; although at the time of the treaty his Majesty did
not exp^ct that they should be admitted, and yet resolved to grant a free
Assembly; By which it is now too manifest what his Majesty's mind is both of
the late Assembly at Edinburgh, which yet was called by his Majesty's
authority, and countenanced by his Commissioner, and of Episcopacie, although
removed out of this Kirk by the consent of his Majesty's Commissioner: And by
which every man may easily judge, whether the matters of Religion and the Kirk
be settled and secured, as is pretended by our adversaries, going about to work
division. This is the prevailing power of our enemies, without respect to the
Kings honor, or to common truth and honesty: that what was done before by his
Majesty's consent, may be undone, and that the pacification no more have place,
but all may be involved in a bloody war: The ground of pacification was a
free Assembly and Parliament: Now the one although peaceably closed is denied
to be free, and the other is hereby declared to be unprofitable for the good of
the Kirk.

10. The distinction made by the writer of the Declaration; of Traitors to God
and to the Country, upon the one side, and Traitors to the King, on the other
side, deserves no thanks from the King, nor approbation from any good and wise
Subject. It is evil policy, and worse divinity: for Traitors to God and
their Country, must be Traitors to the King; and such as are faithful to God
and the Country, must be the Kings best Subjects: He is the greatest Traitor,
who labors to divide the three whom the first has so nearly joined. The
right of his Majesty's Crown and the acts of Parliament command all the
Subjects to rise with their King, and to assist him when heriseth for God and
the Country: But no right nor act of Parliament forbids to stand for God
and the Country in the case of public invasion. To strike upon this string
were to fall in the fault which we have even now reproved, and will never fill
the ears of the King and the Subject with a pleasant hermonie. We only declare
that what soever have been the merits of those who have gone out from us, and
have wrought division between the King and the Country, we neither have
pretended nor have threatened to proceed with censures against them; their
complaints arise not from us, but from their own fears and furies within, which
begin to waken and vex them.

11 It was far from our thoughts to usurp any part of his Majesty's royal
power, in discharging the attendance of his Majesty's Subjects at the Session,
which we never did call in question; we did only in such an exigent and
extreamitie, modestly protest for indemnitie, if any sentence should pass
against us, for whom it was impossible to attend; as is evident by the words of
the Protestation it self, as follows:

ANd seeing the Session is now appointed to sit down, which tends to the
prejudice of his Majesty's Subjects, who lately have been so busied in their
preparations for the defense of the Religion and country, that they are now
necessarily retired to their own dwellings, for settling of their private
affairs, that they cannot be tymously advertised to attend any Law-businesse,
without greater prejudice then benefit; and that the best part of the Lieges
have so secured their Evidents, that the samine cannot be in readiness in
this short time of Session. Therefore, and in respect the down-sitting of the
Session now cannot be otherwise intimate unto them, but upon forty days,
whereas there are only twenty days to run after the appointed day of this
meeting: We protest that all members of the College of Justice, and all his
Majesty's Lieges are in bona fiae not to attend this Session, but that all
acts, sentences, decreets and inter-loquutors to be given and pronounced
against them, (if any shall be) are in the self, null, void, and ineffectuall,
suchlike as if the samine had never been given nor pronounced, and protest for
remeed of Law against the samine and every one of them.

Having now the second time cleared our proceedings of unjust imputations, and
our deportments of ingratitude and insolency, the order of the Declaration
draws us on immediately to the proceedings of the Parliament which we will
follow, how soon we have truly represented some of our proceedings in the
Assembly indicted by his Majesty, and holden at Edinburgh, August 12. 1640.
All which are past in silence by the Declaration, but in so far as they are
taxed by the way in the ninth pretended breach; but cannot be praetermitted by
us, because they are the greater and more substantial part of our proceedings,
which we desire may be known to all men. And because a free Assembly was at
first the one half of our humble desires, and since the closing of the
Assembly, the securing of our Religion, and the adding of the civil sanction
in Parliament to the acts of the Assembly, has been the greatest thing that we
have petitioned, for obtaining whereof, the Commissioners of the General
Assembly did attend the Parliament after the sitting thereof. Some few of many
are here remembered.

After the Assembly was conveened, and his Majesty's Commission read; excusing
the absence of his Royal person in these words: quod quidem gravissimis
maximique momentinegotiis, reditum nostrum in Angliam urgentibus impediti jam
praestare non possumus, See page 24. and granting as full power to his
Commissioner to do, as if his Majesty had been present in person, in these
words: Sicutinos facere potuissemus, si in nostra sacratissima persona
adessemus, secundum Ecclesiae consuetudinem legesque praedicti antiqui regni
nostri. And after the Assembly was constitute in all the members, and some
ordinary matters dispatched, there were many speeches and deliberations in the
Assembly, for settling the peace of the Kirk in such a way as might both
preserve the liberties of the Kirk, and give his Majesty best satisfaction, all
which ended unanimously in the act following, Sess. 8. August 17.

THe Kings Majesty having graciously declared, that it is his Royal will and
pleasure, that all questions about Religion, and matters Ecclesiastical, be
determined by the Assemblies of the Kirk, having also by public Proclamation,
indicted this free National Assembly, for settling the present distractions of
this Kirk, and for establishing a perfect peace against such divisions and
disorders as have been sore displeasing to his Majesty, and grievous to all his
good Subjects. And now his Majesty's Commissioner, John Earl of Traquair,
instructed and authorized with a full Commission, being present and sitting in
this Assembly now fully conveened, and orderly constitute in all the members
thereof, according to the order of this Kirk, having at large declared his
Majesty's zeal to the reformed Religion, and his Royal care and tender
affection to this Kirk, where his Majesty had both his birth and Baptism, his
great displeasure at the manifold distractions and divisions of this Kirk and
Kingdom, and his desires to have all our wounds perfectly cured with a fair
and fatherly hand. And although in the way approved by this Kirk, trial has
been taken in former Assemblies before, from the Kirk Registers, to our full
satisfaction; yet the Commissioners Grace, making particular inquyrie from the
members of the Assembly, now solemnly conveened concerning the true and real
causes of so many and great evils, as this time past, had so sore troubled the
peace of this Kirk and Kingdom. It was represented to his Majesty's
Commissioner by this Assembly, that beside many other, The maine and most
material causes were, First, the pressing of this Kirk by Prelates, with a
Service book, or book of Common prayer, without direction or warrant from the
Kirk, and containing beside the Popish frame thereof, diverse Popish errors and
ceremonies, and the seeds of manifold gross superstitions and idolatry, with a
book of Canons, without warrant or direction from the General Assembly,
establishing a tyrannical power over the Kirk, in the person of Bishops, and
over-throwing the whole discipline and government of the Kirk by Assemblies,
With a book of consecration and ordination, without warrant of authority
Civil or Ecclesiastical, appointing offices in the house of God, which are
not warranted by the word of God, and repugnant to the discipline and acts of
our Kirk, and with the high Commission, erected without the consent of this
Kirk, subverting the Jurisdiction and ordinary Judicatories of this Kirk, and
giving to persons merely Ecclesiastical, the power of both swords, and to
persons merely Civil, the power of the keys and Kirk censures. A second
cause was the articles of Perth, viz. the observation of Festival days,
kneeling at the Communion, confirmation, administration of the Sacraments in
private places, which were brought in by a null Assembly, and are contrary to
the Confession of Faith, as it was meant and subscribed anno 1580. and diverse
times since, and to the order and constitution of this Kirk. Thirdly, the
change of the government of the Kirk from the Assemblies of the Kirk; to the
persons of some Kirk-men, usurping prioritie and power over their brethren, by
the way, and under the name of Episcopal government, against the Confession
of Faith 1580. against the order set down in the book of Policy, and against
the intention and constitution of this Kirk from the beginning. Fourthly, the
civil places and power of Kirkmen, their sitting in Session, Council and
Exchequer, their ryding, sitting and voycing in Parliament, and their sitting
on the bench as Justices of Peace, which according to the constitutions of this
Kirk, are incompatible with their spiritual function, lift them up above their
brethren in worldly pomp, and do tend to the hinderance of the Ministry.
Fifthly, the keeping and authorizing corrupt Assemblies at Linlithgow 1606. and
1608. At Glasgow 1610. At Aberdein 1616. At Saint-Androes 1617. At Perth 1618.
which are null and unlawful, as being called and constitute quite contrair to
the order and constitution of this Kirk, received and practiced ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and withal laboring to introduce novations into this
Kirk, against the order and Religion established.

A sixth cause, is the want of lawful and free Assemblies, rightly constitute
of Pastors, Doctors and Elders yearly, or oftener prorenata, according to the
liberty of this Kirk expressed in the book of Policy, and acknowledged in
the act of Parliament 1592.

After which, the whole assembly in one heart and voice, did declare, that
these and such other, proceeding from the neglect and breach of the National
Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdom, made anno 1580, have been indeed the true
and maine causes of all our evils and distractions. And therefore ordain,
according to the constitutions of the general assemblies of this Kirk, and
upon the grounds respective above-specified. That the foresaid service-booke,
books of Canons and Ordination, and the high Commission be still rejected.
That the articles of Perth be no more practiced; That Episcopal government,
and the civil places and power of Kirk-men be holden still as unlawful in
this Kirk, That the abovenamed pretended assemblies at Linlithgow 1606. and
1608. At Glasgow 1610. At Aberdein 1616. At Saint-Andrewes 1617. At Perth 1618.
be hereafter accounted, as null and of none effect. And that for preservation
of Religion, and preventing all such evils in time coming, General assemblies
rightly constitute, as the proper and competent Judge of all matters
Ecclesiastical, hereafter be kept yearly and oftener prorenata, as occasion
and necessity shall require: The necessity of the occasional Assemblies
being first remonstrate to his Majesty by humble Supplication. As also that
Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synodall Assemblies be constitute and observed
according to the order of this Kirk.

After the voicing of this Act, his Majesty's Commissioner consented verbally
to the said Act, and promised to give in to the Clerk in writ, the declaration
of his consent: and that he should ratify this Act in the ensuing Parliament.

This act was accompanied with the testimony of two witnesses, Master George
Grahame, and Master Alexander Lindsay, the one deponing in the same Session,
the other in the next and ninth Session, by their writs given in to the
assembly, that they had deep sorrow for exercing the office of Episcopacie in
the Diocese of Orknay, and Dunkeld, against the word of God, the confession of
faith, and constitutions of this Kirk, for which they earnestly called for
mercy from God, and that they renounced that office in all time coming: as is
expressed at large in their poenitentiall bills, put upon record in the books
of the assembly.

From this assembly there were two Supplications directed, one to his Majesty's
Commissioner against a book called A Large Declaration concerning the late
tumults in SCOTLAND. After it was examined by the appointment of the assembly,
and found to be dishonorable to God, and his true Religion, to this Kirk and
Kingdom, and diverse eminent persons in the Kirk and Kingdom, and to be full
of lies, in averring known untruths, in wilful concealing and perverting many
truths, in wresting of intentions, words and actions; All which tend after a
special manner to the dishonor of the Kings Majesty our dread Sovereign, and
of his Majesty's high Commissioner the Marquis of Hammiltoun, upon whom it is
unjustly fathered, as is contained at length and particularly in the censure of
the book, registrat in the records of the assembly, which were long here to put
in print, and therefore we have only insert the Supplication.

The Supplication of the General Assembly, to his Majesty's Commissioner,
against a book called, A large Declaration.
WE the Members of this present Assembly, for our selves, and in name of the
several Presbyteries, Burghes, and Universities, for which we are
Commissioners: Resenting the great dishonor done to God, our King, this Kirk,
and whole Kingdom, by the book called a large Declaration, have here
represented the same to your Grace, and have collected some, amongst many, of
its absurd and gross passages; That from the consideration thereof, your Grace
perceiving the intolerable evils foresaids contained therein, may be pleased
to represent the same to our gracious Sovereign, and in our behalse humbly to
beseech his Majesty (so much wronged by the many foull and false relations,
suggested and persuaded to him as trueths, and by stealing the protection of
his Royal name and authority to the patrocinie of such a book) To be pleased
first, to call in the said book, and thereby to show his dislike thereof: Next,
to give commission and warrant to cite all such parties as are either known or
suspect to have had hand in it; and to appoint such as his Majesty knows to
be either authors, informers, or any ways accessarie, being Natives of this
Kingdom, To be sent hither to abide their trial and censure before the Judge
ordinary: And in special Master Walter Balcanquell, now Deane of Durhame, who
is known and has professed to be the author, at least avower and maintainer
of a great part thereof, That by their exemplar punishment, others may be
deterred from such dangerous courses, as in such a way to raise sedition
betwixt the King and his Subjects, Gods honor may be vindicate from so high
contempt, his Majesty's Justice may appear not only in censuring such
malefactors, but in discouraging all such under-myners of his Throne, his
loyal and loving Subjects shall be infinitely contented to be cleared before
the world of so false and unjust imputations, and will live hereafter in the
greater security, when so dangerous a course of sedition is prevented. And so
will have the greater and greater cause to pray for his Majesty's long and
prosperous reign.

The Supplication was received by his Majesty's Commissioner, and read in
Council, and promise was given to impart the same to his Majesty, and to
return his Majesty's answer.

Another Supplication was directed from the assembly to his Majesty's
Commissioner, and the Lords of Secret Council, concerning, the subseriving of
the Covenant, which together with the acts of Council and assembly, ordaining
the same to be universally subscribed, and with the Lord Commissioners
particular declarations, touching the act August 17. and touching the
subscribing of the Covenant, we have now from the Registers of the Kirk put in
print, that all men knowing our proceedings, may have their scruples removed,
and may with equal judgment consider how far we are wronged.

The Supplication of the General Assembly, to his Majesty's Commissioner, and
Lords of Secret Council:
WE the General Assembly, considering with all humble and thankful
acknowledgement, the many recent favors bestowed upon us by his Majesty, and
that there rests nothing for crowning of his Majesty's incomparable goodness
toward us, but that all the members of this Church and Kingdom be joined in
one and the same Confession and Covenant with God, with the Kings Majesty, and
amongst our selves, and conceiving the maine let and impediment of this so
good a work, and so much wished by all, to have been the informations made to
his Majesty of our intentions, to shake off civil and duetifull obedience,
due to Soveraignity, and to diminish the Kings greatness and authority, and
being most willing and desirous to remove this and all such impediments which
may hinder and impede so full and perfect an union, and for clearing of our
loyalty: We in our own names, and in name of all the rest of the Subjects and
Congregations whom we represent, do now in all humility remonstrat to your
Grace, his Majesty's Commissioner, and to the Lords of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Council, and declares before God and the World, that we
never had, not have any thought of withdrawing ourselves from that humble and
duetifull subjection and obedience to his Majesty and to his government, which
by the descent, and under the reign of 107. Kings, is most cheerfully
acknowledged by us and our Predecessors: And that we never had, nor have any
intention or desire to attempt any thing that may tend to the dishonor of God,
or the diminution of the Kings greatness and authority: But on the contrair,
acknowledging our quietness, stabilitie and happiness, to depend upon the
safety of the Kings Majesty's person, and maintenance of his greatness and
Royal authority, as Gods Vicegerent set over us, for the maintenance of
Religion, and ministration of Justice. We have solemnly sworn, and do
swear, not only our mutual concurrence and assistance for the cause of
Religion, and to the uttermost of our power, with our means and life's to stand
to the defense of our dread Sovereign his person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the said true Religion, Liberties and Laws of this
Church and Kingdom: But also in every cause which may concern his Majesty's
honor, shall according to the Laws of this Kingdom, and the duty of good
Subjects, concur with our friends and followers in quiet manner, or in arms,
as we shall be required of his Majesty, his Council, or any having his
authority: and therefore being most desirous to clear our selves of all
imputations of this kind, and following the laudable example of our
Predecessors 1589. do most humbly supplicate your Grace, his Majesty's
Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, To
enjoyne by act of Council, that this Confession and Covenant, which as a
testimony of our fidelity to God, and loyalty to our King, we have
subscribed, Be subscribed by all his Majesty's subjects of what rank and
quality soever.

The act of Council containing the answer of the Supplication abovewritten, at
Edinburgh August 30. 1639.
THE which day in presence of the Lord Commissioner, and Lords of Privy
Council, compeered personally John Earl of Rothes, James Earl of Montrose,
John Lord Lowdoun, Sir George Stirling of Keir Knight, Sir William Douglas of
Caveris Knight, Sir Henry Wood of Bonitown Knight, John Smyth Burgess of
Edinburgh, Master Robert Barclay Provest of Irwing, Master Alexander Hendersoun
Minister at Edinburgh, and Master Archibald Johnstoun, Clerk to the General
Assembly: and in name of the present sitting General Assembly, gave in to the
Lord Commissioner, and Lords of Privy Council, the petition abovewritten, We
the General assembly considering with all humble, etc. which being heard read,
and considered by the said Lords, they have ordained and ordain the same to be
insert and registrat in the books of privy Council, and according to the
desire thereof, ordain the said Confession and Covenant to be subscribed in
time coming by all his Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, of what rank and
quality soever.

The same day his Majesty's Commissioner after his entry in the assembly,
delivered himself by word to this meaning

We have received the supplication of the Assembly, desiring that the Covenant
may receive the force of an act of Council to be subscribed by all his
Majesty's subjects. We have found the desire so fair and reasonable, that we
conceived our selves bound in duty to grant the same, and thereupon have made
an act of Council to that effect. There rests now the act of assembly,
concerning which I am so fully satisfied my self, that I come now as his
Majesty's Commissioner to consent fully unto it: and am most willing that it be
enacted here in this Assembly, to oblidge all his Majesty's subjects to
subscribe the said Covenant, with the assemblies explanation. And because there
is a third thing also desired; my subscription as the Kings Commissioner unto
the Covenant, this I must do with a declaration in writ. As a subject I will
subscribe as strictly as any other man, with the assemblies declaration; but as
his Majesty's Commissioner I must prefixe to my subscription, the declaration
following; of which no Scottish subject shall have the benefit, no not my self
as Earl of Traquair.

The declaration of his Majesty's Commissioner concerning the subscribing of
the Covenant.
Seeing this Assembly according to the laudable form and custom heretofore
kept in the like cases, has in a humble and dutiful way, supplicat to us
his Majesty's Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable privy
Council, that the Covenant with the explanation of the assembly might be
subscribed, and to that effect that all the subjects of this Kingdom by act of
Council, be required to do the same: And that therein for vindicating
themselves from all suspicions of disloyalty, or derogating from the greatness
and authority of our dread Sovereign, have therewith added a clause whereby
this Covenant is declared one in substance with that which was subscribed by
his Majesty's Father of blessed memory 1580.1581.1590. and often since renewed.
Therefore I as his Majesty's Commissioner, for the full satisfaction of the
subject, and for settling a perfect peace in Church and Kingdom, do according
to my foresaid declaration and subscription subjoyned to the act of this
assembly of the date the 17. of this instant, Allow and consent, that the
Covenant be subscribed throughout all this Kingdom, In witness whereof I have
subscribed the premises.

The Lord Commissioner his Declaration concerning the act of the assembly
August 17.
I John Earl of Traquair, his Majesty's Commissioner in this present assembly,
do in his Majesty's name declare, that not withstanding of his Majesty's own
inclination, and many other grave and weighty considerations, Yet such is his
Majesty's incomparable goodness, that for settling the present distractions, and
giving full satisfaction to the Subjects, he does allow: Likeas I his
Majesty's Commissioner do consent to the foresaid act, and have subscribed the
premises.

The Lord Commissioner his declaration concerning practices outwith the
Kingdom, contrary to the premises.
IT is always hereby declared by me his Majesty's Commissioner, that the
practice of the premises prohibited within this Kirk and Kingdom, outwith the
Kingdom of Scotland, shall neither bind nor infer censure against the
practices outwith the Kingdom.

This last declaration was not approven by the assembly, and therefore was
insert in the Register only recitative as was then declared when his Majesty's
Commissioner required that it might be put upon record.

The act of the assembly, or daining by Ecclesiastical authority, the Covenant
to be subscribed.
THE assembly considering the great happiness which may flow from a full and
perfect union of this Kirk and Kingdom, by joining of all in one and the same
Covenant with God, with the Kings Majesty, and amongst our selves. Having by
our great oath declared the uprightness and loyalty of our intentions in all
our proceedings, and having withal supplicated his Majesty's high
Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council, to
enjoyne by Act of Council, all the Lieges in time coming, to subscribe the
Confession of Faith and Covenant, which as a testimony of our fidelity to God,
and loyalty to our King, We have subscribed. And seeing his Majesty's high
Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council, have
granted the desire of our Supplication, Ordaining by civil authority all his
Majesty's Lieges in time coming to subscribe the said Covenant, that our union
may be the more full and perfect, We by our act and constitution
Ecclesiastical, do approve the foresaid Covenant in all the heads and clauses
thereof. And ordaines of new, under all Ecclesiastic censure, That all Masters
of Universities, Colleges and Schools, All Scholars at the passing of their
degrees, All persons suspect of Papistrie, or any other error. And finally,
all the members of this Kirk and Kingdom, Subscribe the same, with these words
prefixed to their subscription: The article of this Covenant, which was at the
first subscription referred to the determination of the General Assembly being
determined. And thereby the Five Articles of Perth, The government of the Kirk
by Bishops, The civil places and power of Kirkmen upon the reasons and grounds
contained in the acts of the General Assembly declared to be unlawful within
this Kirk: We subscribe according to the determination foresaid. And ordain
the Covenant with this Declaration, to be insert in the Registers of the
Assembly of this Kirk, General, Provincial, and Presbyteriall, ad perpetuam rei
memoriam. And in all humility supplicates his Majesty's high Commissioner, and
the honorable Estates of Parliament, by their authority, To ratify and
enjoyne the same under all civil pains, which will tend to the glory of God,
preservation of Religion, the Kings Majesty's honor, and perfect peace of this
Kirk and Kingdom.

Those and other Ecclesiastical matters being debated, and with the
approbation and consent of his Majesty's Commissioner peaceably determined in
the Assembly, We found our selves bound to render thanks to God for his great
mercy, and to the Kings Majesty for his Royal favor to this Kirk and
Kingdom, fearing nothing less then the challenge of insolency or sedition,
and filled with hope that the Parliament now approaching, should ratify what
was universally and with the lyking of his Majesty's Commissioner concluded in
the Assembly; The Assembly gave thanks for what they had received and
petitioned again, What was promised by his Majesty, and certainly expected by
all his Majesty's Subjects: This thankesgiving and petition delivered to his
Majesty by our Commissioners, was in this manner:

MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,
WE your Majesty's most humble and loyal subjects the Commissioners from all
the parts of this your Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom, and members of
the National Assembly conveened at Edinburgh by your Majesty's special
indiction, and honored with the presence of your Majesty's high Commissioner:
Have been waiting for a day of rejoicing, and of solemn thanksgiving to be
rendered to God by this whole Kirk and Kingdom, for giving us a King so just
and religious, that it is not only lawful for us to be Christians under your
Majesty's government, which sometime has been the greatest praise of great
Princes: But also that it has pleased your gracious Majesty to make known,
That it is your Royal will and pleasure, that all matters Ecclesiastical be
determined in free National Assemblies, and matters civil in Parliaments,
which is a most noble and ample expression of your Majesty's Justice, and we
trust shall be a powerful mean of our common happiness under your Majesty's
most blessed reign. In the mean while we do most humbly upon the knees of
our hearts, bless your Majesty for that happiness already begun in the late
Assembly at Edinburgh; in the proceedings whereof, next under God we have
labored to approve our selves unto your Majesty's Vicegerent, as if your
Majesty's eyes had been upon us, which was the desire of our souls, and would
have been the matter of our full rejoicing, and do still continue your
Majesty's most humble Supplicants for your Majesty's civil sanction and
ratification of the constitutions of the Assembly in Parliament, that your
Majesty's Princely power, and the Ecclesiastical authority joining in one the
mutual embracements of Religion and Justice of truth and peace may be seen in
this Land; which shall be to us as a resurrection from the dead: And shall make
us, being not only so far recovered, but also revived, to fill Heaven and
earth with our praises; And to pray that King CHARLES may be more and more
blessed, and his Throne established before the Lord for ever.

By which it may appear, that we were not unthankful for his Majesty's
Justice and goodness, that we were not conscient to our selves of any wilful
breach, and that therefore we were confident of the crowning of the Work in
Parliament; wherein what our carrtage was, will now be made manifest by the
relation and proceedings of our Commissioners sent from the Parliament to the
King, against all that has been, or can be imputed unto us; In the mean time
remembering that we are a Kingdom, and that they are but one subject or two who
inform against us. A Kingdom conveened in Parliament, which can best judge
what is most conducible for our selves and the collective Body, which we
represent, and a Kingdom living under our own native King, in whom we have as
great interest, as a Kingdom can have in their King, and whom we desire to
honor; we cannot dissemble our grief, but are forced to complain, that in our
own National affairs we have not greater credence, regard and power with his
Majesty, then all others whatsoever. But this is one evil amongst many that
presses us sore through the want of his Majesty's Royal presence amongst us,
which we trust will move his Majesty in his fatherly affection, to be the more
tender: and all others, remembering themselves, to be the more equal in their
judgment and actions toward us.

ONe thing there is very necessary to be remembered, before we come to the
proceedings of our Commissioners, sent from the Parliament to the King: A paper
bearing some reasons to prove, that in commanding to swear the Covenant 1580,
and 1581. his Majesty that then was, and his Council, did not intend the
abjuration of Episcopacie. This paper although it be come to few hands before
this time, yet was it much esteemed by the Author, and therefore was put in his
Majesty's own hand, and by his Majesty sent to one of our Ministers, as a
strong hold and impregnable strength for Episcopacie, against all that had been
done in the Assembly at Glasgow, or was intended in the ensuing Assembly and
Parliament. It seems indeed to be the last endeavor and assay of our
adversaries in that kind, from no small knowledge of the proceedings of this
Kirk in former times, and with no less artifice and engine set on work,
wherein they will outstrip all that has been written in the large Declaration,
as insisting on things childish and trivial, in comparison of this fine and
subtle invention never brought to light before. This last breath of
Episcopacie expiring in this Kirk, and giving up the ghost, we judged it not
convenient to conceal, But have set it down here with a solid and modest
answer, written at that time when the paper came to our hands, and intended to
remoove the scruple out of his Majesty's mind, and to show the Author his own
error, if it had been of simplicity, or if it be wilful, to convince him the
more.

That in commanding to swear the Covenant 80. and 81. His Majesty that then
was, and his Council, did not intend the abjuration of Episcopacie.
BEcause, but ten years before, viz. In 71. there was a solemn agreement made
between the Commissioners of his Majesty's Council, and the Commissioners of
the General Assembly of the Kirk, That (during the Kings minority, or without
a contrary order from Parliament) Arch bishops and Bishops, should continue as
before they did: And that in every Metropoliticall and Episcopal See, there
should be a Deane and a Chapter, and that the bounds of Dioceses should not be
confounded. Nay, there was an exact Form, at that time set down by the said
several Commissioners, and reg^stred in the books of Council for the
creating of Bishops after a Protestant manner, viz. by Conge deslire to the
Deane and Chapter, then a form of returning the election, with petition to the
King for his Royal assent, with commandment to the Archbishop, etc. for
consecration, then the Oath the new Bishop was to take before his Majesty, viz.
That he acknowledged the Kings Majesty Supreme Governor of his Realm, as
well in things Temporal, as in the conservation, and purgation of Religion
(which differs in words from the English Oath of Supremacy, but is in sense
the same) And that he held the said Bishopric, and the possessions thereof
under God only of his Majesty's Crown etc. Lastly, there was a form concluded
on, for his restitution to his Temporalities.

Now this agreement was in precise terms confirmed by his Majesty and
Council in that self same year 81. when that Covenant was commanded by them
to be sworn by the Subject. So that it cannot be conceived, that his Majesty
and Council should in the same year give order to swear down Episcopacie,
wherein they apparently took such special care to confirm it. And no honest
man will deny that the subject was bound to swear that Covenant in that sense,
and none other, which was agreeable to their intentions who commanded it to be
sworn.

It is objected that under those words ( We abjure, etc. The Popes wicked
Hierarchy) Episcopacie is sworn down.

R. If by those words they will overthrow Episcopacie, I see not but withal
they must be forced to confess, that they have at once abjured both their
Presbyters and their Deacons.

For the Council of Trent makes the Hierarchy of the Church to consist of
those three Orders; Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. Now, if under the word
Hierarchy, one of these be sworn down, how can the other two escape? for it
consists alike of three, and therefore all three must needs run the same
fortune.

If they reply, that indeed they still retain Presbyters and Deacons, but yet
so only as they are ordained in the reformed Churches.

R. The like I reply for Bishops, that they were then ordained in a form
allowed by reformed Churches, as this in substance was by the Church of
England, and in precise terms by the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland.
For it is not probable, that in ten years space, there should be no
Bishopric void, and so none ordained according to the form in the Council
Books. Nay, it is apparently plain, that some were so ordained, and took that
forenamed Oath, viz. John Archbishop of Saint Andrews in the year 72. and
James Bishop of Dunkell in the year 73. as it is registered in the books of
Council: where perhaps others are recorded too.

If they say, That the Scottish Bishops must needs be part of the Popes
Hierarchy, because they succeeded those, and received imposition of hands from
those who lived in obedience to the Pope.

R. I again reply, That their Presbyters are in the very same case: for, I
presume they will not say, but they must needs derive their orders, either
from Bishops of that obedience, or from Presbyters who were ordained by such
Bishops. Because that seeing in the beginning of the Reformation, there were no
other Clergy men in these parts, they must take their orders either from them,
or none; for I persuade my self, they will not affirm, That non Presbyter can
ordinare Presbyterum. Nay as they are learned men, they should not say, but
that a Priest ordained by the new Roman Church, if he leave his superstition,
and turn Protestant, needs no more ordination to become a Presbyter with us.

But what then must be the meaning of those words, That they abjure the Popes
wicked Hierarchy?

R. As I conceive, the sense of them is plain from a precedent clause in that
Covenant, viz. (that they abjure the Popes five bastard Sacraments) and yet I
hope, they intended not to swear out either Matrimony, or holy orders in
general (which yet are two, as all know, reckoned by that Church amongst her
five) but only they abjured those corruptions and superstitious forms which
the Romish Church had annexed to these divine Institutions: as in calling them
Proper Sacraments.

So when they abjured his wicked Hierarchy, they did not swear out Bishops, no
more then they did Presbyters or Deacons: But they abjured the corruptions and
superstitious Con-comitants, which the Pope had annexed to those holy Callings.
V.g. amongst many other abuses, that Bishops were constrained to swear such an
obedience and dependence on the Pope, as was derogatorie to the supreme power
of their own native Prince. So that then it was almost an impossible thing to
be at once a stout Prelat, and a loyal subject. And suppose Bishops or
Presbyters in this treasonable constitution, they were then (no doubt) in that
point, the Popes wicked Hierarchy, as now they may be the Consistories.

All this, I the rather urge, because I conceive, that the acts of King and
Council are the best interpretors of that Covenant, because it was set on foot
by authority of King and Council: for Quisque optimus interpres sui.

THE ANSWER. Whether in commanding to swear the Covenant 1580. and 81. his
Majesty that then was, and his Council, did intend the abjuration of
Episcopacie,
IN all commanded oaths and abjurations, a twofold deception is to be avoided;
One is, in him who takes the Oath, that he have no fraudulent intention,
contrary to the sound and professed intention of him who tendereth the Oath;
otherwise, both Gods Name is taken in vain, and our Superior is deluded. The
other is, In him that tendereth the Oath, that he have not an hid and secret
intention, contrair to that which is open and professed. In this case, the
regard must be had, not to that which is secret and unknown, but to that which
is professed, and which is known to be the true meaning of the words of the
Oath.

That abjuration of Episcopacie was professedly intended in the Covenant 1580.
and 1581. by his Majesty and his Council, may be apparent. First, from the
words of the Confession commanded to be sworn; where profession is made, that
we shall continue in the obedience of the doctrine and discipline of this
Church, which discipline at that time was not the government of the Church by
Bishops, but by Presbyteries: the whole heads of the policy of the Church,
(except such as concerned Patronages, Church rents, and the like) after much
agitation from Assembly to Assembly, being agreed upon, not only by the
General Assembly, but by his Majesty's Council, Episcopacie being abandoned,
and Presbyteriall government established: such as before were called Bishops,
being tied to particular flocks, ordained to be called by their own names and
by the name of brethren, and forbidden to usurp the power of Presbyteries, till
at last in the General Assembly holden at Dundie, July 1580. the office of a
Bishop was abolished by a particular act, as unlawful in it self, and Bishops
ordained to dimit the samine, under the pain of Excommunication: Like as in the
Assembly at Glasgow, April 1581. the said act was further explained and
confirmed: the Kings Commissioner presented to the Assembly the Confession of
faith subscribed by his Majesty and his household, together with a delineation
of the bounds of the Presbytery to be erected, with a Letter to that end for
the dissolving of Prelacie, the book of Policy was insert in the Register of
the Church, and the Confession of faith immediately thereafter ordained to be
subscribed according to his Majesty's Proclamation. As before the forming of
the book of discipline, and the abolishing of Episcopacie; so now the
subscription of the Confession of faith, and erection of Presbyteries went on
together: In July 1580. Episcopacie was abolished. In January following, the
Confession of faith was subscribed by the King and his household. In March it
was commanded to be subscribed by the subjects. And in April direction was
given by the Assembly for subscription and erection of Presbyteries.

2. The same is manifest from other words of the Confession, wherein the Popes
wicked Hierarchy is abjured. It is confessed according to the Council of
Trent, that the Popish Hierarchy consists of these three orders: Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons: for neither are the Pope, Primates, Metropolitans, or
Archbishops, members of the Hierarchy, but as they are Bishops; neither are the
inferior orders of Subdeacons, Acoluths, Exorcists etc. of the Hierarchy,
because they have no rule over the people, but only serve the Priests and
Deacons, which although they be the lowest order in the Hierarchy, yet are they
of the Hierarchy by reason of their charge over the people. Hence is it, that
in the Confession of faith, the Popes manifold orders are set apart and
distinguished from the Popes Hierarchy. This being the Popish Hierarchy abjured
by us, it must be interpreted to be as far abjured, as by the doctrine and
constitution of our Kirk, it is interpreted to be Popish, that is, as it is
made up, and does consist of these three orders, and therefore the
unlawfulness of any one of the orders, makes the Hierarchy componed of the
three, to be unlawful. It is a paralogisme to argue from our abjuration of the
Popish Hierarchy, that we have at once abjured every member thereof: It is
enough that any one member is abjured. Secondly, all the three orders are
interpreted to be Popish, in so far as Bishops the head of the Hierarchy, not
only had their dependence on the Pope, which was an high derogation to the
Prince, but also because their office was in it self a corruption, it having
no warrant in the word of God, which was a dishonor done to the Son of God.
And the other two of presbyters and Deacons, are thought lawful and
warrantable in themselves, interpreted to be Popish, as having Popish
corruptions adhering to them their Presbyters being sacrificing Priests etc.
and receiving ordination before and without a calling to a particular charge,
and their Deacons admitted to minister Baptism, and having nothing of the
office of a Deacon, as it is institute by the Apostle, and used in the reformed
Churches. And therefore the office of Bishops was purged out of this Church, as
Popish in it self, and the other two which had degenerated, were purged of
their Popish corruptions and abuses, and the office retained according to the
first institution and primitive integrity. It is to be observed here, that
although this Hierarchy did enter into the Church before the Pope came to his
greatness, yet it is called the Popes Hierarchy, because it was maintained and
obtruded upon the Church after the mystery began to work, that is, after Popery
began, even as dedicating of Churches, Altars, Days, Vows to creatures, etc.
are here called the Popes, although all of these entered not at one time into
the Church.

This one ground of truth furnishes answer to all objections made in the
contrair. The rule and pattern of office bearers in the Church, is to be
learned from Scripture, and not from the example of other reformed Churches,
which we reverence according as they are conform to that straight rule and
first pattern. We do not abjure Scottish Bishops, because they succeed to
Popish Bishops, who lived in obedience to the Pope, and because they received
ordination from them: but because although they presume to be the chief office
bearers in the house of God, they have no warrant nor authority from God. And
therefore it cannot be inferred that Presbyters and Deacons ought to be
abjured, because they received ordination either from popish Bishops, or from
Presbyter^ ordained by such Bishops: for whatsoever be the consecration of the
one, or ordination of the other, we still account Episcopacie to be one of the
relics of popery, and for that cause to be rejected, and the office of
Presbyters and Deacons to be a divine Institution, and therefore to be purged,
and being purged, to be retained. Where it is objected, That by like reason we
might be interpreted to abjure Matrimony and Orders, because we abjure the
Popes five bastard sacraments. This objection were strong, if we could give no
better warrant from Scripture for Matrimony and Ordination of Ministers, then
for Episcopacie: but since these are warranted and not this, the accidental
corruptions of these, and the substance of this ought to be abjured.

3. The intention of authority is manifest by the commanding to subscribe the
Confession of faith in the year 1590. when we had no Bishops, and after
Bishoprics were annexed to the Crown. It is not to be supposed that authority
had one intention at this time, and a contrary intention in the year 1580. The
Kings Majesty that then was, did write and subscribe with his own hand in the
margin of a printed Sermon which was preached by D. Bancroft at Paul's cross,
these words: My speaking, writing, and actions, were ever one, and without
dissembling or bearing up any thing whatsoever, ne quid asperius. JAMES REX. As
the Assembly had the same intention in subscribing the Confession 1581. at the
commandment of authority, which they had in the year 1590. when they
petitioned the Council for interposing their authority to the subscription: so
must we think, that the King and Council had the same intention at the one
time and the other, and that the Council and Assembly had the same intention
at both times, conform to this intention of the Council and Assembly, when at
any time afterward there was any meaning or motion to bring in Episcopacie
again in this Church, the confession of faith was alleged to the contrary, as
may be seen by diverse instances.

4. His Majesty's intention is further known (if there be yet any doubt) by
the true commentary thereof in his actions: for after the Assemblies had cast
forth Episcopacie, and established presbyteriall government, while they were
now about the dividing of the country in circuits for presbyteries, the Kings
Majesty sent to the Assembly conveened at Glasgow April 1581. a delineation or
plot for this end, and for the dissolving of Prelacies, and with all the frame
of a Letter to be directed to Noblemen and others for promoving the work; for
which the Assembly returned humble thanks to his Majesty. All this was done
immediately after the confession of faith was subscribed by his Majesty and his
household in January, and was commanded to be subscribed by the Subjects in
March, so that there can be no question about the intention and meaning of
King, Council and Assembly in the point of the discipline of the Church,
mentioned in the confession of faith.

Yet One thing is mainly objected, to prove that his Majesty and his council
did not intend the abjuration of Episcopacie: In the year 1571. there was a
solemn agreement between the Commissioners of his Majesty's Council, and the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, that during the Kings minority, or
without a contrary order from Parliament, there should be Archbishops, and
Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Abbots, and Priors, their office and form of
election, the oath taken by them at their admission, the restitution to their
Temporalities were all particularly agreed upon. This agreement in the year
1571, was in precise terms confirmed by his Majesty and Council in the year
1581. when the Covenant was commanded to be sworn by the Subject, and
therefore it cannot be conceived, that his Majesty and Council did in the same
year give order to abjure Episcopacie, wherein they took such special care to
confirm it.

Ans. For answering this objection, we are to consider, first, that in the
year 1571, January 12. there was indeed a convention of Superintendents,
Ministers and other Commissioners, for consulting about the government of the
church; but that convention was not a General Assembly of the Church: for the
Register calls it only a Convention, and not an Assembly: the ordinary
Assembly was holden at Saint Andrews in the same year 1571, March 6.
according to the appointment of the General Assembly the year before. This
convention was procured by the Court for worldly ends, especially that titles
of Bishops, Abbots and Priors, which were not proper in the persons of
Noblemen, might be given to Kirk-men or Ministers, with some small portion of
the benefice, that the noble men themselves might reap the benefit of the
Rent, which was the cause of the Scottish name of Tulchan Bishops at that time,
a name not improper for them, a Tulchan in our language being the skin of a
calfe stuffed with straw, and set up beside the Kow to make her give milk to
the owner. 2. Although that convention at Leith was not a Gener^ll Assembly,
yet did it not appoint those Bishops by it self, but gave power to seven of
the number, or any four of them, to confer with the Regent and some of the
Lords of secret Council, who did agree upon the office of Archbishops and
Bishops, Deanes and Chapters within the bounds of Dioceses, etc. which was of
less authority in a matter of so high importance, then if it had been their
own doing. 3. The articles and conclusions agreed upon by the Commissioners of
his Majesty's Council, and that convention were not approven in the next
ordinary General Assembly holden at Saint Andrews March 6. 1571. the General
Assembly at Perth 1572. was not only offended with the names of Archbishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, Chancellours, etc. as sounding to Popery, but also
declared that they did not approve that order of Church government, but did
tolerat the same allanerly, till a more perfect should be obtained, for which
they labored afterward at all occasions. So that the conclusions of that
meeting at Leith, 1571. never had the authority of this Church, but were
disclaimed by it. During the time of this toleration, many complaints were made
in the Assemblies against Bishops: and in the year 1573. and afterward some
were appointed by the Assemblies to confer with the Regent and Lords of
secret Council, upon the jurisdiction and policy to be continued and
established in the Church, till at last after many disputations and much
reasoning, the matter was brought to a final conclusion, the office of Bishops
was abolished, and Presbyteriall government established.

Next concerning the act of Council in the year 1580. confirming the
agreement at Leith, we answer, 1. That the Council lawfully could not
confirm that agreement, introduce Episcopacie, or change the government of
the Kirk, contrary to the acts of so many General Assemblies kept from the
year 1571, to 1580. wherein the policy and government of the Church was so
expressly set down. 2. The act of Council was never published nor made known
to the subject, nor heard of in this cause, till this time, wherein no other
thing can be alleged for salving of Episcopacie from abjuration. 3. This act
of Council was posterior to the command for subscribing the confession of
faith: for the act was made in October 1581. and the commandment came forth in
March, many months before. 4. No such intention was professed when the charge
was given for subscription, neither could the confession of faith in any sense
bear the conclusions of that agreement: these offices, and the form of their
election being damned as Popish in the Assembly before; no man will marvel
much at such an act of Council, who knows what other acts passed that year
in Council, and who is not a stranger in the history of that time, the
perusal and knowledge whereof will both show how suddenly Covenants have been
broken, and will easily give satisfaction against all mistakings of this kind,
to so many as desire to know the truth.


AGainst this our abjuration of Episcopacie, first and last, our adversaries
arise with great hate and strength and fight with tooth and nail: for upon the
one hand, Episcopacie must be asserted by no other then by divine right, and
Hierarchy maintained not only as tolerable and lawful, but as necessary and
divine; Although before this time, neither our own Doctors and Prelates, nor the
English have been so peremptory and bold about this point; for while some of
them have maintained Episcopacie by divine authority, yet others have been more
ingenuous confessing it only to be grounded upon ancient custom, and therefore
to be an humane invention, or Ecclesiastic tradition. And a third sort
different from both, will have it to be Apostolic. Again some of them make the
form of Kirk government to be universal and perpetual, and others hold it to
be local, and conformable to the civil policy; Thus have they been divided
one of them from another; But in this exigence and point of time, one must
undertake for all to cry up Episcopacie, as coming from Heaven, and not from
the earth, even as it has the altitude of fixed superiority, and the latitude
of spiritual jurisdiction. And why? because we have abjured it, and our
Assemblies have found it unlawful in this Kirk: this was their modesty of
expression, desiring more to reform at home, then to be busy abroad, for
which they find no more courtesy, nor less acerbity of spirit, then if they
had given out a general sentence concerning the government of the Kirk. It is
not for us, nor for this naked relation of Truth to enter in dispute, but if
our adversaries show not themselves more learned in their arguments, nor they
prove skilled in our Kirk-government and History, which are the grounds of
their vehement exhortation to their Northern brethren, they will be found to
have given but words in stead of substance. As our adversaries have risen thus
upon the one hand against our abjuration of Episcopacy, by averring it to be of
divine authority, that the contradiction in the point of Kirk-government may be
plain and strong: So do they upon the other hand with all immanity and bar
barousnesse against all our treaties and entreaties, constrain our poor
Countrymen and women in England and Ireland, to swear oaths, whereof some
covertly, and other expressly carry an abjuration of the Oath and Covenant of
Scotland, as damnable and treasonable, although it was sworn at first by the
King himself that then was, and is now again subscribed by his Majesty's
Commissioner in his name, and with his consent ordained to be subscribed by
Subjects of all ranks throughout the Kingdom, and therefore may as well he
called a Royal as a Popular Covenant: What impiety this is against God, and
what provocation of his Justice, what a snare it is to many poor souls* how
great dishonor is hereby done to Royal authority by had counselors and
wicked ministers, and how far it is from procuring cheerful obedience, or
tying the hearts of people to Soveraignitie, we leave to be considered, and
heartily wish that a more wise, a more conscionable, and a more effectual
course may be taken for settling the peace of the Kingdom. The words of the
Oath which has been ministered lately, to be signed and sworn by some of our
sea faring men, and by them produced before us, we have set down, and
thereafter shall go on to the proceedings of our Commissioners sent to England.

I A. B. one of his Majesty's Subjects in the Kingdom of Scotland, do by
these presents sign with my hand, upon my great oath and as I shall be
answerable to God upon my Salvation and Condemnation, testify and declare,
that CHARLES by the grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, is may Sovereign Lord; And that next unto Almighty GOD,
and his Son CHRIST JESUS, He is over all persons within his Majesty's
Kingdoms and Dominions, and in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil,
supreme Governor. To whom, his Heirs and Successors I am bound in duty, and
allegiance to all obedience, if it were to the loss of my life, estate and
fortunes, and do hereby abjure all combinations, Covenants and Bands that can
be pretended upon pretext of Religion, or Liberty of the Kingdom, and
specially the damnable and treasonable Covenant, commonly called the popular
Covenant, so much magnified now in Scotland, and do promise never to take Arms
against his Majesty, his heirs and successors, offensive or defensive, but to
abide constant in allegiance, duty and obedience, which I profess Almighty
GOD has tied me to, and to do the uttermost of my power against all
oppositions whatsomever for rain or home bred, So help me God.

The proceedings of the Commissioners sent from the Parliament of SCOTLAND: To
the KING.
SO soon as our Commissioners got presence, and had the honor to kiss his
Majesty's, hand; they did in all humility represent to his Majesty how
grievous it was to his Majesty's good Subjects of that his ancient and native
Kingdom, that their loyalty should be called in question; or that their
proceeding should be traduced, as trinching upon his Majesty's authority, or
as contrare to the Laws. And craved a public hearing before his Majesty's
Council of both Kingdoms, for clearing of the justness and lawfulness of
their proceedings, and vindicating them from those unjust aspersions laid upon
them by sinister information, and that relation made publicly by the Earl of
Traquair, before the whole Council of England, to their prejudice. And did
likewise deliver to his Majesty a thanksgiving from the general Assembly,
containing a supplication for ratifying the conclusions thereof: upon the 20 of
February, 1640.

The King commanded that what ever they had to remonstrat or petition to him,
they would present the: same in write: And that he would signify his pleasure
to them by the Earl of Traquair, whereupon they gave in the remonstrance or
supplication following:

MOST SACRED SOVEREIGN,
BEing sent here from the Parliament of Scotland, humbly to remonstrat, that no
earthly thing could be more grievous to them, then that their loyalty should
be called in question, or that any such hard impressions should be given to
your Majesty against their proceedings, as trinching upon your Majesty's
sacred person, and inviolable authority, as not warranted by the fundamental
Laws and laudable practices of your Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom; or
as contrare to the promises and remonstrances which were made to your Majesty
by your humble and faithful Subjects in the truth of their hearts, and were in
the same sense graciously accepted by your Majesty: And seeing your Majesty
has out of your goodness and justice kept one ear for us, and would not give
place to the suggestions and obliquies of any, till the reasons of our
proceedings and demands were made known from our selves, who are allowed by
your Majesty's Royal warrant to come here for that end. Therefore we humbly
crave, that your Majesty out of your fatherly care, and tender compassion of
your native Subjects, may be graciously pleased to grant us a full hearing;
and to call such as are here, of the Council of both Kingdoms, that before
your Majesty and them, your Majesty's Subjects may be vindicat from these
aspersions and imputations wherewith we hear they are charged; and that we may
clear that the desires and proceedings of the Parliament, are so agreeable to
the fundamental Laws and practice of that Kingdom, and to the articles of
pacification, as may merit approbation at the throne of your Majesty's justice,
and procure your Majesty's royal commandments for the proceeding of the
Parliament; that by the mutual embracement of Religion, and justice: the peace
of the Kirk and Kingdom (whose distressed estate and condition can hardly
admit delay) may be established, and the love and cheerful obedience of your
Majesty's Subjects confirmed and increased.

And lest by occasion of that relation which was publicly made by the Earl of
Traquair, before your Majesty and your Council, any prejudicat thought may be
harbored in your Majesty's royal heart; and if any hard impressions be given
against your Subjects unheard; the same may be disludged: We humbly crave
that we may have that relation in the same terms, and as it was then delivered
under his hand, which since it is sought, that we may be the more able to
give all respective satisfaction to your Majesty's royal and just
commandments, we hope will not be refused: And having once the permission, and
happiness in public to clear the loyalty of your Majesty's Subjects, and the
lawfulness of the proceedings of the Parliament, we shall thereafter (lest
verbal expressions be controverted) be most willing and desirous, according to
your Majesty's commandments, To receive what ever exceptions, objections, or
informations, are made against any of the particular overtures, articles, and
proceedings of the Parliament in writ, and in the same way shall present our
answers, and humble desires. And do humbly crave your Majesty's gracious
Answer.

Upon the 26. day of Febr: The Earl of Traquair did show our Commissioners,
that it was his Majesty's pleasure that they should subscribe the two former
petitions given in by them to his Majesty, and that they keep that same way
thereafter in all petitions or writs, shall be by them presented to his
Majesty, which accordingly they did: And they required the Earl of Traquair
to write and subscribe any direction, or commandment he carried from the King
to them, which he did.

Upon the 2. of March, The Earl of Traquair did signify to them under his
hand, that it was his Majesty's pleasure, that they should attend at the
Council chamber, the next day thereafter, at two of the clock in the
afternoon such of the Lords of the Council, as his Majesty had appointed for
that effect. And our Commissioners understanding that the King was going to
Hampton-cour, and that the hearing he appointed for them, was only before
these of his Majesty's Commit or Joyntos: And being enjoined by their
instructions, not to answer nor acknowledge the Committee, nor no other
Judicatorie, desired the Marquis of Hammiltoun to show his Majesty, that they
would decline to propone their Desires and reasons of their Demands, or make
answer either to the Committee, or any other whatsoever, except to the King
their Master, to whom they were sent, which being made known to his Majesty,
He was graciously pleased to delay his going to Hampton till the afternoon,
and did hear our Commissioners himself: In whose Royal presence and audience,
(His Majesty having his Committee with him) our Commissioners did clear us
and our proceedings from these unjust aspersions laid upon us, did show what
high estimation we had of Soveraignitie, and our constant resolution to stand
to the defense of our Religion, and that our Desires, both in matter and
manner, are no other, but what we did humbly crave in our former Petitions, and
are necessar for establishing Religion and the good and peace of the Kingdom,
and are agreeable to the fundamental Laws and laudable practices thereof, and
to the articles of Pacification, without wronging the Kirk or State, or any
ways trinching upon his Majesty's Princely Power and Royal Authority. And
did therefore crave, that his Majesty would be graciously pleased to command
the Parliament to proceed and determine, for ratifying the conclusions of the
Assembly, and enact such other Statutes, as are necessar for establishing
Religion, and settling the peace of the Kingdom: As their speech then spoken,
and thereafter given in in writ does import, as follows:

SIR, as we did show in that humble Remonstrance which we gave your Majesty
in writ; That no earthly thing could be more grievous to your Majesty's
Subjects, conveened by your Royal Authority, in the Parliament of Scotland,
then that their loyalty should be called in question, or that any such hard
impression should be given against their proceedings, as might derogate from
that high estimation which they have of Soveraignitie, and the tender respect
they carry to your Majesty's inviolable authority. So do we now acknowledge
your Majesty's goodness and justice in keeping one ear for us against all
suggestions and obloquies, till the reasons of our proceedings and demands were
made known from our selves, and that your Majesty is graciously pleased to
grant us this favor of a full and public hearing. But because the Parliament
of that your Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom is independent, and not
comptable to any other Judicatorie: We hope your Majesty will pardon and
allow us to declyne to speak or answer before any of your Majesty's
Counsels, or other Judicatories whatsoever, as these who have any power to
judge of the Laws, actions, or proceedings of the Parliament of that Kingdom:
As we acknowledge your Majesty's favor in allowing us to tender the liberties
and freedom of your Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom: So are we glad
before all the world, to clear the loyalty, and lawfulnes of their
proceedings, and do congratulate, that your Majesty has indicted a
Parliament here, who we hope will advert to the good of Religion, your
Majesty's honor, and peace of your Dominions, albeit they be not Judges to
determine of our actions, which when they shall be known to your Majesty, not
upon report, but upon true trial, we are most confident, will merit
approbation at the Throne of your Majesty's Justice. But because we hear that
your Majesty's good Subjects are traduced as having intention to diminish your
Majesty's authority, and shake off that civil and duetifull obedience due to
Soveraignitie.

Therefore before we descend to the particular actions, and articles of the
Parliament, for vindicating us from so grievous and foull an imputation, we
do in our own name, and in name of the Parliament who sent us, Declare before
GOD and the world, that we never had, nor have any thought of withdrawing our
selves from that humble and duetifull subjection and obedience to your
Majesty, and your government, which by the descent and reign of so many Kings
is due to your Majesty: And never had nor have any intention or desire to
attempt any thing that may tend to the diminution of your Majesty's Princely
power. But on the contrare, acknowledge our quietness, stabilitie, and happiness,
to depend upon the safety of your Majesty's Person, and maintenance of your
greatness and Royal authority, as Gods Vicegerent set over us for maintenance
of Religion, and administration of Justice: And have solemnly sworn not only
to stand to the defense of your Majesty's Person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of Religion, Liberties, and Laws of the Church and
Kingdom; But also in every cause which may concern your Majesty's honor,
shall according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the duty of good Subjects,
concur with our friends and followers in quiet manner, or in Arms as we
shall be required. But if any be so wicked as to seek occasions to divide
betwixt your Majesty and your Kingdom, and for their own ends go about to
prostitute the purity of Religion, and the Liberties and Laws of that your
Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom: We can give them no other Character,
but that which your Majesty's Father of blessed memory gave them, terming such
men, vipers and pests against the King and his Kingdom. And if it please God,
for our sins, to make our condition that deplorable, as they may get the
shadow of your Majesty's authority, (as we hope in God they will not) to
palliate their ends; Then as these, who are sworn to defend our Religion, our
recourse must be only to the GOD of Jacob for our refuge, who is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, and by whom Kings do reign, and Princes decree
Justice. And if in speaking thus, out of zeal to Religion, and the duty we
owe to our Country, and that charge which is laid upon us, any thing has
escaped us, since it is spoken from the sincerity of our hearts, we fall down
at your Majesty's feet, humbly craving pardon for our freedom.

Having thus with your Majesty's permission cleared the loyalty of your
Subjects. That we may next show the reason of their demands, and equity of
their proceedings in Parliament: We do first crave, that if our answers cannot
give plenarie satisfaction to the objections and exceptions, that shall be
made against their proceedings; That our not knowing of these objections
(albeit we did often require your Majesty's Commissioner to show the same,
that we might be the more able to give your Majesty content) yet being still
concealed from us, and the Records and Registers of Parliament being kept up
from us, may serve much for our excuse; and if any of the propositions, or
articles sought or craved in Parliament, shall seem harsh at the first view, to
these who know not our laws: That we do expect from them the judgment of
charity, who ought rather, nor pass rash censure on us, to profess
ignorantiam and juris and facti alieni; and that they would distinguish betwixt
the desires, and actions of a Parliament, who being conveened by royal
authority, and honored with your Majesty, or your Commissioners presence, are
makers of Laws, and against whom there is no law, and the actions of private
persons, against whom laws are made.

And as the desires of the Subjects are no other in the matter, but what they
did humbly crave in their former petitions, and are necessar for establishing
of Religion, and the good and peace of the Kingdom, which can never repugne to
the Kings honor, and are agreeable to the articles of pacification; so in
manner they are agreeable to the Laws and practices of that Kingdom. And to
condescend more specially, all the articles given in, are either such as
concern private subjects, such as are for manufactories, trade of Merchants, and
others of that kind, which do not so much concern your Majesty or the
public, as the interest of private men which are but minima, and de minimis non
curat lex: Or they are public acts, which do concern Religion, and liberties
of the Kirk and Kingdom, as the ratifying the conclusions of the Assembly, the
act of constitution of Parliament, the act of rescission, the act against
popery, and others of that kind, wherein because the Parliament knew that the
eyes of the world were upon them; that hard constructions have been made of
their proceedings, and that malice is prompted for her obloquies, and waits
on with open mouth to snatch at the smallest shadow of disrespect to your
Majesty: That our proceedings may be made odious to such as know them not,
we have endeavored to walk with that tenderness which becomes duetifull
Subjects, who are desirous to limite themselves according to reason, and the
rule of Law: For better understanding whereof, we must distinguish betwixt
regnum constituendum, and regnum constitutum; a Kingdom before it be settled,
and a Kingdom which is established by Laws; wherein as good subjects esteem
it their greatest glory to maintain the honor, and lawful authority of
their King; so good Kings (as your Majesty's father of ever blessed memory
affirms) holding that maxim, That salus populi est supremalex, will be
content to govern their Subjects, according to the Law of God, and
fundamental laws of their Kingdom. Next we must distinguish betwixt the Kirk
and State, betwixt the Ecclesiastic, and civil power, both which are
materially one; yet formallie they are contradistinct in power, in
jurisdiction, in laws, in bodies, in ends, in offices, and officers; and albeit
the Kirk and Ecclesiastic Assemblies thereof, be formally different, and
contradistinct from the Parliament and civil Judicatories, yet there is so
strict and necessary a conjunction betwixt the Ecclesiastic, and civil
jurisdiction, betwixt Religion and Justice: as the one cannot firmly subsist,
and be preserved without the other; And therefore like Hypocrites twins,
they must stand and fall, live and die together, which made us in all our
petitions to your Majesty, who is custos utriusque tabulae, to crave that as
matters Ecclesiastic may be determined, by the general and other Assemblies
of the Kirk, and matters civil by Parliament: So specially to crave, that the
sanction of civil law, should be added to the Ecclesiastic conclusions, and
constitutions of the Kirk and her Assemblies, lest there should be any
repugnance betwixt the Ecclesiastic and Civil laws: which your Majesty did
graciously condescend unto. And your Majesty's Commissioner representing your
Majesty's royal person and power in the general Assembly, wherein all the
Congregations and Parishes of Scotland are represented, after particular
inquiry anent the true and real causes of the evils, which do so much trouble
the peace of that Kirk and Kingdom. Having found that the government of the
Kirk by Bishops, and Civil places and power of Kirk-men, amongst other
novations brought in that Kirk, were two main causes of these evils: And having
consented, that Episcopacie be removed out of the Kirk of Scotland, and that
the Kirk be removed off the state; And declared all civil places and power of
Kirk-men, to be unlawful in that Kingdom. And having ratified the Covenant,
ordaining all the Subjects to subscribe the same with the general Assemblies
explanation, in that sense: and being oblidged to ratify the conclusions of
the Assembly in Parliament: It does necessarly follow, that Bishops who usurped
to be the Kirk, and did in name of the Kirk represent the third estate; and
Abbots, Priors, and all others who did represent the Kirk to be taken away,
which also by necessar consequence does infer, that there be an act of
constitution of the Parliament without them, and an act for repealing the
former laws, whereby the Kirk was declared the third estate, and Bishops did
represent the Kirk, both which the Kirk has now renounced and condemned: So
that unless the act of constitution of the Parliament, and act rescissorie
pass, it is impossible either to have a valide Parliament, or to ratify the
conclusions of the Assembly: which your Majesty has graciously condiscended
to perform, and which your Subjects are oblidged to maintain: neither does the
passing of these acts wrong the Kirk nor State, nor diminish your Majesty's
princely power, and royal authority; not the Kirk, because she has renunced
and condemned that civil power and worldly pomp conferred upon her in time of
Popery, esteeming the same not to be a privilege, but a detriment
incompatible with her spiritual nature, and as being repugnant to the
doctrine, and discipline of that Kirk, and volenti non fit injuria; nor is the
State wronged, because the whole Congregations of that Kingdom, being
represented by their Commissioners from Presbitries in the general Assembly,
has given their consent to the desires and conclusions of the Kirk, have with
allowance of your Majesty's Commissioner, according to the ordinance of the
general Assembly, and Council, sworn and subscribed the Confession of Faith,
in that sense; and have always been, and are your Majesty's supplicants, That
the Parliament may ratify what the Assembly has found, and concluded: Neither
can we believe that your Majesty (who we hear does acknowledge Princes to be
like shining stars, which have their splendour for the benefit of the world, and
who esteems the prosperity, and welfare of your people, your greatest
content, and the having of their hearts to be your Majesty's greatest
security, which are the words of (...), and which your Majesty has so well
learned, that they are abridged in the inscription of their coin, Presim ut
prosim) will think, that the granting of that, which upon so good reason is so
earnestly desired both by Kirk and State, to be any diminution of your
Majesty's royal prerogative, and privilege of your Crown, which by our acts
of Parliament is defyned, to be that power which your Majesty has over all
estates and persons, and not any particular interest more in one estate nor
another; and which is competent and reciprocal to the King, and does pertain
to your Majesty inviolablie, and is no ways contingent, separable, nor
mutable, with the change of any of the Estates; but is that power which does
justly belong to the King, before any Bishops were in Scotland, and which did
belong to him in time of Popery, when Bishops were allowed, and had their
dependence of the Pope, and which did likewise pertain to the King, in the
time of reformation, when Episcopacie was abjured and removed out of Scotland.
In the which oath, all the Subjects are sworn to maintain your Majesty's
greatness, and authority, with their lives and means: which we shall
acknowledge, and will be ready to defend, to the last drop of our blood.

And seeing your Majesty's Subjects have no other ends, but such as serve for
establishing of Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom, and are agreeable to
the fundamental Laws thereof, and to the articles of pacification; And that the
Parliament is the only lawful mean to remeid our evils, remove distractions,
and settle a solid and perfect peace. The sum of your Majesty's subjects their
desire is, that your Majesty may be graciously pleased, to command, that the
Parliament may proceed freely, and determine anent all these articles given in
to them, and whatever exceptions, objections, or informations, are made against
any of the particular overtures, articles, or proceedings of the Parliament,
we are most willing and desirous, according to your Majesty's commandment
(for avoiding contestation about words) to receive the same in writ, and are
content in the same way to return our Answers and humble Desires.

After some questions moved by his Majesty, and by some of the Committee,
which were answered by our Commissioners, and all that past written by them,
immediately by after their return to their lodgings from his Majesty. The
conclusion of that days hearing was, that against the Kings return from
Hampton Court, they should show his Majesty their Instructions. And after his
Majesty's return upon the 8. of March, they were commanded to be at Whitehall
the next day thereafter, at two of the clock in the afternoon, where so soon as
they did appear before his Majesty, He did call for their Instructions, which
they did exhibit and read: Their power was called in question, as being only
subscribed by some Noblemen, and Gentlemen, and as not flowing from the
Parliament, whereunto they did answer; That their Instructions were warranted
by the Parliament, because they are relative to former Instructions, given to
the Earl of Dumfermeling, and Lord Lowdoun, which were subscryved by a great
many Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Burgesses who were present, sitting in
Parliament, and that their last Instructions are subscryved by these
Commissioners, who were appointed by the Parliament to make remonstrances to
his Majesty, and receive the return of his answers, who were authorized with
Commission from the Parliament, to that effect: All which our Commissioners did
instruct. And after long debating anent the validity of their power. The
particular dispute, and reasonings whereof, our Commissioners did for their
memory put in writ. The Kings Majesty said, he would hear the particular
reasons of their demands, whereunto it was replied, that their demands were
only that the Parliament might proceed and ratify the conclusions of the
Assembly, and determine anent the articles given in to them, according to the
Laws of the Kingdom, and articles of pacification. And if there were any
objections to the contrair, they were ready to receive, and answer the same in
writ. The King said, It was his Commissioner behoved to give these, and that
his Majesty was to maintain his actions. And thursday the 12. of March was
assigned for their next hearing, and the Kings Commissioner commanded to give
his objections to them in writ, against that time.

Upon the 12. of March, The King called for the power and warrant granted by
the Parliament to these Noblemen, and others who had subscryved our
Commissioners Instructions; which being contained in the declaration made by
the Parliament, his Majesty commanded the whole Declaration to be read, did
expostulat and quarrel the same, as trinching upon his prerogative: And
diverse objections were proponed against the Declaration, both by his Majesty
and these of the Committee. Which was answered by our Commissioners, who did
write what was reasoned, and answered concerning that point, and craved that
what could be objected against that or any other of the Parliaments
proceedings, should be set down it writ, whereupon the King commanded the Earl
of Traquhair to set down the state of the question in writ, which he did in
manner following, viz:

WHether are you warranted or instructed from Parliament, to satisfy his
Majesty, anent his power of proroguing of Parliaments of himself, and of his
own Royal prerogative simply; and whether a Parliament thus prorogued
simply, by his Majesty's own sole, Royal power, can or may sit before the
time to which his Majesty has prorogued the same.

And if you have no warrant nor instruction herein from the Parliament, what is
your own private Judgment therein.

Likeas his Majesty commanded the Earl of Traquhair to give some other
propositions, and querees, and the 16. of March was assigned to our
Commissioners, to give in their answers, which propositions were delivered to
them upon the day of March, which are these, viz:

Protestation given in at the first prorogation of the Parliament, at least
given into the Commissioner, to be represented to his Majesty.

Act desiring the power of articles.

New augmentation of customs, to be discharged, and no custom nor imposition
to be imposed hereafter, but by advice of the Estates.

No change of the value of money or coynage thereof, but by advice of
Parliament.

Book of rates to be revised by Parliament.

The Castles of Edinburgh, Dumbarian, and Stirling, to be entrusted only to
Natives, and these to be chosen from time to time, of honest men, by advice of
the Estates.

Act anent the Judicatorie of Exchecquer.

Because these propositions were delivered to our Commissioners, without any
objection against the same, or querees, concerning these demands, They did
require that if there were any querees to be demanded of them, or any
objections to be made against these, or any other acts and propositions given
in to the articles, That the same might be set down in writ. Whereunto it was
answered, That his Majesty was to make no propositions to them, but that his
Majesty being informed, that such motions, and propositions have been made,
either in face of the articles, or to his Commissioner, has taken notice
thereof, as prejudicial to his Majesty's authority. And therefore required
them to show the reasons why they did demand the same.

Upon the 16. of March when our Commissioners did appear before his Majesty,
They did present their answers in writ, to the former queree and propositions,
in manner following: viz:

AS our power and instructions from the Parliament, do warrant us to show,
that their proceedings and desires, are agreeable to the Laws and practice of
the Kingdom, and to the articles of pacification: So we are enjoined
particularly to answer all objections, which either were proponed, or which
they conceived could be proponed against the acts and proceedings of the
Parliament: And as concerning any other question which was not moved in
Parliament, nor is against the articles and propositions given in to them; As
the same did not fall within the consideration of the Parliament: So neither
can it come within the compass of our instructions, as that whereunto we have
warrant to answer: It is also to be understood, that the propositions and acts
given in to the articles, are not statutes, but are only proponed and given in
to them to be prepared for the Parliament, That the Parliament may enact or
refuse the same, as they shall find them expedient or inexpedient for the good
of the Church and State: And as concerning the queree, anent the prorogation of
the Parliament, we are warranted by our instructions and informations, to show,
that the prorogation of Parliaments of that Kingdom, once being conveened in
plain Parliament, and having chosen articles, or entered on actions; has ever
been done with consent of the three Estates, as may be seen in the reign of
King James 6. Queen Mary, K. Ja. 5. K. Ja. 4. K. Ja. 3. K. Ja. 2. K. Ja. 1. And
so forth in all the printed and written Records of Parliament. And they are
confident, that your Majesty will be graciously pleased, to keep that order
and form of prorogation of Parliaments, which all your most worthy and Royal
Antecessours did. Neither did the Parliament expect, that your Majesty (who
did graciously grant this Parliament for establishing of Religion, ratifying
the conclusions of the Assembly, and settling the peace of the Kingdom; and
has accordingly given an ample power, under your Majesty's broad Seal pro
tentione and observatione Parliamenti, without any power or clause of
prorogation or delay) would require this Parliament to be prorogued without
consent of the Estates of Parliament; Till these things be performed which your
Majesty was graciously pleased to condescend unto.

Where it may be objected, That a Parliament was prorogued or continued, De
mandato Regis: It is answered, That proves the denomination of the act to be
taken from the King; But does nowayes prove, that the act was made without
consent of the Estates, more then that act of Parliament of K. Ja. 2. holden at
Edinburgh, the 28. of June 1450. fol. 33. Bearing that the three Estates did
continue the Parliament, without naming the King; will infer, that the
Estates wanted the Kings consent; For it is usual that the denomination of
acts of Parliament, is taken, sometimes from the King only, sometimes from the
Estates, and sometimes from both; And that the prorogation was done by act of
Parliament, is enough to prove it to be done with consent of the Estates: And
the Letter written by K. Ja. 6. in the Parliament May 1604. To the Lord
Balmerinoch his Majesty's Secretary; That seeing the Parliament of England was
continued, therefore the Estates should continue the Parliament of Scotland,
(which they did) does evince that the Parliaments were continued with consent
of the Estates. And having thus, (according to the instructions given to us)
shown the Judgment of the Parliament, (whose Language and mind we ought now
to speak, and not our own private opinions) anent the form and order of
prorogation, which has been constantly observed, in all preceding
Parliaments, we do so much tender your Majesty's royal power and lawful
authority (which we have solemnly sworn never to diminish) as we neither
dare nor will presume to exceed our instructions, to define what your Majesty
may do in the hight of your power. For to dispute a posse ad esse, is both
against Law and Divinity; And what ever your Majesty may do in the hight of
your power, we hope your Majesty will ever be graciously pleased to rule your
Subjects according to Law, the continual practice whereof we have shown in
this point, neither know we any former Law or practice to the contrair: And if
any man has informed your Majesty, or affirmed, that it is otherwise,
affirmanti incumbit probatio.

As concerning that act whereby it is craved, that the power of the articles
may be defined, we have direction and information from the Parliament, to
show the equity, lawfulness, and expediencie of that act, which may easily be
perceived, from the reasons contained in the narrative of the act it self,
which brevitatis causa, is referred thereto, as also from the written records,
and printed acts of Parliament, from the nature of all Committees, and from the
present estate and condition of the Parliament of that Kingdom: For as it is
clear by the history of that Kingdom, and the records of Parliament, that
there was never such a thing heard of, as Lords of articles, until the time of
King David Bruce; So it is manifest in all the printed and written records of
Parliament, since that time, that many Parliaments had no Lords delegat for
articles at all, and when there was any chosen, the nomination and election of
them, was ever with the common consent and advice of the whole Parliament, till
the Parliament in anno 1617. That the Bishops took upon them to remove out of
plain Parliament, to the Inner-house, and choysed some out of the Noblemen,
and the Noblemen them, and they two choysed the Commissioners to be on articles
of Shires and Buroughs, which as it was against the first institution, and
form of election of al preceding articles, introduced by and with the prelates:
So do it fall and ought to be removed with them, ut effectus removetur cum fua
causa: for they being removed, cannot choice the noblemen to be on articles, as
the Noblemen cannot chose them, nor can they both together choice the Barons
and Burgesses: So that it does of necessity follow, that there be no articles,
but that all be done in face of plain Parliament, as it was of old, or else
(if articles be) that the ordour of election be from the whole Parliament: or
that every Estate of Parliament, make choice of such of their own number, as
are to be on articles: For according to the common received maxim, Quod omnes
tangit ab omnibus approbari debet; and status ac ordines regni, (who are chosen
to represent the whole Kingdom, and are appointed to conveen in their name, for
establishing such Laws as are necessare for the good of the Commonwealth)
ought to discharge that trust themselves, and not to entrust potestatem
vniversis commissam to some few delegat persons, exceptonely in cases of
necessity and utilitie, which either may be done or omitted, according to
conveniencie and occasion of affairs* For as this freedom of chosing or not
chosing of articles, in practice and de facto, was arbitrarie and changeable
pro occasion and distinctione temporum. So there is never any statutorie law
enjoining the necessity of articles, or determining the power and manner of
their proceeding, and in actibus liberis (of the Law) non currit prescriptio:
And it is very agreeable with reason, that the power of articles (which is but
a committee delegate from the Parliament to prepare matters for their
consideration) have not a boundless and illimited power, but be comptable to
them; and the power of articles is only preparative, and no ways
determinative, and is but curatio by virtue of a delegation, which ends at the
redemand of the granter, and ought no ways to be privative of the Parliaments
power, but only cumulative; and they ought before closing or ryding of the
Parliament, to render an account to them of all that has been proponed or past
in articles, That the whole Parliament may have a competent time for
consideration, agitation, mutual communication, discussion, and deliberation
of the reasons and conclusions of these articles, which are to be voiced; and
not to vote blindly, and without foreknowledge, to agree or disagree, to such
things as by their suffrages are enacted to be laws, which requires not only
voycing, but also hearing, free reasoning, and ripe advisement; as is clear by
the commissions granted by the Shyres and Buroughs to their Commissioners, and
from the acts of Parliament, K. Ja. 1. Par. 7. act 101. And acts of Parliament
1584. and 1587. K. Ja. 6.

As for answer to the new augmentation of customs and book of rates. It is
humbly acknowledged, that the customs belongs to your Majesty, as a part of
the patrimony due to your Crown: likeas by diverse acts of Parliament,
especially by the 179. act Par. 13. and 206. act Par. 14. and act 251 and 254.
Par. 15. K. Ja. 6. It is evident that the customs of native and foreign
commodities has been imposed with consent of the Estates; and this new
augmentation was only imposed by the Excheckquer, and condiscended unto by
some of the Burrows, upon promise (as is affirmed by them) made by the Earl of
Traquair your Majesty's Thesaurer, That the present book of rates without
alteration should be ratified in the next Parliament: the performance whereof
was only craved, by that article given in, And that no new augmentation should
be imposed upon custom, but that which is agreeable to justice and the Laws of
the Kingdom: Which the burrows conceived, they might very lawfully represent
to your Majesty, and the Parliaments consideration.

The reason and occasion of that article given in to your Majesty and the
Parliament, anent the value of money, and concerning copper-money, does flow
from the sensible loss and great prejudice, which your Majesty's Subjects of
that Kingdom does sustain by the huge quantity of copper money, which has
been coined there, and allowed with advice of your Majesty's Council to pass
current, at a rate so far above the intrinsique value thereof: as beside what
is coined within the Kingdom, there are likewise a great quantity coined
abroad in other Countries, and brought in to Scotland, and a great quantity of
false ones forged by Tinkers, and through occasion thereof all other money is
exported and taken away, and no other money almost left, and the crying of them
up and down in so short space, (of late) has brought the esteem and value of
them to such an uncertainty and confusion, as no man knows now at what rate
they should pass, or whether they should pass or not, which to your Majesty's
Subjects is a very great prejudice; especially to Tradesmen, and other poor
people, in whose hands, most part of that base money is, whose distressed
condition cries to your Majesty for remeid. Likeas the importing of Dollars
from foreign kingdoms, and tollerating of them to pass (for a long time) at
a higher rate and price nor is answerable to the true value, and above that
price, gave occasion to export and take away your Majesty's own coin; and the
crying down of the Dollars thereafter by your Majesty's Council, at such a
time, when as there was little or no other money in Scotland, occasioned great
scarcity of money in that Kingdom. From the bypast experience of which
loss, and for remeid thereof, that article craving, that the value of money
should not be altered without advice of the Estates of Parliament, was given
in without thought or intention to trinch in any sort upon your Majesty's royal
authority; but that your Majesty for the good of your Subjects, may be
graciously pleased, That the standart of the money, consisting in the fynnes,
the weight, and price of money, which from time to time has been ruled, and
set down in Parliament, be not altered, but by advice of the Parliament. And
that the fynnes, price, and weight of money has been ruled and determined by
Parliament, may be seen by that act of Parliament, holden by King David the
second, in anno 1366, in these words, Statutum quod fabricetur moneta de
materia jam all at a in regnum, and quod in pondere and metallo aequipolleat
monetae currenti in Anglia, and fiat in ipsa signum notable per quod possit ab
omni aliaprius fabricata evidenter cognosci, quousque in proximo Parliamento
super hoc maturius avisari possit. The same is also manifest from a great many
other acts in the reigns of K. Ja. 1. K. Ja. 2. K. Ja. 3. K. Ja. 4. K. Ja. 5.
K. Ja. 6. Especially K. Ja. 1. Par. 1. cap. 23. anno 1424. Item K. Ja. 2. Par.
6. cap. 29. and Par. 8. cap. 33. Par. 13. cap. 59. Par. 14. cap. 72. Item K.
Ja. 3. Par. 1. cap. 9. Par. 3. cap. 18. Par. 4. cap. 21. Par. 6. cap. 46. Par.
7. cap. 50. Par. 8. cap. 64. Par. 13. cap. 93. Item K. Ja. 4. Par. 1. cap. 2.
Par. 2. cap. 17. Par. 5. cap. 55. Item K: Ja. 5. Par. 7. cap. 99. Item K. Ja.
6. Par. 1. cap. 17. Item in the unprinted acts of K. Ja. 6. Par. 5. anno 1578.
Par. 7. cap. 106. Par. 8. amongst unprinted acts an. 1584. Item in his 13. Par.
an. 1593. amongst the unprinted acts. And such like in printed acts of his Par.
15. cap. 249. and Par. 16. c. 9. And in the Parliament an. 1633, holden by your
Majesty's self: There is commission given in Parliament to the secret Council,
and other Commissioners, anent the frequent course of Dollars, and base copper
money; by reading of which acts. It is most manifest, That the fynnesse,
weight, and price of money has been ruled and determined by your Majesty's
predecessors, and your Majesty's self, with advice of Parliament: neither is
it meaned, nor intended, that your Majesty's royal privilege, (which has
been and is due to your Majesty, and your royal antecessours) shall thereby
in any fort be trinched upon nor impared.

The reason of that article, whereby it is humbly craved, that the castles of
Edinburgh, Dumbartan, and Striviling, may be entrusted only to Natives; and
these to be chosen by advice of Parliament, of such faithful and honest men,
as do tender your Majesty's honor, and the safety of the Kingdom: may be
seen not only from the nature and importance of the charge, but likewise from
the former practice of your Majesty's royal predecessors, who did dispose of
these castles, with the special advice and counsel of their Parliament, as is
recorded in the old Registers of the Parliament 1368. Likeas fol. 83. of the
old acts K. Ja. 4. It is concluded by advice and deliverance of the three
Estates, That Patrick Lord Haills be keeper of the castle of Edinburgh, and
artilerie of the same, etc. Item fol. 21. cap. 35. K. Ja. 6. in the old acts.
The three Estates ordaines the castle of Dumbar, and fort of Inchkeith to be
demolished and destroyed, that no foundation remain thereof. Likeas by diverse
unprinted acts, as in anno 1578. and 1585. and 1606. Your Majesty's houses has
been disposed of with advice of Parliament. And not only national statutes,
but the common law of nature and Nations, do forbid the receiving of strangers,
to be keepers of the strengths of a free Kingdom. And when the Parliament of
Scotland 1604. gave commission anent the Union with England, with exception of
reserving of free Monarchy, and the fundamental laws, liberties, and
privileges of that Kingdom: Your Majesty's father in his printed speech to
the Parliament of England 1607, when he interprets that clause of fundamental
laws, declares that he could not make Scotland a naked Province without
liberty, and set Garrisons over it, as the Spaniards do over Cicilie and
Naples, or govern them by Commissioners: So that his Majesty in his own
interpretation does acknowledge, that the putting in of Garrisons, especially of
strangers, as of English men in the Forts and Castles of Scotland, as the King
of Spain puts in Cicilie and Naples; or as the King of England puts English in
the Forts of Ireland; is a breaking of the fundamental laws and liberties of
Scotland, and the using of it like a naked conquest Province, like unto
Cicilie, Naples, or Ireland. And as your Majesty's Subjects gave an undoubted
proof, how tender their minds are in the point of obedience to your Majesty's
commandments, not only in delivering of the Castles to be disposed of, at
your Majesty's pleasure, without any assurance, other then their confidence in
your Majesty's goodness and justice; so have they of late given a very
submisse and rare testimony of their obedience, in the humble reception of
these strangers, and ammunition, which your Majesty was pleased to send to the
Castle of Edinburgh, where the honors of the Crown and Kingdom, and registers
are keept: preferring their obedience to your Majesty's commandment, to their
own safety, even at this time, when their ears are filled with rumors of
hostill preparation against them: All which makes them, and us in their names,
humbly to supplicat and expect, that your Majesty will be graciously pleased
by recalling of that Garrison, to free your loyal subjects of these fears and
dangers, who will ever be ready to hazard their lives and fortunes to do your
Majesty service. Neither do they in the act, which is given in to the
articles, arrogat or assume power, by themselves to appoint keepers for your
Majesty's Castles; but do humbly crave, that your Majesty may out of your
goodness, be graciously pleased to declare, for further satisfaction of your
Subjects, that the Captains and Commanders of your Majesty's Castles, may be
chosen by advice of the Estates of Parliament: And that such as shall happen to
be placed betwixt Parliaments, may beetryed and found by your Majesty's
Council, to be men of such quality, as are fit and able to undergo that
charge, which in the judgment of the Parliament, derogats nothing from your
Majesty's royal power.

As for reasons of the act, anent the judicatorie of the Exchequer, we have set
down some few of the many reasons which do sufficiently prove the equity, and
justnes thereof.

1 The Session and Exchecquer are distinct judicatories, and not subordinat one
to another, and cannot be coincident in the same object: And therefore seeing
the question of right and nullitie of rights, is competent to be decyded by the
Lords of Session, by way of action, or exception; it is altogether incompetent
to be discussed by the Lords of Exchecquer.

2 The Lords of Exchecquer are incompetent judges in a declaratour of nullitie,
by way of action, and consequently cannot annull any right by way of exception,
which is a more summar way: And it were absurd in law, seeing the subject and
question is one, whether proponed by way of exception or action, that
incompetent judges of the action, they should have a more absolute and summar
jurisdiction by way of exception.

3 It appears by an act of Parliament not printed, 1593, (entitled, Commission
to the Exchecquer anent decyding suspensions in the Kings cause) that before
the said act, the Exchecquer had not power to decyde in suspensions, while it
was given them by the Parliament: far less then can it be thought, that they
ever had, or can have power to decyde in the point of heretable rights: Neither
does the late act 1633, authorize the Exchecquer to decyde therein expressly:
And if it be truly considered, some general words contained therein,
intermixed with the particular cases therein expressed, should not, nor cannot be
extended to so high a point, as the disputing and decyding of the Subjects,
their heretable rights. Likeas at the making of the said late act, the Lords of
Session having heard some surmize, that your Majesty's Advocat was giving in
such an act; seven or eight of them conveened together, and sent for the
Advocat, who assured them, that there was not, nor should not be any such
thing: but that the act should be conceived in so clear terms, that it should
not be possible to draw in under any part thereof, a power to the Lords of
Exchecquer to dispute, let be to decyde in heretable rights. And as the
Subjects heretable rights and infeftments are by this act saved from being
decyded, or annulled by incompetent judges; so your Majesty is no ways
prejudged thereby, seeing the Lords of Session, who by the laws of that
Kingdom are proper and competent judges of heretable rights and infeftments;
may and will decyde any questions, which may concern your Majesty, the
nature, tenor, and validity, of any heretable right.

After reading and debateing of the former answers, and agitation anent the
Earl of Traquaires carriage in Parliament (in refusing these things therein
till, whereunto he had consented in the General Assembly, Especially that act
of Assembly of the date the 17. of August, whereby Episcopacie, and the civil
power and places of Kirkmen, was condemned, as contrary to the Confession of
faith, and constitutions of that Church; And declared to be unlawful, and
removed out of that Church and Kingdom, and all the subjects by act of the
Assembly, with the Commissioners consent, ordained to subscryve the Confession
of faith with the Assemblies explanation) Our Commissioners (as they at the
closure of all their hearings) did humbly crave, That his Majesty would be
graciously pleased to command the Parliament, to proceed and ratify the
conclusions of the Assembly, and pass such other acts as were necessar for
establishing Religion, and the peace of that Kingdom: And did require, that
his Majesty would signify his pleasure concerning the desires of the
Parliament, and did urge their dispatch, showing his Majesty, the danger and
prejudices which might result from delay: But his Majesty commanded them to
attend his time and leisure, and appointed the 23. of March for the next
hearing. And that all farther propositions and demands which were to be made to
them, would be given in to them in writ, that they might answer the same
against that time.

Upon the 20. day of the foresaid month of March, about six a clock at night,
The Earl of Traquair sent to our Commissioners these propositions following.

PRotestation against the Thesaurer, and privy seals precedencie, That their
giving way to the Thesaurer, and privy seal, should not prejudge them of their
right.

The act anent the constitution of the Parliament in time coming, being by the
articles remitted to his Majesty, to be considered till the next Parliament,
was thereafter questioned by some of the Nobility and Barons, who orged the
same to be brought in, in open Parliament, without any such reference.

Article craving every Commissioner of the Shyres to have a several voice.

Article craving the Parliament to choose their own Clerk, or to have two of
every Estate joined with the Register, and that all acts voiced in Parliament,
be immediately subscryved by two of every Estate.

Article for every Estates choosing of their own Lords of articles.

Act discharging proxies.

Article against the book entitled (a large Declaration)

Commissioners of Shyres to give a roll of freeholders, out of which the
Justices of peace are to be chosen.

Act anent the disorders of the North.

Articles craving the Council to be subalterne, and censurable by the
Parliament.

No patent of Nobility to be granted to any, but such as have Ten thousand
marks of yearly Land rent.

No taxation to be granted, but in plain Parliament.

Act of pacification.

Article craving particular Commissions of Justiciarie and leiveteinandrie to
be discharged.

Article in favors of Sheriffs and Stewards only to be obliged to produce
horning for the taxation.

Patent of making powder to be discharged.

Act discharging remissions for slaughter and theft, but upon satisfaction to
the party.

Act discharging protections.

Act of common relief.

Article craving the act 1633. (ordaining that confirmations and infeftments of
Ward-lands, shall not prejudge the Kings Waird) to be repealed.

Act discharging the duty paid to the Conservatour upon the coal.

Article craving the ammunition and arms brought in since the beginning of
these troubles, to be free of custom.

Article anent the election of the president of the Session, and admission of
the Judges presented by his Majesty.

Act craving Statesmen being Noblemen, to have but one voice.

His Majesty's warrant, for Master William Hay his deputation in his fathers
place, opposed by the rest of the Clerks.

Upon the 23. day of March, the subsequent answers were presented to his
Majesty, by our Commissioners, to these former propositions, viz:

THe protestation made by some Noblemen, that their giving way to the present
Thesaurer and privy Seals precedencie, should not prejudge them of their
right; Carries the reason of the protestation in it self: Because in Law and
practice it is usual to any who conceive themselves prejudged (even in these
things where acts of Parliament passes against them) To protest; multo magis in
such a case as this, is it lawful for them to protest, That their giving way
to that, which they conceive, has no Law for it, should not prejudge their
right, which is only craved prout de Jure.

The act anent the constitution of the Parliament, remitted by the articles to
be considered by your Majesty till the next Parliament, was questioned and
urged, that the same might be brought in open Parliament, without any such
reference; for diverse reasons: First, because in that act there was a clause,
craving it might be enacted, that there should be stataria parliamenta, once
in two or three years at least; at which clause of the act, so soon as it was
understood by the proponers, and ingivers thereof, that your Majesty might
conceive the same to derogat from the freedom of your royal power of
indicting Parliaments, when your Majesty pleased; They did pass from that
part and clause of the act. And albeit it may easily be demonstrat from the
prejudice which your Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom susteines, through
want of your royal and personal presence, and their living at so far a
distance from the place of your Majesty's residence, how requisite it is, that
there be frequent Parliaments holden in that Kingdom: yet lest the desires of
your Majesty's subjects, might seem in any ways to trench upon your
authority, they did pass from that part of their desire, and did only
insist, that there might be a right constitution of the Parliament,; and that
an act might be past for rescinding and repealing of such former acts of
Parliaments as repugne the acts and conclusions of the Assembly, which is
conceived to be so absolutely necessar, as there neither can be a valide
Parliament, without the same; nor can the acts and conclusions of the general
Assembly be ratified; which to refuse were both contrar to the principal end,
for which the Parliament was indicted, and against your Majesty's royal and
gracious Declarations; And that it is impossible, (without passing the
rescissorie act and act of constitution) to have a valide Parliament, to
ratify the conclusions of the Assembly, is manifest: Seeing by the former
constitution of the Parliament, no act of Parliament can pass without the
consent of the three Estates, of which the Kirk was the third; As is to be
seen by the act of Parliament 1609. And any act for ratifying the conclusions
of the assembly, or for any other cause whatsoever, which can be past in this
Parliament (till the Parliament be lawfully constitute without prelates, or any
other representing the Kirk) cannot be valid, but may be quarrelled and
annulled, upon that formal and fundamental ground of the former constitution
of Parliament, which stands established by the acts of Parliament
1584.1587.1597. and 1606. By all which it is clear, that the Parliament was
constitute of the three Estates, whereof the Kirk is one, and that no act of
Parliament could be made, but by the special advice and consent of the three
estates; and that the Prelates voting in parliament, and representing of the
third Estate, was a privilege granted to the Kirk; and that they as her
office-bearers had only vote in name of the Kirk, may be clearly seen by the
231. act. Par. 15.1597. K. Ja. 6. Where the Kings Majesty, and his Highness
Estates, restores Ministers provided to Prelacies, to have vote in Parliament,
and that upon this reason, as having special consideration of the great
privileges and immunities granted by his predecessors, to the holy Kirk
within this Realm: and to the special persons exercing the office, dignity,
and title of prelates within the same, which have represented one of the
Estates: And that the said prelates have been from time to time conserved in
the same integrity wherein they were at any time before; So that his Majesty,
out of his singular affection to the advancement of Religion, declares this
Kirk to be a true and holy Kirk, and that the Ministers and pastors within the
said Kirk, provided to the office, place, title, and dignity of a Bishop or
prelat, shall at all time hereafter have vote in parliament, suchlike and as
freely as any other Ecclesiastic prelat had at any time bygone. And that all
Bishoprics shall be disponed to actual preachers, which proves, that in time
of popery, and ever until that time 1597. this privilege of vote in
Parliament was granted to the Kirk, and only to the special persons, who by
virtue of their office, did represent the Kirk, which is also clear from the
act of annexation 1587. whereby all the Temporalities of benefices were annexed
to the Crown, notwithstanding whereof they did vote still in Parliament in
name of the Kirk, (having no Temporalities at all) till the Parliament in the
year 1606, Wherein it is clear in the act of restitution of the estate of
Bishops: And also in the 6. act of the Parliament 1609, That vote in Parliament
is given to prelates, as one of the privileges and liberties granted to the
Kirk, whom they did represent, and did ever sit pro Clero upon his Majesty's
right hand, and voice in name of the Kirk.

But seeing in the late General Assembly holden at Edinburgh (after particular
inquyrie anent the true and real causes of the evils which did so much trouble
the peace of that Kirk and Kingdom) It is found that the government of the
Kirk by Bishops, and civil places and power of Kirk-men, especially their
voting in Parliament, amongst other novations brought in that Kirk, were two
main causes of these evils. And that the General Assembly, with consent of
your Majesty's Commissioner, representing your royal power and person, has
removed Episcopacie our of the Kirk of Scotland, and declared all civil places
and power of Kirk-men to be unlawful in that Kingdom, as contrary to the
Confession of faith, and constitutions of that Kirk, and has ratified the
Covenant, ordaining all the subjects to subscryve the same, with the general
assemblies explanation in that sense: And your Majesty being obliged to
ratify the conclusions of the assembly in Parliament, It does necessarily
follow, that Bishops who usurped to be the Kirk, and did in name of the Kirk,
represent the third Estate, be taken away; which also by necessar consequence
does infer, that there be an act of constitution of the Parliament without
them, and an act for repealing the former Laws whereby the Kirk was declared the
third Estate, and Bishops did represent the Kirk. Both which, the Kirk has now
renounced and condemned as a detriment and prejudice incompatible with her
spiritual nature: Neither does the passing of these acts, wrong the Kirk nor
State, nor diminish your Majesty's Princely power; as was demonstrat by that
which was spoken to your Majesty the 3. of March, and which we did thereafter
present to your Majesty in writ, which (for brevitie) we abstain to repeat.
And if your Majesty's Commissioner deny, that he did consent to the act of
assembly August 17, whereby Episcopacie, and the civil places and power of
Kirk-men, and in special their voting in Parliament, was declared to be
unlawful, as being contrare to the Confession of faith, and constitutions of
that Kirk; and that he did approve, that all the subjects should subscryve the
Confession of faith, with the general assemblies explanation; we offer to
prove the same by the very acts of the assembly, and records thereof, bearing
his assent, first verbally, and there after, given in by writ: The truth
whereof we are able also to verify and make good, by witnesses of all ranks
of persons, who were present at the assembly: And so soon as these
Declarations which the Commissioner caused registrate in the books of
Council, as being emitted by him in the general assembly, were required to be
insert in the records of assembly, (which was eight days at least after the
rising of the assembly) The Commissioners of the Kirk discharged the Clerk to
insert the same, as not being emitted in the assembly, and as contrary to the
acts thereof, and true declarations made by the Commissioner in the general
assembly, which are registrate in the books thereof, and does bear his
consent, for which he got public thanks.

The reason of that article craving every Commissioner of the Shyres to have a
sever all voice, appears in the very proposition it self; For that any who by
the laws of the Kingdom, and by their commissions, comes authorized, as
Commissioners, to hear, treat, and determine in Parliament, and yet not to
have a decisive voice in Parliament, seems to be repugnans in adjecto; and
that by the ancient practice, the whole Barons and Freeholders within that
Kingdom, had vote in Parliament, may be seen in the old records of Parliament,
as in the reign of K. Ja. 1. in his 6. and 7. Parl. K. Ja. 2. in the old acts,
fol. 26.33, 36. K. Ja. 3. in the 112. act. Parl. 14. Item Parl. 1487. 15.
October. The Parliament being continued, all freeholders are enjoined to come
to Parliament, to treat and conclude, notwithstanding whereof no such
privilege was claimed in this Parliament, but only craved the declaration
and determination of the Parliament, whether each Commissioner of the two sent
from a Shyre, have right in law of a several decisive voice, which if at any
time it has been marked otherwise; they allege the same has proceeded from
the ignorance, error, or corruption of the Clerk: And as the Barons and
Freeholders are the far greatest part of the body of that Kingdom, and that
all of them of old had voice in Parliament, till their absence by some late
acts, especially the 101 act. Par. 7. K. Ja. 1. and Par. in anno 1587. K. Ja.
6. is dispensed with, and they exeimed from necessity of coming, and of the
unlaws, which they were liable to pay for none compeirance, providing they send
Commissioners in their names to vote in Parliament: They think it agreeable
both with law and reason, that every one of these few Commissioners, who do
represent so many, should have a several decisive voice. And the act of Parl.
holden by K. J. 6. an. 1587. bears that the Commissioners of Shyres, shall be
equal upon articles with the Burrowes, and shall have votes in Parliament: The
meaning whereof does import, that every one of the said Commissioners shall
have a decisive voice, because quod de omnibus dicitur, de singulis dicitur:
and if both the Commissioners of one Shyre, should have but one decisive voice,
then it would follow, that every one of them has but half a voice; and
consequently when the one is absent, the other being present, should have no
voice, and one could not be chosen upon the articles without the other; both
which are contrare to reason and custom. And it is undenyablie true and
constant, by continual custom, that when there is only one of the two
Commissioners of a Shyre, chosen upon the articles, that one by himself without
concurse of his colleague has a plenarie voice in articles: Therefore it
follows necessarly, that as every one of two Commissioners, have a full voice
in articles, so each one of the two should have a full voice perse, and
severally in Parliament; otherwise every one of them would have but half a
voice in Parliament, and a full voice in articles: And the act given in anent
the Barons voices, is not to demand or crave any new thing, or novation, or new
privilege to be granted to them, but only craves the declaration and
determination of Parliament, which in justice may be craved by any who desire
their right to be cleared: Neither is there any such thing craved in
Parliament, as the chosing of any other Clerk, but it was only humbly craved,
that some should be allowed from the Parliament, to sit by the Clerks, to mark
that the voices were rightly enumerat.

That article whereby it is craved, That every Estate may chose their own Lords
of articles, or else, That the Lords of articles be chosen from the whole
Parliament, is agreeable to the liberty of all free judicatories, who have
power to chose their own preparative Committees, who except they be chosen by
the judicatorie it self, or by these whom they do represent, cannot be justly
reput to have any power from them; for their power is only from them, from
whom they are delegat, and they can only propone, or voice in articles, in
name of these who did chose them, and gave them power; and what they do in name
of these who did not give them power, is, a non habente potestatem: But because
the reason of this article is more fully cleared in one of our former answers,
anent the power of articles, which is coincident with this article, we remit
to the former answer.

The reasons of that act, desiring that proxies may be discharged, and that no
patent of Nobility be granted to any but such as have 10000 marks of yearly
land rent; are contained in the act it self, and it seems not to be agreeable
to reason and equity, That the honor and power of voting in Parliament, which
is conferred on Noblemen, and their successors personally, and whereby they
have power to reason, voice, and judge according to law and conscience, can be
entrusted to another, with an implicit faith; to determine and give the
judgment of the granter of the proxy, in matters of highest moment,
concerning Religion, your Majesty's service, and the good of the Country,
before the granter thereof know so much, as what is to be proponed in
Parliament: And as concerning the second part of the act, craving that no
patent of Nobility may be granted, to any who are not Natives, but such as
have 10000 marks of Land rent: The same was remitted and recommended to the
Commissioner, to be represented and remonstrat to your Majesty, whose
gracious answer they do expect.

As concerning the book entitled, (A large declaration) The general Assembly
taking notice thereof, and conceiving that thereby your Majesty, that Kirk,
and whole Kingdom is wronged; did give in a supplication to the Commissioner,
and Lords of your Majesty's privy Council, humbly craving to represent the
same to your Majesty's gracious consideration: Like-as in the articles of
Parliament, the Estates did humbly recommend the Assemblies supplication to the
Commissioner, for obtaining graciously the desire of the said supplication:
Neither did they know a more humble and respective way for redress and
removing these imputations which lies upon them by occasion of that book:
concerning which, amongst the other particulars recommended to the
Commissioner, to be represented to your Majesty. They do confidently expect
the return of your gracious answer.

As concerning that proposition, whereby it is desired, That the Commissioners
of Shyres may be allowed, to give in a roll of free holders, out of the which
the Justices of peace are to be chosen: The reason of that desire is, Because
the Commissioner of each several Shyre, knows best who are the fitteft and
ablest men, within their own several Shyres, for your. Majesty's service, and
the good of the Country, which is no ways craved to derogat from your
Majesty's power of chosing; but only as an expedient, to be past or refused,
as your Majesty, and the Parliament, shall think convenient.

As concerning that act anent the disorders in the North: The reason why the
same was craved, did result from the complaints and grievances, against the
thift, oppression, slaughter, and great insolences committed these diverse
years bygone, and of late in those parts; the redress and remedy whereof, and
for keeping peace in that part of the Country, deserves your Majesty's
consideration and justice: And all that we remember was required of the
Parliament was, That the former acts of Parliament made for punishment of
thift, rapine, and oppression, might be revived, with such farther addition, as
your Majesty should find expedient, and conduceable for the peace of the
country, which we hope your Majesty will ever tender.

The reason of that article, or act, craving the Council to be subalterne, and
censurable by the Parliament, Is from the warrant of former Laws, cited in the
act it self, wherein there is no more craved, but that the former acts of
Parliament, against leasing makers, and makers of division betwixt the King and
his Subjects, may be revived; And that the Council and Session, may be
comptable to your Majesty, and the Parliament, for any injustice shall happen
to be committed by them.

Where it is alleged, there was one article, That no taxation should be
granted, but in plain Parliament, we remember of no such article or motion
proponed.

As concerning the act of pacification, The warrant and ground thereof, flows
from the humble petitions and remonstrances of your Majesty's Subjects, wherein
they did clear their loyalty, and made offer of their civil and duetifull
obedience to your Majesty. And which by their humble supplication to your
Majesty's Commissioner, and Lords of Council, and to the Estates of
Parliament, insert and registrat in the records thereof, They have again
solemnly renewed. And from your Majesty's favor, in condescending to the
articles of pacification, wherein your Majesty was graciously pleased, That an
act of pacification or oblivion, should be past: And in the narrative of the
Act it self, there is one humble and thankful acknowledgement of your
Majesty's goodness and Justice, and is drawn up in such terms, as was
conceived, might best express your Majesty's fatherly care and goodness,
toward your ancient and native Kingdom, without wronging the true and loyal
meaning and intention of your Majesty's Subjects: And as for the body and
legal part of the act, the same was after much debating, framed with advyce of
Lawyers, and consented unto by the parties chiefly interessed.

As to that article anent particular commissions of Justiciarie and
Lievtennandrie, all which was intended or desired thereby, was, That the abuses
of these commissions, might be in all humility represented to your Majesty,
by your Commissioner: And that your Majesty might be graciously pleased, to
grant the like commissions, only upon weighty and necessar causes, and to
endure only during the time of necessity, and the ingivers of the act was
content to have it reformed that way.

As concerning that act given in for sheriffs and stewards, craving that they
might only be oblidged to produce hornings for the taxation; It is not a new
desire, but that which has been craved by them in diverse former Parliaments;
And they think, that production of horning against the persons liable in
payment, should be an exoneration to them; because they allege, they want
many of the casualities and benefices, which Sheriffs had of old by virtue of
their office.

As concerning the proposition which was made, anent the patent for making of
powder, All that we remember was craved by the in-givers of that article, was,
that in respect the Earl of Linlithgowes patent, was void by a clause
irritant in his patent, whereby he was oblidged to keep the Works going, and
which are now decayed, and the Country frustrate of the benefit and profit
which might have accressed to them through that commodity: That therefore it
might be allowed to any who were most fit and able to undergo the work to make
powder.

As concerning the act given in for discharge of remissions for murder,
slaughter, theft, but upon satisfaction to the party; All that was intended or
craved thereby, was only, That the heavy prejudices redounding to the
Country by remissions, purchased upon misinformation, might be by supplication
presented to your Majesty's consideration; That by your Majesty's goodness and
justice, the like inconveniences in time coming may be prevented.

As for that act craving discharge of protections, there was nothing craved
thereby, but the reviving of two former acts of Parliament, viz: the 47. act.
Parl. 11. and 13. act of the 23. Parl. K. Ja. 6. without any derogation to your
Majesty's power or authority, which was done with the Commissioners consent:
Likeas it was recommended to him, to represent the same to your Majesty, with
the reasons thereof.

The reason of the act of common relief, is, Because as the blessings of
Religion and peace, which from your Majesty's happy government and fatherly
affection to your Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom, especially at this
troublesome time, are common benefits, whereof every good subject ought to be
sensible. So is it agreeable with reason and justice, that according to their
interest, every one may contribute a proportional part of the charges, which
has been spent for so good ends, and the ordinar cause for which taxations are
granted, are ad relevationem imperii, ob conservationem libertatis ac
dignitatis, ac religionis, vel ob utilitatem communem subditorum, wherefrom
albeit some be averse, yet the consent and voices of the most part should
oblige for these ends, whereunto your Majesty's consent, and royal authority
is humbly craved to be added, that the same may flow from your Majesty's
goodness and Justice, and have execution to infer payment thereof, seeing
the whole Commissioners of Shyres, and Burrowes, and the whole Nobility (very
few excepted) are content freely and willingly to make offer of their
proportional part thereof.

As for that article craving the act 1633. (ordaining that confirmations and
infeftments of Waird lands, shall not prejudge the Kings Waird) to be
repealed, There was no dispute nor conclusion made there-anent in articles,
neither (as we remember) was it craved by that article, that the act 1633. be
repealed simply, but that the meaning of that act may be explained and
interpreted.

As for the article or act, anent the duetic paid to the conservatour upon
coal, The same is craved to be discharged by the coal-masters, because it was
an unlawful exaction, which he had no warrant to exact by his gift, which was
instructed in articles by production of his gift, whereupon the act was past in
articles.

The desire, craving ammunition, and arms brought in, to be custome-free, is
warranted in Law, in so far as the commodities either expected or imported
for the particular use of Noblemen, Barons, and Freeholders, which are for
their own use, and not to be sold again, are by act of Parliament declared to
be custome-free.

As concerning the article anent the election of the President of the Session,
and admission of the Judges presented by his Majesty, There was no new thing
craved thereby, but the ratifying and approving of the 39. act. Par. 6. K. Ja.
6. 1579. And that allanerly in so far as concerns the freedom of election,
to be made by the Senators: of the College of Justice, of the president
thereof, without any other clause of the said act: Neither does the act given
in, bear any thing concerning the admission of any other Judges presented by
your Majesty.

As for that article, anent Statesmen, being Noblemen, to have but one voice,
we remember nothing of any such question.

As to the last proposition, Concerning the opposition made by the rest of the
Clerks, against Master William Hayes deputation in his fathers place: The
Commissioner to whom they did produce their reasons in writ, can best give an
account thereof.

And albeit we have in obedience to your Majesty's commandment* according to
our bound duty, shown the reasons why these propositions (whereof your
Majesty has taken notice, as prejudicial to your authority) were demanded,
yet many of these propositions are of so small moment, being only and me erely
about the interest of private persons, as they are of no public concernement,
and de minimis non curat lex. Nor does the Parliament stick upon these or any
other articles of that kind any farther; nor as they have clear warrant of Law,
and as your Majesty and Estates shall find them convenient for the good of
your Subjects: But the humble and earnest desire of your Majesty's Parliament,
is, That seeing we have shown your Majesty their humble desires, and reasons
of their demands) your Majesty may be graciously pleased to command the
Parliament to proceed, and ratify the conclusions of the Assembly, and pass
such acts as are necessar for establishing of Religion, and for the good and
peace of the Kingdom, according to the articles of pacification, That by the
mutual embracement of Religion, and Justice, under your Majesty's happy
government, Truth and peace may kiss one another, and the joy and cheerful
obedience of your Majesty's Subjects may be increased.

After the deliverie and reading of which answers, and answering all objections
which were proponed by his Majesty, or those of the Committee thereupon,
(which our Commissioners immediately after their parting with his Majesty, did
put in writ) They declared that they had according to their Instructions, with
honest and willing hearts performed that charge which was laid upon them, and
did show his Majesty, how much Religion, and that whole Kingdom did suffer by
delays: And that it would please his Majesty to give them their dispatch,
that they might return to those that sent them, who are longing much for the
return of his Majesty's gracious answer. Being thereafter removed, and within
the space of half an hour called in; The Kings Majesty said, That he could
not now appoint them any time for dispatch: But that his Majesty would take
his own time to consider of their answers, and would then make his farther
pleasure known to them.

AFter that our Commissioners had thus acted their part faithfully, in what was
committed to them by us, demanded of them by the King, and could be expected
from them by others: This Declaration comes forth under his Majesty's name,
which may make his Majesty's pleasure known to them, and no more but known,
they being shut up and one of the Noblemen put in prison, upon some pretensions
of our powerful enemies (which what they are shall appear afterward) so that
they are deprived not only of the benefit of further hearing, but of all
liberty to just fie themselves, and their proceedings. A necessity therefore
is laid upon us to compare the Proceedings with the Declaration, that if there
be any demands, accusations, or objections (as we believe there be few or
none) which have not been proponed to them, they may now be examined by us and
satisfied.

First, concerning the form of electing the articles, nothing can be said by
us, which can so satisfy the minds of such as are not acquainted with this
difficulty, as the article it self as it was conceived, (which yet with other
particulars of this kind we are constrained to spare, lest these papers grow
to a greater bigness then we intended) for the article is disjunctive, that
either the whole Parliament, or each estate by themselves severally shall
choose the articles: And therefore although it were proven by some practicks,
that every Estate did not choose their ovn articles, but that they were chosen
by the whole Parliament, this does not militat against us, but falls into the
other part of the disjunction contained in the article: We holding this
constantly, that neither by the records of Parliament which are kept up from
us, and unto which we appeal, nor (so far as we can learn of old Noblemen
who have assisted in Parliament for many years) by the testimonies of
Parliamentarie men in the year 1609. and 1612. specified in the Declaration
page 21. or any other year before 1617 can it be shown that the form used
since the year 1617. had place in the election of the articles; it was
introduced with the Prelates, and must go forth with them again: it being
impossible that Bishops having no place in Parliament by virtue of the act of
Assembly, and of his Majesty's Declaration, promising to confirm the acts of
the Assembly, can have any place in the articles. And therefore that it was
necessary that the election of the articles should be altered unto the form
used before 1617. even when Prelates had voice in Parliament; which can neither
reflex upon his Majesty's royal authority, nor upon the internal life, or
external luster and glory of the high court of Parliament. What is objected
for the power of the articles, Declaration page 21. is so clearly and fully
answered by our Commissioners, page 19, 20, 21. that nothing more Nothing can
belong to them by virtue of any preceding act of Parliament, or by the nature
of the thing it self, which is to be a preparatory committee for the
Parliament, that shall by us be denied, although it must be confessed that it
belongs properly to the Parliament to determine their power, as in their
wisdom they shall find convenient.

Concerning the constitution of the Parliament, it was necessar that it should
suffer also some alteration, but that was accidental and by inevitable
consequence following upon the act of the Assembly, and subscription of the
Covenant by his Majesty's Commissioner, and upon his Majesty's irrevocable
Declaration, which can never be interpreted to have any affinity with Treason
spoken of in the Declaration, except we will say that the Kings Majesty and
the whole Estates of Parliament who have full and uncontrolable power to make
and abolish laws can run themselves in the guiltiness of that crime upon
changing of their own laws and customs: the fear is greater, that acts of
Parliament made for the advantage and advancement of Prelates against the
Confession of Faith and Covenant of God, and against many protestations of the
Kirkbe Laes-Majestie divine to be repented of, lest it pull down upon us the
wrath threatened this day.

Acts of rescission or repealing are so necessar, that it were not only an
incongruitie, but a repugnance to make a new act, and withal to suffer former
acts ordaining the contrary to stand in vigor, and not to abolish them: but
the cause of quarrelling is in the matter of this act of rescission, which
cannot be remeeded, except by rescinding of the act of Assembly, of the
Confession of faith and Covenant, and of his Majesty's Declaration which we
trust shall never be repented of, since it can be no diminution of his
Majesty's right or power in Assembly or Parliament; and since the Pastors of
the Kirk desire not to meddle with the civil affairs of the Kingdom, and are
heartily content, for their means of life and any temporal thing that they
possess, to be represented by the temporal estates of Parliament, as the rest
of his Majesty's Subjects are, whatsoever their calling or quality be. Were
the fountains and first original of this place and power of spiritual or Kirk
Lords discovered, they would be found so bitter and venomous both to King and
people, that they would be soon disgusted of them, and would be glad to
apprehend the opportunity of the temperament and moderation of Kirkmen,
willing to sequestrat themselves to the care of souls from State affairs, and
secular government, which have ever proven unluckie in their hands, as never
being created of God for such a work, and the bane of Religion, and the
service of God, as we of late and many other nations before us have found.

It is known that an act of oblivion in such a case of peace making and
accommodating of affairs, is very different from an act of Remission: for
although it beseems not Subjects to stand upon pointiles, subtilties, or
complements with their Prince, yet knowing the minds and malice of our
adversari^s, who upon the least word from us would begin to justify themselves
and condemn us from our own mouths against their just sufferings, that they
might be conquerours in the end. And resolving to remain constant in the
Confession of our own innocence, that we had neither deserved the imputation of
Rebellion and Treason, nor yet any hostility and invasion, but were certain
our selves, and labored to certify the Kings Majesty of our uprightness and
sincerity in all our actions, we judged it most reasonable in humility to
acknowledge his Majesty's justice, goodness, and fatherly care in giving way
to the settling of th^se commotions, and withal to have the authors and
abettors to bear their own blame and burden, whereof to exoner them were to
wrong the Kings honor, and without faultiness to defile and oppress our
selves and the cause of God.

The answers of our Commissioners, Concerning the act of relief, and the Five
demands, page 26. 27. and to many other propositions made to them, are so full,
that we need to add nothing; Our adversaries have concealed more of the
grounds of our actions as they are proponed by our Commisioners, supposing, it
may be, that they should never see the light, then they have opposed unto the
truth express by them, yet one point of their artifice, it is not meet that we
should pass over, They charge us, upon our propositions of keeping our Castles
by natives, and of denying patents of honor to strangers, but by such as have
a competencie of Land-rent within the Kingdom, that thereby we are working
division, and wakening ancient National animosities, and in the mean while
they fall in the fault themselves, and labor by all means to provoke the
English against us, that our mutual union of brethren may be changed in a
slavery and subjection of the one Nation to the other, that the glory of one of
the two Crowns may be h^d under the other, and there may be no other relation
but of Master and servant, which may have more aw and authority, but less love
and good liking. We indeed profess, that at this time it is hard to admit
Garrisons of the English within our Castles (although for winning the Kings
Majesty to think the better of us that has been done) and we refer to the
English themselves, whither they think it reasonable or well grounded policy
to confer titles of honor and voice in Parliament upon men who neither have
place, nor office, neither house nor land, neither sowing nor reaping in this
Country But it is comfortable to us to think, and is unto us a ground of many
hopes, that the two Nations so long, and so far divided before, are in our time
straightly joined, not only by natural union in one Island, but also spiritual
in one Religion, civil under one Head, moral in the mutual interchange of so
many duties of love: And domestical, by marriages and allyances, bringing
forth children to be pledges of increasing and ever-during love to both
Nations; we heartily wish, that all our Contrymen honored there were like
Joseph, or Daniel, or Mordecai, men of many blessings unto them, although
through the absence of our King we be deprived of the opportunity and means,
that they may wish the like happiness unto us here: Neither shall there be any
favor put upon our postnati amongst them in Parliament, or otherwise, but we
shall strive in all thankfulness to equal it according to our small power. But
withal we wish that our unworthy and disnatured Country men may find small
respect there: and such as are highly respected and honored, forget not in the
time of necessity the Religion and liberties, the soul and life of the mother
that bore them, and the breasts that give them suck.

When the Parliament had proceeded in their articles and demands after this
manner, and upon very good grounds we promised unto our selves a peaceable
conclusion. The Lord Commissioner shows, that it is his Majesty's will that
the Parliament be prorogated to the 2. of June, and that by his Majesty's
authority only: of the prorogation, the praetension is page 30. that our aim
was not now for Religion, but to alter the whole frame of civil government:
The deduction of our proceedings by our Commissioners has shown what our aim
has been, and what reasons and means we have used to attain it. The settling of
Religion, as it should be determined in assembly, was promised. And therefore
no necessary consequence thereof, although importing some alteration in the
members or order of the Parliament, should have been denied. Other matters of
Religion may be settled by Law, without the smallest alteration of Parliament.
But when it is found by the Assembly of the Kirk to be against Religion, that
the Ministers of Christ be Lords of Parliament, a change in Parliament must
needs accompany it. Other things were promised, which might conduce for the
good and peace of the Kingdom. The particulars which were presumed to be of
this kind, were proponed and demanded, and ought to have been disputed in face
of Parliament, and either received or rejected as they did deserve. Of the
proroguing of the Parliament by his Majesty's mere commandment, the reason is
given page 31. because we had disputed it: upon what grounds the dispute was,
may be apparent from the declaration of Parliament: Which we have here set down
for two reasons: One is, that it self may be in stead of an answer against what
is opposed. And therefore we only desire, that after the censure thereof is
read, it may be read the second time, and considered, and there will need no
other reply: Another reason is, that the difference may be seen betwixt the
declaration which was made by us in the Parliament House, and that which was
printed by his Majesty's authority; we mean not escapes of the Printer, but
wilful errors of the Author, that no man may any more be ignorant, how far
the King there, and the Kingdom here are abused; we suppose the Reader to be
honest and judicious, that we need not insist in exponing the causes why such
and such parts of our Declaration are left out: and therefore will content our
selves to describe the words and clauses which are past over in a small
Character.

The Declaration of the Estates of Parliament, concerning the prorogation of
the Parliament, etc.
WE Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses, Commissioners of shyres and Burrowes
conveined in this suprcame Court of Parliament by his Majesty's solemn
indiction, and holden by John Earl of Traquair his Majesty's high
Commissioner, do with all dutiful and loyal respect unto the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and with our best affections to the preservation of the Body
of this Kingdom which we now represent, make known, that where contrary to the
malignant disposition, and the wicked devises and practices of some of our
disnatured Countrymen and their accomplices, his Majesty's face did not only
begin to shine upon us, to the calming of all these tempests and troubles which
were at first raised by their own inventions and innovations of Religion; but
his Majesty did also with advise of the Couns^llours of both Kingdoms, declare
and assure, that it was his Royal will and pleasure for afterward, That all
matters Ecclesiastical should be determined by the Assemblies of the Kirk, and
matters civil by Parliament, and other inferior judicatories established by
Law, which was and is the sum of our whole desires; and therefore was pleased
to indict a free General Assembly, to be conveined at Edinburgh the 12 of
August for settling the peace of the Kirk, and a Parliament to be holden 26.
August, for ratifying the constitutions of the Assembly, and for settling such
other things as may conduce for the peace and good of the Kingdom. And because
his Majesty could not be present in his own Royal person, (which was our
earnest desire and had been our great delight) It pleased his Majesty so far to
tender the minds of his well meaning subjects, as to promise unto them a
Commissioner instructed with full power, to bring matters to a final
conclusion both in Assembly and Parliament, against all fears offrustration,
and jealousies of prorogation, or delays. And forsameekle as John Earl of
Traquair, his Majesty's Commissioner, honored with a most ample Commission,
according to his Majesty's Royal word, having closed the Assembly, and having
sitten with us in Parliament a very long time, for debating and preparing such
articles as were to be presented in face of Parliament, does now take upon
him, and that without the consent of the Estates, and without any offense on
their part, who have endeavored in all their proceedings, to witness their
loyalty to the King, and duty to his Grace, as representing his Majesty's
sacred person, to prorogate the Parliament upon a private warrant, procured by
sinister information, against his Majesty's public Patent under the Great
Seal, and that upon pretense of a clause in the Commission under the quarter
Seal, which was only for fencing and continuing of the Courttill the
down-sitting of the Parliament, and that even by representation of the Estates,
who now being present themselves, cannot be represented by Commissioners, but
do directly dis-assent, which warrant is now expyred in it self, and is not
renewed under the quarter Seal; whereby he does heavily offend all his
Majesty's good Subjects, and endanger the peace of the whole Kingdom, for
which he must be liable to his Majesty's Royal animadversion, and to the
censure of the Parliament; this being a new and unusual way withour precedent
in this Kingdom, contrary to his Majesty's honor, so far engaged for
present ratifying of the acts of the Kirk, contrary to the Laws, Liberties,
and perpetual practice of the Kingdom, by which all continuations of
Parliament once called, conveened, and begun to sit, have ever been made with
express consent of the Estates, as may be seen in the reign of K. Jam. 6. Q.
Mary, K. Jam. 5. K. Jam. 4. K. Jam. 3. K. Jam. 2. K. Jam. 1. and so forth
upward in all the printed and written Records of Parliament, contrair to the
public peace both of the Kirk and Kingdom, which by reason of the present
condition thereof, and the great confusion like to ensue, cannot endure so long
delay; and which is to the advantage of our malicious adversaries, who for
their own ends, are uncessantly seeking all occasions, by dividing betwixt the
King and the Kingdom, to bring both to utter ruin and desolation. THEREFORE
We the Estates of Parliament, out of our zeal to acquit our selves according
to our place both to the Kings Majesty, whose honor at all times, but
especially conveined in Parliament we ought to have in high estimation, and to
the Kingdom which we represent, and whose Liberties shall never be prostitute
nor vil^fied by us, are constrained in this extremity to manif^st and declare
to all men who shall hear of our proceeding, that as we have not given the
least cause, or smallest occasion of this unexpected and unexemplified
prorogation, So we judge and know the same to be contrair to the constitution
and practices of all preceding Parliaments, contrair to the Liberties of this
free and ancient Kingdom, and very repugnant to his Majesty's Royal
intentions, promises, and gracious expressions in the articles of the late
pacification, which we trust will be no sooner presented to his Majesty's
equitable consideration, but the adversaries who have informed against us,
shall be driven from his Majesty's presence, and receive their deserved
recompense of reward. And we do further declare, that any prorogation made by
the Commissioners Grace alone, without consent of the Parliament by himself,
or any Commissioner in his name, or under the quarter Seal, or by the Lords of
the Council, who have no power at all in matter of the Parliament during the
sitting thereof, shall be ineffectuall, and of no force at all to hinder the
lawful proceedings of the Subjects, and the doers thereof to be censurable in
Parliament. And farther we declare, that the Commissioner his nomination of the
articles by himself, his calling together these articles, and commanding them
to sit continually, and proceed, notwithstanding their day lie protestations to
the contrair, his keeping frequent Sessions of Council, and determining causes
in Council during the time of the Session in Parliament, his calling down and
calling up of money enduring the Session of the Parliament, without consent of
the Estates of Parliament, notwithstanding that the Parliament had taken the
money to their consideration, and had purpose to have given their advice for a
determination there-anent, his frequent prorogating the ryding of the
Parliament without consent of the Estates, or mentioning in the acts of
prorogation the consent of the articles, although it was done by their advice,
are contrary to the Liberties of this Kingdom, freedom and custom of
Parliament, and that they be no preparatives, practiques, nor prejudices in
time coming against us or our successors. But because we know that the eyes of
the world are upon us, that Declarations have been made and published against
us, and malice is prompted for her obloquies, and waits on with open mouth to
snatch at the smallest shadow of dis-obedience, dis-service, or dis respect to
his Majesty's commandments, that our proceedings may be made odious to such
as know not the way how these commandments are procured from his Majesty, nor
how they are made known and intimat to us, And do as little consider, that
we are not now private subjects, but a sitting Parliament, what National
prejudices we have sustained in time past by misinformation, and what is the
present case of the Kingdom. We therefore declare, that whatsoever by the
example of our predecessors in the like cases of necessity, by his Majesty's
indiction, and by the articles of pacification we might do lawfully in sitting
still, and which in this extreme necessity were justifiable, not only before
so just a King, but to the faces of our adversaries: yet out of our most
reverent regard and humble desire to render not only all real demonstrations
of civil obedience, but to put far from us all show or appearance of what
may give his Majesty the least discontent, We have resolved for the present
only to make remonstrances to his Majesty of the reasons of our propositions
and proceedings in this Parliament, and how necessary it is, that without delay
a speedy course be taken for the preservation of the Kirk and Kingdom, from
the evils which the enemies of our Religion, the Kings honor, and of our
peace, do project and long for. And in expectation of his Majesty's gracious
answer to these our humble Remonstrances, that some of each estate having power
from the whole body of the Parliament, remain still here at Edinburgh to
attend the return of his Majesty's gracious answer to our humble and just
demands, and farther to remonstrat our humble desires to his Majesty upon all
occasions, That hereby it may be made most manifest against all contradiction,
that it was never our intention to deny his Majesty any part of that civil
and temporal obedience which is due to all Kings from their Subjects, and from
us to our dread Sovereign after a special manner, but merely to preserve our
Religion and the Liberties of the Kingdom, without which, Religion cannot
continue long in safety: And if it shall happen (which God forbid) that after
we have made our Remonstrances, and to the uttermost of our power and duty,
used all lawful means for his Majesty's information, that our malicious
enemies, who are not considerable, shall by their suggestions and lies prevail
against the informations and general declarations of a whole Kingdom. We take
God and men to witness that we are free of the outrages and insolences that
may be committed in the mean time: And that it shall be to us no imputation
that we are constrained to take such courses as may best secure the Kirk and
Kingdom from the extremity of confusion and misery. Which Declaration above
written, we the Estates of Parliament, require the Clerk to insert in the
records thereof, and grant extracts thereof under his hand and subscription.

This is the just copy of the Declaration, produced and read in the utter
house of Parliament upon the 18 day of December 1639 According where unto, the
Nobility nominated and appointed, the Earls of Lothian, and Dalhoussie, the
Lords Yester, Balmerinoch, Cranstoune, and Naper: The Barons nominate the
Commissioners of the three Lothianes, Fyfe, and Tweddell: The Borrows nominate
the Commissioners of Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Stirling, Hadingtoune, Dumbar, to
attend here at Edinburgh the return of his Majesty's gracious answer to their
humble Remonstrances.

Sic subscribitur, Alex. Gibsone.



BEtwixt the prorogation of the Parliament and the sending of our last
Commissioners, three points are touched in the Declaration: One, that the Earl
of Dumfermling, and the Lord Lowdoun were sent with Commission from the
Parliament, to make their remonstrance to his Majesty, but were not admitted
to his presence, and were commanded to return; because they were not licenced
or warranted by the Commissioner, and had not acquainted him with their
propositions: Although it be of verity that the Commissioner had showen to
diverse of the members of the Parliament, his Majesty's own warrant for the
coming of some to his Majesty's presence, which to them seemed more sufficient
and of greater authority, then any thing they could have from himself; and why
might not they have some things to propone or to complain of upon the
Commissioner to his Majesty, which was not sitting to acquaint him with, that
his Majesty in his fatherly affection, which cannot be transmitted to another,
might judge between him and them: It was in his Majesty's power to give such
answer to their propositions as seemed good in his own royal wisdom but to
command them who had not bin sent without his Majesty's warrant, to return
unheard, after so long a journey, was more then could have been expected or
suspected by a Kingdom conveened in Parliament by his Majesty's authority.
The second is, that the Earl of Traquair at his coming made a large and exact
representation to the Council of England, (...) he most considerable matters
proponed in Parliament: of the largenes of his relation we doubt not, but how
exact it was our adversaries can best discover, who had taught him before so to
say his lesson in public, as might serve most for the ends intended by them,
especially to animat England against us, for which they have set their wits
since the treaty of peace to make all means, whereof this was a powerful one,
to cooperat. The third is, the judgment of the Lords of his Majesty's council
of England, to reduce us to our duty by force, rather then to give way to our
demands. Of which we say no further, but that it was the sentence of a Council,
and of the Council of England against a Parliament, and the Parliament of
another Kingdom: That it was p^^^^unced upon the hearing of the relation of
one man, a new creature, and but of yesterday, against a whole free Kingdom of
ancient Nobles, Barons, and others, whose Commissioners two Noblemen were even
now barred from hearing and presence: and that it was in a matter of war and
peace, which might engage both the Kingdoms, then which nothing could be more
important for the present generation and for the posterity. In Council is
stability, but this is found not by precipitation, but after many days
agitation, when the matters debated are more then ordinary, and such as, it
may be, fall not to be considered, once in many ages. To us we confess, it
seemed incredible at first, and afterward a matter of demurre and astonishment.

Although our Commissioners formerly sent, were repulsed, yet we did not
desist, but remembering that we were dealing with our own native King, who might
be moved to know and compassionat us his own people at last, we sent this
humble supplication for a new hearing.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Remonstrance and Supplication of the
Noblemen, and Commissioners of Shyres, and Burrows, his Majesty's good Subjects
of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND,
Humbly showing,
THat where the great want of your Majesty's royal presence in person at th^^
^igh Court of Parliament, as we have also at other times experienced, has been
apprehended by our adversaries for a fit opportunity to their mis-informations
and hard impressions against our proceedings in Parliament, as trenching upon
your Majesty's sacred and inviolable authority, as not warranted by the
fundamental laws and laudable practices of this your Majesty's ancient and
native Kingdom, or as contrary to the promises and remonstrances which were
made to your Majesty by your humble subjects, in the truth of their hearts,
and were in the same sense graciously accepted by your Majesty. And although
to our common regrate, and the suspending of our hopes and humble desires, your
Majesty has thought meet to give order to Your high Commissioner to prorogat
the Parliament: yet such has been your Majesty's wisdom, justice, and
goodness (which in all humble thankfulness shall ever be remembered by us)
that your Majesty has kept one ear for us, and would not harken and give
place in your Royal heart to suggestions and obloquies of our enemies, till
the reasons of our proceedings were made known from our selves, and we should
have the favor of a full hearing: And for this end, it was your Majesty's
royal pleasure to permit and allow the Estates of Parliament, to send some of
their number to give your Majesty true information; which being conceived by
them for a sufficient warrant, made them direct two Noblemen, the Earl of
Dumfermling, and the Lord of Lowdoun to your Majesty's Court, instructed with
full commission to that effect: But since your Majesty judged it not
convenient to grant unto them access and audience at that time; We now from
the sense of the distressed condition of this your Majesty's Kingdom, which we
nothing doubt but your Majesty will in your tender and fatherly car,
compassionar, do in all earnestness desire, and in all humility supplicat,
that your Majesty may be pleased, upon this our declaration, that we intend
nothing but what shall merit approbation at the throne of your Majesty's
justice, to give commandment for the proceeding of the Parliament, that thereby
our evils may be cured before they be past remedy, many dangerous consequents
may be prevented, and the troubled estate of this Kirk and Kingdom speedily
settled, which is the longing desire, and universal expectation of all your
Majesty's peaceable Subjects: Or if your Majesty shall find it necessary for
their further satisfaction against all exceptions to make particular inquiry,
and to take notice of the reasons of our proceedings and demands from our own
mouths, which we shall be most willing to render; in that case we are
confident that your Majesty's royal ears will be in the mean while shut
against the sinister informations of such men as are fallen out with the times,
and think our common calamities a mitigation of their just sufferings. And do
humbly entreat that your Majesty may be pleased to give signification of your
Royal will hereanent, and to grant warrant for sending some from us to your
Majesty's presence, that so soon as may be the Parliament long since begun by
your Majesty's indiction, may by your Majesty's wisdom and goodness, have
the wished conclusion, to your Majesty's honor, and the joyful acclamation of
the whole Kingdom.

To which this answer was given:

At his Majesty's Court at Whitehall the 11 day of December, 1639.
HIs Majesty having read and considered this supplication, is gracioufly
pleased to permit such number of them to repair thither, as they shall please,
to show the reasons of their demands.

Sic subscribitur, Sterline.

Upon this answer four Commissioners were sent, who did acquit themselves in
their charge, as is expressed before in their Supplications, speeches, answers,
and whole proceedings: Concerning which there be three things mentioned in the
Declaration to make them all null and themselves odious; First, that they were
not instructed with sufficient Commission, which is abundantly answered by
themselves page 14. For their commission behoved to be deficient, either in the
form and authority, or in the subject and matters to be treated: The
authority was as great as first the Parliament then sitting, and thereafter
the Commissioners of the Parliament could grant: And where it is said page 44.
that they were persons of no great eminency who did subscribe: Their
Commission we desire to be considered, 1. That the first commission was
subscribed by the Subjects of every quality sitting in Parliament: 2. That the
second commission could not be subscribed in that manner, the Parliament being
no more sitting but prorogated, but behooved to be subscribed by the
Commissioners of the Parliament, authorized to sit at Edinburgh for making
remonstrances, and receiving answers from his Majesty. The meanest of these
Commissioners whosoever he was in person, was in this act, of greater
authority and eminency, then the most eminent in the Kingdom, who was not
clothed with the same commission: And therefore although there were many
Noblemen in Edinburgh for the time, yet they did not sign the commission,
because they had no warrant from the Parliament, and that for me of doing has
been reprehended in former times as displeasant to his Majesty, and so was the
authority sufficient. As for their limitation in the matters to be treated
before his Majesty, it may appear by his Majesty's allowing them to come up
under the Secretaries hand, that they went to give the reasons of the demands
made in Parliament, and withal did declare as is contained in their
proceedings, page 45. that the Parliament does not stick upon these or any
other articles of that kind any further, nor as they have clear warrant of
law, and as his Majesty and the Estates shall find them convenient for the
good of the Subjects. And did supplicat that his Majesty would be pleased to
command the Parliament to proceed, and ratify the conclusions of the Assembly,
and pass such acts as are necessary for establishing Religion, and for the
good and peace of the Kingdom according to the articles of pacification.

But that we may remove all suspicion of latent or underhand dealing, we have
here set down the just copy of the instructions given to our Commissioners
first and last.

Instructions from the Noblemen and Commissioners of Shyres, and Burrows
conveened to attend this present Parliament, To the Earl of Dumfermling, and
Lord Lowdoun, concerning such business as they have desired to be imparted to
the Kings Majesty: Subscribed with their hands, At Edinburgh the first day of
November, 1639. By some of each Estate for themselves, and as representing the
rest of their number at their command and desires.

1. FIrst to show and declare, that our desire anent Religion is, That we may
enjoy the same according to Gods word, the Confession of Faith, and
constitutions of the Kirk of Scotland; and that all matters Ecclesiastical
shall be determined by the assemblies of the Kirk, without incroatching upon
the liberty, privilege, and government of any other reformed Kirk.

2. To show and declare, That we never had, nor have any intention to diminish
his Majesty's greatness, and authority, which by the law of God, and of this
Kingdom, and by the descent of 108 Kings, we acknowledge to be due to his
Majesty: neither did we ever intend to impair or withdraw our selves from
civil and temporal obedience to his Majesty: but in every thing to carry our
selves as becomes faithful, humble, and loyal Subjects, whereof we shall be
ready to give real demonstrance and proof when his Majesty's service shall
require the same.

3. To show how grievous it is to his Subjects, That we hear his Majesty is
misinformed and displeased with any of our proceedings. The lawfulness and
loyalty whereof, we desire ye may clear to his Majesty.

4. Ye would give to his Majesty a true information of all our proceedings in
the Assembly and Parliament, whereof ye have the special acts and reasons for
the same, and justify them against al aspersions and objections, especially ye
would clear they do no ways trinch upon the Kings authority, whereof his
Majesty seems to be misinformed.

5. Ye would show the great prejudices of this Kirk and Kingdom, by continual
bygone letts, and delays of the progress of the Parliament, and how much it
may contribute to his Majesty's honor, the Subjects content, and for procuring
of hearty and cheerful obedience, That the affairs of this Kirk and Kingdom
may without longer delay be settled, especially seeing all the Subjects desires
are given in to the Parliament and articles, and are such as agree with the
articles of pacification, without the least wronging of his Majesty's
authority, or impairing of the Subjects civil and duetifull obedience.

6. Ye would therefore urge after your clearing of all objections made against
any of our acts and proceedings, That his Majesty may be graciously pleased
to direct his Commissioner to go on in Parliament, without further delay, to
determine all the articles by the advice of the Estates, and to the ratifying
of the conclusions of the late Assembly, and settling all such other things as
may conduce to the public peace and good of this Kingdom, according to the
articles of pacification, and his Majesty's Commission under the great Seal.

7. For the clearer determining of all questions, ye would earnestly desire the
production of the laws and records of Parliament, the up-keeping whereof is
contrary to all law, practique and reason.

8. If the King will not condescend to give order to his Commissioner to go on
presently in Parliament, for ratifying the acts of the Assembly, and for
determining and deciding such acts as are given in to the articles, then at the
least his Majesty may be graciously pleased to enjoyne the Commissioner to
prorogate the Parliament in the terms contained in the offer made to him,
which ye have with you.

9. And if his Majesty send for the Commissioner, ye would try and advertise
whom ye think fittest to be sent from the Estates with the Commissioner, to
inform the Kings Majesty more fully, and to procure his Majesty's warrant for
their up-coming, for better clearing of matters, and for his Majesty's further
satisfaction.

10. Ye would be frequent and sure in your advertisements to us how our
business goes, and what ye conceive will be fittest to be done by us here.

11. Ye would remember the many grievous complaints given in to my Lord
Commissioner, and Lords of articles by these of this Nation who are In-dwellers
in Ireland, of whom oaths are exacted, unwarrantable by the Laws of the
Church of Ireland, as also some of this Nation have been pressed in England
with the like oaths.

At Edinburgh 20. Jan. 1640.

Instructions from the Commissioners appointed by the Estates of Parliament to
make remonstrances to his Majesty of the reasons of the prepositions and
proceedings in Parliament, and for receiving his Majesty's answers, and upon
the return thereof to remonstrat their humble desires to his Majesty upon all
occasions, given to the Earl of Dumfermeling, Lord Lowdoun, Sir William
Douglas of Cavers, and Master Robert Barclay Provest of Irwing, Commissioners
direct to his Majesty, with the advice of the Noblemen and Commissioners of
Shires and Burrows conveined for the time, which are added to the former
instructions granted to the said Earl of Dumfermeling, and Lord Lowdoun by the
Estates of Parliament, November. 1. 1639.

SEeing the Earl of Dumfermling, and Lord Lowdoun were den yed access to
impart to his Majesty the former Instructions given to them by the Estates of
Parliament, and seeing upon their return, his Mejestie was petitioned to give
order for proceeding of the Parliament; or if his Majesty should find it
necessary for his further satisfaction, to take notice of the reasons of our
proceedings from some of our selves, that his Majesty would give signification
of his Royal pleasure here-anent, and grant warrant for such as should be sent

And that now his Majesty by his answer to our supplication has allowed and
given warrant that such as we think fit to send, may repair to his Majesty to
show the grounds and reasons of our demands: We have for discharging of our
humble duty according to his Majesty's commandment sent you up to impart to
his Majesty the former Instructions given to the Earl of Dumfermling, and Lord
Lowdoun.

To show that our proceedings and desires are agreeable to the Laws and
practices of the Kingdom and articles of pacification, as you were also
directed to do by the former Instructions: which when you have cleared, lest
verbal expressions be controverted, you shall give in the sum of our
demands, and crave the answers thereof in writ, and what else shall be objected
against us, or replied for our justification, and that for avoiding
contestation about words in time hereafter.

If you be called to give answer and account to the English Committee or
Council, or any other Judicatorie, you would show that you are sent only to
his Majesty and discharged, likeas we do hereby discharge you, to answer to
any Commit or Judicatorie, who cannot meddle in matters of the Parliament of
this Kingdom, being independent of any, but of God and the King.

Because we hear that sinistrous informations, and the late relation made by
his Majesty's Commissioner before the whole Council of England, has given
hard impressions against our proceedings, whereof as we cannot but be sensible,
so you shall crave, that his Majesty out of his tender care and fatherly
compassion of his subjects (who esteem no earthly thing more grievous to them,
then that their loyalty to his Majesty should be called in question, and
their proceedings traduced) may be pleased to allow you that favor, to clear
them in public before his Counselors of both Kingdoms from these unjust
imputations, without acknowledging them as a Judicatory, which you must always
decline.

You shall be earnest with his Majesty for obtaining a short day to be
assigned for the sitting down of our Parliament, not only for remeiding these
great evils formerly known, but also the confusion wherein the Subjects are
cast by the copper-money lately coined, going at so high a rate, far above the
intrinsic value, which being called down and up by the Council within the
space of eight days, is made so questionable, that scarce will any receive it
till order be taken therewith.

That for such desires and motions as were made in articles, and which the
Commissioner required might be communicate with the King before the Parliament
should determine thereof, his Majesty being now acquainted therewith by his
Commissioner, may return the signification of his Royal pleasure there-anent,
lest the proceedings of the Parliament by reason thereof be longer delayed.

You shall beseech his Majesty with all earnestness in our names to be
pleased to trust no mis-report of our desires and actions, till first he be
pleased to communicate to us the Informations he has received against us, that
so we may either clear the same, or take the readiest way to give his Majesty
all lawful satisfaction, which may prevent all mistakings in time coming.

Seeing by the articles of pacification his Majesty was pleased to appoint a
Parliament for removing the distractions, and settling a perfect peace in this
Kirk and Kingdom, you shall therefore demonstrate many of these acts and
over-tures presented to the articles, whereat exception was taken, were so
absolutely necessar for that end, as neither the causes could be removed, nor
remedies applied without them.

You shall remonstrate to his Majesty, how that contrary to the articles of
pacification, whereby all things should have bin put in the like condition they
were in before the late troubles. The Castle of Edinburgh which had no greater
number then 24. or 30. men allowed for keeping thereof, is now furnished with
six or seven score soldiers, who have victuals provided and laid in for a 12.
month, potpieces, garnets, fireworks, and all other hostile furniture, not fit
for defense, but for harming the Town of Edinburgh, notwithstanding the
present Captain professed he desired no greater number of men then 60. for
performing all duties in keeping that place. And that the Castle of Dumbartan
is furnished in like manner, and manned with Englishmen, contrary to our acts
of Parliament.

To answer the objections which either are proponed, or which we conceive can
be proponed against the acts and proceedings of the Parliament, according to
the particular answers you have for that effect.

You are earnestly and humbly to entreat, that the Kings Majesty having heard
his Commissioner and you to the full, may be graciously pleased to appoint the
Parliament without any longer delay, to sit down and determine all the articles
given in to the Lords and others of articles, whether they were past or
referred, or not past, and to ratify the conclusions of the late Assembly, and
for settling all such other things as may conduce to the public peace and good
of this Kingdom, according to the articles of pacification, and his Majesty's
Commission under the Great Seal.

And if any new propositions or challenges which were not proponed before, and
which may deeply concern our business, and whereof you have not any ground
or warrant to make answer in your Instructions and Informations, and which may
necessarily require advice and answer from us before your return, in that you
shall write or send to the Commissioners appointed by the Parliament to remain
at Edinburgh, as you find convenient to crave farther advice and instruction
there-anent.

Seeing upon the relation of our proceedings, we hear there is a Parliament
appointed to be in England (which we have this long time earnestly wished for,
as the remedy of many evils, both for his Majesty's good and the peace of the
Dominions) we are confident they shall consider the estate of our business,
albeit we and our Laws are independent and different from them, as they are
from us, we are able to clear to all who shall inquire in our actions and
demands, that they are agreeable to the Laws and Liberties of our Kingdom,
and the duty of loyal Subjects; and that we never had, nor have any
intention to wrong his Majesty's Princely power, or lawful authority, nor
withdraw our selves from that civil and temporal obedience which is due from
us to our dread Sovereign, but merely to preserve our Religion and Liberties
of our Kingdom, without which, Religion cannot long continue in safety.

You are to deal earnestly with his Majesty, and humbly to beg at his hands,
that you may be quickly dispatched back again, that you may be at home in
Scotland betwixt and the 25. day of March next to come.

Sic subscribitur Lothian, Dalhousie, Balmerino, Napeir, Dundas of that Ilk,
Wachtoun, Thomas Myrtoune of Kambo, William Rig, Sir David Murrey, Sir George
Stirling of Keir, John Smith for Edinburgh, Thomas Bruce for Sterling, James
Glen for Linlithgow.

Another particular is mentioned in the Declaration page 46. The neglect of a
Ceremony and complement witnessing in our Commissioners the sense of his
Majesty's Grace and goodness in hearing them who had no power to accomodat
affairs: which how it was we know not, but his Majesty knows well that the
Scottish Nation glories more in kindness and realities then in expressions by
word or gesture: they might also have interpreted a thanksgiving at that time
when they were so serious, to have been a loss, or interruption in business,
or have feared the aspersion of glossing, faining, flattering, which has been
put upon us before. And it may be that their sense was the less, because they
conceived their instructions to be full: As they were obliged to the example of
the Lord Marquess of Hammiltoun, named here for this good office; so are we
all longing for the happy time when our hearts shall be so far affected with
the sense of his Majesty's grace and goodness, that our Supplications may be
turned in thanksgiving to God and the King, our troubles into a firm peace,
and all our clamours and complaints into acclamations of joy, at which time
there shall be no want of Ceremony, thansgiving, or gratulation from the whole
Nation.

The third is, That the answers of our Commissioners, were impertinent, etc.
page 47. And that the Lords of the English Council were of opinion that our
Commissioners ought not to be heard till they should acknowledge that the
Supreme magistrate must have authority to call and dissolve Assemblies, and
to have a negative voice in them, etc. If their answers did give the reasons of
the demands in Parliament, as it may appear by their proceedings, they did, in
so many of them as were controverted: for other demands there was no just
exception against them, as is acknowledged, Declaration Page 45. 47. they were
not impertinent but satisfactorie, although they did not satisfy our
adversaries, who were determined to receive no satisfaction, but in the
overthrow either of our Religion and Liberties, or of our selves: It could not
in reason be expected, that three or four Commissioners should hold a
Parliament there with a Committee, and leave nothing to a Parliament here, but
an approbation of their doing: This has more in it then can be told in few
words. It had been good before the Council of England had given their opinion,
which we believe was not their sentence, that they had called to their
remembrance, that our Commissioners were sent not to give judgment, but to
give the reasons of our demands, and that they behoved to keep themselves
within the compass of their instructions, that in the time of the peace
making, his Majesty thought it not meet to insist in the three Querees, of
calling and dissolving Assemblies, and of a negative voice, as may be seen
before in the first part of this answer page 13. And that his Majesty did
graciously acknowledge that all matters Ecclesiastical, (whereof, this being
understood of the Assemblies of the Kirk, is one) ought to be determined in the
Assemblies of the Kirk, according as it is determined in the late general
Assembly, act. August. 17. of prorogating or dissolving of Parliaments, and
other assemblies, our declaration speaks, page 55. What other supreme powers
in the Christian world, may do by their different laws, constitutions and
customs, were long and laborous to enquire; but we shall strive to keep our
own, without wronging any other Kingdom, either by our sentence or opinion,
especially in times of danger.

Before we come to the third part of the Declaration, we meet with the answer
of three objections which are supposed to be made upon our part.

The first is page 47. that his Majesty promised unto us a free Parliament,
and we add that a special promise was made of the ratification of the acts of
the Assembly in Parliament, and of settling other such things as may conduce to
the good and peace of the Kingdom. Like as we were oblidged both by the nature
of the thing it self and our promise, To seek nothing but to enjoy our Religion
and liberties, according to the Ecclesiastical and civil laws of the Kirk and
Kingdom, and not to diminish his Majesty's greatness and authority. But when
the Parliament is conveened, the acts of the Assembly are refused to be
ratified, in so far that his Majesty's Commissioner refuses to repeall and
rescind such acts of Parliament as are inconsistent with the ratification of
the acts of the Kirk; although it cannot upon any shadow of reason be denied,
that the Parliaments power and freedom consists in this, to make and unmake
laws, as in their prudence shall seem convenient: Other articles which were
proponed, as they were conceived to be for the peace and good of the Kingdom;
so neither in the intention of the proponers, nor in their own nature and
condition, did they touch or trench upon his Majesty's Glory, Crown, Scepter,
or Power, as is before made manifest; they all tending either to the sensible
good of the Subject, or to the reforming of such abuses as do obscure his
Majesty's justice and goodness, and being granted would conciliat love,
reverence, and cheerful obedience to his Majesty's government.

The second objection supposed to be made by us: Declaration page 48. is from
his Majesty's allowing of the Covenant, and commanding of the Lord Marquess of
Hammiltoun, the former high Commissioner, and other his Majesty's Subjects to
subscribe it, and from the Earl of Traquair, his Majesty's high Commissioner,
his subscription or allowance of the subscribing of the Covenant. It was never
in our minds to make use of the first, our reasons are extant in print against
it, as subtilie disappointing and destructive of our intended reformation,
against the late novations, and against Episcopacie it self, the waggoner which
had brought them in; and when it was subscribed by some few, it was done with
this express Declaration, That they subscribe it in no other sense, but that
which it had in the year 1580, when it was at first subscribed; which is found
by the Assemblies of the Kirk, (contrary to the Lord Marquess his meaning)
quite repugnant to Episcopacie, and all the attendants thereof in Kirk and
State: we indeed acknowledged it to be the same in substance, with that which
we have subscribed of late, but that, by our adversaries, who ever set
themselves against our explanation and application thereof to the late
corruptions and innovations, was not acknowledged till the Assembly at
Edinburgh, and by some of them is still denied; what is pertinent for the
clearing this question, was so fully written at that time, that nothing needs
now to be added. Concerning the Earl of Traquair, it is alleged,
Declaration, page 50. that we have no warrant for our actions, (for rebellious
courses and treacherous combinations, no man can have warrant, and we detest
and disclaim them) from his subscription of the Covenant: First, because it is
evinced by the petition of the General Assembly for subscribing of the
Covenant, that our subscription before this time was neither laudable nor
warrantable; where we entreat the reader, whosoever, to make some pause, and
compare the words of the Supplication of the Assembly with the words of the
Declaration.

The words of the supplication as it was presented before the Council table,
stands registrat in the books of Assembly and Council, is prefixed to many
subscribed copies of the Covenant, even that which was subscribed by the
Commissioner and Council, and is printed supra page 40.

ANd following the laudable example of our predecessors 1589, do most humbly
supplicat your Grace his Majesty's Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, to injoyne by act of Council, that the
Confession and Covenant, which as a restimony of our fidelity to God, and
loyalty to our King, we have subscribed, may be subscribed by all his
Majesty's Subjects.

The words of the Supplication as they are cited in this Declaration, page 50.

NOw following the laudable example of their predecessors, they do humbly
supplicate for the same, and that they may be allowed and warranted to
subscribe it.

The cogging and cosenage is so gross, that we are forced to turn our answers
in this point obvious to every ey, into a complaint, that any of whatsoever
quality shall be suffered after this foul and falsifying way, to wrong the
Kings honor, and the Kingdoms peace in so high a matter as is a Covenant.
Next, our actions are said to be unwarranted: because this Covenant, by that
which is prefixed to the Commissioners subscription* is declared to be one and
the same with that of 1580. which gives no warrant to such actions as ours
are. Where first we desire it to be known universally, that the Earl of
Traquair his Majesty's Commissioner, did subscribe the Confession of Faith and
Covenant, with the explanation of the Assembly: First in the house of
Parliament in presence of the Lords of articles, September* 6. both as
Commissioner with the declaration made in the Assembly to be prefixed to his
subscription, and as Traquair simply as other subjects have done: Next, that
he subscribed the Covenant in the new house of Exchecquer, as a Counselor
with other prime Lords of Counsel, Roxburgh, Lawderdaile, Southesk, and many
others, and that without any Declaration at all, even the Marquis of Huntlie
show his desire to subscribe with others, but that he would have done it with
protestation of his liberty outwith the Kingdom, which the Ministers who were
present to take the oath and subscription of the Lords, could not admit. But
neither his Lordship, nor any other, pretended any scruple either in Religion,
or civil obedience to the King, against their subscription; so that neither in
the Assembly, nor in the Parliament-meeting of the articles, nor at the
Council Table, was there any suspicion of treasonable combination against the
King from this subscription. Secondly, if both, that of the 1580. and this of
1638. be one, then certainly this has no more then that, and that has no
less then this: Neither is there any other difference of the one from the
other, but (as was expressed in our Protestation, September. 22. 1638.) such as
is of a march stone hid in the ground and uncovered, etc. for this end, and for
giving full satisfaction to authority; these words We have sworn and do
swear, not only our mutual concurrence and assistance for the cause of
Religion, etc. but also that we shall concur with our friends and familiars
in quiet manner or in arms, as we shall be required of his Majesty, his
Council, or any having his authority, in every cause that may concern his
Majesty's honor, according to the Laws of this Kingdom, and the duty of
good Subjects, etc. are insert in the Supplication of the General Assembly
first part of this representation, page 48.

Our third objection is, That the demands proponed by us in Parliament, are but
matters in fieri, which is so praegnant that it cannot be answered, if it be
considered as it was modestly proponed, and very truly exponed by our
Commissioners in their proceedings page 45, 46. for many demands may be made to
the articles, which may be rejected by them, and many things may be concluded
in articles to be proponed to the Parliament, which in face of Parliament being
disputed, may be judged inconvenient. Demands are not definitions, nor
propositions to be accounted conclusions; Things done by men must be in fieri,
before they be in facto esse, every conception comes not to the rypenesse to
be a birth.

BY that which we have said, we believe we are free, before, and in the
Assembly and Parliament, of insolences, and the heavy censures of Rebellion
and Treason, which are so ordinarily, and at every other word thundered out,
that they are become the less formidable unto us, who desire that all our
actions and proceedings in this cause, may be seen in their own colors, and
who are supported with this inward testimony, that we fear God, and still
honor the King, although nothing can proceed from us which will please our
adversaries, except we will follow their rules, which are not unlike those of
the Jesuits found at Padua, when they were expelled the territory of Venice:
One of them was, that men should take heed, that they press or inculcat not
too much the Grace of God; Another was, that men must believe the Hierarchicall
Church, although it tell us, that that is black which our ey judges to be
white. Unto which we may add the third, invented by Ignatius Loyola, of blind
obedience, which we have no mind to practice, because it is repugnant to the
essence of the virtue of obedience, which proceeds from knowledge and
election. We entreat our adversaries to show us in good earnest, and not by way
of railing, In what sense have we incurred the censure of Rebellion and Treason
in the Assembly (as is alleged page 52.) The Assembly was conveened by his
Majesty's authority, countenanced from the beginning to the end by his
Majesty's high Commissioner, all things were done with high respect to the
Kings Majesty, and with frequent prayers for his happiness; Nothing was put in
deliberation, till it was first proponed to his Majesty's Commissioner; nor any
thing determined without his advice, consent and approbation, all was done in
that order and decency which this Nation, out of use of Assemblies, through
the tyranny of Prelates, usurping the jurisdiction of the Kirk, could attain
unto at the first or second time, and all was closed with rejoicing in God, and
with many praises and prayers for the King, under whose Majesty the
Commissioner also had his own part: And yet in the Assembly we must be guilty
of Rebellion and Treason, We cannot be moved to think, but the mitre of an
usurping Prelat, by the authority of a National Council, may be thrown to the
ground, without the violation or smallest touch of the Crown or Scepter of
Imperial Majesty: because we deny both the Tenets of the Romanists: One, that
the temporal power of Princes is directly subordinat and subject unto persons
Ecclesiastical, as having all power given them of God. Another, of such of
them as are touched with a little shame, that the temporal authority does not
reside in persons Ecclesiastical, but is given unto them indirectly, as
necessar for the Spiritual; which is but a shift and a difference of words,
what then should our judgment be of unlawful and usurping prelates and
pop^l^ngs, may be easily known by others; or, if need were, made known by our
selves, if this were not a digression; only this much we intended, that to
dethrone a prelat, and to over-turn prelacie, we judge it no Treason against
the King. And so we come to the answer of the third part of the Declaration,
touching our faults since the Parliament.

Not three or four, but Ten transgressions and exorbitancies are here libelled
against us. The first three are the provyding of men, munition, and moneys for
our own defense, which in us who are the Estates of a free Kingdom, is held
lawful by the Law of God and Nature, by our acts of Parliament, by the
practice of other reformed Kirks, by the testimony of famous Divines, by the
assistance contributed by our own Princes to other Kirks and States invaded and
distressed, (and we add) by the judgment of many amongst our selves, who in
the beginning of our troubles, and before the late pacification, had about
this, their own scruples, wherein since, considering what is done in England
for advancing of Pop^rie, and what is done at home expressly against the
articles of the pacification, they rest perfectly satisfied. If the defense be
lawful, the hands of men, and the aid of moneys are necessary adminicles,
which all the Subjects do acknowledge, and therefore contribute most willingly
without the least exception, except of some few, not against the thing it self,
but against their stint and proportion, which yet is less quarrelled in this,
then it has been at any time in ordinary Subsidies or taxes. It is known to
the world, that Scotland has no Treasures whereof to boast; but on the
contrary if we be blocked up, we will be necessitated either to famish, or to
fight our selves free: And although we had the treasures of Craesus or Darius,
we would not put our trust in them. The sentence of Q Curtius, which after him
is become common in the world, crying up moneys above the just value, that they
are the Sinews of war, is upon good grounds by wise men, and upon better
experience, recalled and exploded. The sinews of this war, (if a war shall
be) must be a good cause, good consciences, and Soldiers stout and fearing
GOD, who cannot be found out by gold, but will be able to find out gold, as
some writers about this have spoken well.

Our fourth Transgression is from our papers and pamphlets, and namely against
an Information from the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, to the Kingdom of
England. Many things have been written on both sides, but in very different
manner: inasmuch as the writings of the prelates and their partisans, are full
of railings, detractions, injuries, and slanders against this Kingdom, and
full of sedition, to stir up our King against us; much written, that our
defense is unlawful, nothing against the unlawfulness of the invasion: But
our writings are full of al kinds of reverence to the Kings Majesty, and of
respect to the English Nation, pressing the matter in hand without digression
or falling from the purpose upon the persons of men, further then the action
intended against our adversaries the authors of all these evils, did enforce
us. The for me of answering our Information, not by evidencing any untruth or
undutifulnesse in it, but by Proclamation, and by fire and faggot, is indeed
for the time the most easy, the most compendious, and the most affrighting way
to the poor ignorant multitude. But England can tell, that the truth cannot be
consumed by fire, but will rise more pure and clear out of the ashes, and fly
with multiplied wings further abroad in the world, then before. We might also
without presumption have expected, that an Information coming not from a
particular person, or society, but from a Kingdom, would have found with the
Council of England some better entertainment: But we trust our Informations
will be more precious in the sight of our friends, who know through what
difficulties they make their journey, and what acceptance they find at their
arrival.

The next three Transgressions are about the Castle of Edinburgh, and certain
Fortifications. Outrages and violences we have committed against none of that
Castle: but many have we endured out of a desire and hope of peace, and for
them have returned courtesies and favors. Materials to the Castle were not
denied; till, by boasting, profession was made of that which we might have
known before, that it was to be turned against our selves and the Town: neither
then were they altogether denied, so far as our own necessary use of
materials would permit. Neither was any work raised against the Castle, but a
Rampire only for defense of a Court d' guard, till violence was done from the
Castle. Our desire and hope of peace, and our unwillingnesse, by the smallest
breach, to lose the* thanks of our former obedience, have moved us to
supererogate, and to do more then we were oblidged, but have not suffered us
to be deficient. It is rather to be wondered at, that we have done so much,
to make up a Fortification against our selves, and to put weapons in the hands
of our enemies, then to be reprooved, that we have done no more.

The eight concerning the Lord of Southesk, and no other of quality, except Sir
Jews Stewart, we remit to the information of their own Letters, come to his
Majesty's knowledge. The carriage of Noblemen, of Barons, and of the Magistrates
of the town of Edinburgh upon the harmless accident of their surprizall by the
multitude, does rather deserve thanks, then challenge from themselves, or any
other, as is contained in our Remonstrance page 32. their safety in the time,
and their Liberty granted them since, how soon they could be in safety, are
real testimonies that no evil was meant against them: We would not have it
supposed, that we do all that we are able to do, or what we do for good, that
it is done for evil.

The ninth concerning the rendering of the Town of Edinburgh into the hands of
a Committee, and thereby the incurring the guilt of high Treason: we wonder how
any should be found so wicked as to invent it, and much more if his Majesty, or
any wise or good man, can be moved to believe it; They have the honor to be
the first City of this his Majesty's Kingdom, and as a principal member do
join in this common cause of mutual defense: but neither know of any such
usurping Committee, nor of submission to any power, beside that of their
Sovereign Lord and King: how ready the Magistrates and whole Body of that Town
have been to all good offices for his Majesty's honor, how far they have
strained and spent themselves upon public works for the honor of the
Kingdom, how difficult commandments they have obeyed at his Majesty's
pleasure, and how they have omitted nothing which they conceived could be
brought within the compass of the duty of humble and faithful Subjects; These
who sometime professed themselves to be their friends, but are now become their
enemies, can bear witness. We may truly with them, and in their name honor
them with this testimony; that as it is his Majesty's glory to have one prime
City in this his Kingdom, so have they beside all other respects, by their
affections and deportments, deserved to be the first, and to have a better
place in his Majesty's estimation, then to be suspect of Rebellion or Treason.
Declarations of this kind are devised to be divisions betwixt the King and his
best Subjects.

The Tenth Transgression is kept to the last place, Decumanus fluctus, as a
great wave to over whelme us and our Cause; But we have no fear so long as we
sail in the ship of a good conscience, which by no surge or storm can be
wrecked. This is that French Letter so much talked of, and insisted upon, as to
open a gate to let in foreign power to rule over England and our selves; which,
by what consequence it can be inferred, we would fain know; when a people is
sore distressed by sea and land, is it unlawful by the Law of God and man, to
call for help from God, and man? Is there no help nor assistance by
intercession, by supply of money, etc? Is all assistance by the sword and by
men? Is all imploring of assistance an argument of subjection unto the
assistant? May not friends and equals assist as well as superiors? Shall it be
thought that diverse Princes and Estates sued unto for help, are all invited to
be rulers and governors over one and the same people? We love not shrouds nor
disguisements; we speak the plain truth, and fear nothing so much as that
truth be not known; We never had intention to prefer any foreign power, to
our native King whom God has set over us. We love not our selves or the
English Nation so little, as to raise up any wall of partition between them and
us. The Proclamation at that time, as may be seen in our last Remonstrancepag.
34. was without example. Great forces by sea and land were coming upon us,
Informations went abroad in other nations, to the prejudice of us and our
Cause. This made us to resolve to write unto the French King, apprehending that
upon sinister relation, his power might be used against us, as may be seen in
our Instruction, printed in our Remonstrance, page 37. What kind of assistance
we called for, whether of men or mediation, may be best known by the Commentary
of our Letter, our Instructions which are ready to be seen, and are signed also
by the Lord Lowdouns hand now in prison, and therefore (if we should need to
say it) not falsified; without subjection or soveraignitie of either of the
Nations, Scotland or France. Aid and assistance has been given in former
times, If we had called at that time, or have called now in the return of our
troubles upon Denmark, Holland, Sweden, Poland, or other Nations for help, are
we therefore inviting them all to soveraignitie over us? And when all is said
or done, the Letter was but an Embrio for saken in the birth, as containing
some unfit expressions, and not agreeable to our Instructions, and therefore
slighted by the Subscribers, but catched for some great advantage by this
treacherous and secret accuser of the Kingdom. Another Letter was formed
consonant to the Instructions, and signed by many hands: But neither was this
sent from us (although some invent or imagine, that it was intercepted by the
way to France would be but late to avert the danger which was so near. The
Letter it self carries two tokens, that is, was unperfected; one, that it
wants a date; another, that it bears no superscription from us: Both these
are craftily turned against us: The blank date has made our enemies to number
this Letter amongst our pretended faults committed after the Parliament, where
as it is universally known that it was written in May 1639. before our marching
to the Border, and therefore ought to have been buried in the pacification;
This is well known to the Commissioner, who talked of it before his going to
England, and was occasionally made known to some of quality in his Majesty's
Camp. The want of the superscription has made them to indorse it Au Roy, a
title, say they used by the subjects of that Kingdom to their own Prince only:
But we affirm, that the Letter was neither sealed, folded, nor written on the
back by us, or by our knowledge: and we hold it but a poor argument and ground
of accusation against the French or Dutch: supplicating or writing to our King,
if they should say, To the King, every King being the King in his own
Dominions. We love not to harp more upon subscribing, superscribing, or sending
of letters to other Princes, and to the Pope himself from examples of old and
of late, which are not hid from the eyes of the world: It is sufficient to us
to have justified our selves, and to show how innocently the Lord Lowdoun
suffers, for putting his hand to such a Letter, the guiltines or innocence
here, not being personal or proper to the Lord Lowdoun, but national and
common to us all. And although it had been a fault, and his alone, yet what
soever it was, it did in time, and for along time go before his commission and
employment, and therefore ought not to have bin challenged till he had returned
to his country, unclothed himself of his commission, and turned again to be
what he was, a private Nobleman. The dignity and safety of nations, kingdoms,
Estates and Republics are much interessed in their Commisioners and Legates
(whether they be sent from one Prince to another, or from a kingdom province or
republic to their own Prince, Their dignity: for what is done to the Legate, is
interpreted to be done to them that sent him;their safety, because if Legates be
wronged, there can be no more composing of differences, nor possibility of
Reconciliation, which is the ground of the Law of Nations, whose being consists
in their honor and safety, and therefore it will have no Legate to be accused
during his Legation for any thing committed by him before it, It commands Legates
to be free even from the inferior Law of Reprisall, and does reckon these to
be the excellent effects which it produces in all places where it is obeyed:
Religion to God, Piety toward our Country, propulsation of injury, keeping
of faith, and that Legates be inviolable. And although there were not such a Law
of Nations, yet his Majesty's own roy all and inviolable warrant for the coming
of our Commissioners to his presence at this time, is enough for their safe
conduct and security. If they have committed any thing at home against their
King, Country, or any particular subject, the fundamental Liberties and
indepencie of the Kingdom, and the practices of the former times since 1603.
not only in the persons of Noblemen, but of others of mean quality, do
require; that they be tried and judged at home in a Legal way by the ordinary
Judicatories of the Land. How many bloody wars, and what horrible calamities
have ensued upon this transgression of the Law of Nations, we leave to be
remembered from the Records of history, and earnestly entreat for their liberty
and safety, who are to us as our selves.

When the wittiness and malice of our adversaries are vented to the uttermost
against all our proceedings since the pacification (for things done before on
either side ought not to be remembered; not that we fear a new try all but
because they are unty mous and impertinent) By that which we have said and
represented, the unpartiall, and such as are not praepossessed, will find, that
till the peaceable ending of the Assembly, and the proroguing of the
Parliament; not only the bonds of piety to God, loyalty to our King, and zeal
to be approved of our neighbors; but our desire, our care and hope, that all
should end in a settled peace, did oblige and tie us to bear many injuries, to
construct all, so far as was possible, to the better part, and to do many
things beyond the bounds of duty or obligation; having always before our eyes,
that we were dealing with our King, who by time would perceive the plots of our
enemies, that our desirable peace being obtained, would be abundant
satisfaction for all our sufferings, and being confident in God, that by his
providence and the richesse of his goodness, all our losses might in a short
time be repaired. And since the proroguing of the Parliament, we have followed
after peace, in sending our Commissioners to be mediators of peace, by
remonstrating the reasonableness of our humble desires, and as we still do beg
peace, so have we done nothing, but put our selves in order against invasion
and unjust violence; which if we had expected, or if we had not been
transported with the love of peace, and of our King as a Prince of peace, would
we have taken verbal expressions at the Camp, for a ground work to build our
peace upon? would we have slipped from our advantages, and put the Castles and
Strengths of the Kingdom into our enemies hands? would we without precedent in
this Kingdom, have yielded at this time to the prorogation of the Parliament,
or would we have received an English garrison with arms and ammunition into
the Castle of Edinburgh? All these have we done, and all these this day are
turned and used against us, and yet are we blamed to be the breakers of the
peace. But because this is the question proponed in the beginning, if the
balance of every just judgment stand not right already, we shall now by a
short summary and recapitulation of what we have done, and what we have
sustained, since the pacification, make the weight more sensible. It will ease
us not a little when we shall see them weighed in the scales of unpartialitie,
and shall hear the sentence pronounced, that the accusations against us, are
found light and of no moment in comparison of this counter poise of our
performances and just grievances.

NO material point of the treaty which we have not performed: We
incontinent dissolved our Armies, disbanded our Regiments, rendered the Castles,
and all ammunition, restored all things that were not spent, have kept no
unlawful meetings, and desisted from all fortifications. When the Assembly was
conveened, matters Ecclesiastical were determined according to the
constitutions of the Kirk, in the presence, and with the consent of his
Majesty's Commissioner, for which the Assembly gave humble and hearty thanks to
his Majesty, entreating and hoping for ratification of the Acts of the Kirk in
Parliament; wherein being conveened, our care was to walk so warily, that
neither his Majesty should be provoked, nor the liberties of the Kingdom
prejudged: and therefore we labored to have enacted things plain and
necessary, serving for the good of Religion and the peace of the Country: And
directed our Commissioners, to give information to his Majesty, concerning
things that might seem questionable. And when the Parliament was prorogat by
his Majesty's authority, without any precedent practice, we suffered our
selves to rise: And although our Commissioners were repelled, yet did we send
our Commissioners again in greater number, to render the reasons of our
demands. Our innocence suffered us neither to fear such intertainment to them,
nor such answer to our demands, as are contained in this Declaration: but
constantly desiring peace, and hoping for the return of our Commissioners,
with his Majesty's gracious answer, for the sitting of the Parliament; we have
received strangers, and with them all kind of munition within our Castles,
which are now with great insolency and barbarousnesse, even against women and
children, used to our own hurt.

On the other part, It grieveth us that quarrels have been picked and made up
against us, from the best and most ingenuous of our actions: This is a colored
thread that ruuneth along the whole web of this Declaration; we but point here
at the first end of it; It was openly professed before the Kings Majesty by
our Commissioners at the Camp, that his Majesty's Declaration would not
satisfy without his Majesty's own benign interpretation by word; and yet no
sooner was this made, out of a desire of peace, but incontinent it is
quarrelled, and afterward the paper bearing his Majesty's words, burnt by the
hand of the hangman.

New fortifications were made and great Garrisons kept at Barwick, Carlisle,
and other places, and the officers brought over sea were not dismissed.

The Castles of Edinburgh and Dumbartaine extraordioarly fortified with
ammunition, and all sorts of fire-work, for destroying the town, and
especially with Garrisons of strangers; The fortification of Leith first
granted to the Town of Edinburgh, to be disposed upon, and thereafter the
contrary commanded to make a quarrelling.

Suspicions and jealousies fomented in the hearts of the good subjects, by
frequent meetings and consultations with the excommunicat Prelates; and by
calling of fourteen of us to Barwick, who were accounted prime leaders in this
affair from the beginning.

An oath pressed upon our Country men in England and Ireland, which because
they could not take, as supposing it both in the intention of those who
ministered the oath, and in the condition of the oath it self, to be contrary
to their National oath and Covenant, they are punished diversely in their
persons, goods, moneys, lands, and shipping; and our desires to have them
restored are not regarded.

Some words of his Majesty's Declaration at the Camp, which were delet at that
time, as very prejudicial to our cause, have been printed in the edition
published at Paris, and are taken in again now in this Declaration.

The Prelates, although excommunicat, were called to be members of the Assembly,
to the great discredit of the Kirk, and far from that which was spoken at the
time of the Treaty.

The book, called, A large Declaration, complained on at the Camp, and censured
since in the Assembly and Parliament, neither recalled nor the author
punished: But our informations although given out in name of the Kingdom,
burnt by the hand of the executioner, and all men forbidden to read or have
them.

When it was not possible for the Lieges to attend, the Session was commanded
to sit, and since that time no proclamation nor course taken for ministration
of justice.

Although the Assembly proceeded and was concluded with the consent of his
Majesty's Commissioner; yet are we accused of Treason and Rebellion in the
Assembly.

After the Assembly was closed, new Declarations were emitted by the
Commissioner, prejudicial to the Declarations made in the Assembly, and
destroying the substance of the acts of the Assembly.

The refusing to ratify the acts of the Assembly, namely that of August 17,
except with these limitations and declarations, which would more have enervat
nor strengthened the acts of the Assembly.

The refusing to restore to the Kirk her right of planting of some Kirks,
usurped by the Prelates; and to grant the commission for plantation of Kirks.

The Registers of the Parliament, although often desired, for removing of
questions, were withholden.

The Lord Commissioner his usurpation in the chosing of the articles, above any
thing that ever was done by any Commissioner, or any of our Kings themselves
before.

The act of oblivion refused, except it had been turned in an act of pardon,
which his Majesty did not press, but passed by, and caused delet in the time
of the treaty.

The act of relief so necessary for the Subjects, refused, and the matter of
Coin altogether disordered.

The Parliament prorogat against the laws and continual custom of this
Kingdom, and against the articles of the treaty.

The laboring of division by all means in the time of the sitting of the
Parliament, whereof some were shameful and unnatural, as is confessed since
under the hand of some of the conspiratours, upon theremorse of their
conscience.

The Lords of Dumfermling and Lowdoun sent from the Parliament, and that upon a
warrant showed by the Lord Commissioner, were not honored with his Majesty's
presence, but commanded to return.

Scandalous relations of the proceedings of our Parliament, made at the Council
table of England, and judged there: but the benefit of hearing before the
Council, denied to our Commissioners.

The Committee appointed by our Parliament for necessary and pertinent ends,
is quarrelled, and an English Committee of some few allowed to sit and judge of
our Parliament.

The answers of our Commissioners taxed as impertinent, but no particular
reason given to show that they are such.

The Covenant allowed by the Assembly and subscribed by the Lord Commissioner
disallowed, and that which was rejected before, esteemed.

Our Commissioners pressed to give their judgment concerning calling and
dissolving Assemblies, and the negative voice in Assemblies, contrary to the
laws of this Kirk and Kingdom; otherwise not to be heard.

Counselors and officers of Estate discharged their places summarlie and
never heard.

Commandment given to the town of Edinburgh to publish a Proclamation for
discharging the Earl of Argyle from executing the office of justiciarie
belonging heretablie to him by act of Parliament, and to disclaim and disallow
a Committee appointed by Parliament.

Commandment given to the town of Edinburgh, to receive to the Castle,
Garrisons of strangers over their own heads, and to furnish all materials for
their own ruin.

Great violence and outrage done by the Castle of Edinburgh, not only against
men and buildings, but women and children for many days past, without any
provocation from the town.

A terrible commission granted to Northumberland, for subduing and destroying
us, before our Commissioners, who were waiting and ready to clear our
intentions and actions, had a hearing.

Great preparations by sea and land, at home and from abroad against us; before
it was told us for what fault.

Our Ships and goods taken, and the owners stripped naked, and more barbarously
used then by Turks and Infidels, and we referred by the Governor of Barwick to
the Council of England for satisfaction.

Letters sent for eight Noblemen to repair to Court, to be put, it seems in
the same condition, with the Lord of Lowdoun.

The restraint of our Commissioners, and the imprisonment of the Lord Lowdoun,
against all equity, law, and conscience.

All things devised and done that may make a rupture and irreconcilable war
between the two Kingdoms.

All means used to disgrace this Kirk and Kingdom: Books, Pasquils, Maskes,
honoring of our cursed Prelates, advancing of our deposed Ministers, denying
presentation to Kirks, etc.

No other answer given to our Commissioners there or to us here concerning the
reasons of our demands, whether they satisfy or not, but a declaration given
out, denouncing a war, and armies coming upon us.

The Parliament of England (which was called upon the sentence of the Council,
animated by the relation made by the Commissioner, that it was fit to use force
against us) has not seen just cause of war, or of giving moneys for war,
and so to enter in a national quarrel, and therefore is broken up; and yet
the expedition cease not.

By this time it may be evident how matters stand, all being brought to a
worse condition then at the beginning; nothing done nor granted for the
enjoying of our Religion and liberties, but all the means which have been used
by us, not only before the Assembly and Parliament, but even in the Assembly,
so peaceably ended with the consent of the Commissioner, are censured for
Rebellion, Treason, and contempt of authority: Large profession is made before
God and the world, of a constant intention, that we shall enjoy our Religon
and liberties, and more then this, we nor do nor did ever desire: how then
comes it that we rest not satisfied, since his Majesty is disposed to grant
all our desire? The fallacy may be soon seen: The Declaration professes,
that his Majesty never did hinder us from the enjoying of our Religion, etc.
because his Majesty is still in the opinion, at least our enemies would have
it to appear, that the Service Book, the Canons, Episcopacie, are nothing
against our Religion. And therefore would grant us a Religion, that may consist
with them and take them all within the compass of it: In this sense the
Lutherans, Arminians, Papists were they our Superiors, would grant us the
enjoying of our Religion, because they conceive it not to be Religion wherein
we differ from them: and Politics please themselves with a few principles of
religion, and what is over those, to be but superfluous or indifferent: And
where it may be opposed, that his Majesty grants the enjoying of our Religion
and liberties according to our Ecclesiastical and civil laws, the same
deception does recurre, and can never be removed, till determination pass in
Assembly and Parliament, what are Religion and liberties by our laws: This was
therefore the sum of our desires from the beginning, which his Majesty was
also graciously pleased to grant, but when the Assembly has conveened and
determined: And when it begins to appear what the determination of the
Parliament is like to be; then all is called and counted rebellion, Treason,
and contempt of authority in the Assembly and Parliament, although proceeding
soberly, posedly, and upon such grounds as were furnished by the laws of the
Kirk and Kingdom: This is the round that we have run, and we are led back
to the point at which we had our beginning. A circular course which forteth
well with the advice professed in a divisive meeting in the time of the
Parliament, and since discovered: I will never be an adviser of his Majesty
to invade this Kingdom by hostility, but to make shows upon our borders, that
we may be ever in arms, our means may be consumed, and we inpoverished, that
so the King at last may obtain his ends: which is to turn this work into
Penelopes ^ebbe, to do and undo, and thus to labor in vain: But the adviser
might have been better acquainted with the Scottish temper of his own
countrymen.

Seeing then that our humble desires of enjoying our Religion and Liberties,
are the same which they were from the beginning: Religion principally, and
things civil for Religion; that for obtaining them we have not strayed from
the fair and straight way of legal redress by Assembly and Parliament, which
his Majesty injustice did promise at the pacification. And concerning other
demands, about matters Civil, although it be most certain from by gone
experience, that the corruption and thraldom of the Parliament has been the
occasion of the corruption and thraldom of our Kirk; That by our Records it is
out of question, that the cognition and decision of the articles, does
properly belong to the Parliament; and that in Parliamen: we have proceeded
upon no other grounds, but the Laws and laudable practices of this Kingdom,
never questioned before, but inviolably observed, as the only rule of
government: yet lest pressing any of those too much, we should work contrary
to our own ends, and frustrate our selves of our desired peace; It has been
shown to his Majesty, that these demands were but motions and propositions
made to the Lords of Articles to be by them prepared for the Parliament, where
they might have their final determination from his Majesty and the Estates,
as might serve most for the well-publicke, without trenching upon his Majesty's
authority. The proceedings therefore of the Assembly, countenanced and
concluded with the consent of his Majesty's Commissioner, and of the Parliament
now laid open to the world, aiming at no thing but the establishing of Religion
and such things as should be judged necessary for peace as was agreed at the
pacification, can never be found to be the true cause of war. This must rest
first upon the incendiaries, who kindled the fire, and are now enraged when
they find the smoke blown in their own eyes, and their own nests thereby
consumed; hopeless to get it extinguished, and themselves builded up again to
their content, by a fair and legal way. And next upon some others, whose
exorbitancies cannot escape censure and punishment, and therefore they labor
to have them drowned in the deluge of a common confusion.

When his Majesty with his honorable attendants came down the last year to the
Border, they did see that Babell which the children of men had builded here,
and the affliction of this people by reason of their taskmasters, and would it
please his Majesty to peruse these papers, and to make a new trial, as it is
the glory of a King to search out a matter, we would no more doubt of our own
justification, nor we do of his Majesty's justice: the light and influence
whereof we find ecclipsed and hindered by the intervention of the wickedness
of bad and unjust Ministers, to the darking also of his own glory, which we
heartily wish may shine as the Sun, to the comfort of all his Dominions,
rather then to be turned into a storm and tempest of an unnecessary and
unnatural war, which we have labored by all means to prevent, and now
resolve to endure by the help of God, and in hope of a happy success, if the
English as they are invited, or the Irish as we hear they have offered, shall
come against us. To reduce us to obedience, neither of the Nations shall need,
for we resolve to obey without force, the decrees of Assemblies and
Parliaments, which are our sovereign Judicatures in Spiritual and Civil
matters, and to which his Majesty has remitted us; In this case we only
appeal to that prime Law of Nature, Offer not that to another which thou would
not have done to thy self: graced and perfected by the mouth of Christ, whose
name we all do bear: All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and Prophets. Wisdom would
rather direct, without wronging of Piety or Justice, first to search the cause
and fountain of our troubles at home, and to take away the wicked before the
King, and when this is done, and his Majesty's Throne established in
righteousness, then to join as one man against the two great Catholics, the
one a King, the other a Prelat, who have in their desires and hopes long ago
destroyed us, and as their opportunities serve, cease not to invade us, or
under-myne us. This might be a trial both of others, and of us, whether we are
disaffected to piety, or to his Majesty's honor and service; This might in
end make both the King glorious, and the Kingdoms ^o recover what glory any of
them have lost. This would make the Lord of Heaven and Earth to say, Drop down
ye Heavens from above, and let the skies power down righteousness: let the
earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring
up together: I the Lord have created it.

FINIS.

