THE TILLAGE OF LIGHT OR, A TRVE DISCOVERY of the Philosophical Elixir,
commonly called the PHILOSOPHERS STONE. Serving, To enrich all true, noble and
generous Spirits, as will adventure some few labors in the tillage of such a
light, as is worthy the best observance of the most Wise.

By PATRICK SCOT, Esquire.

Agere and pati sortia,
Sed
Misereri and sapere difficile.
Tamen
Quemcunque fortem videris miserum ne dixeris,
quia
Labor and patientia dura molescunt.
LONDON, Printed for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop near
Serieants Inn in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Golden Bucke. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND every way Noble, JOHN, Marquess of HAMLETON,
Earl of Arren, Lord Euendeale, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Knight
of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, in the Kingdoms of England, and Scotland.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
ALthough many powerful motives have given wings to my boldness, to beg that
my ill tilld Tillage may be enclosed by the hedge of your Honors Protection;
yet the chiefest reason is, that your innate Wisdom and Bountie-polished by
the Theoricke practice, and love of Learning, values real good meaning, above
greater shows of fawning flattery, or affected curiosity.

I do but set a Candle before the Sunshine of your exquisite knowledge in the
true Divine and Philosophical Elixir; but since what I have done, is as well to
show my ambition, to have your Honorable approbation, as to be a Symboll of
my zeal to your service: If it please your Honor to pardon my zeal, you may
justly condemn my aspiring aim, whose prematured Labors soars so high, as
give Cognizance to the world, that as I am, I shall ever continue

Your Honors devoted Servant, PA. SCOT.

TO THE GENEROUS READER.
THere is, generous Reader, no Tillage more difficult, then that of the Heart;
in the heart, no field more rough to plough, then that of Wisdom: marvel not
then that my blushing pen proclaims my ill Husbandry, in putting off this ill
cultured Farm to your survey; yet if you value the Balkes with the better
Ground, you shall rate the whole at a high price: Howsoever, I am your
Suppliant, that you will accept of my Love in the offer; laugh at my vanity,
in greeting you with Performance, and conceal my rusticitie in both. Your hard
censure may perhaps send my Plough to guard the Breach of some
Caterpiller-eaten Hedge, turn my Grounds waste, to be Nurseries of Brambles,
or inroll me Retainer to Duke Humphrey, who has already more Attendants then
good cheer.

Farewell.
Preparatio, Analogia and perfectio operis Diuini and Philosophici.
IN sudore vultus tui manducabis panem tuum.
Virtutem sudore dii obuallaru^t.
Perseuerantia sola virtutum coronatur.
Qui perseuerabit vsque ad finem is saluus erit.
Fac volatile fixum and fixum volatile, sic habes magisterium.
Errata.
PAge 1. lin. 5. read Hipocrates for Hipocrites. page 1. l. 14. read Elixir,
as else where. pa. 4. l 18. read Mettallicall. pa. 23. l. 5. read that for
the. l. 7. read pounding for punding pa. 24. l. 3. after corporal, a full
point. pa. 25. l. 15. read there for then. page 26. l. 22. read yet, for that,
page 29. l. 20. read stone.

THE TILLAGE OF LIGHT.
SVch is the community of Love, and simpathy of affections, which civil
society challenges of us in tendering the weal of others, as our own, that
as Hipocrites his Twins who sorrowed and sickned together, we ought equally
condole either public calamities, or private distemperatures: if then I shall,
by my Tillage forestall the painful toil and wastefull charges which I
observe, have been and are, yet unprofitably employed in the search of an
imaginary non ens, only known by the usurped name of the Philosophers
elixar, or stone, I hope I shall wrong no true Artist, and prevent some future
charges in the finding out of Artificial gold, or (as some name it) light
incorporat by art, which is but a poysonable pill gilded with sophisticated
curiosity, base covetousness or incroaching cunning; emulous strangers and
irreconciliable enemies to Philosophy.

That I may the better clear this, let us consider first, that Philosophy in
the denomination, is only extended to the love of wisdom; that this wisdom
consists in moulding the actions of Philosophers in a divine frame, and
innocent observance of humane society; that by such presidencie and imitation,
wisdom might be exalted to the highest degrees of humane reach: but least
wisdom might Prophecy to the wind; or that she will not be apprehended but
of sound minds; that a glorious spirit will not appear but in her own kind,
and that a precious seed requires pure earth, these Philosophers did sometimes
pourtrey wisdom in dark hierogliphicks, sometimes in fabulous attire, they
have deified her, entituling her to the names of Mercury, Pallas, Minerua,
begotten by Jupiter; all which do mystically imply that true wisdom comes,
and by us received from heaven.

If we will leave these heathen sparks of natures light, and look back upon
the glorious sun of sacred writ, we shall find, that in the beginning and
succession of time, wisdom was recommended to us by mysteries, parables,
allegories and analogies: but that divine Oracles or Philosophical morals were
applied to any material elixar, or that any curious search was any further
allowed then might advance wisdom, be profitable to humane society hear,
speak glory to the Creator, and joy to the Creature hereafter, we never
find warranted in divine or humane records. I admit that there is a quallity
of brightness given to clear bodies, even from the Creation; that this light
is called the soul of the world, and must be first incorporat, as a visible
quallity in a clear body, before it can give light, vegetat or make inanimat
things pleasant. This light was incorporat in the sun, whose virtue and
essence cherishes the essence of every creature: but the full knowledge of the
tillage of light, arises from the true notice of the first and last end of
things: as man was created of pure earth, coagulat by pure air: so his last
end is to shine as the sun. There be spiritual, intellectual and sensible
perfections of light; the first is that inaccessible light which sees all
things, but is comprehended of nothing; the second is a spiritual reallity,
whose nature possesses no place, yet is intyrely whole in every part of his
circumscription: by the third we understand the senssible perfection of the
Sun, Moon and Stars. Because heaven and earth differ not essentially,
being originally from one Chaos but in the order of beings, and prime
termination: therefore as Kings, Rulers and Magistrates, and others eminent in
Charge, are called lights, as having relation to supreme light: so we may
take precious stones, salts and mettalls for inferior fixed lights, for the
better pollishing of nature and illustration of art; the knowledge and use
whereof Angels and men are not able to express. The lowest kind of light we
apprehend as it is a means, whereby the eye discerns his oblect, or as it is
substansified in man, or as it is fixed in a Homogeniall body of natural
radical heat, as in precious stones, salts and metals, of the last whereof
we are hear to consider, specially what nature and art can do, either joined
or severed, in reducing of mettalls to the perfection and multiplication of
millions, by proiection of an Elixar upon unrefined metalicall substances;
whether the Philosophers perfection is literally to be understood of a
material Elixar, or whether Vrim and Thummim, aurum dei, Ezekiells coals of
fire, quintessence, and Philosophers elixar are meant of multiplication of gold
by art, or whether Alchimists have wrongfully enforced these titles upon the
Philosophers work, (as Sophisters cavil upon words when they want matter)
which are only to be understood in an allegorical sense.

In this consideration we must begin again at the true ends of divine light
and Philosophy; whose designs are (as I have said) under shadows to exalt the
excellency of wisdom, and not to keep her as a Buson to spend idle time;
neither to wrong nature, or flatter art, by making the one believe what she
cannot do, and by persuading the other to bring imposture into the world.
Nature only extends her self to the first perfection of the Creatures, and
produces natural effects from natural causes. Art by it self can but
dignifie and pollish natures works; by a kind of sublimation separate the
gross parts from the pure, rectify the substance of things, and draw from
vile things wholesome and good effects, but never add essence to the first
substance other then it had before. Nature and art joined, may attain more
glorious perfections; yet is miraculous multiplication of unrefined substances
of another nature, by proiection, without the extent of their Commission, least
surrepticiously they should usurp upon the great wheel of the world their
Ruler, and presumptuously intrude into their sovereigns place. For that
All-seeing eye which pearceth through ages, as the sun through the air, did
from the beginning foresee the corruption of nature, and curious peruersenes of
art; therefore to stay the one and the other, he did confine them within the
precinct of his will, least they should extend their il actions as far as
their ill wills: I grant through an admirable wisdom he has left some part,
of these low terrestrial things unperfected in a kind, to serve unto man as
matter to work upon; he has given us corn, not bread but art to make it;
woole and not cloth, but art to make it; mines not money, but art to coin it;
and he has given us stones not buildings, but art to make them. This
Al-seeing light has established a rule and certain law, whereby all things
must be produced, disposed, and maintained in their own kind; which regular
order, so long as we make it not an essence separate from him, we may call it
nature; he has appointed art to be natures helper, and to cooperate with her
in the great hopes of the world. But has barred both of them from
transmutation by a prematured birth of things of another quallity, into such a
fixed perfection as may multiply millions, neither can nature and art multiply
otherwise, then by putrefaction and propogation: it is his eternal decree,
that none of his Creatures be invested in that glory which is proper to
himself, least foolish man should ptesume upon base earth, or think that he
had committed the government of his Creatures to his servants nature and art,
to set himself at rest; who is still in action, shyning in his wonderful
works; in communicating his infinite goodness to all his Creatures, and above
all to man. These be great Master-peeces of light, which none but his own hand
can work; whereby it must necessarily follow, that whatsoever powerful
faculties we observe in the second causes, they must not induce us to think
that the first cause is idle, or that the others do any thing but the
direction of the first, far less must we believe that this order and
continuance of things which we call nature, is the chief cause of them, but
the effect of the will of divine providence and beams of the great light, no
more then in music the melody is not the cause, but the effect of concords
produced by the skill and art of the Musician, who gathers the sounds, and
reduces them to consonance.

This divine providence is so powerful, that he can apply any thing to do his
pleasure; though he seldom lets the natural course and use of nature and
art, yet carries he them where he pleases; and like that great circle of
heaven that inuellopeth all the rest, does he dragge them after him about the
world.

You see then that nature and art, either severally or jointly are but the
handmaids of divine providence which fills, governs and ouerspreadeth all
things, and rules every part thereof with infallible council and most
certain reasons: that we do not apprehend this sacred light, but either very
late or not at all, is, because this wisdom is so deep, that we cannot
penetrate unto it; or that our negligence or stupidity is so great, that we
vouchsafe not to consider rightly what nature and art can do; and what they
cannot do. What more fond conception can there be, then that art by fire can
force nature, to produce that which in the current of her course and connection
of causes she cannot do? or that nature and art joined, can Metaphisically
transmute natures works to other ends then they were created; or form them in
other moulds then their own. We may as probably suggest, that art may enable
fish to live and multiply upon the land, beasts in the air, and fowls without
air; as that Mineralls removed from their natural places, may by art be
brought to multiply in a greater perfection, then by nature in the womb of the
earth, where the sun applies his force, according to the quallity and
disposition of the matter; for Mineralls can never be said properly to multiply
or propogate, because they have only elementall mixture, but wants either
vegetable seed, or sensible quallity. That the mystical inuolution of all
those titles and operations which might seem to point at a material Elixar,
were to other and better ends then Alchimists imagine, shall be proved by the
truth of divine and humane wisdom.

First, as the Almighty did shadow under the great name of Jehovah, his
eternity, omnipotency, justice and mercy, to teach the sons of wisdom to
admire, adore, fear and magnify him, who was before all time glorious in
Majesty, omnipotent in power, impartial in Justice, and superabundant in
Mercy: so, in beautifying the Priesthood with the rich ornaments of nature
and art, he adorned the breast plate of Aaron with twelve precious stones,
according to the twelve Tribes, leaving a place in the midst for Vrim and
Thummim, intimating by the first, the purity and graces wherewith Pastors and
people ought to be endued hear upon earth, and by the second, their perfection
in the Kingdom of Grace and glory in heaven hereafter. That Vrim and Thummim
signify light and perfection we are not to doubt, but that they were
artificial substansified substances is not yet cleared. As the rest of
Ezekiels vision was a similitude of the glory of the Lord in the delivery of
his Embassage to the Prophet, so by the fiery coals or stone mentioned in that
vision, is meant the force and effects of Gods word. Aurum Dei, spoken of in
that prophecy or else where in Scripture, alluds to the incomprehensible
goodness of the Creator; and to the holiness and thankfulness required in
the prime Creature. But if we believe, that any of these pointed at a
material elixar or substance to be sought by art, if it be not heresy it is
gross error: all Scripture (as Isidor learnedly seconds the rest of the
Fathers) ought to be interpreted morrally and understood Spiritually; whosoever
then applies it otherwise to things that pervert the nature, order, and
meaning of Scripture, may be good textuaries, but are rash text-wresters and
not better grounded in Diuity then Rabbelais or the Curat, that applied the
authority of his horse to those that denied purgatory. It was Arius prancke,
Verba Scripturarum simplicia sicuti in eis reperiuntur itidem vt Diabolus
assimulare: to wreast sinfully the words of Scripture, as they are expressed
(if we may believe Eusebius) is a loosnesse of liberty, and lightness of
vanity more then any of the Fathers durst take upon them.

Next, that the strayning of the Philosophers work to an artificial Elixar,
powerful to multiply Gold by proiection, drives all wit out of harmony; I
prove by the chief aim of Phylosophie, then by the harmefull consequences
which the infinite multiplication of Gold would produce. All Philosophers
agree, that their principal aim is, to extract a light or a true Summum bonum
(as they call it) or content from the contempt of adulterate, inconstant,
terrestrial suggestions and delights: if this be true, as most true it is, it
would follow, that Philosophers would never have bestowed so much labor in
vntwining a Spiders web, and finding out a light by the multiplication of Gold,
which they did hold their Summum malum, and in so base account, that some of
them when they had it, did throw it in the Sea; others when they might have had
it, did refuse and reject it, that they might with more ease attain to that
content which Philosophy enjoys: from which the cursed care of Gold so much
detracteth, that (as Experience tells us) by it Religious duties are
profaned, Justice corrupted, all bonds of civil society and true friendship
are infringed, and the light of Humanity quite rased out of the minds of
worldly Golden Spirits.

Secondly, if it were possible to multiply or transmute a greater proportion of
other unrefined Metals into Gold by proiection, what benefit should thereby
arise either to the Philosophers, or from them to others? they should acquire
nothing by it but corruption of manners, and stain of their profession, others
but the euersion of all politic government, mutual commerce, and industrious
exchange: Kings should be inferior to Philosophers in the purchase of so great
Treasure: and so all Sovereignty (to whom by all National Laws belong the
prerogative of all Gold and Silver Mines) would turn again to a confusion,
and hotch-potch: many that are now holden wise, would perhaps turn fools, and
those that have now little wit, would have then none at all. We should see
every covetous pennie-father, merciless Usurer, and Jewish Broker become
Philosophers, and convert the blood of the poor upon which they now feed, into
the new found Elixar. We should see the Philosophers pearne their Cloaks, and
become insatiable worldlings, usurious Caterpillars, hellish pawn-mungers, and
cut the garments of the necessitous, to make them riding coats in their
journey toward hell. O what a pitiful sight were it to see the of-falls of
heaven, the drugges of the earth, and hells fit fagots invested in heavens
richest indowments? But what more tragical spectacle were it to behold Virtue
stripped naked, spoiled of her beauty, heavens gate which now stands open for
her, close shut up, and the entry confined to the narrow passage of a Needles
eye, through which how hard it is for Asses laden with Gold and corruption to
enter, the Master of Heaven, when he was upon Earth has foretold. I tremble
as in an Ague, to hear of this exchange, that Vice should reach Heaven, and
Virtue enter in the right way to Hell.

O deceitful Riches, how falsely are you called goods! who knows you rightly
may entitle you to be true evils; none makes us bond-slaues but you, none
wrongeth us but you; you abridge us of our liberty, and intercepts us in our
way toward Heaven: O pelf, none can praise you, but must dispraise true
Liberty. None can get you, or keep you, without the hazard of loosing
themselves; you are Achanes Wedges, or Turnus his girdle, that bereaues us of
life. So ticklish and hard is your use, that seldom do you more good nor
harm. I do verily believe, if frowning Fortune can favor good men in any
thing, it is in releeuing them from that burden that so sore presses their
shoulders.

But think me not so surcharged with passion, as I seem to favor a Stoycall
austeritie, Heremitish retyrednesse, or voluntary poverty, I affect lawful
liberty in the first, and am so far from barring good men from the right use
of Riches, that if I were not fully assured that divine Providence has her
secret ends for our weal, and knows better what is good for us then our
selves, I should go near to suspect her of Injustice, in unequal sharing of
her temporal goods; which so long as we use as dispensators of them to the
supply of our own wants, and helping of the necessities of others, so long are
they Heavens good blessings, and the charitable dispensation of them, is the
concomitant effect of saving Faith; yea, they are so necessary to the best of
men, that without them they are not able to effect that good which they would
do. But when we adore Gold for God, and in chesting, or putting of it to
unlawful use, starues our fellow members, and smoothers Virtue with want; or
when we make it the fuel of Ambition, corruption, and injustice, then justly
may those blessings be changed into curses; Riches which were given to be our
servile vassals, and dutiful servants in our journey toward happiness, be
made our racking Landlords, or merciless executioners here, and the
Paradisian sword to bar our entry there; where before we can have a Quietus
est, we must give account tam eorum que accepimus, quam eorum que rapuimus.
Moisture was not given to Springs to remain in the place where it is bred, but
to be conveyed by Conduits to the watering of barren dry grounds. Nature at
first was delivered of two daughters, says Plato, Plenty, and Poverty, that
the one wanting might crave what she lacked, and that the other having might
supply Pouerties wants. But when Jack turns John out of doors, or when
plenty profuseth upon idle uses, and starues her sister poverty, that is, not
dispensare, but dissipare bona aliena, not good menagerie, but bad husbandry
of goods committed to our trust. There is nothing more certain, then that best
things abused are most dangerous; our Understanding, the sovereign faculty
and Sun of the soul in man's little World, in our first estate of innocence,
made us little inferior to Angels, being now depraved, makes us inferior to
beasts, who having nothing but sense, yet seem they, by keeping Natures laws,
and directing their appetite to its proper objects, to offer less injury to
reason then we, who leaves the true objects of Wit and Will, and affect
nothing so much as falsehood for truth, vice for virtue, shadows for substance,
and Pigmalion-like dotage on pictured beauty. What shall I say of either
curious or covetous metaphisicall spirits, but that like Adam they long to eat
forbidden fruit, or like Moles, nusle themselves in the earth, and so together
are deprived of light here, and return to darkness and dust from whence they
came; after which, their name is either extinguished with them, or never
recorded but to their shame. To this purpose, Lucian brings upon the stage,
covetous rich Gnipho, bewayling in hell, that the incestuous prodigal
Rodochares did upon earth wastefully consume his ill gotten goods. Cum Religio
parit diuitias filia deuorat matrem: where devotion is only extended to hatch
Riches, there often times the Daughter strangles the Mother, says Saint
Augustine. Man is not only mortal, that he may have an end of his misery,
that the good may be praised without envy, the wicked blamed without fear, or
that riches may be despised as unnecessary after death: but as mortality is
the reward of virtue; it is also the wages of wickedness, that the good may
be eternally happy, and shine as the Sun, and the wicked unhappy and
enclosed in darkness: for wickedness and punishment are twins, that are
borne and live together; the one comes first into the world, and the other
follows at his heels, and is the executioner of the first by the stinging
remorse of Conscience, heavy and mournful sorrows, bitter repentance,
remediless despair; and by the terror or hope of this divine Justice in
punishing of vice, or rewarding of virtue were the actions of the Philosophers
restrained from vice, and inured to virtue, by the contempt of covetousness,
and the tartness of their condition allayed with the sweetness of the hope of
future Riches. Since we must depart hence without carrying any thing with us,
it is not for our ease to be as easily laden with luggage as we can? If we
will consider rightly, we shall find that a moderate carriage, even in
greatness, may be fitly compared to those that sail close by the shore;
that ambitious or covetous aspiring or griping, resembles those that are in the
Main: the one by casting a small rope may come to the land when they please,
the other must attend wind and tide, and so often times by boisterous storms,
or contrary winds suffer shipwreck, or miss their wished haven.

If we speak truly, there is nothing that makes greatness great, but
moderation of high fortunes settled in generous minds by a due examination and
contempt of base flying vanities, and by the praiseworthy aspiring to the
glory of frugall employment of its short time in those Honorable Actions,
which only challenge the name of greatness. I mean not by frugall
moderation, a parcimonious hand which is able to draw contempt upon
Sovereignty, but that true noble and judicious mean betwixt all extremes,
which add one stage more to the Trophies of greatness: whereof if we did
know the virtue, we should not censure it as we do: But when we judge of
moderate frugalitie in strangers, she gayneth her cause, and goes away with
praise and reputation; but our private interest corrupts our judgment in
things that concerns our selves. What are the rarities of Wisdom, Nobility,
or Discretion, rightly placed in greatness, but as capital Diamonds which
shine in rich Jewels? Solomon is no less admired, in giving the Child to the
right Mother, then in his Treasure and storehouse of Wisdom: Alexander is no
less great in conferring a rich reward above the desert of a modest suitor,
yet beseeming the dignity of the giver, then for conquering the whole world:
great Charles the Emperor is as famous by giving of a Penny to a presumptuous
bold Bufon, that claymed to be his kinseman from Adam, as he is justly honored
for all his brave actions in peace and war.

But to come to my task, perhaps you will say, that for shunning the former
evils, the Philosophers did obuiate this community of their Elixar, by
communicating of it to none but to the sons of wisdom, I answer, that such
concealment of knowledge was against the Philosophers doctrine; as they were
Learners, so they were Teachers; Scire and Nescire was their Emblem, that they
might take others help in the one, and they were so careful in the other,
that their light should not shine under a Bushel; they did put it in a
Lantern with this superscription upon the Frontis-piece, that all the learned
might read, Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciet alter: if we shall
be only wise to our selves, we shall at last turn fools; standing water
turns puddle. As Wisdom spoke by Africanus, Vsus me genuit, Matter me
peperit: so is it use and communication of studies that begets Wisdom. I
say further, that there was never Art having a known subject, and principles,
but some one or more, although not all may be as capable of it as another;
neither has any Art been so concealed, but by tradition or writing, has been
communicate to others, and reduced to some certain perfection. If the
knowledge of this Elixar did by tradition come to Miriam the sister of Aaron,
(who as some say was learned in this Art) then certainly the Reuealers were
much to be blamed, for communicating such a mystery to a woman's tongue, which
they might as safely have committed to the wind: That she had that knowledge
by divine revelation, I will not take Alchimists word for warrant, credo quod
haud, the rather, that in all my observations, by perusing most Authors upon
this Subject, or conuersing with some chief Professors of this Chimera, I have
never found truly demonstrated, that there was, or is such a thing in rerum
natura, as Alchimists dream this Philosophers Stone to be. I confess, I have
seen many Texts wrested to wrong constructions; that I have heard much
thundering of the perfection to which this Nothing has been brought: but
because Ex nihilo nihil fit, nothing did ensue but consumption of the
Undertakers estates, and loss of their labors. Therefore, since words without
deeds are weak proofs, I reject such authority as Apochryphall, and am so
far from believing such fairded suggestions, that if the Philosophers
positions were literally to be understood, I should never hold them other then
like Mathematical demonstrations, wherein by many fair propositions is
proved much, whereof no Artificer can make use upon Wood or Stone.

I should not much wrong the Philosophers, if I should iouially conjecture,
that the punctual setting down a seeming real Elixar, was to exercise
curious spirits, least they should precipitate themselves upon the more
dangerous Rocks of higher forbidden Mysteries, or become altogether idle: for
although the more we look upon the Sun, the more our eyes are dazelled, and
our sight worse; yet are our minds fraughted with such perverse curiosity,
that they aim at things above our reach. On the other side, Oli^dant vitia,
Idleness is the cursed mother of many wicked brood, and is the tares which the
envious sow when we sleep. It is observed for future posterity, that
whilst the Romans had war with Carthage, and enemies in Affricke, they knew
not what vice meant in Rome. Idleness is that Laconish mother, Schoolmasters,
and Burreawe that brings forth, teaches, and hangs up Thieves, or what
shall I call her but the infected air that ingendreth caterpillars, which
consume the sweet of other men's sweat If it were strictly observed, that none
should eat but such as labor in their own calling, I think more should die
of hunger, then of sickness: but it is pity that such Drones, or Domitian
flees should eat up the Honey of the painful, or swarm in the Courts
dedicate to Virtue. Every man ought to have a sweating Browe, to beget the
necessities of life, or a working Brain, to advance the public good; the
most Blessed allows of no Ciphers in his Arithmatique: Paradise was as well a
Shop to exercise Adams hands with labor, as it was a Garden to feed his
Senses with delight. To this purpose, in the discovery of Curiosity and
Idleness, the mind of man is fitly compared to a Clock, composed of many
wheels, admitting every day change and alteration; sometimes it goes too
fast, sometimes too slow: when it is idle, it is always subject to rust; but
skilfully wrought, neatly kept, carefully winded up, and orderly set to a right
hour, then in action it shows fair, and goes right. If we would have our
minds go in right temper, we must propose unto our selves those Rules that
may conduct and avail us most, in the right carriage of all our actions,
although sometimes the success be thwarted, and concur not always with our
desires, yet we must be still in action. Many skillful Pylots have suffered
Shipwreck, that were well acquainted with the Art and experience of
Navigations, and others less seen therein, have ouerpast many dangerous
Voyages; yet were it folly to infer, that without Art, Experience, Card, or
Astrolobe, we should try the dangers of Navigations.

But whither go I? my purpose was to speak somewhat of the true elixar, and
to prove that the text of Philosophers that writ upon it, or the Commentaries
and Orthodoxe exposition of those places are either strained, or altogether
mistaken, which shall be cleared by that which follows.

Hermes, Isindarius in codice omnis veritatis, the great Rosary, the pandects
of Mary, the Prophetise (as some name her) Morien, Auicen, Balzane, Abugazall,
Bengedide his brother, Abumazar, Hali, Calib, Esid, Serapien, Thomas in
breuilogs, Michaell Scot in his breuiary, Hemas in his retractions, Aros the
Arabian King and learned Philosopher; and the most part of all the Philosophers
hold four chief tenants of this Elixar: First the Mercury is taken to be the
chief matter to work upon; Secondly, they hold that much punding and beating
of the matter inculcat by Tere, Tere, Tere, atque iterum Tere ne te tedeat,
quickneth and refineth the spirits and virtue thereof, and makes the matter
fit for the work. Thirdly they maintain that fixing of Volatile, is the
Magisterum or master piece of that work. Lastly, they say when the red color
is espoused or conjoined to the white, the work is perfected. A superficial
censure might take these literally, and conclude that preparing, sifting,
ponding of the matter, putting of it in fit vessels, luting and calcination;
sometimes feeding of that sulphurious fury with soft, sometimes with more hot
fire, might in the end bring fourth some Salamander: but let us not be
deceived with such excursory survey, and consider iudiciously what Aristotle in
his light of lights, Avulfanes in his Pandects, Daniell in his retracts,
Euclides in his Philosophical meteours and almost all the Philosophers works,
affirm in these words our Mercury is not common Mercury, our gold signified
by the red color is not common gold, neither our silver signified by the white
color vulgar silver, they are quick, the other dead, they sperituall, the
other corporal? what then is the Philosophers Mercury, but wisdom the child
of heaven, and the glory of the earth? the pounding and mixing of the matter,
is the beating down and qualifying of our affections in the mortar of a wise
heart; the feeding of it with more or less fire is, the timely pressing and
relaxing of our corrupt will, the fixation of volatile, is the reduction of our
inconstant running wits, to the solidity of true wisdom: Lastly the Red
color joined to the white, which crowns the work, gives us to understand,
that perseverance in virtue will gain us the garland of victory over all
foraigne encumbrances; and subdue our unruly domesticke affections, which
unless they be overcome, pounded, qualified, sublimat and fixed to a pure
Syndon-like white, are ever ready to debord from the precinct of reason, to a
soule-killing liberty.

We may see then (as a picture drawn by a skillful workman should have
relation to all the parts it imitateth; so the pounding feeding, fixing and
perfecting of the Elixar, only fitly resemble, the inconstancy and ebulition
of our affections, which are ready to break out and mar the glorious
perfection of light, unto which Philosophy intends to bring us; if the most
powerful spirit of sanctification, by transmutation do not Captiuate the
powers and faculties of our soul.

Let us go a little further, in the several operations, circumstances and
qualities of the Philosophical elixar, and we shall find, that neither of
them may be fitly adapted to any thing else, then to man's formation in virtue.
All ancient and modern Philosophers agree, that by the true mixture of heat
and cold, moist and dry, we attain to the knowledge of the qualities of
things engendered thereby, as hard, soft, heavy, light, rough, smoothe, that in
the elementall Commixtion the several elements, as water, earth, fire and
air, are to be graduate in the degrees. That although earth be most vile, yet
is it most apt for mulplication and generation; is the only fixed element,
whose multiplication is no less admirable then that of fire, whereof one
spark kindled in combustible matter, will increase till the subject be
consumed; Again all those Philosophers do mystically observe; that the
Commixtion of the four elements must be Gramatically, that is in
Orthographicall disposition and convenient Concordance; Rhetorically, that is
orderly, ornatly or neatly; Logically, that is, by true kinds not
sophisticated, that they must be joined Arithmetically by proportionable
numbers; Musically in the melody of true accord, and in the effects of harmony
which are glorious: neither (say Philosophers) is Astrology to be neglected
for knowing the seasons of Conjunction. Lastly Magical observation much
avails, that is, wisdom to know the right disposition of the whole work.
When the elements (says Anaxagoras) be thus orderly disposed and digested then
will colors draw toward perfection; naturally will be sublimat to an
intellectual heat; which operation is known seldom and by few; when the
natural heat is thus purified, then nature and art by degrees aspire to
perfection, which is known by chainge of colors in the work, which (as the
four Complexions in man) according to the right temperature of elements, their
quallities, and their opposed passiues, beget a digestion, which may be as well
sometimes in outward cold, which begets inward heat as in outward heat
which causes inward cold; although the chief digester be the vital heat of
the degerent; that the heat of the digested things, helps the digestion and
the working thereof. Because Coagulation is no substanticall form, but the
passion of material things, in the elementall Commixtion, the Agent in the
operation of colors is wisely to be examined; sometimes it is heat,
sometimes cold, sometimes moisture, sometimes dryness, and those be the
causes of colors. Whiteness is caused by clear matter terminat in a fit
subject, black color when parts of a dark body oppress the cleerenesse of
the subject. Again, by Commixtion of light and darkness are engendered the
mean colors, which show also according to the more or less heat or cold,
dryness or moisture, as green color is a Commixtion of clear water with
earth by combust substance: so the cleerer the earth be the purer the greenesse
is. Rubie color is a thin fume in a clear body, which is clear or dark
according to the quantity of the light, as appears in the Amatist which has
less cleerenesse and more obscurity; Tauny color is of terminat cleerenesse,
infused with a thick fumosity congregat by water, and succensed by earth. Pale
color is of watrish earthly parts, which being cold and thick, are fixed in a
kind as in dying, or pale faced envious men, in whom the natural blood
leaves the exterior parts, and resorteth to comfort the heart, the Sapphire, or
orient blew like unto the heaven, is much fairer then the liuid pale color,
because it participats more with water, air and light; all other blew colors
the sadder they be, they have less air, and more earth; Silver color turned
to a bright azure is caused by brightness and perspicuity of air. Yellow
citrine or golden color is caused by strong decoction and digestion of humors
engendered by heat as in gold, honey, and gaul; and this color is begotten of
white and red. Thus have you the elementall commixtion, colors and qualities
to be considered in the Philosophers work, as the operation thereof begets
diverse digestions and degrees of more or less perfection in the Creatures: so
the participation and operation of supreme light, works diverse effects in the
mind of that prime Creature, which is only capable of the beams and
impression thereof; and in this mind of man an equality is most necessary.
There must be (says Aristotle) no repugnancie nor division in our stone, till
all colors have appeared, that natural matter by supernatural cooperation
may of many colors beget such a color as is desired, which is more precious
then all the Jewels in the world: therefore concludes he common Philosophers,
can by no natural means, attain to the knowledge of this elixar.

Many other Philosophers, alluding to the same purpose, but more to show their
Curiosity, then to detect truth, add smelling and tasting to the former
apparition of colors; but these I ouerpasse as impertinent. Others more
analogically say that the elixar must be dissolved, cherished, fixed, and
revived by liquors, which are specially to be considered in purity, quantity,
thickness, and thinness, not physically, because the true Elixar is a thing
of the second intention, and has a Metaphysicall operation. Physicians say,
the more thick vryne is, the more it signifies humidity: but the Philosophers
say, the more thick this liquour is, it has the more siciety; and the more
subtle it is, it betokens the greater humidity.

Aristeus says, that air is secretly enclosed in water, and by an ayeriall
power bears up earth. Aristotle says, that the right separation of water
from air, is a chief masterpiece of the work: other plain dealing
Philosophers do hold, that Rain water which comes of condensed air, is
the chief nutritive liquour: others affirm, that Dew falling from Heaven in
May, before the Sun enter into Scorpio, is a fit liquour for their stones;
some say that all condensed frostie liquours are to be rejected, because their
acuitie is infected, and dulled with cold; others prefer milk for the
whiteness, some water of Litarge and A^ar; but Democritus, whom I prefer to
all ^hese silly men, advises to take Celestial ^ermauent water, whose virtue
is to abide all ^inde of fiery trials. Rupercissa says, that ^he chief
liquour to refresh the Elixar, is Aqua vitae, because it is spiritual, it will
re^iue dead things, and make gross matters spiritual; Hermes bids us take a
liquour fresher then any water in taste, that will never consume, but the more
it is used, the more it is increased, and this liquour he calls Crude
Mercurij, which is the matter of the white work. All these liquours diversely
illustrate, have naturally diverse powerful qualities of cleansing, both of the
substance and means by dissolution, separation, fixation and resolving matter
into Atommes, and as liquours have diverse qualities and operations: so are they
found by diverse means, sometimes by cutting, as in Terebinth; sometimes by
pressing, as Wine, Sydar; sometimes by grinding, as Oil; liquour is also found
by distillation of Vegetables, Mettalls, and Animalls; some Liquours also by
natural working are produced, as urine, sweat, milk, blood: all these liquors
by a viscositie cleave to things, and leave part of their substance with them,
but that unconstant vagabond Quicksiluer is so fleeting, that he will never
fasten to any thing, except to a metal o^ his own kind, that is (says
Calib) poysonable covetousness, or flowing riches, are seldom fixed or takes
hold, but in subjects o^ their own kind. By the knowledge o^ diversities,
contrarieties, and accords, we may choose what quality we will make Lord; the
perfection of love is best known by the defects of hatred, of hope by fear,
of confidenc^ by distrust, and of joy by sorrow: in all these and other
things, our understanding find greater difficulty to find them by
resemblance, then by contraries. It is more hard to discern white upon white,
then black upon white; and there is greater wisdom to distinguish good from
good, then evil from evil; because in the confusion of things, those that
most resemble, are least known one from an other, but in the commixture of
diverse things, either in quality or substance, they are instantly discovered.
But let us not trust that one thing may be hot and cold, dry and moist in one
posture, for two contraries can never subsist in one degree; therefore if we
know not every circumstance and gradation of this great work, we shall never
bring it to perfection: for as divine providence by nature made all things in
true number and proportion: so every defect in that number and proportion is
imperfect, and wrongeth both the first and second cause.

We must then consider wisely of the means whereby this work is complete and
when they are purified in the third degree; the purer the means be, the
nearer to perfection they are, and retains such a part of the virtue of this
Art, that without their aid, the principal may not give influence to the
final end, neither the effluence answer the expectation of the principal
cause. As the Soul is tied to the Body by means of a vital, natural, and
animal spirit: so as long as these means keep the body alive; so long will
the soul dwell with the body; but when nature or accident take away the
means, the subtle pure immortal soul retyreth from the gross body to
immortality, for which she was created. According to this, (say the
Philosophers) their Elixar has corpus, animam and spiritum, all which must
have means agreeable to their kind, and must be searched by wisdom, least
by ignorance or misgouernement, the Divine work be quite marred.

Thus has my Plough shortly gone through the large field of the Phylosophicall
Elixar; which by allusion to most pure mettalls, is said to convert and
multiply other unrefined metals, having the seed of Gold, into pure Gold: but
as you sow, you shall reap; if you sow sparingly, you shall reap sparingly;
if you sow darkness, you shall reap confusion; and if you sow light, you
shall reap joy. Aurum ab aquilone veniet, that is pure air of wholesome
doctrine, duly and seasonably sown, brings forth millions; but as this
seed is sown by them who have their minds long exercised in virtue: so is it
increased in none but in those that have their minds capable of so holy an
impression. Threshing, winnowing, grinding are necessary uses for Wheat, yet
belong not to the Bakers Craft: but sifting, mixing, and government of fire,
are works of greater skill; if Reason and holiness be the beginning of every
action, doubtless the visible things will separat from the invisible* that is
water and earth from fire and air; for things are corporal, because they
shall be spiritual, which the wheel of the great work will make manifest
when time (the Steward, and dispensator of every thing) shall one day bring
every thought upon the Stage.

But to return to Philosophy, if we will give her the due praises which she
deserves, we shall find that her refyning of us in virtue, is to a more pure
substance, then of thrice purified gold: if we would from vice extract virtue,
quintessence, content and true reputation from poverty and contempt, Convert
exile into our native Country, bonds into liberty, want into wealth, or would
we multiply some few short earthly crosses into Caelestiall permanent joys,
all these can Philosophy do. Philosophy can make Codrus better content then
Cresus; Diogenes contemn great Alexanders conquests; brave banished Rutilius
prefer solitariness to the greatness and magnificence of his City, and
affirm that by purchasing the friendship of Philosophy he has lived no
longer then he was banished: Magnanimous Philosophy will encourage Aristarchus
to do more then all these, by teaching him, bruised in a mortar, to cry out
triumphantly, Stamp on, you hurt but the case of Arstiarchus, but his mind you
cannot touch. It is Philosophy that in adversity (as steel from flint) draws
from us that spark of divine fire left in our souls, which kindles virtue
and makes it appear in its own color. What other thing shall I call
Philosophy, then the light of this life, Mistres of our affections, Tut^ix of
our felicity, and the upright courageous government of our selves in all our
actions by the rule of reason? or may I not name her a stryuing and contention
of the soul, to repair the weak mortality of the body, by participation of
eternal light, unto whose fruition she draws us so much as she can,
employing art and industry, to procure us glory and fame for a quiet mind
hear, and for a happy and glorious hereafter. This divine Philosophy begets
such pleasure in our soul, whilst we are employed about brave and generous
actions, specially, when Constancy wrestleth with prosperity or adversity, the
habit thereof comes to such a sweetness, that none but such as have tasted
it, can express. What greater contentment can come to the soul, then the
testimony that Conscience bears unto virtue; how with undaunted courage she
has withstood adverse fortune, and has not yielded to the Cyrcean cups of
honor, riches or pleasures, then are our joys complete; then does glory and
spendor shine about us and give us pre-eminence amongst men, if it were only
as a torch to lighten us to fair and glorious actions: for if we owe unto
posterity the most part of our best actions, what more earnest wishes should we
have, then our lives may be sacrifized to public good? These sweats and
labors for general benefit, afford us means to enrich others by imitation,
and make our selves illustrious by the commendation of virtue.

But when we yield our selves captives to the bondage of pleasures, then steel
we the darts that pearce our own breasts; Base Telegonus begotten on Circe,
killed his own Father Ulysses: Venus retribution of Helena to Paris for his
golden ball, was the blazing star, that foretold his ruin and the overthrow of
many worthy Trojans beside: in one word, Great Alexander bewayling the
enchantments of effeminat softness, named the Persian Dames, dolores oculorum,
or bad salues for sore eyes.

Egesias the Cirenian, was so powerful in a public Philosophical discourse
of the immortallity of the soul, that most of his Auditors hastened their
deaths with their own hands; if these Heathen, who had only the gloomy light
of nature were so sinisterly zealous to have the reward of virtue, by
preventing nature with untimely death, what ill luck is it, that we who have
the Oracles of eternal truth are so careless and prodigal of our short time,
that we do not freely enjoy the happiness of true divine light, which only
shows generous spirits, worthy to be the masterpiece of that sovereign
worke-master their Creator, I can give no other reason, then quos perdere vult
Jupiter hos dementat; or that our imagination, which is beneath understanding,
and above the Senses, to whom belongs the censure of things, suffers her
self oftimes to be corrupted or misled; and does receive only the
superficial and external form of things from the senses, the Sentinels of
the soul, which she presents with favor to the soul, as they seem graceful
to her, and not as they are universally profitable to the welfare of man: so
that from superficial imagination, and partial relation, proceeds that
apprehension of the goodness or badnesse of things that we call opinion, which
is a rash guide, and so seizes upon our imagination, that most times we stand
at defiance against reason.

Neither does opinon show her self violent in any thing more, then enforcing
her vassels to lay hold upon an imaginary speculation of this golden Elixar, or
light incorporat with smoke, by which (if it were found as it will never be)
the purchasers should be but deprived of true liberty, and the seminary of all
mischief, and Cimerian darkness dispersed through the world.

If any mistake me, and think that in this Tillage of light, I seem to
withdraw the due praise of art, it is far from my meaning I wish that every
Artist were equalled with the art; animated to virtuous designs, and not
checked for undertaking by every goodman goosecap, who grace learning or virtue
with a fogh, as Tobacconists do their smoke, but in a different manner, the
one in derogation, countenance the most elaborat studies of the brain, as the
addition of beggars or imposture, not worthy the least glimpse of a favorable
aspect: the other sacrifize their fume through their noses with such devotion
to an angry faced Bacchus, as oftimes strains tears from their eyes; and
that is the top of their gallantry: But certainly good manners should not be
much wronged, if in a quipping vein, such were served as a sturdy hostler once
girded a country man's unmannerly Mare; so should they have quid pro quo, and
perhaps be grated to the quick that such moathes as labor to extinguish the
light of other men's goodness, might have their wings singed for their pains:
for it is certain that wisdom, policy and learning have no such enemies as
Fools, Ruffians, and Jgnorants; not that witty Ignoramus, that was acted at
Cambridge, but that squint-eyed Envy or stupidity, that depriueth men as well
of the feeling of good, as of evil, and participateth more with the humor and
inclination of beasts then of men.

It is always the common misery of poor spirits, to envy that light in
others, which they have not in themselves; so is it the common consolation of
those, to desire compartners in their wants; specially when they dream to
themselves such security, as no adverse accident can encounter: then do they
in pride or insolency deride or disualue better flowers then grow in their own
garden; esteeming that other men's reputation ecclipseth their greatness.

It is encouragement that adds use to art; and it is the honor of Kings, and
chief title of inferior Lights to be protectors and cherishers of religion,
virtue and learning, and to find out the secrets of art: but I wish that
cunning Alchimists would understand, that it is the wisdom of Kings and
garland of true nobility to be so learned or wise, as they may distinguish
betwixt true art and insinuating foppery, or curious unprofitable search, which
for gain or other wrong ends, put fair vizards upon foul faces, and maskes
cheating or curiosity with art, which are indeed alients from it. These
Alchimists attend greatness as Apes or Parrats, by showing feats of actiuity
in gesture, discoursing and imitation; yet their end is to catch Dotrels and
put them to sale.

The best pattern to pry into their counsel, and bring them to the light was
cut by the hand of the Great light; which although it shines as well in the
darkest corner of the heart, as in the most transparent yolke of purest
Crystal, yet inferior lights can neither see, nor shine, but in the
transparencie of their own or others works. Their care must be then to
cognosce and distinguish, when pride fights under the colors of humility,
hypocrisy is clothed in Religious habit; when corruption is guarded with the
show of Justice, Vice fairded with Virtue, and when Sophistry seems to boult
out much by logical reason, which will not abide the plowing of light, and are
weak and sinowlesse in the School of practice, as experience has taught us.
If we were as careful to be, what we seem to be, as we are curious to
seem to be what we are not, crooked cunning should not go current for art.
We should not be ostentantes, but ostendantes pietatem our penny should be as
common as our Pater noster, that is, our light should so shine in our works as
Angels and men seeing, might sing a joyful Aleluiah to the Great light; but as
all is not gold that glistereth: so every clear body the more clear it
seems to be, is not the more nearer to purity and simplicity; some by a well
tempered Elementarie mixture, and radical heat by cooperation and powerful
influence of the sun show clear and firm as they are: every body of this
kind the more clear, it is the nearer to simplicity, more able to abide the
touchstone of Truth; by how much more it has a simpathicall resemblance to
purest liquid substances, as honey, wine, oil and the like, which before they
yield themselves to use, expel all dregs that abates their virtue, or
blemish their luster: there be other seeming pure bodies, that by a frosty
condensation of congealed cold humors, assumes a cleerenesse, and in a kind,
show as fixed lights, but are not nearer to perfection; apply but fire, or the
least gale of a thaw wind, and forthwith they dissolve incorporat with more
corruption then they had before: these counterfeit substances fitly resemble
puddle water which wants the former expulsive virtue, that separats the pure
from the impure; whereby they decline from their natural perfection to an
unwholesome rottenness, which is good for none, but harmefull, or loathsome to
all.

Now to dig up the last offensive stone in the right tillage of the
Phylosophicall light. Every Christian ought to have such affection, to love and
search the works of the most Blessed, so far as the inquiry is revealed,
and is profitable in the true ends; to admire the rest, and to propose
mysteries no otherwise then they understand, least like blind Mountanus, they
commend the Mulet, and point quite contrary. As in the Eleusine sacrifices, the
Nouices that were initiated, lay all along upon the ground, till the service
was ended: so in the Mysteries of divine wisdom, we have no such countenance
as humility, which is the cognizance of that greatness, and our baseness.

He that knows our shallowness, loves better a credulous heart, then a
curious head, and other men's harms tell us, it is more dangerous to surfeit
upon wit, then want it.

Man is the Microcosmes, or abridgement of the Creation; the Philosophers work
is the abridgement of man's Formation. As the World was made of two several
parts, the one intelligible, sensible, and corruptible, the other,
vntelligible, insensible, and incorruptible: So man was made the middle piece
of both, and perfection of the Intellectual parts, which he has by means of
the body; but in his Soul were the most excellent perfections that be in the
incorruptible world, but are so originally depraved, and depressed with earth,
and weighed down with the burden of flesh, that all the endeavors of Divine
and Humane Philosophers, can never sufficiently labor in man's new formation,
without which his condition is worse then if he had not been at all: therefore,
as in man we rather observe what he is, then what he seems to be: so in the
other creatures, we must not expect that from violence, which is proper to
temperance, or look for goodness in Thunder, Fire, or Earthquake; Nature
produces every thing how excellent soever, by an insensible motion, and not by
violence, and prematured Byrthes, are ever imperfect: whereby it falls out,
that those who err by Art, err most dangerously, arming themselves in
obstinacy, with Science against Reason: but they that leave the high way, and
betake themselves to by-lanes, should know the place well, least they be
wildred. Nature is a better Physician then Art: and Sobriety can cure more
diseases then all Paracelsian Chymicalls; let us value our selves as we ought,
and we shall make little account of the toylesome unprofitable niceties of Art.
The Prophet did not wrap his face in his mantell, till the soft voice came; all
divine and moral knowledge have their termination in rest; the first no eye
has seen, or ear has heard, or tongue is able to express; the other with
admirable virtue and splendour attaineth to that peace of Conscience which
passes all understanding, by the union, and judicious Diapason of discordant
tones.

Now that I be not transported beyond my promise, I will vnyoake my almost
wearied Plough, hoping what I have tilled will direct puny Husbands to the
knowledge of the Philosophers Light, how it must be ploughed, what Seed is to
be sown in right season, and what is the increase; that all other Tillage is
but curiosity, misprision, forgery, or imposture, otherwise then in the
culture of the Natural or Physical operation and virtue of Alchimy, from
which I detract nothing.

It rests now, that I shake hands with such Alchimists as labor in the
timpany of a false Elixar, that we may remain friends or friendly enemies: yet
lest I should under value my self, I offer these ensuing Articles to be
performed before agreement.

First, that they arm their Resolution with patience for losses past, and with
perseverance in the study of the true Elixar; smarting cures are best suffered
by the one, and great Affairs are never brought to good end, but by
Constancy, and calmnnesse. They that have their minds higher then their
fortune, must have care that their passion ouer-reach not their reason; and
Cloth that shrinketh in the wetting, never proves good in the wearing. If
they can command themselves thus, without doubt they shall be capable to
govern the world, and so be masters of the great work: Moderation will give
them leisure to find out the time, place, matter, and all necessary advantages
to compass their designs: if they find to their grief the door shut one
way, they may then redeem such affliction, by finding out a more easy and
better passage to the true Elixar. If they give way to sharp and passionate
motions, which disturb the conduction of affairs, then shall they be exposed
to precipitation, obstinacy, indiscretion, and impatience.

Secondly, for shunning of these evils, I desire, when they have plowed this
Light after me, they break all their Chimicall imaginary golden pots, least
with Perillus, they perish in their own inventions; or (as Homers Cyclope
promised to Ulysses) when they have eaten their goods, which are their
Companions, perhaps they eat themselves last of all. Fair shows balanced
with their incommodities, prove often times unprofitable, troublesome, or
harmefull, as the Italian Proverb implies.

Chi ha bianco Cauallo, et bella moglie
No viue maj sansa doglie.
For prevention of this evil, or enjoying of that good, hopes and fears are
rightly to be mixed, by foresight and providence of the difficulties and
goodness that may arise: and in this kind, I wish the fear of such
Philosophers as labor for a material Elixar, may prevail over their hopes;
but if their hope presupposes such a good is to be obtained, my fear
believes that these former or ensuing evils will be hardly avoided. Our wit
and understanding ought to be rather bent to regard the difficulties of things
of high reach, then to be hoodwinkt with the Tantalus-like hope of
impossibilities: If they do otherwise, it is likely that in the end diffidence
will follow fear, and knowing her self incapable to auert the evil, and
enjoy the good that Chimicall curiosity so much affects, she convert her
self into despair, and so plunge her owners in Menipus his misery: for when
the consideration of evil begets despair, then often times that despair is
the end of the motion of all other passions, as Joy is the repose and rest of
good; and this is a chief reason why Wisdom does examine things by the end.

If Gold dreaming Alchimistes would make up some part of their losses by the
relics of the purest matter, they may put it to sale, to annoint maungie
Hackneyes; for which, if we may believe ancient Farryers, it is a sovereign
cure: or if truth may have trust, all their Ignitions, Calcinations,
Dissolutions, Amalgations, Circulations, Sublimations, Fixations, and
Multiplications, otherwise then in a spiritual sense, are but borrowed words
of Art, to make unguent for ^adish itching diseases, smoke to ruin crazed
estates, or trumpery to uphold Mountebanckes upon the charges of the more
curious then wise.

It is the best half of the work, to choose a good subject. In suiting base
matter with the ornaments of learning, shows much wit, but little wisdom;
and it fares with such, as it does with those that trap Asses with golden
furniture; or with children, who build castles in the sand, which are defaced
with every breath; or with curious workmen, who caruing in knottie Timber,
have toil without end, for their election without judgment. Perseus his scarre
sits in the forehead of Curiosity, Ostentat obstrusam eruditionem spirando
ambitionem, sed carendo occasion iustae necessitatis, aut intention piae
vtilitatis. Let us color blemishes as we will, yet a Croope shoulder is ever
known howsoever it be boulstered; and they that paint old faces, hardly hide
the wrinckles. In Catalognia there is a statute, whereby Cuckolds pay tribute;
me thinks that law is just if it had an addition, that all curious search
should be fined or punished, that as all husbands might look to their charge,
in barring such bankets of Turnups as inrolles them in Cornhill Kallender: so
incroaching Curiosities might not so much trouble the repose of more profitable
studies. Such subjects are only worthy of a Philosophers Pen or Practice, as
(like Archias Lute) wilspeake for their master. They want election, that in a
field of Corn only make use of Cockle; and they want discretion, that having a
whole field of Virtue before them, rather with Menedemus, become sellers of
trifles, with the fools of the world, loosers of time, or with Martial,
missimployers of good wits, then with the learned or wise, honor their
Country by affecting Sciences of greater observation. But such are the
customs of curious or cunning men, to blind the election of others, that for
the most part, they seek out the poison of wit to corrupt the same; like that
Maid, who being accustomed to feed upon Serpents, did make use of poison for
her natural refection.

When presumption simpathizes not with judgment, and preferres craized
understanding, or misled opinion before certain knowledge and true wisdom
without further examination; there such defects of wit or sophisticated art,
pay smooke with wind, and base metal with false coin. The nature of vanity
values things by ostentation, not by reallity, and this vanity begets
curiosity which esteems better of the currentnesse of shows then of the
goodness and virtues of things. Such is the habit of curiosity and cunning
that I blush as I write, and yet I write to make the world blush; but I roll
Sisiphus stone; if I should strain my wit to dregs, I fear it shall not
stem the torrent of worldly streams: Men are richest in infirmities, weakest
in foresight, apt to entertain hurtful pleasures, or errors, and ignorant to
reform them; universal propositions, require no instance and none take
acception at general terms but the guilty.

Thirdly, I desire that such Alchimists as are studious in the true
Philosophers Elixar, Metamorphise Raimond, Albertus Magnus, Veckerus de
Secretis, Friar Bacon and the like into Solon, Pithagoras, Socrates, Aristotle
and in others of all ages that have gotten the glory to be the wisest and most
learned; all which have left this maxim in writing; that in the immortallity
of the soul, as in the center of Philosophy, do meet and end all rules that
may conduce to the wholesome conservation of civil life, and true tranquillity
of mind, about which Philosophers so much labored When such Heathen husbands
of natures light err, in racking of Supreme light, with the tenter-hookes of
Curiosity, or humane reason, let Sacred writ be Vmpier, and level such balkes
with the better plowed ground of Christian harmony.

Lastly, if all well disposed Alchimists will neither strain the first nor
last Philosophers meaning to wrong ends, and admit such favorable construction
to the labors of virtue, as the name, Majesty, and practice of Philosophy do
challenge our friendship, is so combined, that we shall reap the rich harvest
of our Tillage of light, that speaks Glory to the Creator, and joy to the
creature.

FINIS.
The abstract of the Contents.
WHat we owe unto civil society. page 1 That the search of artificial gold
is unprofitable. ibidem What Philosophy is, and the true end thereof. page 2
From when^e the knowledge of light arises. page 3 The division of light. ibid.
Why precious stones, salts and metals may be called inferior fixed lights.
page 4 A subdiuision of light. ibid. The scope of this discourse. page 5 How
far nature extends her self, and how far art. page 6 Nature and art
limited by divine Providence. ibid. What nature is. page 7 Art Cooperats with
nature, yet both of them are barred from Chimicall multiplication, and the
reasons. ibid. Nature is but the instrument, or effect of divine Providence.
page 8 Art cannot force nature to do what she cannot by commexion of causes.
ibid. Alchimists wrongfully enforce Vrim and Thummim, Ezekiels coals, and
aurum Dei upon a material Elixir. page 9 The material Elixir disproued. page
10 What the Philosophers Summum bonum, or content is, and what their summum
malum or chief evil is. page 11 Covetousness spoils the beauty of virtue
page 12 The evils which riches brings with them. page 13 The wrong use of
riches. page 14 The rewards of Covetousness and curiosity. page 15 The
aspiring to honorable action, is the true end of greatness. page 16 What the
rarities of nobility are. page 17 The Philosophers emblem. ibid. No art so
concealed, but has been brought to light. page 18 Perverse curiosity. page 19
Of the bad effects of idleness. page 20 The names of most Philosophers that
have written upon the Elixir. page 21 Four tenants of the Elixir, wherein the
right consideration of it consists. page 22 The Philosophers meaning in the
matter and operation of their work. page 23 The several operations of the
Philosophical Elixir. page 24 The Elementall disposition in the work. page 25
Of Colors. page 26 There must be no repugnancy in the Philosophers work. page
27 All the Philosophers allude to a spiritual sense in their work. page 28
The diversity of liquors. page 29 By contraries we know the predominant
quallity in the work. ibid. Philosophers must know every circumstance and the
means whereby the true Elixir is perfected. page 30 The means are to be
considered in the work. page 31 The true multiplication and increase of the
Philosophers Elixir. page 32 The praise of Philosophy by her powerful effects.
page 33. and page 34 The effects of unlawful pleasures. page 35 The zeal of
the Heathen, and why we apprehend not so great a light. page 36 How true art
is to be censured, and by whom it is vilipended. page 37 Encouragement adds
use to art. page 38 How to distinguish art from imposture. page 39 All seeming
pure bodies are not nearer to perfection. page 40 How we ought to search the
works of the most blessed, and what the Philosophers work is. page 41 The
perfection of the soul, in the estate of innocence is now deprived by sin.
page 42 The end of divine and humane knowledge. page 43 How great affairs are
to be effectuate, and the end of inconsiderat curiosity. page 44 How hopes and
fears are to be tempered. page 45 The Chimicall Elixir is a sovereign cure
for maingy diseases. page 46 Of Curiosity. page 47 Of presumption and vanity.
page 48 The Center of Philosophy, and the harvest of the Tillage of light. page
49
FINIS.

