THE MINISTERS PORTION.

BY WILLIAM SCLATER. BATCHELAR OF DIVINITY and Minister of the word of God at
PITMISTER in Somerset.

printer's device of University of Oxford AC: OX



AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612:

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL Mr THOMAS SOVTHCOT ESQVIRE, at MOONES-OTERY in Devon, grace
and peace.
SIR, when I first meditated what at your instance I revised, and now almost
enforced, publish: I expected co^tradictions from Mammonistes, and scarce hoped
to persuade men savouring of better things. Such a holdfast is covetousnes; so
incredulous is prejudice. Farther opposition from brethren, and Judicious men,
was as far from my thought, as I am in this point from their opinion. But
Austin says well; Aug. cont Advers. leg and prophet. li. 1. c. 2^.
Deus donat prodesse nobis non solum quod docet veritas, verum etia^ quod
obstrepit vanitas. And such opposings against truth are thus far for it, that
they occasion more intentive search, and clearer discovery of the truth. My
purpose is not to prescribe to any man's faith. Nam quis ego sum? Even the least
of Gods little ones. Yet as one that has obtained mercy of God to be
faithful, let me entreat this favor from men, to be heard on even terms,
with me^, I freely confess, of far greater gifts, yet, as I think, having no
such evidence in this point, to carry away so ha^dsmooth a conclusion of such
dependence. This, I hope, will appear to any impartial reader, that the
reasons here brought for tithes, are much nearer to demo^stratiue, the^ those
against them are to probable arguments. My poor pains I have inscribed to
your worship, as for many your well deservings of me, and the Church of God; so
for that you first urged a review of the first rude draught, and have given me
so many occasions to think you will not be the last in practicing this
unprofitable profitable conclusion, when once your Judgment shall be convinced.
And though I love not to be peremptory, (for I know mine own blindness) yet
this I think I may say; the reasons on both sides being peized in even
balance, there will scarce be left place for an (...) or suspense of Judgment,
except men be resolute to hold their conclusion in despite of all contrary
premises. Now the God of all truth direct our hearts to the knowledge and love,
and obedience of the truth. And the same God that begun his good work in you,
confirm, and perfect it to the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Your worships in the truest love, WILLIAM SCLATER.

1. Cor. 9.13, 14.




THis whole period of Scripture, from ver. 5. to 15. consists of one discrete
axiom, in sum this: Though I Paul have power and right to live at the
charge of the Church, ver. 5. yet I have not used that power, ver. 12. the
reason whereof he gives; Least he should hinder the Gospel of Christ, through
suspicion of mercenary. Affection in preaching. Now for that it might be
questioned whether he had any such right or no, he avowes the truth of his
title; by arguments a genere, he was an Apostle and preacher of the Gospel,
ver. 1. Ergo had right. 2. preve^tingly, a pari, in the practice of others;
ver. 5.6. as well as Peter etc. And for that the claim might not seem equal
betwixt Paul and Cephas and the Lords brethren, he shows that to every
minister of the Gospel, maintenance is due for their work sake. By reasons,
1. From voice of nature and consent of nations in other semblant employments*
as who goes to war, etc. ver. 7. 2. From mandate of the law of God. Says not
the law of God the same, etc. ver. 8.9.10. 3. From excellency of blessings
conferred by Ministers, compared with quality of things exacted for
recompense; If we sow spiritual things etc. ver. 11. 4. From allowed practice
of Leviticall ministry, ver. 13. Lastly, from express ordinance of Christ,
the Lord has ordained, etc. ver. 14. this the frame of the text.

Out of all which amounts this plain Apostolical conclusion; That maintenance
is due from people to Ministers for their work sake. Other proofs then are
here set down, it is needless to use. We have here more then two or three
witnesses, five sound reasons enforcing it. The bare word of an Apostle is
enough to carry a point more doubtful. How much more should it sway with us,
when Gods spirit that spoke in them, is pleased by so many reasons to avouch
it? Is it not then a sound tene^t (trow we) of some, that Ministers maintenance
is mere alms? and that in justice, and as due, they can challenge nothing for
their labor in the word and doctrine?

1 Where then is Paul's (...), his right, lawful power and authority, to
receive maintenance from the people, v. 4*2? How says our Savior, they are
worthy of their hire, Luk 9 7.
Paul worthy of double honor 1. Tim 5.17.
? 3 What great thing was this that Paul did in taking no maintenance, ver.
12.15? By these men's divinity he had right to none.

2 And what ods is there betwixt this beggarly conclusion of those old beggars,
and that of late separats, that make it Christ's ordinance for Ministers to live
of their peoples voluntary contribution; and hold it as Christ's own Canon,
that no set maintenance should be allotted us, no not by humane ordinance, but
the people left at liberty to give or not to give, to give much or little,
otherwise then self devotion shall incline them? May I not say of this and the
former as Joseph of Pharaos dreams, Gen 41.25.
the dreams are one? Words only have made a variation. Ministers must live of
the peoples voluntary contribution: me thinks I hear St Paul's tenor for
alms, 2. Cor. 9.7.
As every man wishes in his heart so let him give. Their reasons had need be
pregna^t: let us view them. 1. Forsooth the Apostles thus lived. Resp. J yield
it of some of them: yea sometimes made their own hands minister to their
necessities: why force they us not to mechanical trades? For so lived some
Apostles. But 1 they had power to exact maintenance, since they had right 1.
Cor. 9.4, 5
to have it. 2, Occasional practice binds not to imitation, but in occurrence
of like occasions When scandal inforceth to forbear exaction, we will herein
follow their holy example, least by any means we hinder the Gospel; ver. 12.
and farther then this, their example urges not.

Their second reason is this: because it must be seen that what the people
give this way, they give of love, not for fear of the law. Resp. and it must
be seen that the people Ps. 110.3.
come willingly at the days of assembling. Therefore Magistrates may not
compel by authority to serve the Lord as 2. Chr. 34.31 32.33.
good Josiah did, for now they bear the sword in vain. But thus J reason and
so leave them.

To every duty Magistrates may bind by law, and compel by punishment. Yielding
maintenance to Ministers is a duty. Therefore thereto may Magistrates bind by
laws. Miserum est (says the Poet) aliena vivere quadra: if for any,
miserable; sure most for a minister. This if any thing, breeds right trencher
Chaplens, and would soon fill the Church with sweet tongued and mealemouthed
preachers.

3 I may not leave utterly untouched our peoples, whether ignorant or
affectionate error: that think of their payments to Ministers, as of alms to
their beadsmen; forsooth we live by them. I say no more but this, 1, If 1. Cor.
9.11.
we by them in carnal things, they by us in spiritual. Is the barter so hard
as should occasion exprobratio^? 2. Not by you but by the Lords ordinance 1.
Cor. 9.14.
says the Apostle.

And that Lord that has given to the people the nines; has allotted to us
(audacter dicam) the tenthes as ours.

4 J would feign leave this reproof, but that J see the error has wound it
self into the minds of many of holy profession and practice, who yet delight
to have Ministers acknowledge a debt, even for receipt of dues; and desire to
have conscience free from all bonds more then of humane laws, in this matter
of recompencing our labors. Jf ought come else more then law or custom, if
but a cup of cold water; they supererogate surely in respect of the Minister.
They much forget who said, Philemo^. 19
thou owe unto me even thy own self.

And of the general thus far. Now the inquiry J take it, is not impertinent
here; since maintenance is due to Ministers for their work sake, what portion
or quantity that is, that by Gods ordinance belongs to them. And me thinks in
a duty so generally, though plainly taught, the conscience of the hearers
should desire a more particular direction. Ye will therefore (I hope) give
leave something more particularly to examine the matter. And herein J hold it
not amiss, first to propou^d what is yielded on all sides, where is any
soundness of judgment. 2. Then to add some other principles, as plainly
taught in the Scriptures of the new Testament. Lastly to enquire and resolve of
the particular.

The grants on all sides are these. 1. That there is a maintenance 1. Cor. 9.4,
5 ad 15.
in justice due to Ministers and their families for their work sake.

2 It is yielded that it must be competent; not only for supply of natural
necessities, but for their furniture to every good work of their calling.

3 That it must be 1. Tim. 5.17 18.
liberal; not such as every niggardly mind will judge convenient and
competent.

To which grants, let me add these postulata, as plainly determined in the
Scriptures.

1 That to the Ministers of the Gospel belongs a maintenance as large, as to
the Leviticall Priesthood; this me thinks, excellency of ministry, 2. Cor.
3. 1. Cor. 9.
and blessings conferred thereby, enforces.

2 That this maintenance must rise out of Gal. 6.6.
all and every the goods of al and every of the people instructed.

3 Shall I add another to me seeming more the^ probable? that is, that the
Lord has as certainly provided for our maintenance under the Gospel, as for
theirs under the law. For had the Lord less care of us? was there less need
in respect of the peoples backwardness? no. But he entrusted magistrates with
that care. Resp. And were there not Magistrates among the Jews?

4 That the Lord in the Leviticall law made provision for us that were to
minister in the Gospel. Its clear by the Apostles twice alleging that
ordinance of 1. Cor. 9.9. 1. Tim. 5.18.
not muzling the mouth of the ox.

Thus far I think we walk safely, since in the very steps of the holy Ghost
leading us in the new Testament. Let us now descend toward the particular.

Some tumbling down headlong rather then descending, resolve of a competency
indeterminate; so the allowance be competent, all is well. Resp. Then in case
of this fancied competency, some of the instructed though wealthy perhaps,
shall be exempted from the Apostles iniunction: for suppose some one or two of
the well disposed hearers, shall out of their private, make a competent
allowance; the rest shall now reap our spiritual things, and not sow their
carnal. For as the saying is rife, enough in a ministers maintenance, Enough
is a feast: Gal. 6.6.
but says the Apostle, Let him.i. every him that is instructed, make his
instructor partaker of all his goods 2. See conclusion sixth; and duly weighing
it, tell me whether thou find conscience satisfied with this imaginary
competency? For is there no certain provision for Ministers of the Gospel,
but this uncertain competency? who shall judge of it? Every man? mallem
Cerberum metueres, as the Orator speaks. The Magistrate? why would not the Lord
leave this to Jewish Magistrates? no not to Moses, a man so gracious with him?
and leave it to magistrates under the Gospel? 3. How has he committed this to
Magistrates? absolutely or with limitation? if with limits, what are these
bounds? forsooth a competency. Perceive you not circling and mere
uncertainties?

Leave we this fancy, and see whether we may find some other more certain
particular, to resolve of. And surely when we have in vain turmoiled our
selves to avoid Iudaizing in this point of ministers maintenance, we shall be
forced at length to acknowledge Tenthes, which some call Jewish, to be the
Ministers appointed portion.

That the truth may the better appear, J will propound the different opinions
that J have met withal in this point.

1 Brownists in this question thus peremptorily resolve. That Tithes are so
merely ceremonious and Leviticall, that they cannot without betraying
Evangelical liberty and disavowing Christ's Priesthood, be retained as
maintenance of Ministers of the Gospel. And how full soever of dotage this
dream may seem: yet this J will say for them; They are madd with more reason
a great deal, then any others which hold them ceremonies Levitical. Jf the
assumption were true, their conclusion would soundly follow by doctrine of
the Apostle. Gal. 4. and 5. Col. 2. etc.

2 Some others thinking them judicials, resolve; part, that they may be
lawfully retained as the Ministers stipend; part, that they are the most
convenient maintenance can be allotted us.

3 A third sort, that they are due by Gods law to Ministers of the Gospel; but
these in explanation of them selves diversely derive them thence.

1. some thus: due by Gods law enioyning obedience to the magistrate in things
lawful and convenient. These give them no other ground in Gods word, then
other humane ordinances.

2 Others, due by Gods law: in as much as the church (whose authority with
them is divine) has enioined their payment. So generally Papists.

3 A third sort thus: due by Gods law; in respect of their consecration to
God, either by received custom and consent of Churches, or by donation of
princes, or legacy of testatours. In which opinion I must needs profess my
self to have been long; and never to my knowledge of other; til of late being
to deliver my judgment to my people, J more purposely set my self to see what
the truth was. And during that mistake, I thus thought; that they could not
without sacrilege be alienated from their general end* my reasons were these, 1
That J had found Solomon averring it to be a Pro. 20.25.
curse to devour holy things, and had seen the curse exemplified on many. 2.
That ordinance of the Lord J held moral and perpetual, Levit. 27, 18, 19.
Nothing separate from common use, no not of those which man had separated,
might be again unhallowed, no nor redeemed. 3. That saying of the Apostle much
swaied with me, Gal. 3.15.
If it be but a man's testament no man abrogats it.i. no man ought to abrogate
it. And so much the more, for that being once an auditour of that judicious
divine Mr Perkins, whose memory is blessed; J heard him move the doubt, whether
things given to superstitious uses, suppose to maintain malmonging, might be
alienated. And thus assoile to my remembrance. That from the particular
intention, wherein through ignorance they erred, alienation might be; but from
the general end, maintenance of Gods worship, they might not be aliened.
Thus then and upon these grounds my conclusion is still the same, though my
media be other, and something more peremptory. Now because it is a labor long
and needless to discuss every of the former differences (for the saying is
true, verum est index sui and obliqui:) J will first propound the conclusion
with the explanation; 2. Proceed to confirmation; And lastly annex solution of
Arguments, such as J have met withal, having any show of ground from the word
of God, to overthrowe the conclusion.

The Conclusion in few words is this. Tithes are the portion, at least part of
that portion, by Gods word allotted to Ministers for their service in the
gospel.

By Tithes understand the tenth part of all the hearers increase: Pro. 3 9.
particulars may be read, Levit. 27.30. and alibi. In a word to use the
distinction of Canonists, whither they be personal, of industry, negotiation;
etc. or prediall, as of grounds, etc. or mixed, as of cattle: the tenthes of
the whole increase, not those of Cumin and Anise excepted Mat. 23.23.
, fall within compass of our subject.

1 Of Tithes amongst Jews we may find four sorts distinguished by their ends.
1. some, which for distinction sake, we may call stipendary, assigned to Levits
for recompense of their service. Numb. 18.24.

2 A second sort which we may call sacrificatory: Tithes for sacrifice. Some
call them Decimas secu^daneas, some Decimas decimarum: a tithe of the Levits
Tithes to be given to Aaron, as an heave offering unto the Lord. Numb. 18.28.

3 A third kind you may style Convivales, banqueting or feasting tithes,
appointed for solemn feasts at their general assemblies to Jerusalem, Deuteronomy.
14.22, 23.

4 The last sort may be termed Eleemosynariae. Some call them decimas
pauperum, a tithe which for relief of the poor, widows, strangers, etc.
were every third year to be set out of their goods, ever and above the other
annual tithes, Deuteronomy. 24.29.

This distinction of tithes I thought good to mention out of the Leviticall
law: though this I profess, not to claim our tithes by the mandate given in
law Leviticall.

Now our question is, only of those tithes which we called stipendary; the rest
being two sorts of them apparently ceremonious; the third as plainly a
judicial ordinance. And of those tithes stipendary, this is that we affirm,
that by the word of God they belong for ever to Ministers of holy things, and
therefore in these days to Ministers of the gospel, who alone have now to do
with public ministrations of the worship of God.

Our reasons are these: first grounded on Heb. 7.6.8. He whose descent is not
counted from them, received tithes of Abraham; and ver. 8. here men that die
receive tithes, but there he receaveth them of whom it is witnessed that he
lives. Compare Genesis 14.20.

The argument which this scripture affords, has received much disadvantage,
by slender collection of many, thus only pressing it; Tithes were paid to
Priests before the Levitical law was given: therefore their payment is founded
rather on moral then ceremonial law. To which, answer is well given, that by
as good inference, sacrificing of beasts may be proved a morality, since it also
was in use before giving of the law by Moses. That we may the better see the
force of the Argument here given, let us a little consider the frame and sum
of the text.

The Apostle by occasion of the peoples dulnes, having digressed from cap.
5.11. to cap. 6.20. returns now to his purpose; namely to show the excellency
of Christ's priesthood above that of Aaron, by avouching him a Priest after
the order of Melchisedec. The conclusion is this: Christ's priesthood is more
excellent the^ that of Levi; or Christ is a greater Priest then any after
Aarons order. The reason principal lies thus; He that is a Priest after the
order of Melchisedec is a greater Priest then the Priests after Aaron. But
Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, Ergo, etc. The minor has
first his proof, 1. from a testimony of David, cap. 5.20. 2. from that
absolute agreement betwixt Melchisedec, and Christ: the parts whereof are
these; 1. as Melchisedec was king and Priest of the most high God, so Christ;
2. as Melchisedec king of righteousness and prince of peace, so Christ. 3. as
Melchisedec his parents, kindred, beginning, and end of life are not recorded:
so Christ, as man, with out father; as God, without mother, kindred, beginning,
or end of life. Therefore Christ is truly a Priest after the order of
Melchisedec. ver. 1.2.3.

The mayor remains to be proved and that has his proof from ver. 4. to 11.
the sum whereof is comprised in this principal syllogism. If Melchisedec be
greater then Levi, then he that is a Priest after his order as Christ is; is
greater the^ Levi. But Melchisedec is greater then Levi. Ergo, etc. minor
proved, greater then Abraham greater then Levi. Melchisedec is greater then
Abraham. Ergo then Levi. minor proved: he to whom Abraham paid tithes, of whom
he was blessed, is greater then Abraham. But to Melchisedec Abraham paid
tithes, and Melchisedec blessed Abraham. Ergo is greater then he, ver. 4.5.6.7.

A second argument proving the greatness of this Priest above those of Aarons
order, is laid down, ver. 8. A tithe taker.i. Priest, of whom its testified
that he lives, is greater the^ a tithe taker that dies. But the Priest after
Milchisedec is a tithe taker of whom its testified that he lives; Levits take
tithes and die. Ergo the Priest after Melchisedec his order is greater then the
Priests Leviticall. This is in my simple Logique the disposition of the text.
As for illustrations or amplifications by prosyllogismes, prolepses, or
otherwise, I purposely omit them Now me thinks, the text thus naturally
resolved, there needs no farther deduction of the Argument; yet that the
simplest may see what footing tithes have here thus I collect it.

The portion due to Christ's priesthood, is due to Ministers of the gospel: but
tithes are the portion due to Christ's priesthood. Ergo. The minor is thus
proved.

The portion due to Melchisedec his priesthood, is due to Christ's priesthood;
reason, 1. for that Christ's Priesthood and Melchisedecs are the same; or Christ
is a Priest after that order: 2. other things enunciated of Melchisedec, are
true of Christ eminently and always: as its eminently and always true of
Christ, that he is king of righteousness and prince of peace; eminently and
always true of Christ, he is without parents, without beginning and end of
life, that he blesses Abraham and al his seed, etc. All these are more
properly verified of Christ then of Melchisedec his type. Why not then also
this ever true of him; he takes tithes?

Now I assume. But tithes are the portion due to Melchisedec his priesthood,
yea ever due to that Priesthood. For 1 they were paid by Abraham to
Melchisedec, 2. in the Apostles Logic; a Priest and receiver of tithes are
equipollents. In steed of saying men that die are Priests; he says, men that
die receive tithes: in steed of saying he that lives is a Priest; he says, he
that lives takes tithes: as if in his judgment tithes and priesthood were as
inseparable as kingdom and tribute.

Now the mayor of the principal syllogism if any doubt of, to wit, whether
the portion due to Christ be due to Ministers, let him compare 1. Cor. 9 14.
where is the express ordinance of Christ, that Ministers should live of the
Gospel; 2. who in likelihood should be his receavers, but these that are in
his stead, as its said of Ministers, 2, Cor. 5.20? 3. Besides the same reason
which the Lord assigns of Levi his sharing in things to him self reserved and
sanctified, is true of Ministers, or else of none. Deuteronomy. 10, 8.9
God is Levits portion.i. Gods portion is Levits portion, because they were
taken to Minister before him. Why not then also Christ's portion Ministers
portion, because they only are assumed to Christ to minister in the Gospel? A
reason for not tithing of so plain deduction out of Scripture, if any can bring
me, he shall much sway me to his sentence.

This argument I remember once to have propounded something otherwise, to this
purpose. The portion due to Priesthood after Melchisedec his order, is due to
Ministers of the Gospel. But tithes are that portion. Ergo. And thus
propounding it, I receive these answers: the proposition seems untrue, except
you can prove your selves Priests after that order. Resp. Whereto I thus
answered; that though we be no Priests after that or let yet is there truth in
the proposition, since Christ the high Priest of our profession to whom
originally they belong, has ordained us to live of his portion.

A second answer was by limitation; the portion due (by law) to that Priesthood
is due to Ministers. But with that limitation the assumption is false, Abraham's
payment being an act rather voluntary, then by any iniunction from God. But
contra, that that act of Abraham was no act in this sense voluntary, but rather
an act of necessary and inioined duty, is evident (me thinks) by these
reasons. 1. For that gifts voluntary proceeding from bounty or liberality,
imply a superiority or excellency in the giver above the receaver. For Act.
20.35.
its a more blessed thing, in that kind, to give then to receive. But Abraham's
payment of tithes was testimony of his inferiority. Again the phrase it self
Heb. 7.4.6.
implies as much: Melchisedec tithed Abraham, ver. 6. a phrase that loses all
his emphasis if no iniunction had subjected Abraham to a necessity of being
tithed. 3. What mean they when they say of Abraham's tithing, that it was done
without law? would they be understood of Abraham's fact only, or of tithing at
large as it was in use before the law written? Now sure I wonder how first Gen
14.20.
Abraham, and then after him Genesis 28.22
Jacob, should fall upon a tenth rather then a sixth or twelfth part, if there
were nothing prescribed in their times for tithing? 2. How prove they but
probably that it was without iniunction of law? If this be the reason for that
we find no mention of any law to that end given: by as good reason may they
say of sacrifices, and sundry other actions religious, that they were
arbitrary; since we find no express mandate given of them in those times. But
thus me thinks we may better reason from their practice to an iniunction;
these facts of theirs were approved of God, therefore not done without
iniunction from him. And of this argument and clearing thereof thus far.

The second argument has his ground, Galat. 6.6. 1. Tim, 5.17. Prove. 3.9.
where we read thus; Let him that is instructed, make his instructor partaker of
all his goods; and elders that rule well are worthy of double honor,
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. And honor God with thy
substance, and with the chief of all thine increase. Out of which Scriptures,
thus we reason. If there be a portion to be set out unto God and his
Ministers, out of all and every the temporal goods of every one instructed,
and no certain portion to be found in scriptures but tithes: then are tithes
the portion allotted by Gods word to Ministers for their service. But there is
a portion to be set out unto God and his Ministers out of the temporal goods
of every one instructed, and no other certainty mentioned in scripture but
tithes. Ergo tithes are the portion allotted by Gods word to Ministers for
their service.

The consequence of the proposition depends upon this ground, that some
certainty is by scripture allotted unto Ministers for their service. Hereof if
any demand proof let him consider these. First, for that the Lord allotted a
certainty unto first borne and Levits: and think we it probable he would
leave Ministers of the Gospel at random to a competencie indeterminate? 2. Jn
other cases this argument goes current. The Lord prescribes for the old
Tabernacle all things necessary even to the Besome and Ashpan; not a pin in
the Tabernacle, but what has his prescript from God. Now surely of this we may
say its not a pin, but even a Clavus Traba^is, one of the master nails in our
Tabernacle. And think we his word so sufficient and absolutely exact for all
necessary prescripts, yea circumstances concerning worship, government, any
thing: and this only, a matter of so great consequence, left vnprescribed?

Lastly, if no certainty in this kind can be found in Scripture, how will thou be able to share out unto God his portion in faith? so that thou may be
able to say, I have given the Lord that portion of my goods which he requires
of me? Forsooth the Magistrates determination shall in this point be the levill
and rule of faith. Resp. 1. Then must thou be able to show that the Lord has
made Magistrates in this point his Carvers, which is unlikely vt supra: 2,
Suppose Magistrates make no provision, where is then the direction for thy
faith? 3. Suppose they shall assign Micah his allowance: will thou therewith
be content? Then sure al our lay persons, our Micahs, have faith well guided,
consciences rectified; ten shekels of silver, Judge. 17.10.
and a meals meat, and livery, they afford Sir John. In faith think we?
surely according to Magistrates provision. And why blame we any more, impropriat
persons for so sca^t allowance? perhaps because not competent. Yea but the
Magistrate thinks it competent. And that is in this case the line of faith*
credam? non si mihi etc.

Touching the minor, for the first part see 1. Cor. 9.11. Prove 3.9. Gal. 6.6.
in which place ye have it in so many terms. Let him that is instructed, make
his instructor partaker of all his goods. For the second branch of it; that no
other portion certain is to be found in scripture; I mean which has not an
apparent signification of something peculiar to that state of the people under
Levi, as first fruits, share of other sacrifices: will appear to any man, that
will be pleased to enter induction of particulars. And may I not then conclude
Tithes are the portion allotted us by the word of God? Yea what if I should
say even tithes are in some of these places more then obliquely pointed at?
What means the Apostle to call for maintenance unto Ministers under the term
of double honor? 1. Tim 5 17.18.
for that by honor he there means maintenance, the reason annexed will make a
blind man see. Surely S. Hierome having delivered his judgment of that place,
Mal. 3. Bring all my tithes into the storehouse, in these terms Ecclesiae
populis praeceptum est dare decimas, alleges presently this place for proof,
1. Tim. 5.17. Elders must have double honor. Again what means the Apostle by
that Epithete (double) honor? say some, double.i. large and liberal; but why
double rather then treble, if he meant large, at large? Does he not rather in
that Epithet send us to consider of that Numb. 8.16.
double portion of the first borne in whose room Levi was assumed? And that
which made their portion double, was in part tithes, as shall hereafter at
least probably appear unto us. Proceed we to a third reason which is grounded
on Levit. 27.28. Prove. 20.25. Romans 2.22. Mal. 3.8. where we read thus, Every
thing separate from common use, is most holy unto the Lord. And it is a snare
to devour holy things, and after the vow to inquire. And thou which abhorrest
Idols, committest thou sacrilege? And ye have robbed me. Out of which places
thus we reason. The portion which has bin separated from common use, to
mainetenance of Gods worship under the new testament, is the portion allotted
by the word of God to Ministers for their service.

But tithes are the portion, at least part of the portion separate from common
use to mainetenance of Gods worship under the new testament. Ergo etc. The
mayor is thus proved; because the detainement or alienating of things so
consecrated, is sacrilege. That this may the better appear, it wilbee worth
the while to consider briefly what sacrilege is: which out of Mr Zanchius
Vrsine, and others, we may thus briefly describe: Sacrilege is the taking away
of things sacred.i. deputed to holy uses, or the maintenance of the worship of
God. The matter about which this theft is conversant, are things consecrated to
God; of which there are two sorts: some which God himself either by
reservation, or express mandate, has hallowed unto himself; some which man
has hallowed and separated from common use. of both read Levit. 27.28.29.30.
Now that which makes up the nature of sacrilege, is, the taking away or
detaining of things thus hallowed, and returning them to common use. Thus then
I reason, the detainement or alienating of any thing separate from common use,
is sacrilege. But detainement or alienating of tithes, is the detainement and
alienating of things thus separate. Ergo

To the proposition these answers I have partly read, partly heard in
conference. 1. Understand it say some of things which have been consecrate by
law. Resp. 1. no word of God forces to such limitation. For even of voluntary
and votary consecrations both Moses, Levit. 27. and Solomon, Prove. 20.25.
speak. And was it not free to Ananias to consecrate or not, more then general
laws of piety or charity might sway him, Act. 5.4. whiles it remained was it
not thine own? And after it was sold was it not in thy power, said Peter? yet
was Ananias his detainement sacrilege by circumstances of the text and consent
of best interpreters. He is taxed by Peter not only for lying, but for theevish
and clancular surreption of part of the price, ver. 3. and, says Beza
interpreting the word, Ad sacrilegium etiam accessit deffidentia and
hypocrisis. see also Centuriat. Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ambros. ser. 9. Dum ex
eo quod promiserat, partem subtrahit, sacrilegij simul condemnatur and fraudis.
Sacrilegij quod Deum in pollicitatione fefellerit: fraudis quod, etc: 2. but
grant it with that limitation; we shall anon see, that with that limit we may
assume of tithes that they have bin consecrated.

A second restraint some have thus given to the proposition; understand it say
they, of alienating things consecrated without error.i. to maintenance of true
worship of the true God. Well, agreed; let it be so limited, though with fair
probability and consent of no small clarks, we might contend the contrary.
Keckerman: Syst. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 21.
princeps iure non potest res sacras and bona cultui divino etiam in genere
destinata, etiam ea quae superstitioso cultui serviunt, in vsum profanum
transfer. But grant the limitation: can we not assume thus much of Tithes,
that they have bin consecrate to maintain pure worship of the true God?

Thirdly understand it say some, with these exceptions. 1. Except in case of
the churches superfluity; and this exception has this ground; contentment with
necessaries is required of Ministers; for Moses cries sufficit at the building
of the tabernacle: Resp. What word of God or sound reason gives liberty to
alien seeming superfluities of Ministers rather then of other subjects?
contentment with necessaries being equally required of all. And Moses stays
addition of more; returns or aliens nothing of what was brought by the people,
no not though there were an overplus. But secondly grant the proposition with
that exception; in what case, in what times may we not with that limit assume
of tithes?

Their second exception is when alienation is necessary for preservation of the
Church. Resp. An use of such goods for the time, may perhaps in that case be
allowed: perpetual alienation, besides facts of some men, nothing makes
probable. The show bread was made common to David and his company in
extremity: but might it therefore be perpetually aliened, such necessity
ceasing?

Their last exception, when Princes have no other means to remunerate
subjects, faithful in common services. Resp. What, I wonder, in such case
lays open Church goods to the will of Princes, rather then the goods of common
subjects? Thus I reason and leave them: private goods of subjects, Magistrates
may not alien from them for recompense of servants, much less may the Lords
portion be transferred to such uses. See Genesis 47.22.

Thus then the proposition is clear as it was propounded: let us grant it with
these limits or so many of them as have any show of reason to support them. And
thus conclude. The detainment or alienating of things by law consecrated to
pure worship of the true God, without superfluity, any longer then necessity
requires is sacrilege. But tithes have been by law consecrated to maintenance
of pure worship of the true God, are not superfluous, and now no such
necessity of their alienation. Ergo their detainment is sacrilege.

The fourth reason follows. Whatsoever duty prescribed in the word of God not
either ceremonial or Judicial, that is undoubtedly of perpetual observation.
But payment of tithes is a duty prescribed in the word of God, and is neither
ceremonial nor judicial. Ergo of perpetual observation. The proposition I
think none will doubt of, since there is no duty prescribed in the word of God
which falls not under some member of this distribution, and only Judicials and
ceremonies were temporary.

See we therefore whether our assumption for both parts of the predicate may
be avowed. And first that this is no duty ceremonious; these reasons evince.
1. Ceremonial ordinances were all shadows of things to come, the body
whereof is Christ. This no shadow of things to come, for where is the body
which this shadowed? some, who yet will have it no ceremony but a judicial,
frame this ceremonious resemblance. The number of ten is a number of
perfection, and by paying in this number, as by a sign, the offerer makes
protestation of his own imperfection, and of his expecting perfection in
Christ. Pretty too too. Others thus, they were paid in sign of thankfulness;
others, in signum vniversalis Dominij. Twenty such like, a tolerable wit
would devise: but can they show us these significations or ends of payment in
the Scripture, even but obscurely so much as by allusion intimated? J dare say
no, nor any other end, no not of their payment to Levits, but maintenance and
recompense for their service.

2 All ceremonies have an analogicall resemblance of the things they signified.
Therefore called Col 2.17.
shaddows of things to come, because that as the shaddowe carries though a
dark, yet some resemblance of the body whose shadow it is; so ceremonies of
Christ: therefore termed also Heb. 9.23. Gal. 4 9.
similitudes of heavenly things, being ordained by their very semblances to
teach the rude. This has no Analogicall resemblance either of imperfection, or
thankfulness, or Gods universal dominion. For who can, J say, not only avow
his frame, but even frame it except absurdly? Give us such an analogy of this
as we are able to show of others, we will then believe their payment, to have
been levitically ceremonious. Of sprinklings and purifyings, of Tabernacle, of
Arc, of Propitiatory, of high Priest (and indeed of what not, that was truly a
shadow of heavenly things?) we find their analogy in the word of God. For
instance, as Heb. 9.7.2.
high Priest amongst the Jews alone entered into the holy of holies not
without blood: so Christ into heaven, etc. Can those that so confidently avow
tithes to have been ceremonies, thus draw out the similitude betwixt the^ and
heavenly things?

3 Whatsoever ordinance was before leviticall law, not foreshadowing Christ,
that is no ceremony. But payment of tithes such. Heb. 14 and 28 and Col. 2
Heb. ^.7. etc.
Ergo. No leviticall ceremony may be used after publishing of the Gospel.
Reclamante mundo, libera voce pronuncio ceremonias Iudaeorum and pernitiosas
esse, and mortiferas christianis. Hierom. epist. August. 11^.
(The school men say well, Iudicialia post Christum be mortua, because they
bind not: ceremonialia, mortifera; their very reviving unlawful and deadly.)
But payment of tithes, by consent of all, except Brownists, may be retained.
Ergo.

5 J find not that the Lord in prophetical scriptures taxes so much the
omissio^ of ceremonies, or exacteth in so strict terms their performance, as
he does this of tithes Mal. 3 9.
. Something J find of their faulty performance; something, of their sticking
in them with neglect of moralities: and this to me is a presumption, they were
other then ceremonies.

Lastly J never read Christ speak so much of any Jewish ceremony, as he did of
tithes; Mat. 23.
these things ought you to have done. Though J confess, as much might have
been said of ceremonies during those times. All these considered, may J not
conclude of tithing, it was no ceremony? See we whether perhaps it were a
judicial, concerning only the nation of the Jews, and founded on equity
particular to that people. This is indeed the old tenent of Papists. But 1.
say some, Judicials were all of duties from man to man. This ordinance of holy
things to be done to God. Therefore not judicial.

But what, trow we, imagine Papists to be the civil equity of this
ordinance, particularly concerning the nation of the Jews? Forsooth says
Bellarmine out of Thomas, the tribe of Leui being but the tenth, or at most the
twelfth or thirteenth part of the Jews: tenths must be theirs that equity may
be kept, and that tribe have no greater portion then the rest. Resp. 1. But it
is well answered that this end of their assignement to Levi, has no mention in
Scripture: they are given to Levi for recompense of this service, as the Lords
portion primarily, other end or reason of their assignation we find none. 2.
If this were the end of their allotment to Leui: surely the Lord much forgot
himself, that besides the tenthes of all men's goods, would allot them share in
sacrifices and vows, and 48 Cities with Suburbs of so large circuit as we
read, Numb. 35.4.7.

3 Be it granted, that this was some reason of their assignement to Levi: how
concludes this the ordinance in general? For the iniunction of tithing was as
old as Abraham Gen 14.20.
, when was no place for partition of Gods people by tribes. And if this be all
they have to prove them judicials. J shall crave pardon for subscribing to
their judgment. Lastly, yield them Judicials: yet if of common equity, if
confirmed by positive law, if consenting with law of nature, if serving to
uphold moral duties; binds not the ordinance for ever? J conclude therefore,
since neither ceremonial nor judicial, or if judicial, yet of common equity:
therefore their payment is perpetually to be observed.

The last reason (for I had rather give reasons by weight then number) is taken
from practice of the church in all times from beginning of the world down to
these last days of reformation: ever since God had a ministry in the world,
tithes were their maintenance. Before the law, the first borne; then, the
ordinary priests, received tithes. Genesis 14.20
For that, that Melchisedec was She^ Noah's eldest son, at least by privilege,
if not by birth, few question, none disprove: for the time under the law, is no
question. For Apostles times or much of them, the use of tithes, persecution or
scandale forced to be intermitted. Yet continued that Ius ever in them, and
their inferior Presbyters. And therefore they urge yielding of maintenance,
such no doubt in their general aim as was certain by the word of God; such
as had bin in use: yea plead for portion Gal. 6 6. 1. Tim. 5.17.
of al goods; for double honor. After when God was pleased to grant even but
a little rest, and breathing time to the Churches, presently came tithes again
to be the Ministers portion. Cyprian whose martyrdom fell into the year of the
Lord 259. according to Eusebius his computatio^, Epist. 66.
amongst other goods of the church, more then intimats tithes to have bin
committed to Bishops as general stewards by whom they were distributed to
inferior Ministers. Upon occasion taxing Geminius Victor for appointing
Geminius Faustinus a presbyter, overseer of his will, and thereby occasioning
distraction from his ministry, sets down by way of aggravation the course
established in the Church of God for preventing such distractions in the
ministry. As by Gods own authority and disposition, the tribe of Levi received
tithes from the other tribes, etc. that they might by no means be called away,
or constrained to think or deal with things secular: the same course and
order is now holden in the Church, Vt qui in Ecclesia Domini ordinatione
clerica promoventur, in nullo ab administratione divina avocentur, nec
molestijs and negotijs secularibus alligentur, sed in honor sportulantium
fratrum tanquam decimas ex fructibus accipientes, ab altari and sacrificijs non
recedant, sed die ac nocte caelestibus rebus and spiritualibus serviant* this
mentions Cyprian as a course in his time received in the Church. In the same
age a few years after was Dionysius bishop of Rome about the year 266. Cant.
3. cap. 10.
This man (as Platina in his life testifies; and as himself of himself, in
his epistle to Severus,) assigned several Churches to several Ministers, as
parishes, least one Pastor might defraud another: Gratian cause. 13. q. 1.
the question being then, not whether to any, but unto what church, tithes were
to be paid. The conclusion extant at large in the body of the Canon law, with
some reasons (both most co^sonant to his decree;) it will not be amiss briefly
to collect; because it is of some use in this matter of tithes. That which is
proved there, is, that tithes are payable to the baptismall Churches, and to
the Ministers there serving God, and ministering to the people. After many
testimonies heaped up together, Gal. 6.6. 1. Cor. 9. at length it is concluded
with this expostulation; Quis plantat vineam, etc. who plants a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Nos plantavimus vineam, and vos vultis edere?
Item praecepit Dominus per Mosem, vt nemo mittat falcem in alienam messem. Haec
messis nostra est, and vos vultis falcem in eam mittere? Item Apostolus, they
that serve at the altar live of the altar; sed numquid de eo cui no^ serviunt?
Qui in sacrario operantur, cum sacrario participant; sed numquid cum illo in
quo non operantur? etc.

That I may not spend time and paper whiles I do but actum agere: for the next
age, read what Hierome has touching practice of the Church, in his epistle to
Nepotian; Ambrose his judgment in ser. quadrages.

In times succeeding, Chrysostom. hom. 18. in Act. August. in Psalm. 146. etc:
calling for tithes, and sharply reproving their detainment or spare payment.
For Councils, that one Synod called Matisconensis held anno 580; Cen^uriat.
the second holden at that city, Can. 5. Cent. 6. cap. 9.
not only ordaines their payment, but shows the observation of that duty to
have bin of long standing in the Christian Church. Leges divinae consulentes
sacerdotibus ac ministris ecclesiarum pro haereditaria portione, omni populo
praeceperunt, decimas fructuum suorum locis sacris praestare, vt nullo labor
impediti, per res illegitimas, spiritualibus possint vacare ministerijs. Quas
lege. Christianorum congeries longis temporibus custodivit, intemeratas: nunc
autem paulatim praevaricatores legum, poene Christiani omnes ostenduntur, dum
ea quae divinitus sancita sunt, adimplere negligunt. Vnde statuimus ac
decernimus, vt mos antiquus a fidelibus reparetur, and decimas ecclesiasticis
famulantibus ceremonijs populus omnis inferat.

After this say the Century writers out of Aventine, Cent. 8. c. 7. de bonis
Eccl.
lib. 3. Annal decimas a profanis occupatas Carolomannus suo edicto restitui
iubet. Tithes usurped by seculars, or (as perhaps he names them for their fact)
profane persons, Charlemaine by his edict comma^ds to be restored. The same
authors out of Crantzius his metropolis, lib. 1. cap. 8. talem statum Carolus
magnus, post impositum iugu^ Christi reliquit in provincia, vt liber esset
populus a tributorum iugo, caeterum Ecclesijs and pontificibus iure decimaru^
obnoxious permaneret.

To leave forrenners, in England Anno Dom. 786. Cent. 8. cap. 9.
after account of these writers, was holden a Synod of all states of the
kingdoms and the decrees thereof subscribed, by the several kings then
reigning; and their assessors, Bishops, Dukes, and Cominaltie. In the 17
chapter of which Council thus we read. De Decimis dandis, sicut in lege
scriptum est, decimam partem ex omnibus frugibus tuis seu primitijs deferas in
domum domini dei tui: rursum per prophetam: adferte, inquit, omnem decimam in
horreum meum, vt sit cibus in domo mea; et probate me super hoc, etc dicit
dominus: sicut sapiens ait, nemo iustam Eleemosynam de his quae possidet facere
valet, nisi prius separaverit domino, quod a primordio ipse sibi reddere
delegauit: ac per hoc plerunque contingit, ut qui decimam non tribuit, ad
decimam revertatur. Vnde etiam cum obtestatione praecipimus, vt omnes studeant,
de omnibus quae posside^t, decimas dare, quia speciale domini dei sui est: and
de novem partibus sibi vivat, and Eleemosynas tribuat. More need not be added.
How in after times the case of tithes stood amongst us, practice of the Church
in this land till the days of Henry the 8, abundantly witnesses: exorbitancie
enough from the primary rule of assignement to parish Churches might be noted;
but till those days nothing is found of their whole alienation to seculars.

As a corollary here let us observe that tithes of England have bin by law
separate from common use: the inference thence is out of former grounds, that
they could never be lawfully alienated. Yes said one once; for eius est
tollere, cuius ponere. Resp. Peter was not acquainted with any such mixime in
the case of Ananias; Syst Polit. lib. 1. cap 21.
and Levit. 27. Things once separated from common use, are forever holy unto
the Lord. And hear Keckerman, Princeps iure non potest etc. Things sacred or
goods designed, or destined to divine worship, though but in a generality, yea
though they serve to superstitious worship, Princes have no right to transfer
to common use. Jf his sentence swaie nothing, hear his reason: Res sacrae
pertinent ad statum and scopum ^eipub. eminentiorem and perfectiorem, ideo ad
inferiorem retrahi non debent. media enim perfectiorem finem respicientia, non
debent abusive ad imperfectiorem applicari. And Polanus, In Ezec. c. 48. verse.
14.
Res sanctas e quarum numero est possessio Deo sanctificata, neque vendat,
neque permutet, neque transferat quisquam. Ratio legi addita est; quia res
sanctae non sunt hominum, sed ipsius Iehovae, cui dicatae, cui consecratae,
Epist. 33.
cui sanctificatae sunt etc. Ambrose when one thus presses him to deliver up
the Temple to the Emperor; because all things were his: thus answers; Noli te
gravare Imperator, vt putes te in ea quae divina sunt imperiale aliquid ius
habere; noli te extollere: sed si vis diutius imperare, esto Deo subditus:
scriptum est; quae Dei Deo, quae Caesaris Caesari. But enough of this* we have
seen the practice of the church in all times, and so their judgment for this
duty of tithing; which alone, so long, so generally, on such grounds continued,
me thinks proves more for their payment, then any prescription though never so
gray headed, or even bald with age, can for their detainement.

J might ad to this continual practice of the Church, the unanimous consent of
divines in judgment, from Apostles days downward; till such time as Popish
Demi-sacrilege had made seizure of tithes, transferring them from parochial
Pastors to the Cove^ts of Drones: then began their Schoolmen to study shifts,
whereby to justify the practice of their Synagogue, and after many disputs,
resolved of this as best plaster for that sore, that forsooth they were
Judicials. I might also adioine the consenting practice of heathen by light of
nature, yea suffrages of sundry late divines; but that this task is
sufficiently done by others; and authorities of men even best learned and
devoutest, bear little sway in truths so dangerous. This only I desire, that
in this question we may contend with reasons, rather then authorities: not that
J fear to be overlaid either with weight or number of voices; for the ods in
both kinds I dare avow to be with us. But 1. whereto tends committing of
divines in fight, except to work distraction in people? And, 2. the saying of
Augustine is me thinks judicious; Scripturarum autoritatibus, non quorumque
proprijs, sed vtrisque communibus testibus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio
cum ratione concertet. And of the proving part hitherto.

Let us now proceed to examine such arguments as are brought by the adverse
part to disprove this truth; such J mean as seem to have any footing in the
word of God. For other, others have fully and often answered them. Thus then
some reason. Tithes are not in all the new Testament specified to be the
ministers maintenance; so indeed reasons Bellarmine; so Thomas, so Canisius and
many others of that rank of honest men. In nova lege, in the new law.i. in
scriptures of the new Testament we find no such precept, Ergo not due to
Ministers by the word of God. Resp. Now sure J had thought it had been
sufficient to have found them grounded on any part of Scripture not
particularly concerning the Church of the Jews, because 1. Tim 3.16.
the whole Scripture is given by inspiration from God; and 2. Pet. 1.19.
that word of Prophets (says Peter) is a most sure word, we shall do well to
attend thereto. And therefore hitherto it has been a maxim amongst divines; A
part scripturae non valet argumentum negative. Jts a moral statute given to
Magistrates to punish with death, Genesis 9.6.
the shedder of man's blood; yet J find it not specified in all the new
Testament: An ordinance irrevocable that the Sabbath be kept with cessation
from labors; yet specification of the duty J find not in the new Testament.
Sundry the like might be instanced, as by view of that place Ezekiel. 22 7. ad 12.
to every man may appear. Only let me entreat men fearing God, not so far to
forget their reverence to the old scriptures, and the spirit that inspired
them, as to deny the^ their share with the new Testament in this honor; of
being rule in part of their faith and practice. This age is strangely in love
with Epitomees, if faith it self shall be drawn to her compendium; Aug. de
bono perfect. lib. 2. cap. 11.
But let us beware we fall not into Manicheisme. Christ said of Moses Ioh. 5.45.
He should judge the Jews, so shall he and Prophets judge Christians also, as
well as Evangelists and Apostles.

2 Who can question this truth so clear to all men? so necessary for all that
will with Tertullian maintain the fullness of the Scriptures? That scripture
teaches as well what it implies, as what it expresses. Teaches it not
particulars in generals? Effects or consequents in principles? equals by
equivalence? The conclusion is not expressed in scriptures of the new
Testament; that precept of Sabbath is not abrogated: yet taught in the new
Testament. Since Mat. 5.17.
no precept of the Decalogue abrogated; Ergo not that of Sabbath. The
conclusion not expressed in the new Testament; Infants are to be baptized, yet
taught in the new Testament: Act. 2.38.39 Mar. 10.14. 1. Cor. 7.14. Act 10.47.
since to whom promises, kingdom, covenant, spirit belong, to them baptism.
Ergo to infants. These doctrines are all taught in the new Testament, because
generals, principles, or equivalents are there taught. And so have we tithes
prescribed in the new Testament, vt supra. Yea more the^ so implicit; as in
former reasons has already appeared. Its by this occasion now in my mind
that Tertullian has in his treaty de spectaculis; where be^ding himself to
dissuade Christians from presence at such profane and barbarous spectacles as
were then in use, he thus shapes answer to a reason of this mould: Quorundam
fides (says he) aut simplicior, aut scrupulosior, ab hac abdicatione
spectaculorum de scripturis autoritatem exposcit, and se in incertum
constituit, quod non significanter neque nominatim denuncietur servis Dei
abstinentia eiusmodi: Some men's faith (says Tertullian) whether over simple,
or over scrupulous, demaundes our authority from scriptures for this
abandoning such sights; and makes it self doubtful because such abstinence is
not there expressly and by name inioined to the servants of God. Whereto he
answers; plane nusquam inuenimus, etc. Its true, says that author, we find not
in any place, that as it is apertly said, thou shall not kill, etc. so its
expressly defined, thou shall not go to the circle or Theater etc. but we
find that general of David to touch this particular; Blessed is he that has
not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners; if
in no way of sinners, then not in this: Nam apud spectacula and in via statur,
etc. There needs no application.

Now this argument the same for substance some have urged with this (...); In
scriptures of the new Testament, where Ministers maintenance is purposely
treated of, no mention is to be found of tithes: And that is at least a
presumption, their payment is no perpetual ordinance of God. For is it likely
the particular would have been concealed? Resp. Perhaps, and but perhaps not;
1 If either state of the times had borne it, or 2. necessity required, or 3.
Apostles had been willing to urge the uttermost of right. But considering
first the distress of the times, was such, as scarce any could call any thing
his own; 2. weighing again how fully the particular was in the old Testament
determined; lastly pondering how loath the Apostles were, to exact right, least
any occasion should be given, to suspect of mercenary or covetous affection in
preaching: it was as convenient to omit particularizing the quantity, as to
remit the use of all right, as to some Churches some practiced.

2 But yet this J find; they call for 1. Tim. 5.17.
double honor. For 1. Cor. 9.5. ad 14.
maintenance due by law of nature, and nations, and by ordinance of Christ, and
that is either tithes, or else no certain particular.

3 Who will undertake to evidence the particulars of all duties of justice,
charity, temperance, even there where he shall find such duties purposely
prescribed? Or be so bold (ne quid dicam gravius) as to exclude particularities
of these duties from intention of Gods spirit because the generals are only
handled, upon supposed likelyhoods, or presumptions truly presumptuous? Leave
we therefore this argument, and see whither the rest have better color.
Bellarmine endeavoring to disprove the morality of this duty, thus reasons;
Moral duties have ever bound conscience, eve^ before the law of Moses. But the
law of tithes was not till the times of Moses. Ergo. Resp. the proposition we
acknowledge. The minor how will he prove? If he shall reason from the
scriptures silence; the same may be said of adultery, Idolatry, perjury, almost
of what not? 2. We have that which is equivalent to a precept; the approved
practice of the Saints of God; yea if Lyra may be credited, an implied precept
given to Jacob, Genesis 35.1. when he is commanded to build an altar at Bethel
according to his vow made, Genesis 28. Look back to what is said in clearing the
first Argument, and thereby judge whither the precept of tithing were in those
days given, or not.

His next reason is this, Reason natural teaches not the payment of tenthes
to Priests, but only of what is sufficient to their sustentatio^. Ergo not
moral. Resp. neither does reason direct to keeping a seventh day, but only a
separation of some solemn times to Gods worship. But who would consult with
reason corrupted, and blind since the fall, to determine of moralities? Since
al it reaches unto, even where it has some help from general grace, are
generalities only of moral duties?

His last reason, Matters of vow are no moralities: tithes were Genesis 28.22.
vowed by Jacob: Ergo not commanded. Resp. And are all matters of vow things
arbitrary, none moralities? What think ye of that ver. 21. uttered in some
vow, and as it were with the same breath of Jacob; If the Lord will go with me,
and keep me in the way that I shall go, etc. then shall the Lord be my God?
Was it a matter Arbitrary to Jacob to have the Lord, and him only to be his
God? being the substance of the first moral precept? Yet was it vowed by
Jacob, as we see, on like condition with tithes. More insta^ces might be
alleged: but quorsum:

Proceed we to arguments of our own divines. Tithes say some are originally
in kings and civil Magistrates, and its their Mishpat. i. ius to dispose of
them to civil or religious use. For says the Lord; of Isreal's king, Hoc erit
ius regis vestri, etc: he shall take tithes, 1. Sam. 8.15. Resp. Is it
possible men should advisedly thus reason out of this scripture? Levit. 27.30
The Lord had long ere this declared tithes to be his, Number. 18.24.
assigned the^ to Levi for his service in the tabernacle: and that under
Magistrates civil though not kings. When in his wrath he gives a king to
Israel, revoked he his ordinance of tithing to Levi? Who can think it? I stand
not to dispute the question, whether the words describe a king, or rather a
tyrant. But this I am sure is evident: the Lord there shows the many
mischiefs should befall them as a plague for their rejecting the government
by himself established, such as should make them cry under the burden of his
exaction. A course beseeming an exorbitant tyrant, rather then a regular king.
Just: yea but this shall be his Mishpat. i. his ius ver. 11. Resp. And why his
ius rather then his guise? His right rather then his fashion? As most render,
and the word often signify. See 1. Sam. 27.11. was it his ius to take from the
people their fields and vineyards, and best olive yards to give to his
servants? As is said, ver. 14. How then sinned Achab 1. Reg 21.1, 2, 3.
in coveting the vineyard of Naboth? And desiring to purchase it with money?
Yea, why offers he money or deals by way of contract? It was his ius being a
king, to take vineyards and fields from subjects to give to his servants: much
more to keep for his own benefit and convenience. 3. Alienation of
possessions from tribes and families was flatly forbidden to the Jewish people,
that Christ's lineage and descent might be kept unconfounded.

2 But what when it is yielded he had a tus to exact tithes of subjects? Must
it needs be understood of tithes of Levits assigned them of God? and not rather
of other tithes which he might crave in subsidium? as Genesis 47.24.
fifts were once imposed upon Egyptians. Certainly Ezechias, it seems,
thought tithes the Levits due, and therefore amongst other precepts of
reformation, 2. par. 31. 4. 5. 6
requires their payment to Levi, as thinking tithes committed to him (if at all
to him) but as Church goods of old were unto Bishops, non ut dominis, but ut
oeconomis. And the people bring the^ to Levites in the name of holy things that
were consecrated unto God.

Apostles received not tithes in their days. Ergo. Resp. That is hard, that I
say not, (impossible to prove) 2. not tithes, no nor ought else of some
churches, but made their own hands minister to their necessities, that they
might not be scandalous to weak brethren, nor chargable to afflicted churches;
3. yea suffered bonds, reproaches, cruel deaths, etc. must therefore the
Churches of all ages receive like measure from her children? 4 The question is
de iure non de facto: and that ius was remitted, because burdensome to those
times, as circumcision was in the wilderness, Joshua. 5.5.6.

If tithes be thus due to Ministers, why not also first fruits for these also
were commanded to be paid to Levits? Resp. To these and all arguments
following, this general answer may serve; that we claim not tithes by
virtue of the precept given for Levites. Who ever heard us thus reason? God
commanded tithes to be paid to Levites: Ergo tithes are due to the Ministers
of the Gospel. But thus we claim them; as due to God by reservation from the
beginning, as following Christ's priesthood, as the only certainety mentioned in
scripture, as consecrated to God by consent of Churches and Edicts of princes,
as agreeing with the use and practice of the Church in all times For the mandate
of God concerning Levi, we make it not the ground of our title to tithes. So
that of these reasons we may say as he, they are Nihil ad Rhombum. Yet that
nothing be wanting to any man's satisfaction, I answer, 1. that first fruits
were paid to Aaron, Heb. 7 11
as to high priest, whose priesthood is now passed to another; 2. upon a reason
particular to that people; 3. for sacrifice, as appears at large, De^. 26. 2.
ad 11. appears there any such thing of Tithes? Lastly they were figures as
should seem, of Christ, 1 Cor 15.20.
The first fruits of them that sleep; of beginnings of sanctification, called
by the Apostle Romans 8.23.
the first fruits of the spirit. Can any of these be avouched of tithes? Who
the^ sees not manifest disparity between the two?

If this be a duty of people to pay tithes to Ministers: the^ that also of
Ministers to Number. 18.28.
pay tithes to the high Priest. Resp. The argument proceeds from a false
Hypothesis, supposing us to claim tithes by mandate Leviticall. Which we
utterly disclaim, vt supra. 2. But yet farther I answer; It follows not if
one, then the other due. 1. For Ps 50 12.13
that our high Priest needs them not: but only has ordained for them that 1.
Cor 9.14.
preach the gospel. 2. Sacrifices are now ceased, to which these Decimae
secu^daneae chiefly served Number. 18.28 29.30.
; so that their reason is no more but this, If tithes for stipend, then tithes
for sacrifice: he is merely (...) that discernes not the inconsequence.

If precept of tithing be moral, the^ that also of Mal. 3 10.
bringing them to one common storehouse. Resp. This argument also proceeds
from like fained Hypothesis. see supra. and yet has no good consequence: for
must the substance of a duty needs be Levitical, because some circumstances
thereof concern only Jewish nation? The^ must Sabbath also eve^ for substance
be ceremonial, because some circumstances and ends belong only to Jews Deuteronomy.
5.15.

If precept of tithes be moral, then that also of Ministers not Number. 18.24
having portion amongst their brethren. Resp. The same fallacy that before; for
we claim not by precept given to Levi. And yet the argument follows not. 1.
for says Polanus (though I avow not his answer) that ordinance was
figurative; Polan in Ezech. 44. v. 28.
foreshaddowing Christ that had not where to lay his head. But 2 it was never
forbidden Levits to have portion amongst their brethren in that sense that
these men take portion. They Numb. 35. Levit. 25.34.
Had cities with their suburbs which were their perpetual possession, and
passed from father to son; subject to same laws of Redemption as others.
Wherefore Jeremy a Priests son Ier. 32.7.9.
buies the field of his uncle as next of kin. See also 1. King. 2.26. Thus
therefore understand that ordinance of Levits having no portion amongst their
brethren. No portion, that is, no such portion, separate from their brethren,
as had other tribes, not simply none: the Reason thereof was Jacobs prophecy
Genesis 49.7.
touching their scattering amongst their brethren. Disposed of also by Gods
providence for greater convenience of the peoples instruction, as also by
situation of their cities in Josh. 21.
every tribe is me thinks probable. Lastly a manifest disparity there is
between the two. For the children of Levits succeeded their parents, and were
for ever to be maintained by Levits portion. Not so the children of Ministers,
except they be 1. Tim. 3. Titus. 1.
approved, and found meet for the ministry.

Lastly they object the place, Numb. 18.24. unanswerable, as they think, and
such as if a man but turn to with a wet finger, he shall presently see tithing
a ceremonious ordinance. Now for my part I have viewed the place, and with my
best attention considered what may thence be deduced to prove it ceremonial.
Yet find not that it concludes either the ordinance in general, or yet that
Leviticall constitution to have been ceremonious, for thus we must frame the
Argument. If tithes were assigned to Levi for his service in the tabernacle:
then is the ordinance of tithing merely ceremonious; for that service was
ceremonial. But tithes were assigned to Levi for his service in the
tabernacle. Ergo. Resp. 1. To say nothing that that particular assignement
concludes not the ordinance at large, but the ordinance for Levi only: I
answer 2. that by as good inference they may prove reverence, obedience,
defense of Ministers, ceremonious duties, inasmuch as even these also belonged
to Levites for their service in the tabernacle. For why must Israelits give
Levites honor, obedience, singular love, etc: but for their work sake? And
what was their work? But their service in the tabernacle. So that now our
people owe us no more honor, obedience, love, etc. 1 These. 5 12 13. Heb. 13.17.
for our work sake, as it is prescribed. For these all belonged to Levites for
their service in the tabernacle, which was ceremonious. Briefly; they were
given to Levites for their service in the tabernacle, non qua tabernaculi; but
qua service. And therefore before tabernacle erected, they were paid to
Priests, Genesis 14. 3. Was the whole service of the tabernacle ceremonious? Nay
were not some maine parts of it, apparently moral? What think we of teaching
the people? 2. Chr. 17.9. Act 15.21. Nehe. 8.3.6.7 8.
of Reading the scriptures, and giving sense? of praising God? Were not these
parts of tabernacle service? And had not the Levites maintenance for these, as
well as for slaying sacrifices? Surely if this be the best and clearest reasons
against tithing, I must needs profess, they are so far from making me doubt
of my conclusion, that they rather stablish my judgment therein. And these are
all the arguments I have yet heard urged by men of any judgment, against the
necessity of paying tithes.

One other only which seculars use, I will annexe; and that is drawn from a
perilous inconvenience ensuing upon this doctrine. What is it? Forsooth if
tithes belong to Ministers and are payable to them only, according to the word
of God: it will come to pass, that a Ministers portion shall exceed the
allowance of two or three of his wealthiest parishioners. But that, I tell you,
is a shrewd inconvenience. Resp. A mischief which I wonder the Lord in his
endless wisdom never bethought himself to prevent amongst the Israelits. The
Levites, though according to the general division of Israel by tribes, they
were but a twelfth or thirteenth part: yet according to exact number of persons
reckoned by polles, were scarce the sixtith part of the people. The number of
the people without the Levites, amounted to Number. 1.46.
six hundred and three thousands, five hundred and fifty; to which if we add
their old men, and al from under twenty years amongst them which came not into
the first number, Numb. 1.3.
allowing but double so many for the^, they arise to about a thousand thousands
and three hundred thousands. Now the Levites numbered from the infant to the old
man, were found but two and twenty thousands only, Number. 3 39.
and that is not above the sixtith part of the people. Yet see, the Lord allots
them the tenth of all the increase of the land: besides share in oblations,
Number. 35 4.7
things consecrate by vow, and 48. cities with suburbs of so large circuit,
that according to Hieromes measure of the land, exceeded the portion of any
other tribe in Israel. Its marvel none would undertake to be the Lords
Counselor, and to tell him such large allowance might make Levites proud and
lazy. But this large portion to the Lord seemed no inconvenience: how seems
it so to us, in Ministers of the Gospel?

Again, how falls it, that to other orders and ranks of men, as lawyers,
gentles, etc. their portions exceeding by more then fourths the portions of
others, are not maligned; the Ministers of all other should be subject to
envy?

Lastly, how is it, that men in their own, though far larger portion, know no
measure, but add continually thousands to hundreds; and (as Agars horsleach)
cry, give, give; and as the grave, know no measure of desiring: yet of a
ministers stipend, of fifty, or an hundred pounds, cry Sufficit; Its enough,
and too much? What, I wonder, is that great service these men perform, so over
acceptable to God, or profitable unto men, above the work of a minister? that
they should think themselves worthy of all, whatsoever by a vijs and modis
they can scrape together; and yet to ministers, for their work sake, hardly
beteeme double honor in proportion to the mean wealthy amongst their people.
Tempora, Te^pora, how are ye turned? But I conclude. Since Tithes belong to
Christ's priesthood, since no other certainety allotted to Ministers in
scriptures, since detainement is sacrilege, since tithing no ceremony nor
particularly Judicial, since confirmed by consent and practice of the Church in
all times, lastly (which is not the least) since reasons against it are of so no
force, as we have seen: therefore tithes are the portion due to Ministers for
their service in the Gospel.

Conclusion.
What now remains? but to admonish such as fear God, to deliver their souls
from the guilt of so foul a sin as is this of sacrilege. Why hang ye up
thieves that steal from men, often times but as Solomon says Prove. 6.30.
to satisfy their own souls; and live your selves in open Mal. 3.8.
robbery of God himself? Far be it from me to multiply sins or to cast
unnecessary scruples into the consciences of Gods people. But feign J would
know for my learning, of such as are so loath in this point to wound
consciences (alas, how senseless, and fleshed in sacrilege!) where God has
ever legitimated sacrilege; or made it lawful under the new Testament, to
alienate from him things consecrated to his worship: when turned the truth of
that sentence into a lie; Prove. 20.25 Romans 2. Act. 5.1.3.
It is a sin to devour holy things, and after the vow to enquire. Nay the
Lord it seems, has written it in the hearts of Naturalists with the point of
a Diamond: howsoever some men's simple or wilful ignorance, or impious
profanenes, or insatiable covetousnes seems to detain this point of truth,
Romans 1.58.
as many other, in unrighteousness. When Nabuchadnezzar had surprised the
temple, and seized the sacred vessels appointed to Gods worship: in the midst
of sacrilege, he fears to be sacrilegious; and therefore Dan. 1.2.
brings them to the house of his Gods, supposed by him to be the only true
Gods. Infinite I might be in propounding the sentences, and censures, that
heathen passed upon this point of impiety. And is there any man can doubt
whither detainement of tithes be sacrilege, or not? Shape to they self a
description of sacrilege with any sound limits determining its nature, and see
whither under it falls not the detainement of tithes. I beseech you therefore
suffer the words of exhortation: Give Caesar, Caesar's; and God, that which is
Gods. Need I, I think, to press it by reasons? Not sure if the belly had
ears. But sweet sins, are the dangerous sins, because for the most part
incorrigible; begetting in most, either a loathnesse to be informed, or
obfirmation against all persuasions. Yet let us attempt; who knows whither the
Lord may be pleased Act 16 14.
to open the heart, if but of one Lydia, to attend to the things which are
spoken? Consider therefore, I beseech you, even in the bowels of Christ Jesus;
first the heinousness of this sin of sacrilege. They err in Zanch. de
vitiis exter. Cult. opposite. Thesi 3^
Za^chies judgment, that make sacrilege only a branch of theft, and breach of
the eighth precept; yea rather it is a species of irreligion. Hear his
reasons. For whence proceeds it; but from contempt of holy things, and
manifest vnreverence toward God himself? wherefore steals any man things
separate to preserve the ministry, but because he contemnes the whole
Ministry, yea God himself to whose worship they are consecrated?

And whereunto tendes such fraudulent, or violent praying upon holy things: but
to the utter overthrow of all religion? Satan knows well, Gods outward
worship cannot be continued without the Ministry, nor the Ministry without
Ministers, nor Ministers without Church goods: and therefore provokes he
Tyrants and profane men, to invade the Churches possessions, that by that
means he may hinder, if not wholly overthrowe, the state of religion. To this
purpose Zanchius. Shall I add one other reason? The rather because I see men
think of this theft, even those that think worst, but as of thefts from men;
they rob not God, but Ministers (if any) while they detain tithes, or other
things hallowed. Now let them consider, that the dominion, and property of all
things hallowed, is Gods, and such consecration gives him seizure of them in
see; the use only is the Ministers. Polan. in Ezech. 48.14.
Quae sanctificata sunt Domino, non sunt eorum, quibus data sunt, sed eius,
cuius nomine possidentur. Things hallowed to God, are not so much theirs, to
whom they are given, as Gods in whose title they are possessed. Therefore
(says the Lord to the Israelites detaining tithes from the Levits) Ye Mal. 3.
have robbed not Levi, whose they are in use, but ME, in whom is the property
and dominion. Need any more reasons, then the enormity of the sin? Hear then
2 the detestation wherein in all times amongst all men, christians, or heathen,
this sin was holden. To omit the bitter invectiues every where obvious,
consider the punishments appointed for the sacrilegious. Cent. 9. cap. 1.
Charles the great in his time made this decree; that whosoever should invade,
or waste, or by any cunning means presume to alienate the goods of the church,
he should legally be punished by the Judges, as an homicide, or sacrilegious
thief, excommunicated by the Bishops, deprived of burial; yea, as if his alms
were infectious, or accursed, none must receive it. Amongst the heathen no
tortures were thought sufficient for this sin, Lactant. de orig. Error. c. 3
scourgings, burnings, rackings, hangings, any thing whatsoever their fury
could devise to inflict. Plutarch. de his qui sero a numine puniu^tur.
At Delphos they used to cast them headlong from a rock, which they called
Hyampeia. The Aethiopians had an herb they called Ophiusa, as of unpleasing
aspect, so of far more dangerous effect taken into the body. It so affrighted
with phantasmes of dreadful serpents, that such as dra^k it made away
themselves. Plin. hist. not. lib. 26. cap. 17.
Obid (says Pliny) cogebantur sacrilegi illam bibere; for that cause were
church robbers forced to drink it.

Amongst our selves, breaking up of churches, and stealing the least trifle,
aggravates the theft, and makes the offender culpable of death. If the
Philosopher were now alive, would he not laugh at the spectacle? To see the
great thieves lead the smaller to the gallows? How is it a sin more heinous, to
violate a temple, then to alienate Church maintenance from the worship of God?
3. If none of these move, oh yet let the blood of so many souls perishing by
this, if not as a cause, yet as a great occasion, waken us. Many motions I
have heard of, made for a learned ministry, that every congregation might have
Ier. 3.15.
a past or to feed them with knowledge and understanding. For my part I say as
Gal. 5.12.
Paul in another case; vtina^ excindantur; I would they were cut off that
hinder it. But amongst all, how is it that the point of maintenance comes not
to be consulted? It were to be wished that the Apostolic zeal burnt now in
Ministers, that rather then souls should starve, they would freely give what
they have freely received. But he was Perkins in Job. 33. 23.
an holy man that said, men are men, and must be allured by such arguments as
may prevail even with flesh and blood. It was Gods great wisdom in the
creation, first to provide food, before he made the Animal creatures. And it is
ashame to the Church in the days of peace, to see men of best gifts therefore
divert their studies to other arts, because the ministry affords not
maintenance; for our Church most, where Gods allowance is so liberal, were it
not that sacrilege did intercept it.

4 May J not add the mischief temporal it has brought upon the land?
Complaints are frequent amongst our people against enclosures the decayers
(they say) of husbandry, by which, says Solomon, even kings are maintained. I
dare say, that peculatus, if J may so term it, has not been more hurtful
this way, then has this sacrilege. Cornefields were wont to laugh in our
Gentlemen's now pastures; but tithes seem more compendious to the ground of
housekeeping then the toilesome tediousness of tilling the earth. And scarf a
great man now adays, though but niggardly hospital, that can keep open doors
without a Parsonage. It were well me thinks amongst so many delicates, they
would once in their lives eat one morcel of their own bread. Lastly, if these
persuade not, yet let that terror of the Lord prevail with us; Prove. 20.25.
Its a curse (says Solomon) to devour holy things, a cursed practice, that
brings down Gods vengeance upon the sacrilegious.

Examples we have seen many, and read of more: even kings themselves have not
gone unpunished. The Zech. 5.4.
flying book of Gods vengance, Enter (says Zecherie) into the house of the
thief, and consumes it with the timber, and the stones thereof; leaves scarce
a monument where he has been. Is God thus sharp against petite thefts, and
will he leave sacrilege vnavenged? Search records divine, humane: where find
thou a rob-God without his vengance? observe these sacrilegious amongst our
selves: its much if they prosper to the fourth generation; much, (though God be
much in sparing) if he either leave not them childlesse, or their children
graceless, by one means or other makes them not vomit those morsels of holy
things, that they have devoured. Tithes with lay men, are as the 1. Sam. 5
6.9.11.
Arc with the Philistims, plaguing the unjust possessors, til they return to
the right owners.

Enough I hope of this first sin. And too much perhaps some will say, too full
of tartnes. Let them remember the Callum is thick, and needs a hot Cauterie.
Yea but it may wound the conscience; Vtinam. The remedy is at hand. Restituatur
ablatum, vt dimittatur peccatum. Howsoever, for my soul, I dare not Isai. 5.20.
speak good of evil, Read Ezech. 13.22.

2 As to our people, witty, alas, to their own harm, in shifting to detain
that little of the Lords portion still left him, I say as 2 Par. 31.4.
Hezechias (J would, I could hope with like success) Give the portion to
Priests, and Levits, to Ministers of the Gospel, that they may be encouraged
in the law of the Lord. Needs any more reasons then the encouragement of your
Ministers. Hear Malachy; Detainment is robbery in the highest degree;
sacrilege; Mal. 3 10.
ye have robbed me, says the Lord to withholders. 2. Robbery detested by
Jdolaters; will a man, will an Idolater spoil his Gods? For shame let not
Christians spoil their God. 3 Levit. 27 30
Tithes are Gods by reservation from the beginning, Ministers are but his
receavers. 4. Payment sets open the wondowes of heaven, and brings down a
blessing in abundance; 5. Detainement, a curse, yea upon whole kingdoms. That
saying of Solomon, let never be forgotten; Prove. 3.9.10
Honor God with thy substance and with the chief of all thine increase: so
shall thy barnes be filled with abundance; is a blessing annexed to this duty.
Will any say its spoken only for that state of the Church in Israel? Let him
pervse the whole book, and instance but in one precept there given of
Leviticall performances, except he will too absurdly instare in proposito.

More persuasions I will not add: how fear I, that J shall not persuade, no
not though J do persuade? Shall J presume to speak of the figleaues, men have
sown to themselves to hide their shame? Some thus: To honest able Ministers
they think them due; but dishonestie etc. makes incapable. Resp. With what
conscience then detain ye from such whose honesty and ability your selves
will testify? 2 The Levites in Malachie his days Mal. 2.7, 8, 9
had broken the covenant, were become ignorant, partial, contemptible: yet
even in those times called the Lord for tithes. 3. What law of God, or man,
permits to private men detainment of dues even from the dishonest. Mat. 22.
To wicked Magistrates tribute must be paid. 4. Tithes are due to Ministers, not
qua probi; but qua ministri: not for their honesty; but for their Ministry.

As to those other objections, of customs, Vae tibi flumen moris humanit
quamdiu non siccaberis? Aug. confess.
prescriptions, exemptions etc. I say no more, but what the Apostle in this
case; Gal. 6.7.
God is not mocked. A pretty mocke-God answer it will be, at that great day
when thou shall stand before the great Proprietarie to be examined, how
faithfully thou have given Tithes according to his assignement; to tell him:
for matter of tithing, thou had a custom to the contrary. Dally not with
conscience, deceive not thy self, God sure will not thus be deluded.

Thus far of this question at your request; to whom undeserved kindness has
engaged me so far, as my weak abilities can extend themselus. Of this tract
thus think; The Author thinks himself a man, and therefore subject to
error. Yet would feign so carry himself, as to deserve of Gods Church the
esteem of an honest man, and therefore no lover of errors; much less a
Patron of them against his knowledge and conscience.

FINIS.

