THREE SERMONS Preached by WILLIAM SCLATER Doctor of Divinity, and Minister of
the word of God at Pitmister in Sommersetshire.

Now published by his Son of Kings College in Cambridge.

printer's device of Thomas Harper

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the black Bear. 1629.

SERMON Preached at St. Mary's in the University of Cambridge.

By WILLIAM SCLATER Doctor of Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Kings College, and
Minister of the word of God at Pitmister in Sommersetshire.

Now published by his Son of the same Kings College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the black Bear. 1629.

To that pious root of Religion and virtue, the worshipful and devout
gentlewoman, Mistrisse JANE STILL, Together with her tender branches at Hutton
in Sommerset, William Sclater wishes all happiness and prosperity in this
life, and that which is to come.
Most worthy Matron:
TO avoid the imputation of Ingratitude this slender Epistle of mine prostrates
it self to your favorable acceptance, desiring (though meanly) to express
its Authors service, and (that indubitate office and act of love) his
thankfulness for that abundance of kindness, couetesy and well-willing, which
from the infancy of your acquaintance with our dear Father, has been from you
propagated to us branches of that root. Were it not, that I should be foully
injurious to a Saint in Heaven (the memory of whom, as of a just man is for
ever blessed) I could willingly desire the accomplishment of that w^^^ which
once some, (though in another case) sub^^^^ing under the Statue of Brutus,
made, would G^^ thou were alive Brutus! so I, would heaven would restore him,
whose image externally I bear, and hope to be made heir of those virtues (the
best inheritance) resplendent in him, that he might himself have presented
you with this badge of his thankfulness, the contrary whereof was ever odious
to him, and abhorrent from his nature; but since I cannot crave the fruition of
his presence without bereauing him of felicity, let this grateful office
tendered by his Son have access at the bar of your courteous acceptance,
and if it (weighed in the balance of your rich favors) come short of equal
counterpoizing them, you may in part ascribe it to the tenuity of the enditers
immature judgment, and want of rhetoric to set it down, but chiefly to the
greatness of your kindness, which transcends the capacity of so illiterate a
penman; but what you find defective on my part, suppose (if there be any
sense of such things among the Saints in Heaven) to be supplied by the
approbation of him, whose son I was. The present here offered unto you is a
Sermon preached by the Author, my deceased Father, at St. Mary's in the
University of Cambridge, when he commenced Doctor of Divinity, which through
the importunity of some my worthy friends, and men of judgment, who wish well
to the Commonwealth of Israel, I have put to the press, hoping, that when
it is brought forth, and exposed to the open world, it may find safe shelter,
and protection under the wings of your patronage. In it it you (...) ^^y
furtherance of your faith, I dare promise for the Author, that he has his
desire; as for my self, be pleased thus to think, I had rather be accounted
any thing, then unthankful. Now, the God of all grace, that has called you to
his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect, confirm, strengthen and
stablish you in the true faith of his son, deliver you from every evil
work, and preserve you to his heavenly kingdom. Amen.

Yours devoted in all thankful observance WILLIAM SCLATER.
From my Chamber in Kings College in Cambridge. Nou. 18. 1628.
To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, be pleased co^^teously to embrace what not mine own, but the
maturity of others judgments have thought worthy the Press. The Authors
whole purpose ever was to heal, if possible, the breaches of Gods people, and
further the faith of his Church. Where he is faulty, smite him friendly, it
shall be balm to the heads of his posterity, and perhaps a means, that the
remnant of his labors redound hereafter to the Churches good. Now the Lord
sole giver of increase to the painful endeavors of his Ministers, make this
part of his works fruitful, to the comfort of thy conscience, and
establishment of thy faith. Amen.

Thine in Christ W. S.

THE SPIRITVALL War-fare.
1. PETER. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the Soul.
THis Text is amongst those, that antiquo vocabulo, but nouo errore ye call
precedents: let that be no prejudice to the handling of it.

The resolution is plainly this: We have first a Preface insinuatiue; wherein
first a loving compellation, (...), a meek obtestation, I beseech you.
Secondly, an exhortation; wherein, 1. the Act, abstain, secondly the object
fleshly lusts, thirdly Reasons pressing the exhortation* first from our state;
We are stranger^ and pilgrims; secondly, from their d^n^^^^ (...) ^ect; They
war against the Soul:

(...) It is no title of complement, but a true Character of Pastoral
affection. And howsoever protestations of this nature be not always necessary;
yet the thing is that must season all ministerial performances. Whether he
exhort, or instruct, or reprove, or correct, here must that have place in a
Minister that S. Paul prescribes to the people: 1 Cor. 16 14.
That all our things be done in love. The high Priest in the old Law, when he
goes to Minister before the Lord in behalf of the people, must have in his
Exodus 28. and 39.
Breastplate engraven the names of the Tribes of Israel; on his breast the
seal of love; to signify with what entire affection, a Pastor of the Church
should be devoted to the good of his people. There is indeed a kind of love,
the bane of all Pastoral performances, in effect hatred rather then love. Let
me therefore remember unto you that ancient prescription of Hierome to husbands
in respect of their wives: A wise man must love his wife, indici^ non affectu;
Iudiciously, rather then affectionately* so must a Pastors love be guided by
iudgeme^^* not by affection. Grecians have well d^stinguished them by their
names* the one they call (...), the other (...) blind affection, Balbinum
delectat polypus Agnae. And the lukewarm, worst temper of the Soul in
devotion, begins amongst Pastors to be their peoples commendation. Secondly,
nimium of couniuence at the grossest sins till custom have brought upon them
the die of the Blackemore, and their spots become as those of the Ier. 13.23.
Leopard, never (except by miracle) to be removed. Thirdly, Indulgence and
flattery: Go up and prosper Achabs Chaplains: there are minims of duties: the
Prodigal, such call liberal; the Covetous, good husbands; tatling, in the
style of flatterys is affability; pertinacie, fortitude; very sloth;
staidness, and maturity of judgment; enormities are infirmities; never so
little morality, purity no less then Angelical. Its magna ira dej, says S.
Austin, vt defit correctio, and adfit adulatio. The complaint of Hierome befits
these times; In multis isto maxim tempore regnat hoc vitium; quodque est
grauissimum, humilitatis ac beneuolentiae loco ducitur: eo fit vt qui adularj
nescit aut inuidus aut Superbus Hieron ad Caelantium.
putetur.

The other kind of love only Commendable in a Minister is, discreet Christian
Charity; ordinate love, not inordinate affection. It draws with it compassion
of misery, supply of wants, seasonable Leuit. 19.17.
reproof and correction, when the state of the people requires it. Shall I 1
Cor. 4.21.
come with the rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness? Aug. contra.
epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Nunquid tamen and virga sine Charit^^ ^est? and virga charitatem habet. Sed
aliud est cla^^tas feuerti^^is, aliud charitas ma^s^ce^ dinit: vn^ quidem
charitas est, sed diuersa in diuersis operatur (...) Sometimes ye may observe
Gods servants more peremptory: S. Paul not only 2. Tim. 2.14 and 4.1.
charge, (...) Timothy, to do the office of an Evangelist, prescribes him to
charge the rich in this world to be rich in faith. And Titus to Tit. 2.
speak, exhort, rebuke; (...) with all peremptorinesse of commanding. And
indeed says S. Paul: the Lord has given us power to use 2 Cor. 13.1^.
sharpness, as well as commanded meekness, where it tends to edification,
not to destruction. Its said indeed; the Lord was 1 Reg. 19.11.
not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in the still
voice; Yet its true, Gods voice is as well in the terrible thunder of threats,
as in the meek allurements by promises and soft speeches, except perhaps we
may say, he spoke only by Barnabas, the son of consolation; and not also by
those Boanerges, the sons of thunder.

What may be our direction in prudence? First the rule is ancient: Suum quemque
decet. The Majesty, and peremptory spirit of Elias rests not on all the sons
of the Prophets; as on Eliza^. Some are rather of Moses his temper, meek ever
to admiration. The Lord of all gifts distributes 1. Cor. 12.
severally: and here it has place of the Apostle; Every man has his 1. Cor.
7.7.
proper gift, one after this manner, another after that. Its not safe strayning
against our peculiar inclinations. Secondly, Besides we must learn to
distinguish, first persons, secondly States of persons, thirdly, parts of
ministry.

Jeremy has; Gods word must be as Ierem. 23.29.
fire, and as the hammer to break the stone. There are others of Josias
temper, the noise of any thing fearful resolves, and makes even to melt:
these if we meekely persuade, and allure, as Genesis 9.
Noah speaks of Iapheth we shall sooner bring them into the tents of Shem.
This is Saint Iudes rule; have Iud. ver 22.23.
compassion on some in putting difference; others save with fear pulling them
out of fire. S. Bernard alluding to that in the Psalm: 1. Bernard. Sentent
cap. 4.
there is virga and Baculus: his rule is this: virga ouem, baculo lupum i.e.
mites and obedientes, we must leuius corripere; duros vero cord, and improbos,
acrius arguere, cumque necesse fuit, Anathematis sententia ferire.

Even Gods children, and people must be considered 2. These. 3.6.
brethren sometimes walk inordinately. In this case the Lord himself writes
bitter things against them, he is very Psalm. 89.
terrible in the assembly of the Saints: in such case Moses the mirror of
meekness bids Levites gird with the Exodus 32.
sword. And 1 Cor. 5.5.
Saint Paul delivers to Satan, that the flesh may be destroyed. Thirdly, there
are several parts, and works of our Ministry; wherein Grande dicendi genus S.
Augustine likes not, in delivering doctrines for information. Secondly, If to
exhort; do it with meekness; It may be thou shall win more by allurements,
then by rigor. Thirdly, If to reprove; have reverence to superiors, love to
equals and inferiors; but do it (...) let them feel it smart; and so, that
others also may fear. Enough of this, least I incur the prouerbiall scomme;
Su^ Mineruam.

Abstain from fleshly lusts. First of the object, Fleshly lusts. The desiring
part of the soul is as the stern to the whole man; as the first moveable to
the inferior spheres; as the maine wheel in a clock; after which all other
faculties move themselves. Affections they say are pedes animae the seet of
the soul, so are thoughts, intentions, actions, all things commanded by them.
Its ever the best or worst part of the Soul: that ordered, all ordered; that
irregular, all out of square: Its that wherein piety, or profaneness,
Corruption or grace most shows it self; that by which God most measures piety
and profaneness. Acts of wickedness are not so much detested, as greedines of
committing: Acts of obedience not so much regarded, as desires to obey. No
marvel if S. Peter be so desirous to order it. From this faculty according to
a threefold principle moving it, arise three several sorts of actual desires.
First Natural, secondly spiritual, thirdly Carnal. First Natural, carrying
us from a natural principle to things natural in a natural manner, Secondly
spiritual, from a spiritual principle to things spiritual in a spiritual
manner; or if to things natural, yet in a spiritual manner. Thirdly Carnal,
from a carnal principle to things carnal, or if to things natural or
spiritual, yet in a carnal manner.

fleshly, from these natural or spiritual desires? First, fleshly desires may
thus be distinguished from those that are natural in things of this life. They
are ever immoderate. So is no desire, that is merely natural. Natura minimum
petit, says Seneca; a little, never so little suffices nature: moderate diet,
moderate decking; if it be but victus and vestitus; though not victus and
ornatus, says Bernard, it gives to nature full contentment.

That unmeasurable gorging our selves with these things proceeds not from
nature, but from nature depraved. (...) yea (...) immoderate and ouerfrequent
bibbings, to these not Natural, but Carnal desires carry us: Immoderate
heaping up of wealth, exquisit finenesse in apparel, Epicurcall glutting our
selves with pleasures, is never desired by right nature. Prou. 30.
Give me neither poverty nor riches, is the voice of right nature; that same
horsleach humor, that voice of the Grave, give, give, and never enough, issues
from flesh: these are truly (...) fleshly desires.

There are some of these lusts, says Bernard, so

Carnal desires are marvelous pleasing to sensuality,

As in the pursuit they are pleasing, so have they a farewell in bitterness;
after accomplishment leave nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit: How are
they vanished, and as a Sap. 5 9.
post passed away? and if they leave any thing, its a sting. In the end they
sting as a Cockatrice, and bite as a serpent, as the Prou. 7.
Harlots lips in the greeting, they drop sweetness as the Honey comb, but
their end is bitter as wormwood, sharper then a two-edged sword; as Apoc. 10.
S. John's book; sweet as honey in the mouth, bitter as Wormwood in the
bowels. They are not that make joy and peace, the fruit of spiritual
affections.

Anabaptist to measure it, by paucity of followers. Howbeit I think with
Seneca its ordinarily true: Argumentum pessimi turba est: Its a shrewd sign,
the thing is none of the best, that is affected and applauded by the brutish
multitude.

2. Cor. 10.5.
exalts it self against the obedience of Christ, whatsoever is not Romans 8.7.
subject to the law of God, of it think its fleshly; from it fly as from a
Scorpion.

The act or duty follows; Abstain: The degrees of abstinence thus conceive:
descending first a summo ad imum: the height of abstinence is to repress them
that they arise not: therefore S. Paul 1 Cor. 9.
kept his body in subjection; and that he might keep it under, blue beat it.
The means thus conceive. First, keep thy mind ever busied in some holy and
heavenly meditation: the mind says Oecumenius is (...) always in action; if
it be not detained in goodness, it wanders to evil. The old saying is
occupatum vno: the idle is tempted with two, yea with a Legion of Devils.
Secondly, Though honor may not be denied to the body, to preserve it in
strength and vigor; yet is there a time, when macerating it almost may seem
necessary; That it may have place here, that our Savior spoke; This kind of
fleshly Devils is not cast or kept out but by Prayer and Fasting.

A second but inferior degree is, in case they arise, morbus mentis, and what
for that morsus serpentis says Bernard: Its a high point of this holy
abstinence to deny them harbor; to keep our minds from allowance, our wills
from fullness of consent.

Erasmus gave to cross and thwart our fleshly inclinations; contrary what thy
flesh prouokes unto: If Covetous desires arise, hasten to a deed of liberality:
If desires of revenge, and retaling of wrongs; do good for evil: such
thwarting abates corruption; and blunts the point even of satanicall
temptations.

Joseph is worth our imitation, solicited by his Mistress he hearkens not to
her to be in her company. Our hearts are of a Gunpowder disposition; a very
spark of opportunity inflames them, and setts all in a combustion.

Mic. 2.
take them not by force. The taste of pleasures of sin in action, increases
our natural thirst after iniquity; one act makes not a habit; yet strengthens
a vicious inclination.

Lastly; If the temptation be so violent that affection

As Pilgrims and Strangers. (...): 2 Cor. 5.3.
We have here no abiding City; but look for one to come: our conversation, our
City-freedome, our negotiation, Phil 3.
(...) is in heaven; is, or ought to be, for heaven. The inference is,
therefore Abstain from fleshly lusts. Bernardus de quadragesima ser 81.
Peregrinus si quidem via regia incedit, non declinat ad dexteram neque ad
sinistram: si forte iurgantes viderit, non attendit: si nubentes aut choros
ducentes, aut aliud quodlibet facientes; nihilaminus transit, quia peregrinus
est, and non pertinet ad eum de talibus; ad patriam suspirat, ad patriam
tendit; vestitum and victum habens non vult alijs onerari. In a word; they
hinder us from our home two ways, 1. Meritorie, 2. Effectiue. First, justly by
the sentence of God has he no portion in heaven, that preferrs in his
affection, the Momentany pleasures of sin, before that eternal beatitude
prepared for us in heaven Secondly, effectiue, Col. 3.
And how do they clog, and divert our affections from things above? We are
strangers and Pilgrims, therefore should abstain from fleshly lusts.

If that Reason sway nothing; consider their effect, they fight against the
soul.

Its not (...) but (...), not a slight Skirmish or conflict now and than; but
a continual Warfare, and hostility they are in against the soul. So S. Paul
Romans 7.
the law in the members (...) and James; our pleasures, or lusts in our members
(...) Let us consider how they exercise it; see it in the weapons wherewith they
assault us: secondly in the manner of fighting.

Their weapons 1 are their Objects 2. our inclinations. Their objects before
enjoying, After fruition. First, Before enjoying, as harlots garishly attire
themselves, that they may draw affections; So does fleshly concupiscence
garishly adorn, and paint over the things desired, that by their seeming
beauty they may bewitch us. The Genesis 3.
tree was pleasant to the eye, and much to be desired for Knowledge.
Proportionably see it in all fleshly inclinations. Oh how glorious seems
wealth to a covetous eye? It is the way to reputation; the best proofe-armour
of defense from wrongs. It brings with it an (...) A man may live of himself,
yea what cannot money procure? Such a petty God seems money to a covetous
desire. Ambition, how garish makes it honor seem? When every man must Cap,
and Courtesy, and be at command. And so of the rest.

Secondly, after fruition their fight is dangerous by the same weapons; as for
example, what distractions breeds abundance once enjoyed? Such and so many,
that they leave no leisure for that vnum necessarium. Secondly our
Inclinations: The seeds of all sins are in all the sons of Adam. Yet as in
mixto when all Elements concur; there is ever one predominant; So usually we
shall see some particular lust swaying in every man's soul; whether it be from
the temper of the body, and our natural constitution, or from some strength it
has gotten in us by ancient ill custom. As Satan usually fits temptations to
our inclinations; so our hostis domesticus, that fomes concupiscentiae vents it
self especially at that channel, where its likely the victory is most easy;
the recovery most difficult.

The manner of their war, first, sometimes ex infidijs: covertly and under
color of virtuous affections. Saint Paul tells us of 2 Cor.
(...) of colored covetousness 1. These. 2. Saint Bernard of minium virtutis;
a certain painted complexion of virtues, wherewith vices are sometimes
colored, and take upon them the complexion of virtues: there are vitia
pallitata; vices that wear the livery of virtues, the sword of Goliath lies
hidden under an Ephod, a holy garment, none to that said David; No sword to
Goliahs, no malice to an hypocrites; Goliahs sword lies hidden under an Ephod,
the malice of hypocrisy under pretense of Religion: No vicious desires are so
insinuatiue into well-disposed natures, as these colored, and cloaked with the
show of virtues. I shall ever prefer the scrupulous before the audacious, and
ventrous Conscience; and think him safest that is suspicious. Beatus qui
semper pauidus est, says Solomon, that is, that fears all his actions, as Job
speaks; yea though strongly virtuous.

Simulando fugam; such times fall out with many fastidium only abated in them;
and the motions thereof languishing in their hearts: Concupiscence is sometimes
stupefied, and therefore seems mortified; as Seneca speaks of some temperate
for lack of occasions, or other abilities to exercise their Riot; It fares
with them as with a Serpent in Winter; safely ye may handle them, and need
not fear their poison: yet non desunt tum illi venena, sed torpent: like
think of Concupiscence: Si vitia putas emortua, at creed mihi and amputata
repullulant etc. says S. Bernard, They advantage themselves against us by this
retreit, as Joshua by his flight from the inhabitants of Ai, working security,
presumption, throwing our selves into occasions of evil, laughing at
temptations, as Israel at the Prophets Prediction. 2 Reg. 8.

aperto Mart; Its strange to see the deprauation of man's Nature; created after
Gods Image in holiness, and righteousness: but now is so beset with corruption,
as it must maintain it self against the Devil with the sword. Ah Lord,
whether fell we, when we fell from thee? and thou have left us in the hands of
our own counsel? no case, no not Sodomes so desperate as when the Lord has
left us to our selves.

You have heard the nature of fleshly lusts, 2 your duty, Abstain, and what it
comprizeth, 3. Reasons, first from your estate, secondly their effect.

Suffer now I beseech you a little the words of exhortation. 1 Ioh. 2.16.
S. John diduceth this Summary of S. Peter into three ranks: the first in his
term is the lust of the flesh; so fitly and by (...) he calls those of
Luxury, and her daughters, suppose Drunkenesse, Gluttony, Lasciviousness,
Whordome. Take heed to your selves, least at Luke 21.24.
any time your hearts be ouercharged with surfeiting, and Drunkenness: Tell it
not in Gath, neither publish it in the streets of Askelon; that they have made
an irruption upon the sons of the Prophets; far be it, that they should
ever hear news, that we are possessed with that unclean Devil; that our
tables should swim: with filthy vomitings, and the humor of drinking should
be taken up amongst the sons of the Prophets: In this time of abstinence at
least, Abstain from these fleshly lusts, these fight against the Soul.

Oh Bestiall Epicures they, qui Curios simulant, and Bacchanalia viuunt,
suffering not the force of flesh, yet gorge themselves with more delicious
diet: Isay 22. Drink wine in bowls, and stretch them on their beds of Iuory:
And as these abstemious Monks distenti and crepantes cry out, Quanta patimur;
Alas indeed what torment feels the conscience, to give content to a gluttonous
appetite. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, these fight dangerously against the soul.

The second is the lust of the eye: that with Bernard is Curiosity, to others
better, Covetousness; the eye is not satisfied with seeing says Solomon; see
Prou. 27 20 Eccl. 4.8. This is Senioritatis vitium: seniors they say are
attenjores ad rem. Whom I know my soul and conscience acquits; whom I know not
I am not so uncharitable as to calumniate, but I could tell you of abominable
simony among Patrons, that say this evil is come out from the Prophets of
Jerusalem; and they have taken from us the rule of practice; Dearly beloved, I
beseech you as pilgrims and strangers abstain from fleshly lusts, that so
dangerously fight against the soul; If they will be filthy, let them be
filthy, if they will perish, let them perish, but sine exemplo nostro.

The last is pride of life; It had wont to be said; they that wear soft
raiment dwell in Kings houses; that privilege of royalty our delicacy begins
to intrude upon: so that betwixt Bethel the Kings Court, and Ramoth the seat
of Prophets, habit makes but little distinction. Dearly beloved, I beseech you
as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts they war, they war
dangerously, and that against the soul. Non est res parua quam sic insectantur
hosts, Ciues sic praestolantur: Its a thing of no small worth, that the
Devil, and fleshly desires so eagerly pursue; Saints and Angels so desirously
wish for, and long after.

Deo Gloria.
A SERMON Preached at TANTON in Sommerset,

By WILLIAM SCLATER, Doctor of Divinity, and Minister of the word of God at
Pitmister.

Now published by his Son of Kings College in Cambridge.

printer's device of Thomas Harper

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the black Bear. 1629.

To the Worshipful Mr. EDWARD WAR, Esquire: And to the truly religious and
right virtuous ELIZABETH his Wife, At Chipley in Sommerset, my much honored
friends: Mercy and peace be multiplied.
Worshipful:
TWO things more especial, have occasioned the present tendering of my service
to you: The one is, the greatneess of that love and plenty of courtesy, which
from you the fountains, has ever been derived, and willingly conveyed to our
family, sweetly to refresh, as once the living, but languishing stock, so now
also all the tender branches sprouting out from it: The other is, your
undeserved favors toward my self in more particular. As for the first, we
are all heirs to that service, which our dear Father in all obseruancy
toward you was ever ready to perform: for the second, as I more nearly shall
acknowledge my self to stand for ever obliged to you, so for the present do
desire that my thankful service may have acceptance at your favorable hands,
wherein if (through want of skill to express it) I seem any way defective, he
pleased to suppose out of the kindness of those loving hearts of yours, that,
that which you see not here fully tendered by my unlearned quill, is inwardly
in wishing thoughts supplied: In confidence whereof, here I dedicate my self,
and these few leaves, penned by the Author my deceased Father to your
worthiness, hoping your Worships will veil my boldness in your good
acceptance, and trusting (for the Authors sake) that your strong hands will
support this posthume work (wrested from me by importunity of some my
reverend, and judicious friends) which can live now by no other heat, then what
your beams gives it. It flies to you as a bereaved Orphan for shelter,
confident of safety from the worlds vpbraiding, if you vouchsafe to yield it
patronage. Now the God of all mercy, that has so richly furnished you with his
saving grace, preserve and keep you blameless unto the coming of the Lord
Jesus, Amen.

Your Worships in all thankful respectfulnesse WILLIAM SCLATER.
From my Chamber in Kings College in Cambridge. Nou. 18. 1628.
To the Reader.
COurteous Reader; Be pleased to weigh first in the balance of thy more
mature deliberation the substance of these ensuing leaves, before thou pass
any censure on me, who, through the grave advice of those, to whose judgment J
shall ever subscribe, am now the publisher of them: accept them favorably, as
they are well intended, and if thou reapest from them any comfort to thy
conscience, or increase of thy faith, give God the glory, and use it to thy
greater benefit: Farewell.

Thine in the Lord W. S.

2. KING. 9.31. Had Zimri peace that slew his Master.
IT is the speech of Iezabel, occasioned by the death of her son Iehoram; and
the nigh approach of Iehu the Minister of the Lords vengeance on her and her
posterity: and tends in her intention to deter from his bloody, and, as to
her they seemed, traiterous designs, by remembering Gods late vengeance, on
Zimri a traiterous conspiratour against his master Elah.

The vtterer Iezabel a monster of her sex may make it questionable whether and
how far it concerns us for instruction and use.

Ans. Thus conceive 1. Omne bonum de super: and omne verum aquocunque dicatur,
a Deo: All truth is of God: whosoever is the vtterer, God is the Author. As
all light is from the Sun, because that is the primo lucidum; As all heat from
fire, because that is the primo calidum; so all truth is from God, because he
is the first truth. We may not say of Pharisees they might not be heard because
Pharisees, when they speak out of Moses chair: Hear them, said our Savior,
though they say and do not. Moses his doctrine is of God, though a Pharisee be
the publisher: Caiaphas being high Priest Prophesied that year: his Prophecy
must not therefore be despised because he was an intruder upon the Priesthood,
and one that dipped deep in the blood of our Savior. Balaam once played the
Prophet in blessing Gods people, and foretelling the state of the Church. We
believe it true; God is not as Man that he should lie; nor as the son of man
that he should repent, though Balaam first proclaimed it. Neither will we
question whether God be auenger of Treason because Iezabel makes the
observation. Non vitiat sacramentum malitia ministrantis. Neither is the truth
defiled by the polluted lips through which it passes; Truth is truth whosoever
is the vtterer; duty, duty whosoever is our monitour; And treason is treason,
odious unto God, Though a Iezabel so proclames it.

2 The worst men's speeches and actions receive a kind of sacration by their
recording in holy writ: though they spoke and did lewdly, yet the inspirer of
Scripture caused them holily to be recorded, and intended therein our
instruction. Whatsoever was written before time, was written for our
instruction. Understand it, not only of the virtuous practices of Saints to
occasion our imitation; But of the lewdest facts of veriest miscreants, to be
our caution. How much more those holy things, those pearls of wholesome
admonitions which God is pleased by them to cast before us.

3. We say the testimony of an Adversary is strongest for an Adversary; we
the rather believe some Theological truths because they have consent from
Heathens. In matters of morality we listen to heathens because in them the
light of Nature is reserved. Incest such Incest is damnable, more, because
heathens name it not. Lying who would not more detest, if the devil should cry
shame upon it? And why is not treason more detestable, when Iezabel cries
vengeance against it.

4. Her relation we find suitable with Scripture story. The application after
her intention sorts with Paul's doctrinall rule: such vengeances come on sinners
as ensamples; And are written for our warning. Such truths according with
sacred story: such application congruent in the general to the Rules of
Scripture, let no man despise because Iezabel is the vtterer. Their congruence
with Scripture makes them merit our reverend respect. So far to prevent what
ignorant scruple might pretend to slight the doctrine here delivered unto us.

Had Zimri peace who slew his master?
THe story ye have extant, 1. Kings 16. how Zimri Captain of half the
Charets to Elah son of Baasha, conspired against him in Tirzah and slew him:
How the people moved with indignation at the fact, create Omri Captain of the
host, King over the ten tribes: How Zimri, whither fearing extremities, or
mad with the cross of his ambition, or desperate through conscience of such
crime, becomes an Incendiarie to himself; and wilfully perishes in the fire
himself had kindled in the Kings Palace.

In the Text are three things: 1. the fact of Zimri. He slew his Master. 2. The
issue of his fact. But had Zimri peace? Did Zimri prosper? he prosperd not. 3.
the application of all to Iehu intended to deter him from supposed like
sin, through fear of like vengeance.

1 The fact of Zimri Iezabel counts odious. Who but a verier strumpet durst
make meritorious? How is Christianity grown more heathenish then heathenisme
it self, when sins so monstrous in the eye of Nature shall go as justifiable
by the word of Scripture?

Foorsoth: Ehud slew Aeglon. Ans. True; But Aeglon a Moabite; disabled by
express law of God in regard of his Nation, to rule over Gods people. 2. And
Ehud slew him: A man whom the Lord extraordinarily stirred up, as Othniel, to
be a deliverer to his people: and directed by special instinct to that means
of deliverance. I have a word unto thee from God O King: that verbum is factum
in S. Austines judgment. When he says he had a word from God, intelligendum
est, hoc illi Deum vt faceret praecepisse: Thus understand him, that he had his
warrant and precept from God to do what he did in the manner of deliverance.

Iehu slew Iehoram. Ans. Iehoram, whom God the great disposer of Kingdoms had
deposed from the Kingdom, and devoted to death.

2 And Iehu slew him, now no subject to Iehoram, the anointed King over
Israel: besides, sent with special commission and warrant from God to destroy
from Ahab him that made water against the wall. The Priests oppose Vzziah
attempting to burn incense. Ans. They inhibit his fact, draw no blood from his
person. These and like facts warrantable in the doers, were in great part
extraordinary; so make us no rule; and (...) discrepant from those now
warranted to subjects toward their Sovereigns.

Our ordinary rule is thus: who shall lay hands on the Lords anointed, and be
guiltless? And how wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hand to destroy
the Lords anointed; protexit viuum, vindicavit mortuum, he protected him while
he lived, avenged him when he was dead; says S. Austine of David in respect of
Saul. And who that remember him that said they are Gods, can think treason,
bloody treason less then highest sacrilege?

It is said indeed the Lord set Jeremy, over the nations and over the
kingdoms. To root out and pull down; to build and to plant. Resp. 1. But S.
Austin makes it past question its spoken figuratively. Non quin figurata
locutio tota sit; that is, tropicallie given to the minister or proclaimer,
that in property of speech is meerelie the work of God: As Isay is sent to
make fat the peoples hearts, to blind their eyes, to bow down their backs; so
Jeremy to pluck down kingdoms. 1. Occasionally not efficaciter. The
contempt of his ministry should occasion overthrow of stateliest kingdoms.
2. Denunciatiuelie not by way of violence. Samuel told Saul, the Lord had rent
the kingdom from him: did he ever persuade the people to seditious
insurrections? Jeremy tells Zedekiah that Babylon must subdue him: But did he
encourage Jews to betray or force him to the King of Babel? God shall smite
thee thou whited wall, said Paul to an usurping high Priest: But when he
recalls his harsh term, suppose we he meditated personal violence? God shall
smite him, or his day shall come, or he shall go down into battle and
perish: howsoever my hand shall not be upon him. Thus David, thus Ancient
Saints.

Beloved we live in woeful times, wherein moralities are most cancelled, and
too slightly turned of from being bonds to conscience. Religion ever since
Moses, was to be guided by a written Canon: by Popish divinity the rule of
worship is become almost arbitrarie, and rests for the most part in the
Churches breast. Distinction of Dominions there be that think a mere humane
policy. Prohibition of usury, precept of Tything go current for judicial
constitutions? Adultery I think must shortly grow a Jewish sin, murder is
no longer heinous, when murder of Princes is thought meritorious.

Lord that such thoughts can fasten on Christian minds instructed by the word
of God. Moralities binding in innocence, bind they not since the fall? Has
Christian faith cancelled the law of Nature? Shall Iezabel cry shame and
vengeance against bloody treason, and we think the whore chaste, that gives
indulgence, propoundes heavenly rewards to murder of Princes? Belike then
Christ came to destroy the law, not to fulfill it.

To say in a word, there is a tenent amongst some Divines otherwise orthodoxe,
harsh I confess to my apprehension: That there are cases wherein with cautions
^ubiects may bear arms against their sovereign: I am loath to procure their
envy, knowing their pains otherwise reverend in the Church of God. There is,
I know, wide difference betwixt princeps factus and princeps natus. They say
(themselves must defend it), It is eiusdem tollere cuius ponere, where the
Prince is but factious. But this conclusion I hope we all hold firm; Where
immediate providence settles kingdoms, no other but Gods immediate hand may
attempt to overthrow them. But out upon that deuilitie taught in Church of
Rome, without distinction warranting to subjects murder of their Natural
Princes, be pretenses what they may be.

Suppose them Tyrants by abuse of power, was not Saul such? yet who may lay
hand on him, and be guiltless? Suppose by usurpation, was not Baasha such?
continued not Elah that intrusion? yet Zimri had no peace that slew him.

Suppose them Heretics. Is heresy grosser crime then Idolatry? Elah was an
Idolater. It is truly said, factum sine errore non facit haereticum: Heresy
imports errors in judgment. Yet may facts implie heresy, when the ground of
doing is heretically erroneous. The fact of the Idolater is not heresy: but
his opinion, the ground of his fact, may gather him into the rank of
heretics. To invoke devils is in the fact no heresy, though damned
impiety. But the opinion of deity or adorablenesse to dwell in Devils is
grossest heresy. The fact of the fornicatour is not heresy, but beastly
luxury; But the opinion of Nicolaitans, that fornication is res media, is
damned heresy. To worship God in an Image is not in the fact heretical; yet
opinion that God is acceptably worshipped in an Image, what is it less then
heresy? Suppose them therefore Tyrants, suppose them Heretics; yet what peace
may the Traitor look for more then Zimri that slew his master, tyrannous and
no less then Heretical?

And must Rome hatching such monsters of opinions, be still reputed the Church,
the only Catholic upon earth out of which is no salvation? The Church so
infallibly lead by the Spirit into all truth that she cannot possible be
erroneous in her dogmaticall resolutions?

By their fruits ye shall know them; that is by their Doctrines. For these
are fruits of Prophets as Prophets. Legitimate they notorious breaches of the
moral Law? How are they the Church of God? will worship, Image worship they
teach acceptable to God though damned in the second precept: Equiuocating in
oaths, that is, covert perjury, they iust^fie against the third precept.
Dishonor of Parents for religion sake, murder of Princes they make in casu
meritorious.

Cursed be such faith, it is hellish; such practice, it is no less then
Deuilish, methinkes we should now resolve and say with Jacob; Into their secret
let not my soul come: my glory be not thou joined with their assembly. So of
the fact of Iehu; his issue follows.

Had Zimri peace? Did Zimri prosper? he prospered not. Seven days only he
reigned in Tirzah: and becomes a desperate incendiarie to himself.

Zimri had no peace: must therefore his fact be thought unlawful? Best actions
have sometimes their Crosses: lewdest attempts prosperous success.

Ans. Goodness or euilnesse of humane actions no man wisely measures by the
dispositions of providence; But by their dissonance or congruitie to the Law of
God. Precept and prohibition are the primarie rule of good and evil.
Prohibition makes evil, evil: vengeance shows it evil, and odious unto God.
The murder of Princes law Natural and moral make evil: when vengeance
ouertakes the traitor, that shows it hateful to God, and warnes us to fly
it, if not for Conscience, yet for fear of vengeance. 2. And the distinction
is ancient, there is poena vindictae and there is poena castigationis or
probationis; Crosses that come in the way of trials, at no hand argue our
actions evil. The building of the Temple under Ezra we find disappointed by
the people of the Land; yet was their attempt holy and acceptable unto God. The
cross comes to prove their faith; to try their dependence on God. But
punishments that come in the Nature of vengeances are apparent evidences that
the attempts are evil. Such this of Zimri.

Had Zimri peace? Why not? when he fulfills the Prophets prediction, executes
Gods will in the destroying Baasha his posterity; A prophecy went before of
Baasha that his family should be put out in Israel. Because he had walked in
the way of Jeroboam, and made Israel to sin, his house must be like that of
Jeroboam, his posterity utterly destroyed.

Ans. Thus ye may Answer-Prediction there was of Baashaes destruction;
Prescript none to Zimri to be the executioner, There be that say: Praescit Deus
mala, non praeordinat. God foreknowes and foretells evils, preordaines them not;
Its true, qua mala. Yet may we not imagine our God an idle spectatour of the
malice of men. His prescience even of evil presupposes some act of his will,
determining to permit them.

But thus think; there is wide difference betwixt the instruments of Gods
providence, and the Ministers of his ordinance, those fulfill his purposes;
these also do his commandes. Herod and Pilate and the Elders of the people,
did what Gods hand and secret counsel determined should be done in the death
of our blessed Savior; yet justly falls Gods wrath upon them: they were
unwitting instruments of his providence, no Ministers of his ordinance. When
Iehu destroyed the posterity of Achab: he sinned not in the fact; besides
prediction of the Prophet, he had his special commission from God; wherefore
also his fact is crowned as obedience, and rewarded with the Kingdoms
continuance in his posterity unto four generations. When Zimri slew Elah
there was like prediction, but no such commission; therefore Zimri had no peace
that slew his master.

Briefly, first Gods secret appointments are not the rule of our Actions but
his reveled precepts. Do what God prescribes, thou sinnest not but art
accepted with him; though perhaps in the issue thou cross his secret
determinations. Violate his precepts, though thou fulfill his secret
appointments, thou art obnoxious to the wrath of God. It Is possible says S.
Austin for a man bona voluntate velle quod Deus non vult, as when a pious child
desires and prays for his fathers life whom God has designed to death. And a
man may mala voluntate velle quod Deus vult bona? a man may irregularly will
that which God also wills: suppose when an ungracious son desires the death
of his father, which God also wills. The one wills what God wills not, the
other wills what God also wills, and the ones piety is more consonant to the
good will of God, though willing another thing; then the others impiety,
willing the same that God has determined in his secret counsel. So much
auailes it to limit our selves to Gods revealed precept.

2 Besides in hoc examine, in trial of such actions the inquiry is not quid
fecerint, but quid voluerint; not what they did, but what they intended; And in
rationem venit, non factum, but consilium et voluntas, not so much their fact,
as their purpose and intention in doing. God intended and disposed the
unnatural cruelty of Joseph's Brethren to good; yet they thought evil;
therefore felt the smart of famine, fear of bondage, and the stroke of
Conscience; And who so forlorn or impudent amongst miscreants to say, that in
his damned ambition, or Covetousness, or luxury, he had respect to the will
of God which no man lightly knows but by the event. Ashur is the rod of Gods
wrath: by him the Lord accomplisheth his work upon Jerusalem; yet will he
visit the proud heart of the King of Assyria, and bring down his haughty and
proud looks; the equity is apparent: He thinks not so; but it is in his
heart to destroy and cut off Nations; to satiate his infinite ambition, cursed
covetousness and pompous luxury.

3 Generalities of Gods purpose to destroy Baasha his posterity we will suppose
made known to Zimri; that intellignce he might have by the Prophets
prediction: But particulars of the means, as that he should be the Agent God
reveled not, though therefore he did what God determined, yet had he no peace
in slaying his Master. So possible is it to do what God determines, and yet to
be obnoxious to his wrath I would to God it were seriously meditated amongst
our people; that the multitude were not still transported with that fury of
Atheism; to think sins excusable, their sins no sins because they sort
in the event with the secret appointments of Gods counsel: Generally ye may
observe sins fathered upon providence, which are damned in Gods word and have
no other cause but the malice of the committers. Fate and fortune Christians
heathenishly cry out of; and God made Author of that whereof he is vltor.
Thieves and murderers and bloody Traitors, when vengeance seizes on them,
blame destiny or Planets or harder fortune, as well their sins as their
vengeance are resolved to God as to their first Cause. Yet David taught us,
that God is not a God that wills iniquity: And S. James, God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. Our Savior points us to the
truest fountain of all vicious evils; Out of the heart come Adulteries,
murders* thefts blasphemies or if there be any thing else that naught is. And
James; Every man is tempted of his own concupiscence being thereby drawn away
and intised.

And though it be true God has his action even in evil, his action I mean as
Damescene. (...) by way of permission, yet works he not therein by way of
impression or inclination. He determines to permit the sinner to the Swinge of
his own corrupt heart, to suffer his doing of that evil whereto he is selfely
inclined, and to order it to his Glory. Neither may any quarrel that he
restraines or reformes not. First God is Agens liberrimum, not bound to his
creature* secondly, and bonds he has given us sufficient to restrain from
evil. First, His law, secondly, his threatened vengeance, thirdly our own
Conscience. A threefold Cord is not easily broken: yet the vicious heart of man
finds means enough to break these bonds asunder, to cast away these Cords
from them. And which passes all measure of impiety look if not for
recompense from God, yet for excuse with him, because they fulfilled his secret
appointments. Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? yet accomplished he the
secret appointment of God. Actions are never regular till they suit with
Precept, howsoever congruent they may be to Gods secret ordinance.

The application of all to Iehu, remains. Let Iehu therefore beware like
Traiterous attempts, least happily he taste like vengeance of God.

How follows the Argument from one particular to another, from one instance to
the generality of murtherous Traitors. Must Iehu, all Traitors expect so
dreadful death, because such was Zimries fate? Behold how many miscreants see
we prosper in evil, how rare are examples of Gods visible vengeance?

At this stone how many souls stumble, how many have so stumbled that they
have fallen into the neathermost Hell. To see Gods patient forbearance of many
in like sins, so rare particulars culled out to be ensamples. Confessedly
wonderful is Gods patience: his tolerance great of many vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction. Divines give reasons of it.

Therefore, says Austin some are here punished that we may know there is a
providence taking notice of all; Therefore not all, that we may believe there
is a judgment to come.

And have we not seen worst men become Parents of holiest Children? That Ahaz
matchless for impiety, was father yet to good Hezekiah. And out of Ammon a
revolt from his fathers piety issued Josiah peerless for piety amongst the
Kings of Israel and Judah. Pregnancie after humane equity respits the death of
the most notorious amongst women. Justice wisely considers; it savors much of
injury to make the innocent Infant abortiue for the sin of the mother; and
hopefully presumes the child may be instrument of good to the commonwealth,
if man's forbearance on such occasions be thought suitable to Justice; why not
Gods much more, to like intentions.

3 There is an height and full measure of sinning whereto providence will have
miscreants ascend, before the last vengeance sweepes them away; fill up the
measure of your iniquity, said our Savior to Jews, that on you may come the
blood of Prophets, the wickedness of Amorites is not yet full, therefore their
vengeance has four hundred years respit. Yet what if we say no man sins
without his vengeance, there is inseparably accident to the transient act of
sin a threefold mischief. 1. Macula. 2. Reatus. 3. Poena. the stain, the
guilt and the punishment properly so called, yet the stain and guilt have in
them penalty. First, The soul is blemished, the eximious pulchritude thereof
defiled. Secondly, Conscience trembles at the guilt and obligation to
punishment before other extremities fall upon the sense, so that Plutarchs
observation was as true as elegant: As malefactors in the Roman Empire, had
this as part of their punishment, to bear their Cross to the place of
execution, so bears every sinner his Cross, his torture, while he is but in
via ad extremum supplicium.

Lastly as in blessings promised to obedience God sometimes deals by way of
exchange, so in punishments, exchanging bodily for spiritual: instead of
death, or famine or the sword, sends horror of Conscience and astonishment of
heart, so that they become as Pashur terrors and no less then burdens to
themselves: or obstinacy of will, and hardness of heart that they may never
repent but be eternally damned that had pleasure in unrighteousness.

But to the point.

First the old saying is, what betides any one, may befall every one. Let all
sinners tremble at any sinners vengeance. It may be their fate that has
befallen another. Secondly, the Argument well follows from a particular to the
generality, where is like reason of all. The cause of vengeance is alike in all; And in such singulars, for the paritie of the sin may well be expected
equality of vengeance. So far therefore the inference is current.

Yet its true* her application is erroneous to the person of Iehu. Iehu is not
as Zimri a subject, but now an annoyn^ed King; Gods selected minister to take
vengeance of the house of Achab; comes with commission from the great Lawgiuer
to this seeming breach of the general precept: his fact is not as Zimries,
treason, but obedience, in respect of the special warrant and command of God
given unto him.

Ly dispensations or exemptions in matters of this Nature? that is a question
which popish spirits easily on any occasion apprehend; and are ready to
infer that as the great Lawgiuer to Ehud and Iehu; so his vicegerent on
earth may give indulgence and dispensation in such moralities.

Ans. It has anciently bin questioned in Schools whether moral precepts be
dispensable by authority of God himself: and was never but with cautionate
distinction affirmed. But that man should dispense with Gods moral commandes
has rarely bin disputed; never till of late by any determined. The greatest
flatterers of Popish pride and ambition anciently thus resolved. Papa etsi sit
super omne Ius pure positivum, yet is he not super Ius Naturae aut diuinum. The
Pope though he be above all Law merely positive, yet is he at no hand
superior to the Law of God or Nature. And judge in your selves, first, can man
loose Conscience where God has bound it? secondly, Or stands frail man on
even terms with the Almighty to equal or affront him in Authority. Where are
these records extant wherein God has conveyed such Authority to man to
legitimate what he has condemned? Poor souls miserably infatuated they must
needs be, that think Gods royalties, his peculiar prerogatives communicable to
his creature.

Yield it for the present the truest Etymon of the Popes Epithete:
Antichristus, quasi vice Christus: a vice-Christ, his vicegerent and Vicar
general on earth: Receives the surrogate by his substitution, power more then
was congruent to the principal?

A threefold power of Christ their own divines observe in this question. First
one divine and eternal, belonging to our mediator Jesus, as the son of God,
God equal to his father. Hereto belongs originally, the disposing of
kingdoms; the making or antiquating of laws; and dispensing with them.
Secondly, Another merely spiritual, congruent to the man Christ, but as they
speak to him as a man immortal and glorious now managed by himself without
deputy at the right hand of his father. Thirdly, A third which he had and
exercised by him as a mortal man in the days of his flesh. Wherein alone, as
themselves confess, the Pope may lay claim to his substitution, as being the
only possible for mere man to manage. See if ever our Savior admitted or
exercised such Regalitie on earth: Assumed such dominion, power so eximious as
to dispose of crowns, to translate Kingdoms: Authority so transcendent, as
to cancel the laws of God, or to Legitimate highest breaches of moral
precepts. Hear him speaking to the first: Oh homo quis me constituit Iudicem
aut diuisorem inter vos? Man who has made me a judge or diuider betwixt you?
And to Pilate his profession is; His kingdom is not of this world. To the
second; he came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it.

See his next successors as thy are styled, the Apostles; ever meddled they
with such altitudes of Temporalitie? Assumed they such Authority? Stetisse
lego Apostolos judicandos; sedisse iudicantes non lego, Erit illud, non fuit;
said Bernard elegantly to Pope Eugenius interposing himself as Judge in civil
contentions; that the Apostles stood to be judged I read; that they sat as
Judges I read not. That shall be their glory in the Regeneration, to sit on
Thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Such magnificence they aspired to
none in the days of their mortality. Only to the Bishop of Rome, to that
seruus seruorum Dei, belongs equality of power with God himself: As, God so
may he authorize violations of moral precepts and dispense even with the laws
of God, As God to Iehu to slay Iehoram, to Ehud to slay Eglon, so this Deus
Deorum give indulgence to subjects to murder their Natural princes. But
enough of that Arrogancy no less then Luciferian: we return to Iezabel her
mis application.

Here must be acknowledged the mistake and error of Iezabel, her
mis-application to the person of Iehu. Iehu is not, as Zimri, led with private
ambition, but comes with Authority from God to destroy Iehoram, and his
Brethren. To him therefore impertinently is that example of Gods vengeance.
Howbeit, after her hypothesis, her observation and caution is good; supposing
Iehu as Zimri a traiterous conspiratour against his master, Zimries vengeance
should have bin Iehu his warning.

Sure it is, Gods vengeances are exemplarie; And should be warnings to all, to
fly like sins, least they taste like vengeance. So Saint Paul having to
Corinthians reckoned up a catalogue of Israelites sins, and related their
vengeance, admonishes, that they came to them as ensamples, and were written
for our warning on whom the ends of the world are come. So Saint Peter
mentioning the fall of Angels, the fearful overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the deluge brought upon the old world, closes that they were set forth as
Ensamples.

Thus have Saints holily used their meditation. Nehemiah observing Sabbathes
polluted in Jerusalem, thus to the Rulers. Did not our fathers thus, and all
this wrath came upon us? In another particular: fell not Solomon by this
means, though beloved of his God?

The Ambassadors from the Congregation, to the Rubenites, Gadites and half
Tribe of Manasseh, erecting an Altar not for sacrifice as was supposed, but for
memorial, yet in suspicion of such evil, would thus deter them. Is the
iniquity of Peor too little from which we are not cleansed unto this day, that
you must return also from following the Lord? why am I long.

First, Gods Justice we know to be impartial, with God there is no respect of
Persons. Secondly, And they must look to partake in the plagues that partake
in the sins of Babylon.

I can wish on this occasion as Moses, Oh that Gods people were wise: so wise
as to think every sinners vengeance exemplarie; and to make it their warning
how they fall by example of like disobedience. Providence never so slept but it
has affoorded to all ages spectacles of Gods wrath, examples of his vengeance
upon the children of disobedience. Drunkards how many have we seen after
Salomons threatening, clothed with rags: Adulterers filled with rottenness;
brought to a morsel of bread: lovers of pastime and sporting brought to
poverty. Honorable families ruined by harboring Popish superstition, exposed
to Gods wrath by oppression of the poor, by their excess of Riot, and
luxurious intemperance. Yet who when he sees this, fears and learnes to do no
more presumptuously? And rather thinks not as the Hypocrites in Isai. Though a
Plague run over all, it shall not come nigh him? And is not ready to conceit
some singular specialtie in their degree and measure of sinning whom vengeance
has so overtaken?

To speak to the particular in hand: how frequent have bin examples of Gods
vengeance upon bloody traitors? Who has ever known bloody traitor to have
dyed a dry death? Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? Had Gowrie peace that
attempted to slay his Master? Went those incendiaries of the Powder Treason
without blood to their Graves? I had almost said to their Hell. Search records
divine, humane, and say who ever prospered that but dipped his finger in the
blood of the Lords anointed. It is very remarkable in this sin more then in
many; Though vengeance has passed over other sinners, yet seldom missed it
the head of a bloody traitor. Blasphemers and Atheists we have seen living
and dying without any visible vengeance: Murderers some to have gone to their
Graves in peace: Bloody traitors few or none that have escaped the hand of God,
or sword of the Magistrate.

Yea singular specialties there are many obseruable in their vengeance: Many
dying in the fact, in the heat of pursuing their ambitious and traiterous
designs: so died Zeba the son of Bichri: so Absolon in the heat of his
parricidious ambition, partly by the hand of God, partly by the sword of Ioab.
Oh Absolon my son, my son Abs^lon would God I had dyed for thee, says
David considering the likely issues of such death so inflicted. What means
lamen ation so comfortless and immoderate in David over an ungracious Absolon.
We err in S. Austines Judgment, if we think David so Rachel-like weeped for
loss of his Child though dear unto him. Non orbitatem doluit says S.
Austin: It was not his own orbitie which David so lamentably bewailed, but
seeing into what torments a soul so impiously adulterous, so unnaturally
traiterous and parricidious, especially so cut off by the hand of God, should
now in all likelyhoods be plunged. And surely whateuer our groundless Charity
may conceit, they are miserable deaths that seize on sinners in the heat of
their sins.

Yea see in Zimries vengeance something more to be trembled at. God gives him
up to become his own deaths man. Neither was that Zimri his fate only, thus
dyed the traitor Judas, thus Achitophel, thus Abimelech; Thus some of
traiterous designs in our own remembrance. It is said indeed God may have
mercy inter pontem and fontem, betwixt the Bridge and the Brook. I limit not
Gods mercy to times. Howbeit S. Austine long since determined of the fairest
pretenses brought for selfe-murther, they cannot all excuse it from being
mortal sin. But when a man from his Cradle nuzled in Popish superstition,
proceeds at last to a sin so heinous as is murder of Princes, and makes
close of his own life in selfe-murther, my charity cannot be so charitable as
to hope of that man's salvation.

Such have bin the issues of many traitors. They befell them as ensamples for
our Caution and warning. Yet when may we hope for more loyalty from seduced
amongst Papists. A Hydra of treason there seems to be amongst them; after so
many hands of bloody traitors cut off, spring up new continually of like
traiterous brains; God grant our too much indulgence multiply not that seed of
the wicked amongst us. Truly said S. John of that wine of Popish fornication,
it is vinum inebrians, wine that makes drunk. It is not vinum but venenum and
toxicum; so intoxicates, so infatuates it unto madness those that drink deep
of the dreg thereof; If there be any of that heresy which here me this day, I
advise them not to slight the notice of such vengeances, and pray God for them
they may be their Caution.

To others hitherto of more loyal disposition may it serve to increase
abhorrence from sins so monstrous. Even for our warning is such vengeance
inflicted; And should increase detestation of sins, from which conscience by
light of nature or Grace is most abhorrent. How dyed Zimri, how Judas, how
Achitophel? Their own hands made passage for their souls into hellish
torments, as the devil once complained before their time. How dyed Absolon,
how Zebah the son of Bichri, how Gowrie, how the incendiary traitors. All by
the hand of the Magistrate, most in the heat of their sin. Thus they perished
to become our warnings.

Sic perierunt. And I pray as Deborah and so conclude: Sic pereant inimici tui
Domine. So let all thine enemies perish O Lord, but let them that love thee,
let thine anointed be as the Sun when he rises in his might. Bind up his
soul in the bundle of life. Strike through the Loins of them that rise up
against him, that hate him, that they never rise up again. Hear us O Lord and
answer us; for thy Names sake, for thy Christ his sake in whom we know thou art
well pleased. To whom with thee O father and thy blessed Spirit, for all thy
mercies for thy gracious protection and deliverances of our King and State, be
ascribed and given of us and of thy whole Church, All Praises, Power, Majesty,
Dominion and thanksgiving, henceforth and for ever Amen.

Deo Gloria.
A FUNERAL SERMON Preached at the Burial of the Right Worshipful Mr. JOHN
COLLES Esquier, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace and Quorum in
Sommersetshire Anno. Dom. 1607.

By WILLIAM SCLATER, of Kings College in Cambridge Minister of Gods Word at
Pitmister.

printer's device of Thomas Harper

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear. 1629.

To the Worshipful Mr. GEORGE COLLES, Esquire: Mercy and peace be multiplied.
Sir:
I Here present you with a Sermon, whose conception, birth and being,
proceeded from your renowned Father, as from the sweet influence of a bright
shining star in the celestial Orb, on which the eyes of all virtuously
disposed were ever firmly fixed, even to admiration; wherefore it being now
brought forth, sues for safe protection under you his Son, and hopes to
receive favorable acceptance from you, being the known patron to goodness.
It Is the paucity of such, which makes glorious vice so audaciously impudent as
to dare give affront to bashful virtue, that it becomes inglorious. If any
increase of heavenly knowledge and celestial comfort may accrue to your soul
from it, give God the praise, and the Author is satisfied. So with my prayers
to God for continuance, and multiplication of heavenly and earthly blessings
upon you, I rest

Your hearty well-willer WILLIAM SCLATER.
From my Chamber in Kings College in Cambridge. Nou. 18. 1628.
The Preface.
Beloved in Christ Jesus, we are met together this day to perform the last
office and duty of Charity to Christian brother, an aged and reverend
gentleman, a Magistrate of eminent and best place amongst us. And though I know
the principal end of such sermons be the instruction of the living; yet I take
it there is a lawful and warrantable commemoration of the virtues, and
deserved praises of the dead, as well to stir up to praise God for his graces
that shined in them, as to provoke others to imitate their holy example.
Concerning this worshipful Gentleman deceased, these things I can speak
neither for fashion, nor for flattery. For Religion, the principal
commendation of all men, of meaner, or higher place in the world, this
testimony we can all give him; that he was an ancient, and constant professor
of the truth, now taught and maintained in this Church of England; yea a man
delighted in the title of a professor of the strictest sort; a thing that most
great ones throw of with that odious nickname of Puritanisme. For love of this
truth these worthy evidences he gave of it, while health lasted, an ordinary,
attentive, delightful, and, as I persuade my self, a profitable hearer. In
this kind that one thing is eminent, his care to furnish this place where
himself was an ordinary hearer, with a Minister of some competent ability to
instruct the people, and free from scandal in life. And herein how free he was
from all Simoniacall practices, my self am a thankful witness; and the same
testimony can many others give him touching my predecessor whose soul is now
with God, a rare and worthy example. And if such virtues were capable of
bequeathment, I could wish he had left this commendable part amongst others for
a Legacy to men in his sort; to see the cunning covetous dealing of most men in
this kind it is lamentable, such reseruations and annual gratuities, such
curtolling of Ministers maintenance, as Hanun used the garments of David's
servants, they are cut off by the middle. And Michas his wages, ten shekells of
silver, a livery, and meat and drink, a large allowance for a Minister, and
indeed fit maintenance for such Chaplains, but yet a filthy practice in such
Patrons. For practice of life, subject to frailties, and who is free? But for
aught I know clear from notorious crimes; If any have been so credulous as to
censure him upon bare rumor, let him remember, that such credulity agrees not
with charity, and let him fear, least the hard measures he has mete unto this
gentleman, be no^ rendered him double in Gods just judgment. For state and
calling, a Magistrate of highest place amongst us; employed in affairs of
weightiest importance; a good argument of his tried fidelity: For love of his
Country conspicuous; for dispatch of business speedy, and painful, yea even
in time of weakness: And as I have heard, bewailing his weakness for noe
one thing more, then that it disabled him for service of the Country. Come we
to behavior in sickness, it pleased God to afflict him with a long, violent
and painful disease; yet this has bin observed in him, that he never uttered
any one speech of impatience, and coffeehouse at the hand of God. So great
patience under so great afflictions argues (me thinks) some apprehension of
Gods love even in afflictions. And that we might see his constancy in love of
the truth, when God had debarred him from the congregation, be was not only
willing, but desirous to hear in private; often melting into tears, as well
at the propounding of Gods sweet mercies, as at reproves and denuntiations of
judgments. In private conference desirous and glad to be farther informed
touching his own estate, and means of Salvation, answering with tears to
most things propounded; to me a good arguargument of a contrite heart, which
God has promised not to despise. In the last agony so long as God gave memory
often calling on that sweet name of Jesus for help, mercy, pardon of sins.
Yet when some distractions were on him through violence of pains, able and
ready to give a reason of his hope, being demanded of the ground of his hope of
Salvation he professed to cleave only to the merits of Christ: demanded again
a reason of his hope to have part in Christ's merits; he thus answered; because
I seek him: and surely, says David, thou Lord never failest them that seek
thee in sincerity. Yea after use of outward senses was gone, we often heard
passionate callings on the name of Jesus (I doubt not but he found sweetness in
that name) to help him, and have mercy on him. These so many, and so worthy
prescriptions, methinkes must needs wring from the most uncharitable amongst
us at least a hopeful persuasion that he dyed Gods Child. And for mine own
part I cannot but profess more then a hope that his soul is with God. If any
man think I have been too prodigal of his praises, let him thus judge, that
Christian charity as it loves not to tenter the sins of others, but ever to
extenuate human fraileties, so is it delighted to amplify to the utmost the
just praises of them it respects. Yet this withal; if I have any way faulted;
I fear it is rather in omissions through forgetfulness, then in any sort by
ouerreaching thruogh flattery.

HEB. 9.27.28. And as it is appointed unto all men once to dye, and then comes
the judgment: So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and
unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin
unto Salvation.
THe Context lies thus. The Apostle to show the excellency of Christ the high
Priest of the new Testament above the high Priest of the old Law, has entered a
large comparison betwixt them: the chief things wherein they are compared are
three. First, the Sanctuary, whereinto they entered. Secondly the matter which
they offered. Thirdly, the number of offerings. The Leuiticall high Priest
entered into a Sanctuary made with hands; Christ into heaven it self figured
by that Sanctuary: the high Priest offered the blood of beasts; Christ his own
blood for a price of redemption: the Leuiticall high Priest offered often,
because his Sacrifices were imperfect; Christ but once, because by that one
oblation he has perfected for ever them that be sanctified: therefore is he a
more excellent high Priest. Now this last point of his once offering is farther
illustrated by a comparison of likes in the text now read; the sum whereof is
this; that as by Gods ordinance men dye but once; so by the same appointment of
God was Christ but once offered.

The parts of the text, as of all other plenary comparisons are two, a Protasis
(.i.) the first part of the similitude which is brought to illustrate: An
Apodosis (.i.) the second part which is illustrated. In the Protasis verse. 27.
there are these four things obserueable (for touching the Apodosis ver. 28.
time will not suffer to speak) first, the ground or Cause of Death; Gods
appointment. Secondly, the subject of death, Man; Thirdly, the Number of
dyings, once. Fourthly, the Consequent of death; after that comes the judgment.

Doctrine.
It is appointed. So has Gods hand, and ordinance a special stroke in our
death: Our Savior Matthew. 10.29. testifies of Sparrowes, that not one of them
falls to the ground by the hand of the fowler, but by Gods providence and
special appointment; how much less a man more worth then many Sparrowes? And
that place is known Job. 14.5.
Man's days are determined, and the number of his months is with God; he has
set him his bounds which he cannot pass. More proof needs not amongst us
Christians that have learnt to acknowledge a special providence of God,
extending it self to every action, and accident of man's life.

And here first are controlled two heathenish opinions Deuteronomy. 19.5.
If a man go to the wood with his neighbor to hew wood, his hand strikes with
the Axe to cut down the tree; the head flies from the helue, and smites his
neighbor that he dies: I Exodus 21.13.
the Lord (says God) have offered that man into the hand of the slayer; what
can be more casual in respect of the means, and yet has Gods providence a
stroke therein.

A second error is of those, that have lift up nature, and natural causes in
this kind, to shoulder out Gods providence from all working in the death of
men. And these give unto God no more but a general influence into second
causes; supposing them to work according to that order set in them in the
first Creation. And these men in death violent or natural acknowledge no
special work of God ordering and disposing second causes to their events: but
impute all to distemper of body whereby diseases are brought upon us, which of
themselves work the dissolution of the body. But see we what the Scripture
teaches, It is Deuteronomy. 18.22.
The Lord that smites with consumptions, and agues, and burning fevers: and 2.
Sam. 12.15.
the Lord stroke David's child with sickness; that though it be true, our death
is wrought by these as means, yet Gods hand has the chief stroke in these
immissions. And hereof it is, that we see many dye in their full strength,
their breasts full of Milk, and their bones full of Marrow, as Job 21.23.24.
without bodily diseases; some also visited with deadly sicknesses, as Isay. 38
1.
Hezekiah, and yet recovered: the Lord would teach us hereby, that sickenesses
and bodily diseases are but his arbitrary instruments, which he uses or not
uses at his own pleasure, to bring his purpose to pass. To Conclude, let
this ever be holden as a principal by all Christians, that howsoever our death
is ordinarily brought upon us by sickness, decay of nature, or other inferior
means, yet are they all swayed and ordered not only by a general influence,
but even by a special ordinance, and appointment of God; these being but his
instruments whereby he bringes his appointments to their accomplishment.

Neither are they simply to be blamed, having so good warrant from the will of
God, instinct of Nature, practice of Christ, and his Saints. It is said of our
Savior Ioh. 11.35.
that seeing the lamentation of the people over Lazarus, himself had his share
in weeping. And of Abraham it is written Genesis 23.2.
that he mourned for Sara her death: and of Joseph Genesis 50.
that he kept a seven days solemn lamentation for his father Jacob. And it
was a senseless error of the Storckes grounded upon their heathenish fate,
that a wise man should not suffer himself to be moved with any accident,
though never so lamentable. The Apostle was otherwise minded Romans 1.30.
where he reckons this same Stoicall indolence amongst the vices accompanying a
reprobate mind. And surely if there be any of us found so stockish, as whom
losses of this nature move not to mourning, I say not as Paul, he shows
himself graceless, but which is more, almost unnatural. And for this
gentleman deceased, not to press particulars upon Children, I fear too much
giving the raines to sorrow, when we shall consider the care he has ever
showed of the Countries good in affairs of Commonwealth; how speedy in
dispatch of businesses of the Kingdom, methinkes we should not choose but
bewail the loss of so provident a guide, as members in the body are touched
especially with loss of their chiefest fellow members. Yet this withal let us
all remember; as well they that are nearest touched, as those that are farther
of wounded, that Christian sorrow must in such cases have a double aspect; one
cast on our loss, the other lift up to Gods appointment. When we look on our
loss, he shall be an unnatural child, that cannot bewail, the loss of so
kind a father; an unworthy member of the state that laments not the fall of
such rulers in the Country; But yet if we shall look up to him whose hand has
swayed these things, and by whose appointment death has seized on him, me
thinks again we should a little bridle affections, lest they carry us to
impatience, and coffeehouse at this work of God. It is said of David 2.
Sam. 12. that when God had stricken the child, which Vriahs wife bare him, with
sickness; he fasted and prayed, and wept and would not be comforted. For thus
he apprehended that prediction of Nathan as implying the condition ordinary in
such threatenings; for who can tell (says he) whether God will have mercy on
the child that he may live. But when he saw the evidence of Gods will, and
resolute determination, he left off mourning, and went to praise God. Beloved,
we now see Gods determinate appointment in this Gentleman; it shall be our duty
patiently to submit to his most holy, and just dispositions, and take we heed
lest loosing the bridle to natural affections, they carry us not beyond all
bounds of right, reason and religion. What says the Apostle 1 These. 4.13.
I would not have you ignorant as concerning them that sleep, to sorrow as men
without hope: as if he had said: Immoderate lamentations are fitter for
Heathens, that know no life but this, then for Christians that expect a joyful
resurrection. It is noted of the Egyptians Genesis 50.
that they mourned for Jacobs death 70 days; of Joseph, that he lamented him
seven days only: some man perhaps will think Joseph scarce naturally
affected that so soon ended his mourning, when the Egyptians, strangers to
him, so long drew on their lamentation. But behold the difference betwixt a
hopeless heathen, and a believing Christian: The Egyptians mourn
vnmeasureably, as thinking death to be a destruction of all things; Joseph as a
Christian, hopefully expecting the promise of Resurrection. And let us that
have cause to expect a comfortable resurrection of this Christian Gentleman,
labor by considering Gods holy appointment to moderate our private griefs,
and quietly to rest in Gods holy determinations.

Yet let me a little farther press this point of patience: I say not only
that we should moderate our griefs; but even upon this ground, because God
has appointed, practice patience. There is a kind of patience even in people,
that are heathenish; it is grounded commonly upon the inevitable necessity of
such like events: Such a kind of patience or stupidity rather was that of
Stoics, death was necessary; life not reuocable; therefore vain are all
lamentations. And such a like patience so grounded you shall see in our people.
Well, there is no remedy; we are borne to dye; sorrow will not help it: a good
plausible ground for patience in Reason. But know we, religious patience has
another ground Psalm. 39. I was dumb (says David) and opened not my mouth:
why? because thou O Lord did it. This is Christian patience, to moderate our
affections upon this ground, because we know it is the Lord that does it; and
death of friends betides us by Gods appointment. It is appointed to all men
once to dye.

Job having at large treated of this point, thus inferres for his own use:
seeing God has numbered my days, and determined the number of my months,
decreed my death and dissolution; Therefore all the days of mine appointed
time will I wait Job. 14.14.
until my change shall come: his meaning is, that his whole life should be
nothing but a Continual meditation of death. Our people have taken up an evil
by word; when they will express their utter and extreme forgetfulness of a
thing not thought of, they use this comparison: I thought as little of it, as
of my dying day. Alas, and is that dying day of all things least thought of?
Have we not every day spectacles of our Mortality? and carry we not in our
bosoms the principles of our dissolution? how comes it to pass then, that the
day of death should be of all things least thought of, and farthest out of
remembrance? and yet it is too true, as appears by those long hopes we
promise to our selves. Almost no man so old, or so diseased but he thinks he
may draw on one year longer. A dangerous dream as ever Satan could send upon
men, taking away all care of preparation, and opening a gappe to all
dissoluteness of life, and Conversation: take we heed of it.

Ioh. 9.4.
that while the day lasts we should work the works of God, because there
comes a night when as no man can work. He alludes to the C^^tome and use of
men as David has expressed it in the Psalm, the sun arises, etc. Man goes
out to his work, and to his labor until the Evening; at night when
darkness has covered all things, he retires him to his rest, because he
wants day light to direct him in working. So is the term of every man's
n^turall life; God has given it to the sons of Men, that therein they should
work things pleasing unto God. Whiles this day lasts, work we the works of
God. There comes a night upon us, that couers all with darkness, and leaves
no time for men to work in: Therefore said the Apostle, while we have time
Gal. 6.
let us do good; and Solomon, Eccl. 9.10.
whatsoever thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power; for there is
neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go.

Proceed we to the second thing; the subject of death; (Men (i.) all men. If
any shall object that Enoch and Elias were translated that they should not see
death; and that Gods Children suruiuing at the day of judgment shall not
sleep, but shall be changed. 1. These. 4. Let him consider first, that
Extraordinaria non euertunt regulam; a few extraordinary instances impeach not
the course of general ordinances. And howsoever the suruiuers at the last day
shall not suffer death as it is a separation of the soul and the body, yet as
it puts an end to this animal life, they may be said after a sort to dye; at
least this change is unto them instead of death; or lastly, the Apostle here
speaks of the ordinary course as it is now stablished amongst men by the
appointment of God.

Now mankind in Scripture are all ranged into these two ranckes; Elect and
Reprobate, Believers and Unbelievers; And of both sorts it is true that the
Apostle here speaks; it is appointed unto them all once to dye.

Now because it may seem strange, that Gods Children freed by Christ from the
wh^^e curse of the Law, should yet be subject to a necessity of dying, it shall
not be amiss a little to enquire the reasons of this Gods ordinance in respect
of his Children.

Papists as appears in all their tracts of Purgatory, usually thus explain
it; that Gods Children must therefore dye, because by Christ they are freed
from none but eternal punishments due for their sins. As for temporal
judgments, as sicknesses, Death etc. They still remain unto us in the nature
of punishments; by suffering whereof we must expiate our venial sins, as
they term them: And therefore it is their constant Doctrine, that Christ has
satisfied for none but sins mortal; freed us from no punishment but
Everlasting; there is a remainder of satisfaction left for us, whereby Gods
justice and wrath must by us be appeased.

Now the Apostle Gal. 3.13.
has taught us that Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law (i.)
from the whole Curse due for our sins. And who can read Deuteronomy. 28. but he must
acknowledge bodily sufferinges to be a part of our Curse. Isay teaches Chap,
53. that the Chastisement of our peace was laid upon Christ; (i.) the
Chastisement whereby our peace, and reconcilement with God was perfectly
wrought. And the Apostle Heb. 10.11.14.
affirms that Christ by his one offering of himself has perfected forever
them that be Sanctified.

Yea take we but even Popish concessions in this kind: they grant that Christ
has delivered us perfectly from the guilt of our sins. Now the guilt is
nothing but a Consequent of sin, whereby we stand in account as sinners, and
are liable to punishment for our offenses. Now then; has Christ perfectly
freed us from the guilt of our sins? then stand we as innocent in the sight
of God, and are reputed of God for Christ's sake, as if we had never committed
our sins, therefore also are freed from subjection unto punishment: For shall
we say the Lord punishes a man guiltless? far be it from the just God to
punish the guiltless as the guilty, the guilt is removed, therefore all
punishment.

But we see these temporal pains and death it self remains to Gods
Children after justification? Object.


It is true, Sol.
the things remain the same for substance, but their habit, use, condition is
altered: They remain not in the nature of punishments properly so called; for
they tend not to satisfaction of Justice; nor as parts of the Curse; from which
Christ has freed us; but temporal pains remain as preuentions, as
admonitions, as restrainements, as instructions, as nurturings, as reducements,
as abatements of Corruption. Death not as the wages of sin to Gods Children,
nor as a part of the Curse; but as the period of misery, and a gate into
heavenly happiness. But leaving them, let us see for what ends the Lord has
appointed death for his own Children.

One is, the abolishing of the relics of sin, that even after regeneration
stick in us. By a wonderful wisdom God has ordained, that during the
dwelling of the soul in the body, there shall be also a dwelling of sin in
our mortal body, partly to exercise us by resisting the assaults thereof,
partly to show us from how great a bondage Christ has delivered us: But by
death he puts an end to sin in respect of all practice and inhabitation.
Through envy of the devil sin entered into the world, and death by sin:
Through the wisdom of God death puts an end to sinning. And this is one end
of this appointment of God.

Adam, even after grace; so some portion of afflictions still remaynes to Gods
Children; not as Papists teach, for satisfaction; but partly to give us a taste
of those miseries, from which Christ has freed us, partly to tame and subdue
Corruption, partly to conform to the Image of Christ; Now death brings an end
to all sensible evils. And for this cause also has God provided death as a
remedy, lest too long endurance of evils, should overcome our patience.

Paul desire Phil 1.23.
to be dissolved; because he knew his soul should persently be admitted into
the presence of Christ.

the death of his Saints, methinkes it should teach us contentment at least, if
not rejoicing in the death of all those that dye in the Lord. And surely if any
man have known and felt the misery of subjection unto his sins; the strong
rebellion of Corruption against grace; I doubt not but he is thus minded, that
in that respect; he would change conditions with the meanest of Gods Saints
that have dyed in the Lord. And therefore well is it with the dead; they rest
from their labors; their works follow them; and which is not the least
blessing, they are freed from the miserable bondage to Corruption.

Now as touching the wicked, the Reason of their dying is; because death is to
them a part of the Curse due to their sins: and there must be an end put to
their pleasures in sinning, and a bringing of their souls to those
insufferable torments God has provided for impenitent sinners.

And therefore I wonder not, Use.
if as the wise man speaks, the very remembrance of death be bitter unto
them: it is their judgment, their Curse, the end of rejoicing, the very
suburbs and gate that leads into Hell.

See we now the last thing (.i.) the consequent of death. After that comes the
judgment. I hope I shall not need to use many words amongst us Christians to
evidence this truth being so plentifully taught in Scripture, consented unto by
the Heathen, testified by our conscience, euidenced by particular judgments.

The Scriptures are plentiful in this point; how often occur these and the
like sayings! God shall bring every work unto judgment, with every Ecles. 12.
vlt.
secret thing whether it be good or evil. We must all appear before the 2
Cor. 5.10.
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things he has done
in his body, whether they be good or evil.

The Heathen had their tribunal after death; and Aeacus, Minos and
Rhadamanthus, presidents of proceedings therein.

Yea ask but the Conscience of the vilest Athiest, it will be a thousand
witnesses of this truth; how often are they filled with unspeakable horrors
especially in death? wherefore? but because they know there is a judgment that
follows it. See but particular judgments, which are as praludia iudicij
vniuersalis: the overthrow of Sodom; the deluge of the old world; particular
judgments on particular persons, what else do they testify but a judgment
to come? some sins are here punished that we might know there is a
providence, and a judge that takes notice; not all here punished that we might
expect a greater judgment to come.

Yea that very Confusion of things as they term it, which some have brought as
an argument to overthrow both providence and judgment; (viz) the present
prosperity of the wicked, and the afflicted estate of Gods Children; it is
argument sufficient in Paul's divinity to prove a judgment to come, 2. These.
1.4.5
The present persecutions of Gods children are an evident Demonstration of a
judgment, to come; and Solomon Eccle. 3.16.17.
before him, in his suruiew of vanities, I saw, says he, a place of judgment,
and ^oe there was wickedness, a place of Justice, and behold iniquity: what
inferres he? therefore no providence? therefore no judgment to come? Nay; but
the contrary, I said in my heart, surely God will judge the just and unjust;
for a time there is for every purpose and for every work.

See we a little what this judgment importes. Judgment implies three things.
First, Examination, and withal discovery of every man's works, whether they
be Eccl. 12. vlt.
good or evil; then 1 Cor. 4.5.
come your close and secret adulteries, then your privy and colored bribery,
then your hypocrisy, then your every evil work to be scanned and examined.
The Apoc. ^0.12.
books are opened; first, of Gods Mal. 3.16.
remembrance, wherein are registered every of our sins, even to an Math. 12.36.
idle word; secondly, of our own Conscience, which serves to bring in records
against us of all our ungodly deeds which we have ungodly committed.

Secondly, After Examination follows sentence giving. First, of Absolution to
Gods Children, howsoever here laden with reproaches and scandals, condemned for
Hypocrites. The Lord shall then evidence by fruits of faith, that sure their
faith was unfeigned. Secondly of Condemnation upon the wicked, here blearing the
eyes of men with I know not what pretenses of their good hearts and good faith
to God. The Lord shall then make their madness and dissembling known to all
men by lack of true Good works to grace their pretended faith with all. Math.
25.35.42.

Thirdly, After sentence follows Execution (.i.) A happy admission of Gods
Children into possession of the kingdom prepared by the father, purchased by
Christ Jesus. Secondly, A heavy and uncomfortable dismission of all impenitent
and incorrigible sinners into that lake that burns with fire and Brimestone
before the throne of God for ever and ever.

Use.
Now Brethren, I could wish in applying of this doctrine I had a measure of the
Apostles spirit, that I might with it pierce into the Consciences of us all. S.
Paul 2. Cor. 5.11.
having briefly mentioned this doctrine of last judgment, thus says, that by
this terror he persuaded men. And surely if this terror persuade not to
repentance, I know not what will. The same Apostle Act. 24.26.
treating of Justice and temperance and judgment to come before Foelix an
Heathen, made him tremble and quake every joint of him for fear of that judge,
whom by bribery and whoredom he had offended.

But we are fallen into the times S. Peter 2 Pet. 3.
speaks of, wherein the doctrine of judgment is holden a fable, and nothing
but a mere policy to keep fools in awe. The wicked Jews upon denuntiation
of a particular judgment Isay 22.13.
are brought in thus speaking, Come, say they, let us eat and drink; for to
morrow by the Prophets fabling, we must dye. Must you dye? Ah wretch! And what
follows death? After death comes Judgment: and if thou have any grace in
thee; the very mention of it will make thee tremble.

Solomon Eccl. 11.9.
having to deal with such like desperate scoffers, thus rebukes their
Godless practice: Go to young man, if you must needs have your swinge, on,
rejoice and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, walk in the
ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine own eyes; But know, God for all
these things will bring thee to judgment. It is not a permission, but an
ironicall sharp and reprehension, urged by a severe denunciation of a judgment
to come.

As if I should now say to an unjust bribing Magistrate, if any such amongst
us, go to, seeing thou have sold thy self to work wickedness* eat up the
flesh of the people; flea of their skins, break their bones, chop them in
pieces as meat for the pot, as Micah Mic. 3.3.
speaks oppress the fatherless, and let not the cause of the widow come
before you; say with shame enough Hos. 4.18.
bring bribes, fill your houses with extortion: But know, it is appointed to
all men once to dye, and then comes the judgment. At that day thou shall find,
that a little of Samuels good Conscience; 1 Samuel 12.3.
whose ox have I taken, whose Ass have I taken, whom have I done wrong unto;
or of whom have I taken a bribe to blind mine eyes withal? will do thee more
steed, then all the treasures of wickedness, wherewith thou have filled thine
house.

As if I should say to the Cormorants of the Country, build you houses in
desolate places, join house to house, land to land, Country to Country, till
the poor can have no dwelling amongst us: But know, that for all these things
God will bring thee to judgment: And then thou will wish as Jeremy Ier. 9.2.
that thou had had in the wilderness a cottage of a wayfaring man, rather
then all these sumptuous buildings and large possessions, while the stone shall
cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, woe Hab.
2.11.12.
unto him that builds a Town with blood, and erecteth a City with iniquity.

As if I should say to our scraping merciless Usurers; shut up your bowels of
compassion, and cause the eyes of the needy to fail by vain expectation of
your releife; grind the faces of the poor; buy them for silver, yea for old
shoes; live upon the sweat of others men's faces. But know that for all these
things God will bring thee to judgment; and then thou shall find one penny
given in compassion of thy brothers want, will afford more comfort, then all
the huge masses of silver and gold, that by usury thou have heaped together.

As if I should say to our drunken tospots, power in strong drink, drink and
be drunken, spend your patrimonies at the Ale; But know, that for all these
things God will bring you to judgment.

As if I should say to a beastly Whoremoger; fill thine eyes with adultery, and
thy bones with rottenness; take thy pleasure in dalliance, and fill thee with
lust: But know; that, whoremongers and adulterers God will Judge. Heb. 13.4.

As if I should say to our blasphemous swearers; go to; seeing you have taught
your tongues to speak blasphemies, swear the Puritan out of his Coat, and
thy self out of Gods kingdom; but know; it is appointed to all men once to
dye, and then comes the judgment.

Beloved in Christ Jesus, I know not how these things move you; but if there be
any care of our souls me thinks they should work in us a care to depart from
evil; that we may be found worthy to stand before Christ at his coming. Act.
17 30.31.
And surely if S. Paul^ admonition upon this ground move not to amendment; I
see not what can remain for us, but a fearful expectation of judgment, and
violent fire to devour us.

The Lord for his Christ's sake give us all grace on whom his name is called to
depart from iniquity; that seeing he has appointed a day, wherein he will judge
the world in righteousness by that man, even Jesus, whom he has appointed, we
may all be admonished in every place to repent, and escape those insufferable
torments, that he has provided for unbelievers; in that lake of fire that
burns for ever before the Throne of God. To the same God, the Father, Son,
holy Ghost, three persons, one true, invisible, immortal and only wise God be
all honor and glory for ever and ever Amen

FINIS.

