GOD save HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms the KING
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of great Britain, France and Ireland:
Defender of the Faith etc.
To Our Loveds (...) Messingers Our Shireffs in that part conjunctly and
severally specially constitute greeting,
Forsamekle as by an Act and Proclamation made and published heretofore, and
bearing date the sixteen day of Iulij last, WE were pleased to give
signification to Our good Subjects of Our Royal and princely resolution to
proceed in the matters referred to US by the Submission concerning the few
fearmes and few meals of Erections Tiths of other men's Lands, rate ease, and
price of the same, and others mention^ in the said Submissions, with that
aequitie justice and indifferency, to particulare persons, and care and
respect to the public good and ease of Our Subjects as might manifest Our
royal care and fatherly affection to satle the peace and tranquillity of this
Our ancient Kingdom, with public applause of all Our good Subjects. And how
that WE, after conference had with such of the Nobility, privy Counsel, and
Gentry as were with Us, were moved upon great and weighty consideratiouns to
prorogat the said Submissions until the last day of December, 1629. In the
which conference it was likewise condescended with uniform consent of all rhen
present: That Our Annuitie should take beginning in this instant year 1628.
And because the same annuitie could not be vplifted until the Valuations and
constant rent of the Lands of each Parish in Stock and Teynd were first
determined, It was therefore thought expedient that particulare Commissions and
warrands should be given by these to whom power is granted by the general
Commission, To particulare persons in each Shirefdome, Parish, or other
bounds; For trial of the said valuations, As the said Proclamation containing
diverse other clauses and heads at length bears. Which Act in that point
thereof, tuitching the beginning of Our Annuitie in this instant year 1628.
Our Commissioners for the surrenders and Teynds now present: Have with uniform
consent ratified allowed approved and confirmed, And have be a new Act of the
date of these presents ordained Our said Annuitie to have beginning for this
present year 1628. And be the same Act have ordained the subcomissions to
proceed and goe-on for valuation of the just and constant Rent of Stock and
Teynd of ilke persons Lands. And Our Commissioners being careful (according
to the trust concredite unto them) to bring this busienesse of the Valuations
which is the ground work of our gracious intention for the weall of Our
Subjects in brooking of their own. Teynds to some happy and speedy conclusion.
Therefore they have appointed an meeting of our whole Commissioners to be
here at At Haly-rud-hous upon the twenty two day of September nextocome: And
to attend that whole week, for consulting advising and resolving upon such
Gentlemen within each Presbytrie as shall be thought fittest to be entrusted
with that service of the sub-commissions for trial of the Valuations. Against
whose nomination and election, all persons as well buyers as sellers of Teynds,
having just and lawful cause to object shall be heard, and their reasons
against the Eelction considered and discussed.

OUR WILL IS herefore, and We charge you straightly and commands that
incontinent these Our letters see ne, Ye pass to the market croces of the head
Burrowes of this our Kingdom, and others places needful, and there by open
Proclamation make intimation and publication of the premises: And that ye
warn all and sundry persons as well buyers as sellers of teynds, and others
whom these presents do or may concern, and who hes any thing to propone to
object against any of the persons who shall be appointed and designed to this
ea rand that they compeir before our Commissioners forsaid upon the said
twenty two day of September nextocome and others days of that week and that
they give in their reasouns be word or write against the person or persons
who shall be designed and appointed for trial of the said Valuations wherein
they shall receive indifferent hearing and their objections shall be
accordingly considered. Certefying them that shall neglect this present
occasioun offered unto them for their objections, that they shall not be heard
to object thereafter. And suchlike that you command and charge the Modetatours
and Ministers within the several Presbytries of th^^ ^ur Kingdom that they
inform themselves who are the fittest and most indifferent persouns within
their presbytries to have the charge of this busienesse and that they in due
and lawful time give in their names in write under their hands either to the
Bishop of their Dyocie or to the Lords of our privy Counsel. To the intent
the said Lords after consideration thereof may do therein accordingly as the
said Moderatours and Ministers will testify their affection to the good of
this service. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally Our
full power by these Our Letters delyvering the same by you duly execute and
indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Haly-rud-house the eight day of August and of our
reign the fourth year. 1628. Per actum D. Commissionis praedict.
EDINBVRGH Printed by Thomas Finlason his M. printer


