The Quaestion of TITHES REVISED.

ARGVMENTS FOR THE Morality of Tything, enlarged, and cleared.

OBJECTIONS MORE fully, and distinctly answered.

Mr SELDENS History, so far as Mistakers have made it Argumentatiue against
the Morality, ouer-ly viewed.

By WILLIAM SCLATER, D. D. and Minister of Pitmister, in Somerset.

DEVT. 33. Verse 10, 11. Of Leui he said, They shall teach Jacob thy
Judgments, and Israel thy Law.

Bless, O Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands: Smile
through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him,
that they rise not again.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT. 1623.

REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMINO, ARTHVRO, Prouidentia Diuina Bathoniensi
ac Wellensi Episcopo, Domino meo plurimum obseruando.
HOnorande Praesul, Annus iam agitur ferme duodecimus, ex quo mea,
qualiscunque, de Iure Decimarum velitatio, in vulgus emanauit. Quanto, Credis,
cum literatorum prope omnium applausu? Nec tamen sine vulgi (absit verbo
inuidia) Sacrilegi oblatratu. Fremere exin atque indignari quotquot in Sacra
inuolarant, non aliter ac Demetrius Ephesinus cum suis, vbi Dianae
magnificentia periclitaretur, hoc est, (...) illorum in discrimen vergeret.
Nimirum and de Art Decimandi, perinde vt de Statuaria Opifices illi, Generosi
fere omnes nostri suauiter victitant.

Siquis paulo cordatior, vacillare aliquantulum, vt fit, and tremere: mox etiam
gratulari sibi, quod de Rure paterno, non de Iure Pastoritio victum sibi
quaeritaret. Mirari Ego quorsum Res exiret: Cum ecce Conductitius nescio quis,
Decimarum and ipse, quod nunc audio, impurus Heluo, mea omnia ventilare,
sugillare; censura supra quam Magistrali lustrare; scommate vere Lucianico
mordere, rodere: Pedum etiam supplosioni, si fas, exponere. Transacta Res est:
versa, euersa sunt omnia: Sopita est denuo Conscientia. Faxit Deus, ne non and
mortua.

Eam ego vt semisepultam, si pote, exuscitem, id vero nunc do operam, quam
vereor, ne non inanem? vt, vt, Accepta sit Deo, Ecclesiae vtilis, Tibi grata,
Sat habeo. Inhient etiamdum plenis faucibus Heliogabali nostri Peculio Dei:
vorent quod sacrum est and sanctum Deo. Vorent, vt euomant. Quis vero ferat
nisi (...) perire Sacrilegos? Subit etiam mentem, and solatur aliquantulum,
quod Iudeis diuerbti loco dicitur, Quando duplicantur lateres, tunc venit
Moses. Hac spe (quantilla?) fretus, Rem ipsam aggredior; Auspicato, credo,
satis, quod sub tuis Tanti viri, Auspiciis. Sospitet Deus.

Quod superest Deum Optimum Maximum enixe comprecor, vt Amplitudinem tuam
indies magis magisque amplam reddat: Ipsum Te Ecclesiae, Nobis, quam diutissime
incolumem seruet: vt, quod facis, Pietate, Sanctitate, Industria, Clero tuo
praeluceas. Faxit. Amen.

Pitmisterij, Dat. Kalendis Ianuarijs, Anno Reparationis humanae 1621.
Amplitudinis tuae studiosissimus, Idem qui and Capellanus tibi addictissimus,
WILL. SCLATER.

The Introduction.
SInce I began to smatter in judgment of questions, thus I have ever thought
of the particular; that its amongst those, that may much more easily be
defended, then euicted. So utterly inconsequentiall, are all arguments
pretended against the divine right of Tything, yet so blind is prejudice, so
earelesse the belly, so stiff and absurd covetousness, in denying principles,
and in spite of all premises resolved to hold the conclusion of Sacrilege.

Difficulty of euiction arises hence: first, that opposites take from us
appearing principles, and put us to prove them in our own science: secondly,
have framed to themselves principles, which no man must dare to contradict,
under peril of hissing at for absurdity: A principle it seems to my poor
understanding. First, that praecepts of God, never so ancient, having no
appearing repeal, bind ever to the end of the world. Secondly, that men
willing to loose Conscience from bond of any divine praecept, such especially
as but looks toward morality, must be able to show, by soundest evidence,
the abrogating of that, from which they pretend to be enlarged. For what our
Savior disclaimes, dares any attempt? Math. 5.17.
Dissoluing the Law in any Jot or title? without clear signification of the
Law-giuers will for cessation? Or suppose we, he speaks of the maine only
after the letter, and not of particulars, and degrees of duty, couched under
the maine? Of particulars and degrees of sin employed in the gross? who
should not tremble at so profane arrogancy, that hears him protest his Math.
5.19.
nullitie in Gods kingdom, who breaks, or teaches breach of the lest
commandment.

It Is strange liberty these licentious times have taken; to cancel at
pleasure, what their fancy distasteth in the Law of God.

How urgent is the Deuteronomy. 4.15, 6.
caveat against Image making, for representation, or worship of the Godhead;
how plentifully particularized, and backed with reasons? yet goes it for current
doctrine amongst some Papists, that the praecept was temporary, peculiar to
Jews; in respect of their gross rudeness, and strong propension to
Idolatry. Its a praecept in casu, to Ier. 4.2.
swear the Lord lives in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. A
toleration rather, say Anabaptists, limited to Jews, in their estate of
weakness, and imperfection. No oath lawful to Christians in new Testament,
in what cause soever, by what authority soever imposed.

Praecept of Sabbath, ancient, some think, as the world for the quota of time;
we are sure, enrolled by Gods own finger in the two Tables of stone; yet
thought a mere Jewish ceremony, to vanish with other shadows of heavenly
things, in this time of reformation.

Subjection to Christian Magistrates, enjoined Ephesians. 6.2.
in the first commandment with promise, lawless Anabaptists make proper to
the State, and polity of ruder Jews.

Usury, so damned by Moses, Prophets, Councils, Churches, Heathens, is deemed a
sin peculiar only to the people of Jews.

Were Nicholas of Antioch now alive; or Nichols the Familist, approaching as
near to his heresy, as to his name; they would voice it as strongly, that
fornication was a sin peculiar to Jews; And that Christians may live after
the license of Plato his Commonwealth, rather then astrict themselves to these
laws of Moses, made several, as their opinion seems, to the Jewish Nation.

May not David's Apostrophe beseem us in these times, Psalm. 119.126.
Its time for thee, Lord, to lay to thy hand, for men have destroyed thy Law.
What praecept, with greatest instance pressed, may not a licentious Libertine
plead to be exempted from? If it may be lawful, without ground to avouch it
merely Judicial? Yea, how would my soul wish rather to be a Jew, that
dissolute nature might be restrained in me by laws, and my Conscience enjoy
the sweet comforts found in obedience, then to enjoy such liberties of
Christians, such lawless license, to be Idolatrous, luxurious, impious,
Sacrilegious?

Should not Christian Conscience be well advised, how it slights any the
praecepts of God? Had not the evidences need be praegnant, that induce us to
believe our freedom from their obedience.

Think of it seriously, you that put us to plead our ius, while you keep
possession of Tithes: whither it lie not rather on your Conscience, to prove
repeal of that divine Law-giuen for Tything. Least that tax of our Savior
laid on the Pharisees, light on you; full well have you Math. 15.6.
abrogated Gods commandment to stablish your own tradition, or rather fancy.
And Jude 12.
without fear to feed your own covetousness, and luxury, with Gods reserved
portion. Once we are sure, a law of Tything there was given of God: observed
by Patriarchs, ancient Jews, and Christians; maintained by Fathers, to stand
still in force: how may any dare avouch it abrogated without clearest evidence
of the word of God?

Their principles, such as they are, received amongst the vulgus and their
Chaplens, let us examine. 1. That is impregnable borrowed from Manichees,
pointed at by Thomas; that Christians stand bound to no praecept of Moses, or
Prophets, which Christ, or his Apostles have not, in Scriptures of New
Testament, given life unto. Would they, I trow, be so understood? that all
Mosaicall; and Prophetical praecepts, which are not totidem verbis revived in
new Testament; are now mortua? Apagesis Antinome.

Or suffices the protestation of our Savior that he Math. 5.17.
came not to destroy the lest title of Moses his moral Law; and that of Paul,
that Romans 3.31.
faith does not abrogate the Law, but rather stablish it, to countenance
whatsoever Law given by Moses, explicated by Prophets, which was not either
particularly judicial, or amongst the shadows of things to come. That
yielded, till that of Tything be euidenced to be amongst the seuerals of the
Jews, life it has sufficient put into it by Christ and his Apostles, in their
protestation, and auouchment for the general.

But who so is acquainted with their discreetest answers to arguments grounded
on Scriptures of the new Testament, shall find them to exact a praecept,
punctually there speaking for Tithes; with such scorn shall he hear
arguments of most apparent consequence thence drawn, rejected; because the
conclusion for Tithes, under that name, is not extant in our testimonies Gal.
6.6.
Make the instructor partaker of all thy goods, said the Apostle. Part-taker,
said an Arch-presbyter amongst them, not Tenth-taker; and pleased himself much
in the elegance. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
As Leui ministering about holy things, lives of the Temple, etc. So has Christ
ordained for them that preach the Gospel, to live of the Gospel. To live of the
Gospel, God forbid else; but had Paul meant Tithes, doubtless he would have
named them. coniurati; sworn brothers. Mat. 28.19.
Though Christ said, 1 Cor. 1.16
Baptize all nations; Though Paul baptized whole households; though Act. 2.39.
Promises, Act. 10.47.
spirit, Mar. 10.14.
kingdom, belongs to Infants, yet, after Anabaptists, never meant Christ to
admit Infants to his baptism? for as easy had it been for him to name them,
had he so intended, as to leave it determinable, by doubtful consequetiall
deductions. Thomas; the best Patron, I dare say, of their opinion. That the
ancient practice of Abraham, and Jacob, before the law written, was arbitrary
only, without any iniunction, or praecept of God. And yet, says, Thomas,
Abraham had his Prophetical instinct which was to him a law. And may we
think their sacrificing, and like devotions, or pious offices, were done
without injunctions? By faith Abel offered. Heb. 11. Therefore not without a
word of God Genesis 26.13.
. Abraham kept Gods charge, his commandments, his statutes, his laws.

The names, the same, as of those laws after given in writing, force us to
think, they had their rule of faith, of worship, of life, according to which
they were bound to frame their Religion, and life. Even of the particular,
Abraham's Tything, it shall after appear, it was done of duty, of Justice, by
iniunction, and therefore not, as is supposed, arbitrarily.

Thus the introduction to our intendment. How loath am I, that covetousness
should grow impious, so impious, as without warrant, or sound reason, to
abrogate any law of God, intended to be perpetual: how feign would I persuade
conscience, (and if there be any, it will be persuaded) to prove, before it
affirm, the law of Tything abrogated; to evidence, before it plead exemption
from it; They err, that think us only bound, by reasons to prove such laws
perpetual: those that scize the Lords ancient inheritance to themselves, those
that detain any part of that portion, must prove it temporary, before they
can warrant conscience in such practice, Clearly God gave such a law;
according to it, practiced Patriarchs, Jews, Christians upon persuasion of
obligation; ancients, as many as treated it, judge it to bind the Christian
Church. The authority, the reasons of none, except demonstratiue, shall sway my
judgment, nor ought to sway anies, to think it temporary, belonging only to
the time, and state of the Jews.

A taste of Laymens reasons, much swaying their conscience, let me, though
something out of place, give you; A pidling Cauiller, willing to show his
wit, would needs frame argument against Tything, of the text, which gave me
first occasion to treat the question. After many quarrellings against choice
of that text of Paul, 1. Cor. 9. to support the conclusion, thus he quaerees.
What if from this text he could frame an argument against Tithes? Ans. He
should be to me Magnus Apollo. And if out of this, or any other holy text, you
could handsomely but strain an argument, I would yield you the conclusion.

Its well with you, my Lay-masters, you have in our free hold the eleven points
of the law. I dare say, you shall sooner fetch water out of a flint, then
argument out of Scripture, to prove your ius to them.

Yet this Text would afford some Sampson one. What, trow we, may that be? if
hyre or wages be the maintenance belonging to ministers, then not Tithes: for
hire is a civil thing, and from men by civil contract. Tithes are challenged
from God, as a divine donation. Therefore Tithes, and wages, being of diverse
nature, cannot both be the ministers maintenance. But the maintenance,
belonging to ministers, is hyre or wages. 1. Cor. 9.7. Ergo: not Tithes.

Ans. Witty too too: quasi dicam, if an inheritance be the maintenance
belonging to Leui, then not Tithes: for inheritances are civil things,
descending lineally from father to son, settled upon posterity, by civil, or
natural, or national law. Tithes are challenged to Leui from God, as a divine
donation; but the maintenance belonging to Leui, is an inheritance. Numb.
18.21. Ergo, not Tithes. How easy is it to answer, that Tithes was that
inheritance, and Tithes is this wages? Will you rest in an answer when you have
it? The Apostle says not, our maintenance, whatsoever it is, is wages, or hyre
given by civil contract. But from proportion of wages given in Justice to
soldiers, etc. proves a reward or recompense, due to Ministers for preaching
the Gospel. 2. Is every hire or wages due by civil contract? The (...) or
wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23. by civil contract think you? betwixt
whom, and the sinner. 3. Alters this the nature of things, to have many
efficients? Lastly, if hyre, then not Tithes? what if Tithes be this hyre? as
it was Leuies inheritance. Then though hyre, yet Tithes. Hyre imports the
general, Tithes determine the particular: has not this Sampson pulled the house
upon our heads.

A second argument thence drawn, is from Paul's silencing of the particular,
where he purposely treates of the general. Paul purposely treating of
Ministers maintenance for perpetuity, mentions not Tithes, where one word yet
had struck the matter dead.

Ans. Will it please you to know, that Paul's principal scope is not, to treat
of maintenance; but to persuade the people, to yield of right in things
indifferent, in favor of the weak, by argument drawn from his example. He
yieldes in maintenance, therefore ought they in matters of less moment. His
secondary intention is, to auow his right to maintenance: where, though grounds
be laid that concern posterity, yet is not that his maine purpose.

His conclusion in this second intention is, that he and Barnabas had right to
maintenance: must he needs descend to express mention of the particular
quantum? especially it being elsewhere sufficiently determined? what if he
thought the people well enough able, out of the old Scriptures to inform
themselves of the particular? This once is apparent. Scriptures of new
Testament deal lest particularly, in matters plainly, and plentifully
particularized in the old; as in those maine moralities, of observing Sabbath,
and forbearing usury, etc. is evident.

But to this Argument, Paul purposing to speak of ministers maintenance,
mentions not Tithes. Ergo what? they are not due? or no thought in Paul of
Tithes, as if I should say:

Moses purposing to set forth the Genesis 1.
history of Creation, mentions not Angels: are they therefore not created? or
had Moses no thought of their creation?

Our Savior purposely treating of the Mat. 5.
Moral law, and continuance thereof, speaks not particularly of the Sabbath.
How much quaestion has the Church been pestered withal about that Subject?
Sure our Savior much forgot himself, especially having praescience of things
to come, that he gave not one touch at morality of Sabbath, where one word had
stroke the matter dead. Are ye satisfied? such arguments are the best, that
these men's Logic can frame;

Proceed we now (...) to reuiew of the quaestion; stating it after our old
course, for the Cauillers sake, who has labored to perplexe it; Who knows
whether God will more bless our second endeavors?

THE MINISTERS PORTION.
THE grants on all sides are these. First, that there is a maintenance 1. Cor.
9.4, 5. to 15.
in justice due to Ministers for their work sake. Secondly, Its yielded it
must be competent, not only for supply of natural necessities, but for their
1. Tim. 3.2.
furniture to every good work of their calling. Thirdly, That it must be 1.
Tim. 5.17, 18.
liberal: not such as every niggardly mind will judge convenient and
competent.

To which grants, let me add these postulata, as plainly determined in
Scripture. Let no man mistake the term, supposing them to be Lawyers quaerees,
or matters of moot. My postulata are Mathematica, such as to my apprehension,
in respect of evidence and certenty, admit none, except cauilsome,
contradiction. Those granted, some inferences for the maine purpose, will, of
their own accord, follow. Thus you may number them.

1. That to Ministers of the Gospel, belongs a maintenance as large, as to the
Leuiticall Priesthood: this, me thinks, 2. Cor. 3.
excellency of Ministry, and 1. Cor. 9.11.
blessings conferred thereby enforces.

Object. Yet Christ whose Ministry, and blessings were superior to ours,
thought not necessary His excellency should be adorned with earthly things.

Answ. Now you are in the right. Neither thought he necessary, that
th'excellencie of his Kingdom should be adorned with Royal magnificence. What
is your inference? therefore our Math. 6.29.
Salomons may not be clothed royalty? therefore nor his Ministers Psalm. 8.20.
have where to lay their heads? Know you not that his (...) on earth, was to be
carried in the Phil. 2.7.
habitude of a servant? and that 2. Cor. 8.9.
by his poverty he should make us rich?

2. That this maintenance must rise Gal. 6.6.
out of all and every the goods of all and every the people instructed.

3. That the Lord has as certainly provided for our maintenance under the
Gospel, as for theirs under the Law. For had the Lord less care of us? was
there less need in respect of the peoples backwardness? no. But he entrusted
Magistrates with that care.

Ans. And were there not Magistrates amongst the Jews.

Object. Is not the care of God shown sufficiently in ordaining maintenance
without certeintie?

Answ. That's not the quaere, whither sufficiently: but whither less or more by
determining certeintie, or by leaving all to man's arbitrament. As if I should
ask; does not the father, assigning his child to the care of friends at
large, as carefully provide for his liuelihood; as allotting his son a
portion of lands and revenue, which none may by any means defeat him of? I
should think his care more, that thus certainly prouides, then his, who
commits all to the doubtful regard of friends.

Object. But why thinks M. Selater, the people under the Gospel, as backward
as those under the Law? When God has promised Joel 2.28, 29.
more abundant Grace: Is not Justice a part of Grace? can Grace be without
Justice?

Answ. Grace renewing cannot be without Justice: virtues gracious are connexed.
But the Grace of which Joel speaks, dreaming dreams, and seeing visions, or
if there be any other, coming under the term of Gratia gratis data, may be
without Justice: except perhaps we may think Judas just, because to him was
given, as to others, Math. 10.1.
power to do miracles. Howbeit it must be confessed, that Grace of
illumination, and sanctification, is greater under the Gospel, then under the
Law: 1. In extent of the subjects receiving; which are now all flesh, as well
Gentiles, as Jews. 2. Mensura and gradu, where it takes place, making the
terms of comparison aequall. But think you, this Grace takes place in all
under the new Testament? or meant the Lord to leave us to the gracious
disposition of our sanctified people only, exempting others from bond of
duty, in contributing to maintenance of the ministry? I assure you Sir, if I
should measure men's Sanctification by their Justice in this kind, I should be
forced to assign Sanctification rathest to men of lest knowledge; and to say
of others, who have enclosed sanctity, and sincerity all to themselves, Non
est qui facit iustum vsque ad vnum. Whither it be, that the holy morsel is
sweet; or that they would have justice in this kind, seem mercy; or how the
good year it falls, I know not; Terras Astraea reliquit: This Justice is
taken to her wings, and fled far from our coasts.

4. That the Lord in the Leuiticall Law had eye to provision for us, that were
to Minister in the Gospel. 1. Tim. 5.18.
Thou shall not mussell the mouth of the ox which treads out the corn, was
a branch of Law Leuiticall; yet applied by The Apostle to enforce honorable
maintenance of Ministers under the Gospel.

Thus far I think we walk safely, since in the very steps of the holy Ghost,
leading us in the new Testament: Let us now descend toward the particular.

Some tumbling down headlong, rather then descending, resolve of a competencie
indeterminate; so th'allowance be competent all is well.

Resp. Then in case of this fancied competencie, some as the instructed, though
wealthy perhaps, shall be exempted from the Apostles iniunction. For suppose
some one or two of the well disposed hearers, shall out of their private, make
a competent allowance; The rest shall now 1. Cor 9 12.
reap our spirituals, and not sow their carnals. For, as the saying is rise
enough in a Ministers maintenance, enough is a feast. But says the Apostle,
Gal 6.6
Let him, that is: every him, that is instructed, make his instructor partaker
of all his goods.

The supposed (says the Cauiller) is without example, nigh to an impossibility.

Answ. It should seem then, the Grace of the new Testament is not every where
alike abundant, and ouerflowing. In your countries it works more sparely. My
self have known many, who, out of their own private, have given, over and
above their Tithes ordinary to the Ignorant or idle Shepherd, a largess, as
large as most men think competent, in zeal of their own and other men's
salvation.

But what inconvenience, though contribution arise not out of all and every
able man's goods?

Answ. 1. Cor. 9.11
They reap our spirituals without sowing their Carnalls. 2. They discharge not
the Gal. 6.6.
duties laid on them by the Apostle, and so entangle their conscience with
guilt of sin. An inconvenience call you that, for that of Paul is but a
counsel, not a praecept. 2. A counsel to be obeyed in casu of the Ministers
need. Then indeed the hearers are bound, to afford their Minister, a meals
meat, or nights lodging, and such like cleemosynarie kindness, as they would
afford another man in his necessity.

Sol.
Answ. When will you cease to pervert the straight ways of the Lord? Are
Ministers your Almes-men? Is nothing due to them ex lege Iustitiae for their
labor in the word and doctrine, be they never so well stored of their own,
but only in mercy, respecting their necessities? Is this the 1. Tim 5.17.
double honor Paul would have them thought worthy of? This 1. Cor. 9.14.
th'ordinance of Christ, for Preachers of the Gospel, to live of the Gospel?
what if our inheritances civil were as large, as yours? Is nothing due for our
pains in the Gospel? how then live we of the Gospel? what is the laborers
deserved hyre? the soldiers (...)?

In case of need, you that have this worlds good, will not see this Brother
want. There, there so would you have it Ministers, to hang on your benevolence;
to partake works of your mercy due to humanity; but neither by this, nor any
other text of Scripture, to be entitled to any thing for their work sake.
praecept of The Apostle. For the charge is as great in the next verse, to
relieve the poor.

Sol.
Resp. But think you that also a counsel, not a praecept. 2. Weigh well, you
shall be forced to see, that what is said in the three next verses, belongs to
the point in hand of Ministers maintenance, and not to benevolence toward the
poor. Let me see what this merciful man has said hitherto for the quality
of our maintenance. One while its hire, as much, or little as you can make your
bargain for; Another while, Alms: your servants, or your beades-men we are,
one of the two certain. Sir, I would you knew, the only Master we serve is
Jesus Christ: His servants we are. Our peoples Heb. 13.7.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
guides, rulers, superiors. And the maintenance we claim, is of that
portion, which the God of heaven has assigned us; which who without Sacrilege
can detain from us? But proceed we in examining the likelihood of your
competencie. See conclusion the sixth: and duly weighing it, tell me, whither
thou find conscience satisfied with this imaginary competencie? for is there
no certain provision for Ministers of the Gospel, but this uncertain
competency? who shall judge of it? Every man? Mallem Cerberum metueres, as the
Orator speaks. The Magistrate? why would not the Lord leave this to Jewish
Magistrates? no not to Moses, a man so gracious with him? and leave it to
Magistrates under the Gospel.

Jewish Magistrates were then entrusted. Answ. What? as you would have them now
Trusters for us; that the whole of our maintenance should depend upon their
discretion, to assign, less or more? Where have you it? in what Scripture? in
what Authentic Author? will the text in Mal. 3.10.
Malachi bear it? Let the reader be judge.

No such certentie was left to Levites, as we now claim. No such certeinty.
Ergo none? 2. Such certeintie: so such as its the same for the general.
Tithes, and Glebe, and votarie consecrations. 3. Why none such? Ob. Tithes were
then brought to one common Storehouse, and thereout share given to every one,
according to his gifts, worth, number of children, and necessity. Ans. 1.
Incerta omnia; whether worth, or necessity, or specialtie of employment, were
the rule of distribution: whether all Tithes were brought to one common
storehouse at Jerusalem; or not rather laid up in the several Cities,
assigned to Levites in the several Tribes. 2. Varies it the suchnes or
identitie of the matter of maintenance, that there were some variable
circumstances appertinent to the payment or distribution? 3. Thus conceive your
answer. The whole of Tithes was a certainty due to the comminaltie of Levites:
The whole of Tithes is a certentie due to the comminaltie of Ministers. A
portion of that whole, was due to every Leuite. A portion of this whole, due to
every Minister of the Gospel. 1. Res distributa was then certain, Tithes. 2.
Obiectum distributionis, certain: Levites, not Laickes. 3. Modus
distributionis, in respect of the particular, in a sort indeterminate, while
the ordinance was for Levites to live in common: Our res distribuenda, is
certain: the persons, to whom that portion must be distributed, as certain.
The Modus distributionis, in a sort uncertain; as what number of people, or
circuit of place to be assigned to particular ministers; what ministers to be
deputed to oversight of this, or that congregation; yet ex hypothesi, certain;
suppose such congregations assigned, to such ministers, the Tithes thence
accrewing belong to those ministers by Paul's rule. Gal. 6.6.

3. Suppose it committed to Magistrates? how I demand; absolutely, or with
limitation? if with limits, what are those bounds? forsooth a Competencie.
Perceive you not circling and mere uncertainties? The Magistrate is bounded
with no certentie of number or quantity? What? Ergo, with no limits at all;
which is the quaestion. Object. Yes, a rule he has to follow, the word of God.
Answ. That is large. But what is the rule, or limit prescribed for this
particular by the word of God? Say if you can without circling. Forsooth
Competencie. You are coniured to your circle, and must not out of it.

Leave we therefore this fancy: and see, whether we may find some other more
certain particular, to resolve of. And surely, when we have in vain turmoiled
our selves to avoid Iudaizing in this point of Ministers maintenance, we shall
be forced at length to acknowledge Tenthes, which some call Jewish, to be the
Ministers appointed Portion.

That the truth may better appear, I will propound the different opinions that
I have met withal in this point.

1. Brownists in this quaestion thus peremptorily resolve. That Tithes are so
merely caeremonious and Leuitical, that they cannot without betraying
Evangelical liberty, and disauowing Christ's Priesthood, be retained as
maintenance of Ministers of the Gospel. And how full soever of dotage, this
dream may seem; yet this I will say for them; they are mad with more reason a
great deal, then any others which hold them caeremonies Leuiticall. If the
assumption were true, their conclusion would soundly follow by doctrine of the
Apostle. Gal. 4. and 5. Col. 2. etc.

2. Some others thinking them Judicials, resolve: part, that they may be
retained as the Ministers stipend: part, that they are the most convenient
maintenance can be allotted us.

3. A third sort, that they are due by Gods Law to Ministers of the Gospel: but
these in explanation of themselves diversely derive them thence.

1. Some thus, due by Gods law enioyning obedience to Magistrates in things
lawful and convenient. These give them no other ground in Gods word, then
other humane ordinances.

2. Others, due by Gods Law, in as much as the Church (whose authority with
them is divine) has enjoined their payment. So generally Papists.

3. A third sort: due by Gods Law; in respect of their consecration to God,
either by received custom or consent of Churches, or by donation of Princes,
or by legacy of Testators. In which opinion I must needs profess my self to
have sometime been; till being to deliver my judgment to my people, I more
purposely set my self to see what the truth was. And during that mistake, I
thus thought: that they could not without Sacrilege be aliened from their
general end. My reasons were these.

1. That I found Solomon auerring it to be a Pro. 20.25.
Curse to devour holy things, and had seen the curse exemplified on many.

2. That ordinance of the Lord I held moral and perpetual. Leuit. 27.18, 19.
Nothing separate from common use, no not of those which man had separated,
might be again unhallowed, no nor redeemed.

3. That saying of the Apostle much swayed with me Gal. 3.15.
If it be but a man's Testament, no man abrogates it. 1. No man ought to
abrogate it. And so much the more, for that being once an Auditour of that
Judicious Divine Master Perkins, whose memory is blessed, I heard him move the
doubt; whether things given to superstitious uses, suppose to maintain
Massemonging, might be alienated. And thus assoile to my remembrance. That from
the particular intention, wherein through ignorance they erred, alienation
might be; But from the general end, maintenance of Gods worship, they might
not be aliened. Thus then and upon those grounds, my judgment is still the
same, though my Media be other, and somewhat more peremptory.

Is not Master Sclaters conclusion to take away Tithes, is Sacrilege? Be not
his other Media since his mistake reformed, because Tithes be due iure diuino;
absolutely and simpliciter, and not quodam modo, as by consecration; why then
makes Master Sclaters consecration one of his five reasons?

Answ. Master Sclaters opinion is that Tithes are due iure diuino; that is, by
principles, and Laws of the word of God, absolutely due; by such absolute
prescript as admits no repeal or dispensation.

Why then returns he to the matter of consecration?

Answ. Because that is one of his grounds of claim, laid down in the word of
God; which once was his only, is now one amongst others. 2. Withal you must
understand, there is a double consecration; one by Gods reserving, or
separating things to himself. Leuit. 27.
Another, by humane vow, or dedication. Master Sclaters mistake was, that they
were due only by humane consecration: his reformed judgment is, that they are
holy to God, not only because vowed by men, but because reserved to God by
himself from the beginning. Here is no tantologie.

Object. Alienation was made by the whole state, which has interest in meum
and tuum.

Answ. 1. Varies it the Nature of the action, supposing it to be Sacrilegious,
that whole states are engaged therein? Belike the multitude of offenders,
parit errori patrocinium.

2. Yield States to have interest in meum and tuum; have they dominion over
that which is Dei? Suum cuique, is a good rule for states. Let them give to
Caesar, what is Caesar's: to every one, what is his own; only let Gods portion
be sacred, and kept inviolable: let his dominion and property be holden a
transcendent.

But what if these dispersions into many hands was the only means to banish
Antichrist?

Answ. 1. Those many hands might have been as well Clericke as Layicke, and
that end as well achieved. 2. But Romans 3.8.
may you do evil, that good may come of it?

Object. Return of Antichrist was feared.

Answ. O worthy wight, and worshipped might he be; who never spared woman in his
lust, nor man in his rage, yet feared the return of Antichrist. Credam? 2. But
know you not Ignorance the greatest pillar of Antichrists Kingdom? If amongst
any he may recover his old possession by a Postliminium, most amongst those
congregations which are most stripped of Tithes; forced, poor souls, to content
themselves with Priests of the lowest of the people, because the ancient salary
is seized on, and possessed in Lay-fee. Neh 13.10, 11, 12.
And see issues of such dealing, with means of reformation.

Quaest. But can any in error consecrate unto God? was Cains sacrifice
accepted?

Answ. What is your meaning? so as their act, as theirs, shall please God? and
their persons be accepted, so we answer; no. And so much only presses your
instance in Cain. But so as to give God property in the thing consecrated, who
doubts but they may? The Censers of Corah and Dathan must be employed about the
Altar; because, though erroneously, yet Number. 16.38
they offered them before the Lord: therefore they are hallowed. And for this I
am sure, you have Master Perkins firm in his post-humous Notes. Things
consecrated erroneously, ad Galat 3.
may be employed to the use of Gods worship: yea the next heir of the
Votarie, loses all title to things so consecrated: and may not claim them
from their general intendment: though to him, if to any, they belong of right,
in case there be a nullitie of erroneous consecrations.

Object. Price of a whore must not be brought into the Tabernacle.

Answ. That is, hire taken for her prostitution to filthiness: of turpe lucrum,
God will have no sacrifice. Ergo, not of goods honestly gotten by the votarie?
2. Besides, know you not that the case is ruled? that even of unjust
perquisites, something may redound to poor, something to Church, where the
parties suffering wrong, are not; or are unknown; 3. But is your Whore, the
Whore of Babylon? Methinkes I smell you; I doubt our Albe, wherein we
minister, will hear no better from you, then the Whores smock, though in use
long time before, Antichrist transferred it to his superstition.

Object. This were to sit in the Idols Temple.

Answ. Understand you what you say? To retain the consecrations of Idolaters
to Gods service, how is it more to grace an Idol, then to keep up Temples,
wherein Idols have been worshipped, and apply them to the worship of God? S.
Paul could distinguish, betwixt eating an Idolothyte, and eating it 1. Cor. 8.7
(...). It may suffice, that they be diuerted to the worship of the true God,
whether they were, in the general aim of the Donors, intended,

But quorsum haec tam multa? Its yielded you ex abundante in explication of the
fourth Argument, that such erroneous consecrations give not God seizure in
things devoted. A new and holy consecration without error we have of Tithes,
and such like holy things; beside their ancient reservation from the beginning,
with that protestation of the Lord. Leu. 27.
Tithes are holy unto the Lord: what this Mome has gained by his quarrelling
hitherto, the learned easily judge. Proceed we therefore to our conclusion,
which is thus propounded and explaned.

Tithes are the portion, at least, part of that portion, by Gods word allotted
to Ministers for their service in the Gospel.

By Tithes understand the tenth part of all the hearers increase: that is; to
stop the mouth of the Cauiller, of his Pro. 3.9.
income or revenue. Particulars may be read. Leuit. 27.30. Et alibi: In a word,
to use the distinction of Canonists; whether they be personal, of mere
industry, negotiation, etc. or praediall, as of grounds, etc. or mixed, as of
Cattle, the tenthes of the whole income, not those of Cummin and Annyse
excepted, fall within compass of our subject.

Object. Part of the Portion: here is uncertainty still, says the Cauiller.

Answ. None at all. That part is our certain Portion: other we have; if you
would know what: It is, whatsoever the regular devotion of Princes, or people,
shall please to add as, an auctarie to our maintenance. Zepperus de lege
Mosaica. lib. 4. cap. 40. Decimae, pars sunt illius stipendij, quod ministris
pro officj sui laboribus, diuino and naturali iure debentur.

Quaest. By Gods word allotted. Intends Master Sclater without any ground of
civil or ecclesiastical ordinance?

Answ. This Master Sclater means: though no ordinance of man should assign
them unto us. Ipsissimum Dei verbum, has made them ours.

In what Commandment?

Answ. As they are an honoring of God, so in the first: As they tend to
preserve the public worship of God, so in the second and fourth: As
maintenance of our persons, so in the fifth, being part of the honor due to the
spiritual parent.

Object. But without any point of Consecration?

Answ. Though no consecration votarie had bin from man, yet were they ours by
the word of God. Howbeit the laws for such consecrations given in the word of
God, hitherto belong, and fall within our whole of the word of God.

Of Tithes amongst Jews we find four sorts.

1. Tithes of Levites. 2. of Priests? 3. for love Feasts: 4. and Tithes for the
poor: hear us in Hieromes terms.

1. (...), hoc est, decimam partem omnium frugum Leuiticae tribui populus ex
lege debebat.

2. Rursum ex ipsis decimis, Leuitae, hoc est inferior ministrorum gradus,
decimas dabat sacerdotibus; and haec est quae appellatur (...).

3. Erant quoque and aliae decimae, quas vnusquisque de populo. Israel in suis
horreis separabat, vt comederet eas cum iret in Templum in vrbe Jerusalem, and
in vestibulo Templi: and sacerdotes ac Leuitas inuitarent ad conuiuia.

4. Erant autem and aliae decimae, quas pauperibus recondebant; quae Graeco
sermon appellantur. (...). Hieronym: in Ezech. lib. 14. ad cap. 45.

Josephus, though he mention three kinds only, because he comprises the
secundance in Tithes of Levites, (perhaps having eye to those only payable from
the people,) yet in effect acknowledges the quadripartite distinction; at
least discharges not the people of their trietericall; thus presenting us the
Law from the mouth of the Lawgiver. Vltra duas decimas quas quotannis pendere
iam iussi, 1. Alteram Leuitis, 2. Alteram in sacras epulas, 3. Tertia tertio
quoque anno est conferenda, quae in egenas viduas and pupillos distribuatur.
Antiquitat. lib. 4. cap. 8.

Whether payment of festival Tithes were intermitted in the third year, as
Mr. Seldom would from the Septuagints rendering infer, is a quaestion to our
maine impertinent. Howbeit to me it seems improbable; for were they in that
year freed from their appearing at Jerusalem? or might they in that year
appear empty handed before the Lord? A Iustitium perhaps there might be in
that respect for that Time. To the Septuagint I give the honor due to them;
but dare not prefer them to the text, as now extant with points; especially
where the reading of the original is so constant and vnuaried. Besides who
knows not their manifold aberrations in matters of no small moment? as in that
of the Chronology in Genesis, wherein so many have in vain labored a
reconcilement. The observation out of their rendering must be confessed to be
acute: yet has in it rather witty diligence of observation, then soliditie to
build inference.

If any make quaestion of whether sort we dispute; Tithes we mean of that
Nature with those paid to Levites; which, perhaps, are therefore conuey'd to
them in the term of an Number. 18.
inheritance, because the Lawgiuer would imply their perpetuity, and lineall
descent from Ministry to Ministry unto all generations. The why nots raised
about other kinds, will best be answered in discussing th'obiections.

Of these Tithes this is that we affirm. That by the word of God they belong
for ever to Ministers of holy things; and therefore in these days to Ministers
of the Gospel, who alone have now to do with public ministrations of the
worship of God. Our reasons are these. The first grounded on Heb. 7.6.8. He
whose descent is not counted from them, received Tithes of Abraham: and verse.
8. Here men that die, receive Tithes: but there he receives them, of whom its
witnessed, that he lives. Compare, Genesis 14.20.

The Argument which this Scripture affoords, has received much disadvantage,
by slender collection of many, thus only pressing it. Tithes were paid to
Priests before the Leuiticall law was given. Therefore their payment is founded
rather on Moral then Caeremoniall law. To which, answer is well given; that by
as good inference, sacrificing of beasts may be proved a morality, since it
was also in use before giving of the Law by Moses. That we may the better see
the force of the Argument, let us a little consider the frame and sum of the
text. The Apostle by occasion of the peoples dullness, having digressed from
Cap. 5.11. to Cap. 6.20. returns to his purpose; that is, to show the
excellency of Christ's Priesthood above that of Aaron, by auouching him a
Priest after the order of Melchisedec. The conclusion is this. Christ's
Priesthood is more excellent then that of Leui; or Christ is a greater Priest
then any after Aarons order. The principal reason lies thus. He that is a
Priest after the order of Melchisedec is a greater Priest then the Priests after
Aaron. But Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedec. Ergo: etc. The
minor has first his proof. 1. From a testimony of David, Cap. 5.20. 2. From
that absolute agreement betwixt Melchisedec, and Christ: the parts whereof are
these. 1. As Melchisedec was King, and Priest of the most high God, so Christ.
2. As Melchisedec King of righteousness, and Prince of peace, so Christ. 3. As
Melchisedec his parents, kindred, beginning and end of life are not recorded; so
Christ, as man, without father, as God without mother, kindred, beginning, and
end of life. Therefore Christ is truly a Priest after the order of Melchisedec:
verse 1, 2, 3.

The Mayor remains to be proved, and that has proof from verse 4. to 11.
the sum whereof is comprised in this principal Syllogism. If Melchisedec be
greater then Leui, then he that is a Priest after his order, as Christ is; is
greater then Leui. But Melchisedec is greater then Leui, Ergo, etc. Minor
proved: Greater then Abraham, greater then Leui: Melchisedec is greater then
Abraham: Ergo then Leui: Minor proved. He to whom Abraham paid Tithes, of
whom he was blessed, is greater then Abraham. But to Melchisedec, Abraham paid
Tithes; and Melchisedec blessed Abraham. Ergo, is greater then he. verse 4, 5,
6, 7.

A second Argument proouing the greatness of this Priest, above those of
Aarons order, is laid down verse. 8. A tyth-taker, that is, a Priest of whom
its testified that he lives, is greater then a Tyth-taker that dies. But the
Priest after Melchisedec is a Tyth-taker of whom its testified that he lives.
Levites take Tithes and die. Ergo, the Priest after Melchisedec his order is
greater then the Priests Leuiticall. This is in my simple Logic the
disposition of the text. As for illustrations, or amplifications by
prosyllogismes prolepses, or otherwise, I purposely omit them. Now me thinks,
the text thus naturally resolved, there should need no farther deduction of
th'Argument: yet that the simplest may see what footing Tithes have here, thus
I collect it.

The portion due to Christ's Priesthood, is due to Ministers of the Gospel;
Tithes are the portion due to Christ's Priesthood. Ergo.

The Minor is thus proved. The portion due to Melchisedec his Priesthood, is
due to Christ's Priesthood. Reas. 1. for that Christ is Priest after that order.
2. other things enunciated of Melchisedec, are true of Christ eminently and
always: as its eminently and always true of Christ, that he is King of
righteousness and Prince of peace: eminently and always true of Christ, he is
without parents, without beginning and end of life, that he blesses Abraham
and all his seed, etc. All these are more properly verified of Christ, then of
Melchisedec his Type. Why not then also this ever true of him? He takes
Tithes. May we not assume? Tithes are the portion due to Melchisedec his
Priesthood? 1. Paid they were by Abraham to Melchisedec, as due to his
Priesthood. 2. In the Apostles Logique a Priest, and a receiver of Tithes are
aequipollents. In steed of saying, men that die are Priests, he says, men that
die receive Tithes: In steed of saying, he that lives is a Priest, he says, he
that lives, takes tithes: as if, in his judgment, Tithes and Priesthood were as
inseparable, as kingdom, and tribute: The Mayor of the principal Syllogism
if any doubt of, to wit, whether the portion due to Christ, be due to
Ministers, let him compare, 1. Cor. 9.14. where is th'expresse ordinance of
Christ, that Ministers should live of the Gospel. 2. Who in likelihood should
be his receivers, but those that are in his stead, as is said of Ministers, 2.
Cor. 5.20. 3. The same reason which the Lord assigns of Leui his sharing in
things to himself reserved, and sanctified, is true of Ministers, or else of
none. God is Levites portion. 1. Gods portion is Levites portion; because they
were taken to Minister before him. Why not then also Christ's portion Ministers
portion? because they only are assumed to Christ, to Minister in the Gospel. A
reason for not Tything of so plain deduction out of Scripture, if any can
bring me, he shall much sway me to his sentence.

This Argument I remember once to have propounded something otherwise, to this
purpose. The portion due to the Priesthood after Melchisedec his order, is due
to Ministers of the Gospel. But Tithes are that portion. Ergo, And thus
propounding it, I received these answers.

Object. The proposition seems untrue, except you can prove your selves
Priests after that order.

Answ. Whereto I then answered, that though we be no Priests after that order,
yet is there truth in the proposition, since Christ the high Priest of our
profession, to whom originally they belong, has ordained us to live of his
portion.

A second answer was by limitation: the portion due [by Law] to that
Priesthood, is due to Ministers. But with that limitation th'assumption is
false: Abraham's payment being an act rather voluntary, then by any iniunction
from God.

Answ. But that that act of Abraham was no act: in this sense voluntary, but
rather of necessary and enjoined duty, is evident (me thinks) by these
reasons. 1. For that gifts voluntary, proceeding from bounty and liberality,
imply a superiority or excellency in the giver, above the receiver. For Act.
20.35.
its a more blessed thing in that kind to give then to receive. But Abraham's
payment of Tithes was testimony of his inferiority. 2. Again, the phrase it
self implies as much. Melchisedec Tythed Abraham; ver. 6. a phrase that
loses all his Emphasis, if no iniunction had subjected Abraham to a
necessity of being tythed. 3. What mean they when they say of Abraham's
tything, it was done without law? would they be understood of Abraham's fact
only? or of tything at large, as it was in use before the Law written? Now
sure I wonder how first Abraham, and then after him Jacob, should fall upon a
tenth, rather then upon a sixth or twelfth part, if there were nothing
prescribed in their times for tything? 2. How prove they but probably that it
was without iniunction of Law? if this be the reason, for that we find no
mention of any Law to that end given, by as good reason may they say of
sacrifices, and sundry other actions religious, that they were arbitrarie; since
we find no express mandate given of them in those times. But thus me thinks
we may better reason from their practice to an iniunction; these facts of
theirs were approved of God; therefore not done without iniunction from him.
Thus far I suppose, this Argument cleared. Volumes of new cauills are
behind; which makes me think it hangs much in the teeth of opposites.

Object. Thus is my Cauiller. Yield for a while Tithes due to the Priesthood of
Melchisedec: will it thence follow they are due to Christ?

Answ. We shall tell you anon, when we have learnt your meaning. What is your
meaning, by thus yielding them due to the Priesthood of Melchisedec? mean you
the Priesthood after that order? Then it follows that they are due to Christ's
Priesthood: for his is Priesthood Heb. 6.20.
after the order of Melchisedec.

Perhaps that is not the meaning; but you suppose them due to Melchisedec,
ratione sacerdotij, non talis sacerdotij: or ratione Typica.

Answ. Choose whether you list. If ratione sacerdotij, then to Christ also; for
in him is sacerdotium. And if this be the formal reason of Tithes object,
quia and qua sacerdos, then they are ever due to Christ, because that reason is
perpetual in him: He is a Priest for ever.

If catione Typica, then you demand: must all things be verified of the truth,
that of the Type, and that according to the letter? then all that belonged to
Aaron, or Sampson, must be true of Christ.

Ans. All and every thing belonging to the Type, as a Type, must be verified of
the Antitype with this distinction, either literally, or mistically; not all
literally, nor all mystically: what is not literally, must be mystically;
what is not mystically, must be literally. And that you may see similitudes of
heavenly things, and Earthly their Types, hold, some, after the letter. Read
what is said of the high Priest of Jews as he was Type of Christ. Heb. 9.7.
He enters into the holy of holies not without blood: As he into the holy of
holies, so Christ into heaven: that verification is mystical. As Verse. 23, 24.
he not without blood; So Christ not without blood. That is literal.
Melchisedec brought in as Christ type in the story, without father and mother.
Is not this eminently true of Christ after the letter? Melchisedec without
beginning or end of days: this also literally verified. Though then all
things true of the Type materialiter sumpto, are not necessarily true of the
Antitype; yet as many as belong to the type formaliter taken, as a Type, must,
with that distinction be true of the Antitype. And what is intended to be
verified mystically, must so be verified in the truth: what is meant to be
literally accomplished in the Antitype, must so be fulfilled.

The quaestions then are two. 1. Whether in taking Tithes Melchisedec was Type
of Christ? 2. Whether that part of the Type be verified literally or
mistically by The Apostles doctrine?

That in taking Tithes of Abraham, Melchisedec typed out Christ; hear Mr.
Iunius in Genesis cap. 14. Ad intelligentiam illius Typi and accommodationem eius,
duo maxim obseruanda. Nempe tum in ijs quae dicuntur a Mose, tum vero in ijs
quae reticentur, constitui Typum. In ijs quae dicuntur; vt cum dicitur
Malchitzedec, id est, Rex iustitiae: Rex Salem: id est, pacis: Sacerdos Dei
Altissimi, benedixisse Abrahamo, et decimas accepisse. In quibus omnibus Typus
Christi expressus obseruandus est, etc. What needs Testimony, when the Text
affirms, the Tything of Leui by Melchisedec in Abraham, proves authentically
th'inferioritie of Leuiticall, to Christ's Priesthood.

That it is not mystically, but literally to be fulfilled in Christ's
Priesthood, who can deny? for where is the mystical Analogy betwixt this Act
of Melchisedec Typical, and Christ; as in his being King of Salem, and
Melchisedec; verified this must be of Christ, either literally, or mystically:
not mystically, Ergo, literally. And see if the text say not so much. Heb. 7.8.
He takes Tithes that lives ever: Who is that? Melchisedec as the Type; Christ
as the Truth. Eminently its true of Christ after the letter, he lives ever; And
he lives ever with this Epithete, to be a taker of Tithes.

Object. Nay, you say, The Spirit has made answer for you against such
wrestling; because he has omitted to describe Melchisedec, or Christ to be a
Tyth-taker. Leui indeed has that Emphaticall Title, to be a Tyth-taker:
Melchisedec has no more but (He.)

Answ. No more but He. Is that the matter? but its that (He) to whom, what is
said of Leui, must be (...), applied: else 1. the sentence gapes: and 2. Paul
fails in his comparison. There, that is, in Leuiticall Priesthood, men that
dye, take Tithes: here he, of whom its testified that he lives, must not that
(He) have (takes Tithes) applied unto him? as verse. 21. These Priests are made
without an oath: But this with an oath: What was this (with an oath) but made
Priest?

Object. Melchisedec took once; follows it that Christ must take ever? Apage.

Answ. That but once you will never prove. And 2. May not one Act transient,
being Typical, signify a perpetual act in Christ, as well as the many
Entrings of the high Priest into the Holy of Holyes, Christ's once entering into
heaven? Proh.

Object. Christ by this means claims from his Type.

Answ. Apage. How more Tithes from Melchisedec, then kingdom from David? His
grand Title to Priesthood, and kingdom, is Gods decree and ordination. The
signification thereof in the Types, yet necessary it is, that th'Antitype
should answer exactly to the Type; vt supra.

Object. But thinks any man they were due to Melchisedec or his Priesthood?

Answ. Any man? I dare say thousands after The Apostle, and except your self
all men of judgment. Calvine; Quod debebat Abraham Deo, soluit in manum
Melchisedec. They were therefore due debt from Abraham. Ius sacerdotij illius
subindicat aeternae esse durationis: Hoc autem ideo additum est, ne videatur
posterior lex (vt moris est) priori quicquam derogasse. Calvin. ad Heb. 7.
There was then a Law for their payment to Melchisedec. Iunius ad Heb. 7.
Melchisedec ab Abrahamo Decimas non dubitauit accipere, fretus authoritate Dei;
et ex ea rite perfungens Sacerdotis officio. Authority then Melchisedec had to
take; therefore Abraham praecept to pay Tithes.

Object. There was no praecept.

Answ. None read or expressed in so many letters and syllables: Nor any for
Melchisedec to use function of Priesthood. Think we therefore he did it
without calling?

Object. The act was voluntary in Abraham.

Answ. How understand you voluntary? willingly performed: so did Paul preach
the Gospel willingly: that Act of preaching was in Paul voluntary: yet 1. Cor
9.16, 17.
Woe had been unto him if he had not preached the Gospel.

Object. Not so; but voluntary, as matter of kindness, courtesy and bounty.

Answ. As some alms belike to the poor King of Salem: for such you would have
all that is now paid to Ministers of the Gospel. But oppose you voluntary to
matter of enjoined duty? then say I, payment so voluntary in Abraham, could
not testify his inferioritie to Melchisedec. No payment, except of duty, is
testimony of inferioritie. Heb. 7.6.
Abraham's payment of Tithes to Melchisedec, was testimony of inferioritie;
therefore it was payment of duty. You mistake if you conceive it said, that all
payments of dues imply inferioritie of the payer. Not so: But no payment,
except of duty, testifies th'inferiority of the payer. What have we now to do
with Kings paying wages to servants? and such like prattle. Its still true;
except Abraham's payment to Melchisedec, had been of duty, it could be no
testimony of his inferiority. Compare Romans 13.5, 6.

Object. They were not paid of all, nor of his own, nor often. Therefore not
due by any Law of God.

Answ. All uncertain. Of all, says Moses. Genesis 14.20. that is, says Master
Calvine, reasoning from circumstances of the text, of all his own substance,
and that commonly: for it is likely, he that had sworn to Genesis 14.23.
take nothing, from a thread to a shooe-latchet, for his own enrichment, would
at another man's cost offer unto God? It was a Piaculum unto David to offer unto
his God of that which cost him nothing. 2. Sam. 24.24. And as great scandal
had Abraham incurred amongst those Heathens, by performing his Devotions at
their charge, as by taking of theirs, for his own enrichment. 2. But how
follows the Argument? if but once, nor of all; Ergo, not by Law.

Answ. q. d. Abel offered but once, for ought appears; Ergo, without law. And
yet by faith he offered. Heb. 11.4. therefore not without a word of God.

Melchisedec tythed Abraham; if Tithes were not due, where is the Emphasis of
the phrase?

Answ. Surely quite lost: for it imparts a ius in Melchisedec to take;
therefore a debitum in Abraham to pay them.

This is all one as to say, a Tyth-taker for a Priest: Tithes and Priesthood,
are as inseparable as kingdom and Tribute.

Answ. Even so. That description of Christ's Priesthood by the ius of Tything,
hangs in your teeth. Give me a reason of that trope; putting Tyth-taking for
Priesthood, and see if it enforce not my inference. Priesthood and Tithes are
as inseparable, as Kingdom and Tribute. But do Tribute and Tithes match?

Answ. Yes, in the point of inseparability from their subject: As Tribute to
Kingdom; so Tithes to Priesthood are inseparable. Will you stretch your
comparison further? you wrong your Author, and forget your rule; similia
claudicant.

But how a good-yeare fell Abraham and Jacob upon tenths without iniunction?
Forsooth Jacob by Abraham's example: Abraham by special direction from God.

Answ. By special direction? likely some inspiration: but had that direction
the force of an iniunction? then was Abraham's act of duty, and not arbitrarie.

For sacrifices, their use held by tradition.

Answ. By tradition? Now how a good-yeare comes tradition in to be the ancient
Rule of worship? Tradition, selfe-deuised custom, without a praecept from God.
2. Tradition we yield it was, in a sense, as matters of faith and worship were
all traditionary, till the days of Moses: that is, they were delivered from
father to son, without writing: so was that, that the Genesis 3.15
seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, etc. In that sense
Tradition: but what is not also a divine revelation? So tradition that
sacrifices should be offered: but was not the praecept extant for the matter of
sacrifices? of clean not unclean beasts. 2. for the quality; of the best,
not of their refuse? How else sinned Cain in bringing such a sacrifice? And is
not Abel said, Heb. 11.4
by faith to have offered a better sacrifice? and is there faith without a word
of God?

Thus I conclude. Cain and Abel had sinned, if they had not brought sacrifices:
Cain did sin in bringing such a sacrifice: therefore there was a Law for
sacrifices, and the quality of them; for the rule is of perpetual truth, Romans
4.^5.
Where is no Law, there is no transgression. Likewise, Abraham had sinned, if
he had not paid Tithes to Melchisedec. Therefore that bound Abraham to pay
Tithes to him. For where is no Law, there can be no sin.

But how follows it on all this ground laid, that Ministers must live of
Tithes.

Answ. Because they are ministers of holy things; therefore must live of
Christ's portion; and that Portion is Tithes.

But that place. 1. Cor. 9.14. speaks not of Tithes.

Answ. 1. It will trouble you to prove, that it implies not Tithes, though it
express them not: That (So) and (Christ has ordained) remit us to Tithes, or
else to no certeintie. 2. But quid hoc ad rem? That text is not, in this
passage, alleged, to prove Tithes our portion, save only upon supposall;
that Tithes are Christ's portion. That granted, since Christ has made his
Portion, his Ministers Portion, the Texts alleged will prove Tithes the
Ministers: Deo gratias; I have done with a Trifler. I come now to satisfy my
learned friend in his quaere about this Text. Thus he.

Truth is, that if we take the seventh of th'Epistle to the Hebrews as it is
alone, without reference to whom it was written, and after what manner, and
observing how the Apostle (as in other things) works upon the present opinions
and state of the Jewish Church, by that pia vafrities (as some call it) the
Arguments for the right as Dr. Sclater has resolved them into Logical form,
are such as he that answers them, might answer the proof of any Truth.
Doubtless, he that herein answers Dr. Sclater, answers more then all the rest
of, etc.

Answ. Take we it therefore with all references possibly imaginable; and
consider any circumstance probably competent to be considered; yield also the
Apostle to use, if not that pia vafrities, yet his prudence in working upon the
present opinions of the Jews; what I wonder, may any these references, or
obseruings afford, to cross th'Argument here founded. Particularize the
references; 1. He writes to Hebrews, become Christians. 2. Confessedly infirm
in judgment touching abrogation of Leuiticall Law; and adhaering too much to
their first rudiments. 3. opinioned, as truth seems, that Ancient praecepts
Mosaicall still bound the conscience, after exhibiting of the Messiah. What, to
our maine, will all this afford to nullify or disable the Argument here
grounded? His pia vafrities, if it be conceited after Erasmus, his working upon
advantage of their misconceits, and errors of judgment, has here I dare
swear, neither use, nor footing. For what is in all this passage misconceiued
by those Christian Jews? whereout Paul should strain his conclusion of
Christ's superiority, to Leuiticall Priests? God Heb. 7.21
swears him a Priest after order of Melchisedec: And Verse. 7.
without controversy, the less is blessed of the greater; Verse. 8.
To speak as the thing is, Leui was tythed in the loins of Abraham, savor
any these asseuerations of Paul's working on misconceites.

His prudence it was to ground his conclusions on Scriptures, and Propositions
thereof, confessed by Jews as true; yet truly so confessed; and of force to
afford him, out of their real truth, and intention of the inspirer,
whatsoever inference he makes from them: so was it our Saviors, out of Moses
writings to convince M^^ 22.31, 32.
Sadduces, in the Article of the resurrection: yet was there truth in his
ground, and by undeniable sequel issues his conclusion out of the praemisses
extant in Moses. When Paul at Athens alleges testimony of Aratus the Poet,
Act. 17.28.
(...), we acknowledge his prudence impleading them from their own Authors:
yet dare not think him so impiously vafer, as to lay for ground an erroneous
conceit: or so imprudent a disputer, as to build his conclusion on a ground,
from whence the Argument had not apparent deduction. I presume, this curt
answer affoords so learned and friendly an inquisitor, large satisfaction.
Proceed we therefore to the other Arguments.

I thought, you see I thought, I had ended; and that the mouth of all Calumny
against this Argument had been stopped; when at last I am minded by a friend,
that the grand Syllogismes labor of two foul maladies, (...), and begging of
the Quaestion.

Yet cannot be euidenced any change of terms, or so much as of affection of
any term in the state: neither is either proposition tendered without proof
to any man's credulity; nor without something, prius and notius in se, and
vertuall enough to infer the conclusion. Fair answer expect to your
exceptions; howsoever, carried with tartness more then is meet, and elevation
no less sometime then mucteristicall.

This is the frame.

The Portion due to Christ's Priesthood, is due to Ministers of the Gospel.

Tithes are the Portion due to Christ's Priesthood. Ergo:

The Minor is thus proved.

The Portion due to Melchisedechs Priesthood, is due to Christ's Priesthood.

Tithes are the Portion due to Melchisedechs Priesthood. Ergo:

The Propositions (you say) are both Sophistical, because not propounded in
fit terms to infer the conclusion: besides, have in them a begging of the
quaestion, presuming of that, which in good Divinity is not to be granted.
And the assumptions are both false.

But why, I wonder, are the terms unfit, being two of them the same without
aequiuocation, wherein the conclusion is propounded; and the medium another, no
whit homonymous, and applicable both to praedicate and subject?

Forsooth, the true terms are these:

The Stipend or Wages due to Christ's Priesthood, is due to Ministers of the
Gospel. And

The Stipend or Wages due to Melchisedechs Priesthood, is due to Christ's
Priesthood. Sounds Stipend with you nothing but base Wages?

Emendemus in Melius: Remigius in Psalmos.
he was no Dunse that observed, there is emendatio in peius. These terms are
neither truer, nor true; nor fitter, nor fit for the quaestion: Truth is, fit
for his purpose only, who means to leave the purpose, and to set up a shadow
for himself to fight with. Could you, could any think, that in my term of
Portion, which is part of Temporalties allotted, I should intend Wages? such as
is paid to Hirelings, Maechanicall Artisans, or men of like employment: or if
you take my other term of Praemium, or Recompense, was it intended, trow you,
a Wages aequiualent to the Work?

I ever meant it an Honorarie, allotted by God, to be rendered from men, in
acknowledgement of the virtue, excellency, worth of Christ's Priesthood, and
his Ministers Work, who are employed by him in the commemoration and
application thereof unto the people. This is (...), of that term: that other
is vafra, and (...). Where now is my Petitio principij? or what is that, so
abhorrent from the grant of good Divinity? Forsooth, I presume there is a set
Stipend or Wages belonging to the Priesthood of Christ, and Melchisedec.

Surely I never presumed it. Wages said I ever in all my Sermon? The term is
strange to me. Marry this I presume, and yet am not presumptuous, That there is
a set or fixed Honorarie belonging to the Priesthood of Christ, and
Melchisedec. Will your Reasons force me to think otherwise? then I sit down.

Thus they are. 1. Christ needs none. 2. He requires none. 3. None can be
assigned him answerable to his Work, being a Work of satisfaction for the
sins of the whole World, a Work of infinite Merit. And for Melchisedec and
his Priesthood; Since, 1. None due to Christ. 2. Since Scripture silent for any
probability of any such thing. 3. Since it affoords more then probability to
the contrary: because he a King, therefore, 1. not needing it: 2. therefore
bound rather to give to his Subjects and Family, then to take Wages from them:
Yea, 3. Its ever counted base in a King, to take Stipend or Wages of
Forreiners, or his own Subjects. Ergo,

Quorsum all this? what needs so much ado among friends?

Answ. Its not Wages we enquire of, but the Honorarie of the Priesthood. And of
it, who dares auow, there is none due to Christ's Priesthood?

How fear I, least applying your Arguments to that Conclusion, which is the
only you must insist on, I shall expose them to scorn; and make them appear
such, as you affirm mine, weak as water, light as feathers, not worth
strawes, or the dust adhaering to them.

Resp. What if Christ need no honorarie to be rendered from us? therefore is
none belonging to his Priesthood? Though God Psa. 50.9, 10, 11, 12.
needed nor Bullocks nor Goats in Holocausts, or Thanks-offerings, were they
therefore not to be rendered from Jews? Though Christ needs not our Lands, or
Livings, or Lives, yet, in case of Confession, Mat. 10.37.
can they be but impiously denied him? Who knows not as much as Peter Lombard
in this case, that all our service of God, inward, Psa. 16.2. Job 22.2, 3
outward, redounds to ours, not to Gods behoof? Belong they not therefore to
our God? Christ needs not take: yet its our opus and vsus too to render him
outward, inward service and sacrifice.

When God calls to Jews for Tithes under name of Mal. 3.8.
his own, that there might be meat in his House, no man is so mad to think of
the living God, as is fabled or storied of th'Idol Bell and the Dragon. Yet must
there be meat in his House for them to whom the ministration of his service
was then committed. And though Christ, for his own Person, now needs not this
Honorarie, yet needs he it in his Deputes and Assigns, whom he has 2. Cor.
5.20.
put in his stead, to commemorate and apply the virtues of his aeternall
Priesthood, and to keep in life and being, the Spiritual Priesthood,
exercised by all Christians in the state of this life.

And does he not require it? Pro. 3.9.
Honor God with that he requires. ^. Cor. 9.11.
Render Carnals to them that sow Spirituals: That he requires. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Count Presbyters worthy of double honor; that's apertly the Honorarie we now
speak of. For Wages, or hyre, as you style and explane it, let it not be once
named in this quaestion, as becomes Saints: out upon that base conceit.

None can be assigned him, answerable to his work.

Resp. True as Gospel: nor Wages nor Honorarie aequiualent to his merit.
Psalm. 116.12, 13.
Quid retribuam? says David. Possibly nothing aequable to Gods bounty; our
goodness extends not to him: yet there was Poculum salutis, which he took
and offered in testimony of thankfulness, for so many and great things done
to his Soul. When Jacob according to his Vow erected The Altar Genesis 35.1.
at Bethel, and (who questions?) paid Tithes to God that had kept him; dreams
any man he meant it to the Lord as a Wage for his Work, in safe-guarding his
Person, or Honorarie aequiualent to such merits? Lord, I am Genesis 32.10.
less then all thy Goodness and Truth, which thou have shown me, etc. Why
doubt we that it was a duty in Jacob, and such as found acceptance with God?
Read also that excellent Blessing and Prayer of 1. Chr. 29.
David, what time he delivers his own and the Peoples Offerings toward
building the Temple: It will appear true which you say; the Honorarie was not
worthy the Lord, yet due to him from David, and from the People.

What need I now proceed to particular answer, to what concerns Melchisedecs
Priesthood? The Scripture affoords more then probability, praegnancie of
proof for an Honorarie due to that Royal Priest, and Priesthood. Neither was
it base, but honorable to that King of Salem, to be invested as well in the
Honorarie, as in The Office of that Priesthood. Will you now join in the close
for the Honorarie, as you profess to do upon supposall of Wages? If
Melchisedec received Wages, then you grant, it should be perpetual. What if
he received th'Honorarie, will you then grant, must you not grant, that it
should be perpetual? Iungamus dexteras. This little explication has wrought
our harmony in judgment for the maine.

Must we yet buckle about th'assumptions? What think you? are they yet both
false; and again, you say false, twice false, if my portion be not Merces, but
Honorarium? What if there be no proportion betwixt the worth of Christ's
Priesthood, and Tithes? Therefore not the Honorarie of his Priesthood? What
though no proportion between the spiritual things we sow, and the carnal,
we reap from the people? Ergo, 1. Cor. 9.11.
Carnals no Honorarie due to Ministry for Spirituals? What though no
proportion between the 1. Tim. 2.2.
Quiet and Godliness and Honesty we live in by means of Kings, and the Romans
13.7.
Tribute and Custom we render to those Earthly Gods? Therefore not the
Honorarie of Regalitie? I say not yet as you to me, Apagesis. Yet I advise,
make no such inferences. How vain are they? who sees not their vanity? To say
truth, how were they Honoraries, if there might be found mere paritie or
proportion betwixt them?

As to what is talked of Abraham's paying Tithes, as Wages, to Melchisedec, and
the disproofe thereof: Alas, its naught to purpose. We talk not of Wages.
Whether the scrupulous Gentleman you mention, be the Cauiller I deal with, in
my review, I know not: but find you both iumping on the same Conceits and
Reasons in refutation. I refer you therefore, for farther answer, to what is
said to him in my reply: And for more full satisfaction, to what is scholied
by my much reverenced friend and quondam Colleague M. Mountague, in his answer
to M. Seldom. Yet, that I seem not slightfull of such a friend, or willing to
leap over Reasons for defect of answer, Thus briefly to your Reasons bent to
prove, Tithes not paid by Abraham to Melchisedec of duty, or as you would
be understood, ex debito Iustitiae.

1. No Covenant betwixt Abraham and Melchisedec: Ergo not paid ex debito
Iustitiae. 2. This act of Abraham was an act of Piety and Devotion; Ergo, not
of Justice. 3. Had it been imposed on Abraham by Law, all the Grace and
commendation of it had been lost: for Law and Grace fight. 4. Jacobs Tything,
being of the same Nature with Abraham's, was voluntary, save for his Vow. 5.
Scripture expressly auowes Melchisedec had no Law to take; Ergo, nor Abraham
command to pay Tithes. Thus is your Breuiarie.

But does only Covenant and Compact breed Do not Benefits? etc. What Compact
I wonder twixt Parents and Children, to oblige the Child to obedience and
maintenance? A Commandment there is Exodus 20. Matthew 15.4.
to honor, that is, to sustain the Parent; and its Ephesians. 6.1.
(...), says Paul, without Covenant, to obey in all things.

Because an act of Piety, therefore not of Justice?

Answ. Know you none but civil Justice passing betwixt man and man? Have you
forgotten, that there is vniuersalis Iustitia, binding to render Cuique quod
suum est? Not only to Neighbor and Caesar, but unto God, what belongs unto
him? Is not Piety a part of this Justice? Is it not exactest Justice, which
binds to render duty to our God? Why make you things fight, that are
coordinate or subalterne?

our Offices their Grace, which are done by commandment? Had not Abraham his
Genesis 22.2
command to offer Isaac? or ever passed act from him, by which he received
more grace or commendation from God, then this of offering his son Isaac?
Gave not this the Verse. 12.16.
hent to that excellent commendation, and ratifying of enlarged Blessing? By
this, won he not the style of Iam. 2.23
Gods friend, the greatest encomium God ever gave man? Remember you not the
usual Quaere, whether muchnesse of obligation win not grace to the
performance? or the resolution? Vbi mayor obligatio, mayor acceptatio; because
melior est obedientia quam victimae. I spare censure of your mis-applying
Scriptures, in this and other passages. I wonder, I sorrow at it. But am vowed
to keep close to substance of Answer.

And was it not in Jacob an act of Justice, setting No: For he makes Tithes
the matter of his Vow, which he ought not to have done, if they had been
enjoined by any Law of God. You will not say so of the other part of his Vow, as
I suppose.

But mean you good earnest? Think you it soothly true which Bellarmine says?
Impium fuisset Iacobo vovere Decimas, si absolute fuisset obligatus eas
soluere: Is it your opinion, That no Vow may pass on any matter, whereto we
are obliged absolutely, that is, by peremptory Praecept? when under Nehemiah,
Princes, Priests, People, made Neh. 10.
Covenant, and entered into a Curse, to walk in Gods Law, given by Moses, etc.
Suppose you they erred in the matter of their Vow? were they not absolutely
bound so to do? were they impious in so vowing? when under Jeremy, They Ier.
34.8, 13, 14.
covenant to manumit their servants according to the Law; mistake they the
matter of a Vow? were they impious, in so obliging themselves? Is it so
impious, to add to the Bond of Praecept the Obligation of a Vow?

Laxe, you say, such Promises may be called Vows; properly not Vows. A Vow
properly taken, is of some caeremonious work in the Old Testament; of some
external and corporal exercise in the New; which whosoever affirms to be
Moral duties, does himself more injury, then he is aware of.

Answ. Sir, you minded me in the ingresse, of Sophistry. Truly, truly, I have
forgotten much of it; and count that forgetfulness half as virtuous as the
Athenians (...): Yet pretty well remember my Logique Rules; amongst which,
this was wont to be one Authentic: A negatione vnius speciei ad tollendum
genus vniuersum non valet consequentia. Its no man, therefore no animal; think
you that good consequence? Its no Vow of things left to our choice to do, or
not to do; therefore no Vow at all? suppose you that good consequence? then
farewell all Logique. The Act of Vowing passes as lawfully, as properly on
things commanded, as on those left Arbitrarie. What use Vows of enjoined
duties have, you are not to learn; and may see remembered by me, in answer to
that Argument of Bellarmine. Give us now what differences you please of one and
other sort of Vows, whiles religious promise may lawfully be made to God of
performing what he commands, the Argument will never proceed. Tithes were
vowed by Jacob, therefore not commanded of God. Thus I conceive. A Vow properly
so called, is a religious promise made unto God; is of two sorts, according to
diversity of the matter: There is a Vow of things commanded; and a Vow of
things arbitrarie. Both are properly Vows, howeuer differenced by substance,
or circumstance: therefore proceeds no argument from negation of one species,
to remoouall of the universal.

Abraham's payment to have been without iniunction, Heb. 7.5, 6.

Ans. Express Scripture? then lay I my hand upon my mouth, never more to open
it to that assertion. But are you sure Scripture speaks it, and speaks it
expressly? When Paul said Heb. 7.5, 6,
Leui had commandment to tithe his Brethren, denied he Melchisedec had like
warrant to tithe Abraham? Say, I beseech you, in sober sadness; say as
Conscience dictates: as the Text leads you. Is this (indeed) made difference,
to prove superiority of Melchisedec to Leui; that Leui tythed by Law,
Melchisedec without Law? Where does the Scripture express, or but imply that?
yea, does it not imply the contrary? What intends the Apostle, in comparing
the tything of Leui with that of Melchisedec? but apertly to prove Melchisedec
superior to Leui, even in this honor of Tything? or trow you, this proves a
superiority in Melchisedec, to take without Law, whereas Leui takes according
to Law? Say, I pray, whether is the baser Tenure? that by Law; or that by
Courtesy, and at Will? I should think, that at Will. And if Leui took by Law,
Melchisedec but of Courtesy, Leui sure had the pre-eminence. Far be it, the
Apostle should bring argument to overthrow his intention. Truth is, the
comparison there entered, lies only in the Subjects tythed, not in the ground
of Tything. Leui tithes Brethren: Melchisedec, the Patriarch and chief Father
of those Brethren, is therefore more excellent then Leui; inasmuch, as the very
Prince of their race is subjected to his Priesthood, and bound to render the
Honorarie thereof.

If you now shall ask, what Paul means to mention the Commandment or Warrant
given Leui to tithe his Brethren? thus I should conceive: That whereas Tithes
originally belonged to the Priesthood of Christ, typed in Melchisedec, a Law
was necessary to assign them to Leui, and to make him capable of that honor;
inasmuch, as without this special Law, Leui could never have made claim or
title to that honor, which firstly was settled on the Priesthood of another
Order. So, that upon the point, the difference stands not in Tything by Law,
and without Law; or, better to express my self; Law is not here opposed to no
Law, or iniunction to vltroneousnesse of Tything; but rather this Law for Leui,
to original right: Melchisedec tything Abraham by Right, or Law original:
Leui his Brethren, by Law special, and grant for the time: To which end,
particular Law was requisite, to inuest that Priesthood in the ius of Tything,
which before was settled, as on the foundation in the Priesthood, after another
Order.

The second Argument has ground, Galat. 6.6. 1. Tim. 5.17. Prou. 3.9. where
we read thus. Let him that is instructed, make his instructor partaker of all
his goods. And, Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor, especially
they which labor in the Word and Doctrine. And, Honor God with thy substance,
and with the chief of all thine increase. Out of which Scriptures, thus we
reason: If there be a portion to be set out unto God and his Ministers, out of
all and every the temporal goods of every one instructed, and no certain
portion to be found in Scripture, but Tithes; then are Tithes the portion
allotted by Gods Word, to Ministers, for their service. But there is a portion
to be set out unto God and his Ministers, out of all the temporal goods of
every one instructed, and no other certainty mentioned in Scripture. Ergo,
Tithes are the portion allotted by Gods Word to Ministers for their service.

The consequence of the proposition depends upon this ground, That some
certainty is by Scripture allotted to Ministers for their service. Hereof if
any demand proof, let him consider these: 1. The Lord allotted a certainty
unto first borne, and Levites. And think we it probable, he would leave
Ministers of the Gospel to a competencie indeterminate? 2. In other cases
th'Argument goes current. The Lord prescribes for the old Tabernacle all things
necessary, even to the Beesome and Ash-panne; not a Pin in the Tabernacle,
but what has his praescript from God. Of this we may say, its not a Pin,
but a Clavus Trabalis, one of the master Nails in our Tabernacle. And think
we his Word so sufficient, and absolutely exact for all necessary
praescripts, yea, circumstances, concerning Worship, Government, any thing; and
this only, a matter of so great consequence, left vnpraescribed?

Lastly, if no certainty, in this kind, can be found in Scripture, how will thou be able to share out unto God, his portion in faith? so that thou may
be able to say, I have given the Lord that portion of my Goods, which he
requires of me. Can we doubt, whether God has reserved in Christians
possessions, his sanctified portion? Read, Prou. 3.5. Forsooth the Magistrates
determination shall in this point be the level and rule of Faith.

Resp. 1. Then must thou be able to show, that God has made Magistrates in
this point his caruers, which is unlikely, vt supra. Suppose Magistrates make
no provision, as has befallen many states of the Church; imagine them
Sacrilegiously rapinous; where is then the direction for thy Faith? Suppose
they shall allow Micha's allowance, will thou therewith rest content? then have
our Lay-Parsons Faith well guided, Consciences rectified. Iud. 17.10.
Ten Sheckles of Silver, and a Meals meat, and Liuerie, they afford Sir
John. In Faith think we? Surely, according to the Magistrates provision. And
why blame we any more impropriate Parsons, for so scant allowance? Perhaps,
because not competent. Yea, but the Magistrate thinks it competent. And that
is, in this case, the Line of Faith. Credam? non si mihi, etc.

Touching the Minor: For the first part, see, 1. Cor. 9.11. Prou. 3.9. Galat.
6.6. In which place, ye have it in so many terms: Let him that is
instructed, make his instructor partaker of all his goods. For the other Branch
of it, That no other portion certain is to be found in Scripture; I mean,
which has not apparent signification of something peculiar to the state of
People under Leui, as First fruits, share of other Sacrifices; will appear to
any man, that will be pleased to enter induction of particulars. And may I not
then conclude, Tithes are the portion allotted us by the Word of God? Yea, what
if I should say, Tithes are in some of these places more then obliquely pointed
at? What means the Apostle to call for maintenance unto Ministers, under the
term of double honor? For that by 1. Tim. 5.17, 18.
honor, he there means maintenance, the reason annexed will make a blind
man see. Saint Hierome having delivered his judgment of the place, Malac. 3.
Bring all my Tithes into the Storehouse, in these terms, Ecclesiae populis
Praeceptum est dare Decimas, alleges praesently this place for proof. 1.
Tim. 1.17. Elders must have double honor. 2. What means the Apostle by that
Epithete (double) annexed to honor? Say some, large and liberal. But why
double, rather then treble, if he meant large at large? Does he not rather,
in that phrase of speech, send us to consider the double portion of the first
borne, Numb. 8.16.
into whose room Leui was assumed? and that which made their portion double,
in likelihood was Tithes; as may hereafter, on a new inquiry, perhaps appear.

What says my learned friend to this Argument? may it pass current? All may
be granted, without praeiudice to your Adversaries assertion, forasmuch as
these words are left out, which are energeticall, and wherein the whole state
of the Quaestion lies; which are, one only set particular and perpetual
portion. For say, that some certainty be allotted by Scripture to Ministers,
for their service; yea, that it is to be set out of all and every the temporal
goods of every one instructed; and that there be no certainty expressed, but
Tithes; and Tithes be the portion, for the present, allotted by Gods Word for
the Ministers service: what is all this to the purpose, if this certainty be
alterable in it own nature; and that another (that being removed) may without
sin, be placed in the room and stead thereof, the contrary whereof, is not
by this Argument proved? for all that is, or can be concluded thereof, is
this, that Tithes are the portion allotted by Gods Word to Ministers (of the
Gospel) for their service; which no man doubts of. The quaestion is, whether
they be the sole and perpetual Portion, yea, or no.

Answ. Sir, in my Sermon, when I uttered and penned it, I dealt with Layickes;
witty enough, some of them, to judge of a Consequence, though not much skilled
in form: I have now to deal with a Clericke (too popular I fear me) and
will afford him form praecisely; yet with this prouiso, that he give me
leave regularly to choose my terms. I like not your mending, it is (for I
know you are a prouerbiall man) too Tinker-like. You shall have terms, such as
due form affoords, most energeticall, and terms explicated, that you may see
I mean not to double. Categorically thus.

That portion, that is to say, determinate quantity of Peoples Temporal
substance, which God has allotted to Ministers of the Gospel, for their
service, is that which of duty belongs unto them.

But Tithes are that determinate quantity of peoples temporalties which God
has allotted Ministers of the Gospel for their service. Ergo.

Perhaps I have not yet sufficiently explaned my self. Sure its more for lack
of words then good meaning: Let me then in another particular par or parallel
to this, express mine intention.

The determinate quantity of time which God has reserved and sanctified to
his service under the new Testament, is that which of necessary duty must be
rendered him.

But the seventh of Time, is that determinate quantity which God has reserved
and sanctified to himself, Ergo.

These twins of Moral duties I willingly choose to combine, as well for that
I find no munerall certeintie (which yet is greatest) in any Gods moral
ordinances save in these two of Time and Substance; as also because, as those
of Hippocrates, they weep and laugh, stand and fall together. I may add,
because this of Gods Time affoords that of his reserved substance explication
reciprocally, as that of Substance does support to his Time.

What say you now, do you grant all? or want you your energeticall terms of
only and perpetual. Why more I wonder for Gods substance then for his Time?
will it not follow? no other therefore solely this; And by Gods word allotted,
therefore perpetually and vnalterably to be rendered; I praesume it will for
Gods Time; why not also for his substance?

What use now of your limitations and distinctions? Allotment for the praesent,
and for perpetuity; of alterablenesse in it own nature, and not in it own
nature. Apply them, if you dare, to the point of Time, as you do to that of
Substance. And tell me if your greatest admirers blot not you, as they have
done us poor Tything-men, out of their book of the righteous.

But dic sodes, what mean you in saying th'allotment is alterable in it own
Nature? What? that institution only and command determines their payment to be
duty; and that the office of Tything is bonum only quia praeceptum. For my
part I contend not. There are moralities such by institution only and by Law
of God positive. Suppose now; if you will, their duenesse founded only on Law
positive; will you infer, therefore alterable by man? As if I should ask,
whether because another day is of it own Nature, setting apart consideration
of Gods allotment, ordinable to Gods service, therefore the seventh may be
changed: or whether, because our two Sacraments are in their own Nature
alterable, and other elements, for any thing that is in the Nature of these now
instituted, might be substituted in stead of these, therefore man has power to
alter them. I should think (such is my simplicity) Gods Law and Ordinance
perpetually binds to these, and no other: though there be nothing in their
Nature repugnant to substitution of others. What God has fixed, let no man
move. What he has determinately praescribed, who may dare alter. Gods
ordinance is the Ancientest boundarie; A curse is to him who praesumes to
remove it.

Yea Sir, do you grant all? Says God in his word to Ministers as once to
Leui, I have given them Tithes for the service they do me in the Gospel?
Shall any doubt whether th'allotment be of aequall endurance with the service?
or that the honorarie may be changed, so long as the Service continues? Thus
briefly. As to Leui they were assigned for Numb. 18.21.
his Service in the Tabernacle, and were vnalterably to be rendered so long as
the Tabernacle stood: So to Ministers of the Gospel they must stand, upon this
concession, so long as their Evangelical Service continues, that is, as I
suppose, so long as the Sun and Moon endures. Except perhaps you can
evidence they are exceptiuely or disiunctiuely only allotted; Tithes or some
other thing in room or stead thereof, which who will undertake to evidence by
the word of God?

Our third reason has ground on Leuit. 27.28. Prou. 20.25. Mal. 3.8. Romans
2.22. where we read thus. Every thing separate from common use, is most holy
unto the Lord: And it is a snare to devour holy things, and after the vow to
enquire And, thou which abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? And, ye
have robbed me. Out of which Scriptures thus we reason.

The portion separated from common use to maintenance of Gods worship under the
new Testament, is that portion allotted by Gods word to Ministers for their
service.

Tithes are of that portion so separate. Ergo.

The Mayor is thus proved: because the detainment or alienation of things so
consecrated, is Sacrilege. That this may the better appear, It will be worth
the while, to consider briefly what Sacrilege is, which out of Mr. Zanchius,
Vrsine, and others, we may thus briefly describe. Sacrilege is the taking
away of things Sacred, that is, deputed to holy uses, or the maintenance and
furtherance of Gods worship. The matter about which this theft is conversant,
are things consecrated to God: of which are two sorts. Some, which God himself
either by reservation to himself, or by express mandate has hallowed to
himself; some, which man has hallowed and separated from common use: wherein
is also acknowledged by most prudent, a secret motion of God inclining to such
consecration. Of both read, Leuit. 27, 28, 29, 30.

That which makes up the nature of Sacrilege, is alienating or detaining
things thus hallowed, and returning them to common use. Thus is the Reason. The
alienating or detaining of any thing separate from common use, is Sacrilege.
But detainment or alienating of Tithes, is the detaining or aliening of things
thus separate. Ergo.

To the propositions, these answers I have partly read, partly heard in
conference. 1. Understand it, say some, of things consecrate by Law.

Answ. No word of God forces to such limitation. At building of Tabernacle,
was there any law of God particular to contribute? Why then runs the tenor
thus? Every man whose Exodus 35.5.
heart is willing, let him bring, Gold, Silver, Goats hair, etc. And even of
voluntary and votarie consecrations both Moses, and Solomon speak. And, was
it not free to Ananias to consecrate or not, otherwise then general laws of
piety or charity might sway him? Act. 5.4. Whiles it remained, was it not
thine own? And after it was sold, was it not in thy power?

Yet was Ananias his detainement, Sacrilege: by circumstances of the Text, and
consent of best interpreters. He is taxed by Peter, not only for lying; but
for theeuish and clancular surreption of part of the price, verse. 3. And says
Mr. Beza, interpreting the word; Ad Sacrilegium etiam accessit diffidentia and
hypocrisis. There was then Sacrilege in his detainement, though dedication was
voluntary. Centuriat: Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ambros. Ser. 9. Dum ex eo quod
promiserat, partem subtrahit, sacrilegij simul condemnatur and fraudis;
Sacrilegij, quod Deum in Pollicitatione fefellerat, fraudis quod, etc. They are
strange quaeres raised by giddie spirits, desirous to free themselves from
stroke of this Argument; 1. As whether Sacrilege be a sin in these times of
reformation; their meaning is, whether there be any possibility of a
Christians falling into the sin of Sacrilege, otherwise then by defiling his
body with the flesh, or depriving God of the honor immediately belonging unto
him. A quaestion, I confess, in these times somewhat disputable; wherein the
very matter of Sacrilege is almost annihilated. It calls to mind the tears of
Alexander in the known story, shed upon remembrance of his father Philips
frequent victories, and conquests so large, as there seemed no matter left for
his ambition to work upon. How does their covetousness mourn, and their
hearts languish, that there is left them so little a gleaning, after the great
harvest of their praedecessours? yet how gape they after that little prey upon
holy things, yet vnsurprized? We live in a free state; give me leave freely to
speak my mind. In my conscience I think it true, the clamours against
Bishops calling, and things appendent thereto, has had no other source, then
popular envy at these fat holy morsels, which yet remain vndeuoured, could
they but calm conscience, grumbling, I dare say, in many against the attempt,
and sway supreme Authority, the judgment threatened to the posterity of Eli,
would soon be our fate; To 1. Sam. 2.36.
bow down to our Lay-masters for a piece of silver, and a morsel of bread,
that we might be appointed to one of the Priests offices.

And yet, with conscience they have taken order reasonable; Sacrilege none,
except spiritual, can now be committed; matter of that sin, there is none;
for God, in their opinion, has reserved to himself no portion of earthly
things: neither does man's votarie or voluntary devotion, give him seizure in
any thing, how piously so ever consecrated. Belike then, Sacrilege there can
be none under the new Testament: for there is nothing de iure, separated unto
God. Once impleading the sin of Sacrilege, I was admonished by a grave
Praesbyter, to beware of multiplying sins; making more sins then God had
made; me thinks I may remember him and his adhaerents; to take heed, how they
lessen the number, or minish the quantity of sins so heinous. Is there no
Sacrilege under the Gospel? Can none be committed in days of new Testament
about things consecrated unto God? Genera peccatorum minuuntur. Bless your
selves you Epicures, and carnal Gospellers in this; feed your selves without
fear on things, as we say, consecrated unto God. You cannot now be
Sacrilegious; no more (and yet I dare say so much) then you can be Idolatrous,
murtherous, luxurious. Paul said in vain (and I think he said it to men of
this mould) thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? Romans 2.
Blush for shame at conceits so profane, and think it truest of this glutted
covetousness, which Job long since spoke of the general; He has devoured
substance, but the Lord shall cause him to vomit it.

A second restraint some have thus given to the proposition; understand it, say
they, of alienating things consecrated without error: that is, to maintenance
of true worship of the true God. Well agreed, let it be so limited, though with
fair probability, and consent of no small Clerks, we may contend the contrary.
Keckerman: ^ Syst. polit. lib. 1. cap. 21
Princeps iure non potest res sacras it bona cultui diuino etiam in genere
destinata, etiam ea quae superstitioso cultui ferviunt, in vsum profanum
transfer. But grant the limitation. Can we not assume thus much of our
Tithes? that they have been consecrated to maintain pure worship of the true
God?

3. Understand it say some with these exceptions.

1. Except in case of the Churches superfluity. And this exception has this
ground. Contentment with necessaries is required of Ministers; for Moses cries
sufficit at building of the Tabernacle.

Resp. What word of God or found reason gives liberty to alien seeming
superfluities of ministers, rather then of other Subjects? spoke Paul to
ministers only when he said, Let Heb. 13.5
your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with things
praesent?

2. Moses only stays addition, of more, returns or aliens nothing of what
was brought by the people, no not though there were an overplus.

3. Yea, howeuer in this contribution to building of the Tabernacle, he
proclaims a sufficit, yet when he glanceth upon the maintenance of the
ministry, you have him praying God for abundance. Bless O Lord his substance.
Deuteronomy. 33.11.

4. But yield the exception; In what case, in what times, may we not, with that
limit, assume of Tithes?

2. Their second exception is, when alienation is necessary for preservation of
the Church. In such case 2. Reg. 1^.6.
Hezekiahs practice, may it not be imitated.

Resp. Perhaps yes: so you keep to your pattern: and infer not too far.
View therefore 1. the matter of Hezekiah his alienation; you shall find it to
be of things belonging rather to the ornaments of Gods worship, then to the
maintenance of the ministry. 2. Take it into your serious consideration;
whether an action mutual, or relative, such as these are passing betwixt the
giver and receiver, may not be in casu, on the one side lawful, on the other,
sinful; As if I should ask; may I not without sin in peril of life, and
to avoid violence justly feared, deliver my purse to a Thief? or does not the
Thief sin in receiving, or deteining it? We will suppose Hezekiah to have
done lawfully, in delivering the treasure, and Ornaments of the Temple to the
King of Assyria, thereby to redeem himself and Gods people from his violence.
But can you suppose Ashur less then Sacrilegious in accepting, or detayning
them? For ever I bless his zeal, who to redeem Christian Captives, would
exchange his silver Chalice, for wood: yet shall curse to hell him, who drives
to this exigent, and think his cruelty, or covetousness no other then
Sacrilegious. Though therefore necessity perhaps may exempt such alienation
from crime of Sacrilege on the part of the deliverer, yet is not the action in
all parts void of Sacrilege; yea, cannot be excused, on the receivers behalf,
of profane irreuerence, and irreligion to Godward. Go now and triumph you
Heluoes of holy things, sample your selves from Hezekiah; But know, he is
Sacrilegious, whosoever accepts or retains things holy to God, howsoever
percase lawfully delivered into his possession from hands of the rightful
Owners. 3. Can we but think Hezekiah minded as 1. Kin. 14 26, 27.
Rehoboam practiced? to restore what necessity forced him to decay? Read the
story: perhaps you may bethink your selves of restitution. 4. Let us yield to
necessity; the force of it is great, to legitimate for the time, what nothing
else can warrant. May retaining such things in that case aliened, be excused
from Sacrilege, necessity ceasing? I ask your judgment. The Mat. 12.4.
show bread was made common to David and his company in extremity: might it
therefore be perpetually commoned?

Their last exception: when Princes have no other other means to remunerate
subjects, faithful in common services.

Answ. What, I wonder in such case, lays open Church goods to will of Princes,
rather then the goods of common subjects? Thus I reason and leave them. Private
goods of Subjects, Magistrates may not alien from them for recompense of
servants: much less may the Lords Portion be transferred to such use. Pharao
King of Egypt, and Joseph his Viceroy, give immunitie to possessions of Genesis
47.22.
Priests, when else the whole land is seized for the King: persuaded (I
suppose) things Sacred to Religion ought at no hand be violated. Thus then the
proposition is clear as it was propounded. Yield we it yet with these limits
and exceptions, as many as have but show of reason to support them; and thus
conclude. The detainment or aliening of things by Law consecrated to support
pure worship of the true God without superfluity, any longer then necessity
requires, is Sacrilege.

Tithes have been by Law consecrated to maintenance of pure worship of the
true God, are not superfluous, and now no necessity of their alienation. Ergo,
their detainement is Sacrilege.

REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PATRI, AC DOMINO, GEORGIO PROVIDENTIA DIVINA EPIscopo
CICESTRENSI obseruantiam plurimam.
HOnorande Praesul, Gratulor, sane gratulor mihimet ipse hanc qualemcunque
gratissimi erga te animi mei testandi (...). Adversarium nacti sumus dicacem,
mordicacem plus satis, insulsum tamen. Eum ego salibus, opinor, meis satis
superque conditum ad te mitto. Sale (videsis) forte an tuo condiendum.
Deprecor. Quorsum enim? Sordet, faetet, nescio quo modo, apud vulgus nostrum,
siquid forte asperius in istiusmodi faetulentias animadvertatur: et dulcius
resipit, vt Dario in fuga, quicquid turbaverit in foetore disciplina sanior.
Fruantur, per me licet, putore suo: Tantum ne me, ne meos in volutabrum
pertentent suum.

Ieiuni quicquid id est in hac Apologia nostra, tenuitati, obsecro, condones
meae. Robusti siquid et solidi, hoc ego prope totum tibi acceptum fero. Aut
fama mendax, aut tu aliquando meam Oxonij excusam de iure Decimarum
velitationem legisti, calculo tuo approbasti. Mendax sim, nisi (...), vt sunt,
tua dialecticam adhuc et nutantem sententiam meam aspectu primo firmaverint,
atque in solidum fundaverint. Inibi sum, et fixus haereo. Ignoscas, quaeso,
valetudinario, et quamvis paulo plus quadragenario, senectute tamen (proh Deum)
praematura, et Calculo Renum praegravido, gravedinoso, si non equo aut pedibus
ad te visendum, consulendum festinaverim. (...), vt ego eruditionem, modestiam,
dignitatem tuam exosculor, et plane veneror. Deus Opt. Max. Amplitudinem tuam
incolumem ser vet, vt, quod strenue adhuc fecisti, Decimas Ecclesiae asseras,
vindices; Decumanum hunc fluctum plane Naufragum ab Ecclesia propulses; Clerum
tuum ab eo protegas. Amen.

Amplitudinis tuae perquam studiosus GVILIELMVS SCLATER.

TO this Argument made longsome by idle exceptions, thus my Brother Clerique.
All may here be granted also without danger. For no man denies, that things
consecrated in the new Testament, is the portion by the word of God allotted to
Ministers: nor that the detainement or alienation thereof is Sacrilege: nor
that (as the state of the Church now stands with us) Tithes are that portion;
and so that Tithes are allotted by the word of God for our maintenance even
under the new Testament. But the quaestion is, whether any portion whatsoever
once consecrated be perpetually and only due in all Ages; And so whether
Tithes be that only and perpetual portion for ever; which by this Argument is
not proved. For howsoever the detainement and alienation of Tithes be
Sacrilege (as things now stand with us) yet the change of Tithes into another
kind of maintenance as good or better, is no Sacrilege. For that which Dr.
Carleton says to the contrary, fol. 26. is of no force. For first there is a
great difference between things consecrated to the use of Gods worship in the
Temple under the old Testament (of which sort the vessels were whereof he
speaks) and things dedicated to the Churches and Ministers use in the New.
For those were Types and Sacraments of other things (as appears by those very
vessels, by 2. Tim. 2.20, 21.) but so are not these. Secondly, Tithes even in
the old Testament might be changed, so long as no detriment came thereby to the
Levites, Leu. 27.31. So that though it were granted that Tithes were due iure
diuino (which he takes for granted sophistically) yet by his own reason they
may be changed, because the change is allowed by the same power and Authority
by which they are made holy to God. Thirdly, he plays the Sophister manifestly
in arguing a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter; for thus he reasons:
It is Sacrilege to change Tithes for a maintenance and provision of less
value then Tithes: Ergo, it is simply Sacrilege to make an exchange of them:
which whether it be a good form of Reasoning, I leave to others to judge.



But whereto I wonder all this show of granting all, except to show your self
witty? Why such circling? why speak you not in the terms of your Master
that Heretic in Philosophy, and say any proposition is not (...). As once a
Rabbi in that haeresie, and other schism being demanded what he thought of
the Sermon he sat to censure, said; the man and his matter and gifts he well
approved; only one doctrine was not (...).

Thus take my answer to your quaestion; Nothing sanctified may ever be
commoned, except by Authority of that God to whom they are sanctified. Whether
changed with your limits, is a quaestion coincident, whereof anon.

Of things consecrated are two sorts; some which God; some which man
sanctifies: of Gods sanctifying, you have instances many in old Testament; of
Time the seventh; of substance, once we are sure, the tenth. And of this kind,
but you, now perhaps, none quaestions, whether any may be unhallowed without
warrant from the Sanctifier.

Is the quaestion of that which man sanctifies; whether ever by man's own
Authority it may warrantably be unhallowed? thus is the answer distinct, as
suddenness permits it to be propounded: Sometimes Gods act and man's in
sanctifying passes on the same matter; God sanctified the Sabbath, Genesis 2.3.
by ordinance to his own use; yet we read in Isay after some translations, If
Isa. 58.13.
thou shall call it a delight to consecrate it as Glorious unto the Lord. The
1. Cor. 3.17.
temple of God is holy which ye are; our bodies and souls are Gods; yet said
Paul Romans 12.1.
offer up your selves unto God. Such votarie consecration by man of things
already holy to God, multiplies the obligations to render; aggrauates malice of
Sacrilege.

2. Sometimes man consecrates what God has left common, as Ananias the price
of his possessions: Act. 5.2.
whether dominion or use, as Canonists distinguish, jointly or severally, it
matters not here to specify: of this kind of things sanctified is all the
quaestion. For my part I doubt not but the character of Gods first impression
in Tithes, is indeleble; and that man's votarie consecration of them, gave them
no new hallowing, but increased obligation to their payment. Howbeit ex
abundante, I will suppose they have no other touch of holiness, then man's
devotion has put to them.

Thus is the Argument for the maine upon that supposall. Its Prou. 20.25.
a curse to devour that which is sanctified; that is, any thing that is
sanctified, at any time. And after the vow to inquire; this last clause forces
to judge, he means of things votarily, or voluntarily consecrated by man. Will
you say, while its sanctified; or as the case stands with them amongst whom its
sanctified? You call to mind the idle evasion of Arminians in the quaestion of
Apostasy, whether it be incident to men regenerate. We say as S. John; 1 Ioh.
5.18.
He that's borne of God sins not the sin unto death: True, say they,
quatalis, or quandiu talis. Whereas every man knows that Apostasy proceeds
not from regeneration; and that it implies a ceasing to be talis; and
therefore necessarily excludes the quandiu talis. Every man knows, a sober man
is not drunk as he is a sober man, or so long as he is sober; drunkenness
proceeds not from sobriety; and it implies, to say, ebrius, quandiu sobrius.

Once sanctified, ever sanctified; if th'intendement of the votarie were for
perpetuity. I have heard of the rule, Eius est tollere; cuius ponere; but I
ask your judgment, whether Act. 5.2, 3, 4.
Ananias his reuocation of part upon second thoughts, did excuse him of
Sacrilege?

2. Besides there is by such vow or devotion of man, a new property and
dominion given unto God in the thing devoted. Shall man, can man defeat God of
that property? dic sodes.

Is the quaestion now of the change? Whether the sanctified portion may be
changed, and another with your cautions substituted in stead thereof? I should
think not. Especially if you mean as you must, a change of the whole kind,
for perpetuity.

1. For that God allowed no change of the particular; Much less of the whole
kind. Leuit. 27.33. He shall not look upon it whether it be good or bad, but
the Tenth must be rendered in the particular; because that's it that is holy to
the Lord, said he, ever the tenth or the aequiualent.

2. Next, Solomon; Say not before th'Angel Eccl. 5.6.
it was an error, I was mistaken in the matter vowed; take another which upon
second thoughts is found better. Why should the Lord destroy thee not in thy
time?

3. I find the command peremptory and praecise to pay that which is vowed,
that is, as I take it, that very particular.

4. Because I observe paenaltie (as I conceive) inflicted in case of exchange
attempted; Leuit. 27.
Both the particular and the change must be the Lords.

5. Upon grant of power to exchange, the matter of Sacrilege must be
uncertain, and no man chargeable with that sin as upon certeintie.

6. Why not diminution of part as free from Sacrilege, as exchange? which yet
in Ananias Act. 5.
his case is damned.

But is it naught to purpose which the now reverend Bishop of Chichester said
to this point of exchange? hear him.

If Sacrilege be in taking away holy things from God and his Church, it
appears more in taking away Tithes then in any other thing whatsoever.
Neither can Sacrilege herein be excused, though men should establish something
in place of that holy thing taken away?

1. Because the changing of holy things is Sacrilege no less (though happily a
less kind of Sacrilege) then taking away of the same. If Nabuchadnezzar
having taken away the holy vessels out of the house of the Lord, should in place
thereof have put some other, might his Sacrilege thereby be excused? or
Beltazzar taking the vessels of the Lords house, and in them banqueting with
his Lords and Concubines, if he should in stead thereof have placed other,
could any justify his Sacrilege therefore? no more can the taking away of
Tithes be justified, though something in place thereof should be appointed by
men.

His opinion you are not bound to subscribe unto; perhaps he is not yet grown
classical: but what to his Reason? For things which God himself has
sanctified?

Forsooth; This difference there is betwixt things consecrated to the use of
Gods worship in the Temple under the old Testament (of which sort the vessels
were whereof he speaks) and of things dedicated to the Churches and Ministers
use in the new: for those were Types and Sacraments of other things (as
appears of those very vessels, by 2. Tim. 2.20, 21.) so not these.

Answ. Right so. Yet when I from ground as good or better affirm first fruits
mystical resemblances of Christ and the gifts of the Spirit in this life
given, how merrily game you at me?

But say in good sadness: is there in this point of vnalterablenesse without
divine Authority a disparitie betwixt things then consecrated by God in Old
Testament, and those by him hallowed in New? or has God given more liberty of
exchanging things sanctified in New, then of those other hallowed in Old
Testament? What one passage of Scripture have you to guide you? Belongs not
this to both Testaments? Its Prou. 20.25.
a curse to devour holy things. And, thou that abhorrest Idols, Romans 2.22.
committest thou Sacrilege? put differences, as many as you will, betwixt one
and other in other respects, in this of unchangeableness whereof is quaestion,
you shall never be able to cut difference.

This it seems you saw well enough, and therefore your secondarily avouches
with too much confidence, that Leu. 27.31.
Tithes might then be changed so long as no detriment came by the exchange to
Levites.

1. Belike then your difference is not universal for things consecrated in Old
Testament; for some of them might be changed, as you do handsomely instance in
proposito, the point quaestioned of Tithes. Phi, phi; why dye you changeable?
might they not be changed, and yet might they be changed? Pugnantia loqui te
non vides? Or if you meant your unchangeableness particularly to the vessels
of Service in the Temple, could no other particular of things then consecrated
alterably be instanced in, but the Tithes in quaestion? Why have you so
forgotten notorious absurdities in disputation?

2. But think you indeed Tithes might then be changed in that sort which now
we quaestion? Might Israelites have changed that kind of maintaining Levites
by Tithes, into another as good or better? Say I beseech you. Or had it not
been profane arrogancy in that people to have altered Gods praescript for the
manner of maintenance, under praetense of bettering it?

Will your text prove it? It speaks indeed of Leuit. 27.31.
redeeming a particular Tithe; not a syllable of changing the whole kind of
maintenance into another for perpetuity.

3. Suppose you Redemption even of a particular approved? or rather tolerated?
Tolerated I should think; and not allowed. Because mulcted with addition of a
fifth part. That, in case a man were so headstrong in his affection that he
would needs redeem, way should be given: Howbeit, by his paenaltie he must be
taught that in the act and attempt he erred. My inducement is this: Because I
ever observe addition of a fifth part ordered to be made over and above the
satisfaction or amends for the trespass or damage, how else, but nomine
poenae. Compare these Scriptures, Leuit. 5.15. and 6.5. Numb. 5.6, 7. Et alibi.
And aptly, it tended not to praeuent damage of Levites, which easily enough
was, or might be praeuented in the price given for ransom.

But how glad am I to see you careful to praeuent damage of Levites in the
exchange? and so cautionate for Ministers indemnitie? In case of exchange of
Tithes into another kind of maintenance, you cautionately provide, it must be
as good or better. Et mox, exchange is no robbery in this kind, provided
always that it be made, in an aequall proportion at the least, so as if the
Church be not bettered, yet it is not damnified.

Blessing on your heart for that yet, If ever Lay-Parson, or scrupulous
Gentleman, or Customarie Parishioner cun you thank for your refutation, I much
marvel. Say, I pray you, does the scrupulous Gentleman so practice? Gives he
the aequiualent to the Tithe? If I knew him, and he so practice, at first
greeting I would ciuilly adore him. Miracle, mirror at least he should be to
me, of all the Lay-Order of Parsons, whom I yet know. I may transgress
Charity in my jealousy of that black Swan. But how fear I? least the little
grumble of Conscience be calmed with that parcel of your opinion, Tithes may
be changed into another kind of maintenance, and no care taken of your Prouiso,
for substitution of an aequiualent.

Once I know ten or twenty pounds Coyne-stipend is no aequall proportion to
an hundred or two, or three, in Tithes; nor twopence Rate or Custom
aequiualent to ten or twenty shillings of Tithes. Think of it my Master
Parsons of the Laity; your best Patron steedes you not, as you practice. But I
return to the Refuter.

What say you to that of Dr Carleton? When any thing consecrated is taken away,
that a thing of the same value should be restored, who can expect? and who shall
be Judge?

Forsooth, he plays the Sophister manifestly, in arguing a dicto secundum
quid, ad dictum simpliciter; for thus he reasons: Its Sacrilege to change
Tithes for a maintenance and provision of less value then Tithes. Ergo, its
simply Sacrilege, to make exchange of them.

But does he so reason indeed? you would make him a simple Sophister.

Answ. Thus rather conceive him; to apprehend that supposed (something) to be
substituted in room of Tithes, of ambiguous acception: there is aliquid
indefinitum; where something, is any thing: And there is hoc aliquid, or
aliquid limitatum, as in this case sufficient provision, or in your meaning,
something aequiualent.

Is the something to be substituted, indefinite? any something, in lieu of
Tithes? that restitution or substitution, according to Dr Carleton, and
according to clear evidence of Truth, cannot be excused of Sacrilege; for it
may be of less value, its likely to be so.

Is it, hoc aliquid; aliquid limitatum; after the opinion there mentioned, a
sufficient provision? that is a Castle in the air, as he there truly speaks;
besides, not that sufficient maintenance which God has allotted; and in all
likelihood, not so sufficient: by consequent therefore sacrilegiously
substituted.

Is it your aequiualent? as good or better? To this, thus he truly; None can
name any so convenient as Tithes, to supply the place of Tithes; so as to be
sufficient at all times, howsoever the price of things rise or fall. Which
proportioning of the Ministers estate, making it able to answer all estates
alike, whether dear or cheap, proceeding from the wisdom of God, cannot be
matched by man's wisdom. Thus take him in form.

Every change of Tithes into another kind of provision, which is at any time of
less worth or conueniencie then Tithes, is sacrilegious. But all exchange of
Tithes into any other kind of provision, is at some time necessarily of less
worth and conueniencie then Tithes. Ergo, all change of Tithes into any other
kind of provision, is sacrilegious. Of the Mayor, your limits in exchanging,
permit not you to doubt. The Minor is thus proved. No other provision can make
the Ministers estate able at all times to answer all estates. Ergo, every
exchange of Tithes into another provision is, vt supra, of less worth and
conueniencie. What think you? did the Doctor reason a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter? did not the Bachelor rather view him secundum quid, and
not simpliciter? I should think this rather.

As to what you talk of Canonists opinion, and Ministers practice in
commutation or composition for Tithes, it touches not the purpose: let all be
granted lawful; what is this to a change of Tithes for perpetuity?

Remember you not your own Dunse Canonist, resolving that Tithes cannot be
granted to a Laicke in fee? have you forgotten, that in quaestion of selling
particular Tithes, they distinguish betwixt things Tythable, and the ius of
Tything? Sale of res decimabilis, they allow with cautions: marchandizing the
ius of Tything, they make Simoniacall and Sacrilegious. Their reason is,
because Ius decimandi is spirituali officio annexum. And in case such a
permutation of Tithes as you speak of, were lawful, why not also a
transferring of the ius of Tything?

To close this point, I must profess, I like not such permutations or
compositions for Tithes, except in way of gratification, where scandal is
feared. It has brought upon the Church, Customs and Prescriptions, so many,
of so long continuance, that of Tithe, except the name of Tithe, is left almost
nothing to many Churches.

I profess not Canonist: yet thus much I know; Ministers have no perfect
dominion in Tithes, or other endowments of the Church; and am inclined to
think, they are at most but vse-fructuaries therein. The whole right and
dispose of Tithes is not in Ministers, no nor in the Church fundamentaliter or
terminative: first and originally Leu. 27. Mal. 3.8.
they are Gods; by him as chief proprietary assigned to the Priesthood, for
preservation of their office, and support of the service by them administered.

The fourth Reason follows: The Law first allotting Tithes, to support of the
Ministry, and worship of God, was moral; Ergo, they are perpetually the
Ministers Portion. That Law conceive to be that which guided Abraham and Jacob
in the practice of Tything: revived afterward, and further explained, what
time they were assigned to Leui.

That it was moral, perpetually binding, is thus evident; because in no
respect caeremoniall, or particularly judicial to the state of Jews: you
understand, I presume, by the Argument thus molded, that we mean it merely
moral.

Rather says my learned friend; mixti iuris; In diverse respects, Tithes are
both moral, and caeremoniall, and judicial; as was also the Sabbath in the
old Testament. They are moral, as a sufficient maintenance for Ministers of
holy things. Caeremoniall, as Rites of the Jewish Religion: Judicial, as
maintenance of Levites and Leuiticall Priests.

Ans. So as you say; and not without consent and suffrage of some both old
Schoolmen, and modern more Orthodoxe Teachers. There are Laws and duties of
mixed nature; as long before Mr Iunius taught more then one introductorie
teacher of Schoole-diuinitie. Amandus de bello visu, etc.
But, I pray you, by Tithes mean you the quota? and say you, in that very
quantity they are morally belonging to Ministers of holy things? Sir, we are
brethren, why strive we? you grant the quaestion. Let them be in what other
respects you will, caeremonious, or judicial, or both; if in that quota they
are morally due, I shall be ready to swear anon, they are perpetually due to
Ministers of holy things. And me thinks by your example of the Sabbath, which
you give for instance of the like, you should mean so. For that, I presume,
you grant even in the quotient of Time-morall: though there were some
accessories of Caeremonialitie and iudicialitie also perhaps annexed thereto.
Besides, the very Name of Tithes determinately denotes that certain Portion;
the Tenth part of Temporal substance. So that in saying Tithes are moral,
though with a Quatenus, you say as much as, the tenth part of the peoples
Income by Law moral belongs to Ministers of holy things. Or else give us, I
pray you, the other part of your distinction, or some other respect in which
they are not moral. They are moral as a sufficient maintenance; not moral
belike; as an insufficient maintenance; As if I should say; The seventh of
time is morally prescribed, as it is a sufficient time to be spent in the
service of God: not morally, as insufficient. Whereas to say Truth, Gods
determining this numerall certeintie of Time and Substance to his service,
noticeth it as that sufficiency which we must rest in.

And yet meethinkes you should not mean so as your words purport. For then,
why strive you for lawfulness of man's exchanging that maintenance into another
kind of provision as good or better. Surely upon supposall of that meaning,
were I a man transported with passion, I should be ready to cry out as you; Oh
horrible, Is it possible a Minister of Jesus Christ should teach that man may
alter or reuerse Gods moral praecepts? And if an Angel from heaven should say
so, I know how to esteem him.

But how handsomely might a man with such a quatenus, maintain sacrifices and
burnt offerings to be moral; yea and the duty whatsoever it is, that is most
merely moral, to be caeremoniall and Judicial? The Ios. 13.14.
Sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel made by fire was Leuies inheritance; part
of his maintenance; impleade me, if you list, for saying they are moral; urge
as you well may, that they were merely caeremoniall; my distinction is ready;
in diverse respects they are caeremoniall, and Judicial and moral.
Caeremoniall as rites of the Jewish religion; Judicial as Leuies inheritance;
yet moral as a competency, and part of sufficient maintenance assigned to
Ministers of holy things. And could I not shift, trow you, to maintain prayer
Ceremonial, or Judicial? Press me with your greatest instance to prove it
moral; twenty to one but I shall find a quatenus, that has under it as much
truth, as yours in the case of Tithes; though as spiritual worship, its
moral; yet as part of Tabernacle and Temple service, so its caeremoniall; as a
mean to obtain and praeserue our sustenance and temporalities; so its
Judicial. So be it if you will have it so.

But say for Gods sake, and vex us no more with impertinent manners of speech.
By Tithes the subject in this proposition, Tithes are moral, quatenus, etc.
Mean you the tenth part of temporalities? Then Tithes are moral, and we have
the purpose; And must you not so mean it, as in the other, Tithes, that is,
tenth part are caeremoniall; and Tenthes are Judicial. Let the tenth parts be
caeremoniall or judicial with what quatenus they will, if they be
caeremoniall or judicial with a quatenus, then eatenus very Tenthes are
caeremoniall or judicial; So let Tenthes be moral with a quatenus, yet
eatenus the Tenth part of peoples Temporalties by moral law belongs to
Ministers of holy things. Briefly, mean you by Tithes, Decimam partem
temporalis substantiae, in all three members; or mean you it in the two latter
propositions, not in the first? If you mean it, Tithes are moral; if you so
mean not, you play the absurd sophister, the idle disputant in taking away, or
altering subiectum quaestionis.

I proceed to evidence the first member of the Antecedent. That the law
inioyning Tyths was in no respect caeremoniall. Caeremoniall ordinances were
all shadows of things to come, Col. 2.17
the body whereof is Christ. This no such shadow, for where is the body which
this supposed caeremonies duty should shadow? Some have sheaped us this
resemblance. The number of Ten is a number of perfection, and by paying in
this number, the offerer made protestation of his own imperfection, and of his
expecting perfection in Christ. Pretty too too. Twenty such like a tolerable
wit would devise. But can they show us this signification or end of payment in
Scripture, but obscurely so much as by allusion intimated? I dare say no; nor
any other end, no not of their payment to Leui: but support of Gods worship and
recompense of their service.

2. Leuiticall caeremonies have all analogicall resemblance of the things they
praefigured: Therefore called shadows of things to come. Because as the body
carries a dark, yet some resemblance of the body whose shadow it is; so
caeremonies of Christ and his benefits, etc. Therefore also termed Heb. 9.23
similitudes of heavenly things, being ordained by their very semblance to Gal.
4.9.
teach the rude. Tything has no analogicall resemblance of imperfection, or
thankfulness, or Gods universal dominion: for who can, I say not only avow
his frame, but frame it except absurdly? Give us such analogy of this, as we
are able to show of others, we will then believe their payment to have been in
part, at least, Leuitically caeremonious. Of sprinklings and purifyings, of
Tabernacle, of Arc, of high Priest (and indeed of what not? that was truly a
shadow of heavenly things) we find analogy in the word of God. Ergo, Heb.
9.7.12.
As high Priest amongst Jews alone entered into the holy of holies not without
blood: So Christ into heaven: etc. Can those who so confidently avow tything a
caeremonie, thus draw out the similitude twixt it and heavenly things?

3. No Leuiticall caeremonie may be used after full publishing of the Gospel;
Schoolmen say well, Iudicialia post Christum be mortua, because they bind
not: Caeremonialia mortifera; their very reviving is unlawful and deadly. But
payment of Tithes by consent of all, except Brownists, may be retained. Ergo.

4. I find not that the Lord in Prophetical Scriptures taxes so much
th'omission of caeremonies, or exacteth in so strict terms their performance,
as he does this of Tithes. Something I find of their faulty performance,
something of their sticking in them with neglect of moralities: And this to me
is a praesumption, they were other then caeremonies.

Lastly, I never read Christ speak so much of any Jewish Caeremonie, as he did
of Tithes; Math. 23.
These things ought ye not to leave undone; though I confess as much might
have been said of Caeremonies during those times. All these considered, may I
not conclude of Tything, it was no Leuiticall caeremonie?

To these Arguments thus has my friend. That all Caeremonies were shadows of
things to come, I would not have supposed you would have held; but that I see
it in Print.

And you may choose yet whether you will think it or no if you take my
exegeticall terms of limitation. For I mean of Caeremonies, Leuiticall,
Mosaicall, Aaronicall Caeremonies; as we use to take them contradistinctly to
moralities and Jewish judicials. And so understanding me, why would you not
think it? I assure you I shame not to have it in Print.

For all men know that there are two sorts of Religious Caeremonies in all
Religions whatsoever: some significant and Sacramental and Mystical, other
some for decency and good order, And if Tithes be said to be Caeremonies of
order, I know no exception can be taken against it. 2. But we may go one
degree farther and say with Iunius, that of significant or mystical
caeremonies there are three sorts; one remembrances of things past; another
demonstrations of things praesent: a third figures or shadows of things to
come: or as Beza speaks, Signa (...). The Sabbath may serve for an example in
all these respects, and whether Tithes were so or no who can tell? This we
need not be afraid to say, that Tithes were remembrances of benefits received
in times past, and demonstrations of a thankful mind for the time praesent.
For so they were in Abraham, Genesis 14.20. And Jacob Genesis 28.22. Yea in the whole
time of The Old Testament, seeing they were an oblation to the Lord, Numb.
18.24, 26, 27, 28. And for my part also I am half persuaded that they were
shadows of things to come: If you ask me where is the body which they
shadowed? I dare not tell you my mind, least you laugh me out of Countenance,
and say its the devise of a tolerable wit. This therefore is that which I say,
that seeing the bodies of all caeremoniall shadows are not made known unto
us, it may as well be so for any thing yet appears, as otherwise. And if it
be not so in Tithes, yet if they be significant in the two former respects, yea
if they were not significant at all, but only instituted for good order, it is
sufficient to disprooue that assertion, that all Caeremonies were shadows of
things to come. Yea it is sufficient also to answer your second reason,
Caeremonies have an analogicall resemblance of the things they signified:
seeing this praesumeth the former to be true, that Caeremonies are shadows of
things to come: yea and the third too, for that hereby it appears, that that
may be a caeremonie, which was before the Law not foreshadowing Christ. And
whereas you say, No Leuiticall caeremonie may be used after publishing of the
Gospel; and allege thereto the saying of the Schoolmen, Iudicialia post
Christum mortua sunt; Caeremonialia vero mortifera, Iunius seems to me to
understand it better of Caeremoniall shadows only, and of Caeremonies
Leuiticall so far forth only as any of them does shadow something in Christ:
granting that though in other respects they be in their own Nature mutable,
yet that there is no absolute necessity of remoouall thereof. So that you see,
that though it were granted that Tithes were shadows of things to come, yet
they may be retained, so long as they are not retained in that regard.

And this answers to the full, all that Dr. Carleton alleges to this
purpose, Page 16, 17, 18, 19. Whether in jest or good earnest. For he also
praesupposeth all Caeremonies to be shadows of things to come. Where by the
way it is good sport to see what game he makes of this: that we say, Tithes
are now used in the time of the Gospel not as a Caeremonie but as another
thing. And thereupon rides the hackney distinction of Materialiter verum est,
sed non formaliter, out of breath; to which nevertheless he must be beholden
in the end whether he will or no. For fol. 35. page 2. When he answers
Abulensis, that Tithes have two respects; one in their general ordinance,
another in their particular assignation; and in regard of the former not
instituted by the Law, but only in the latter; what is this (I would feign
know) but non materialiter, sed formaliter? etc. The rest my love couers.

Answ. For answer. I hope you think nor Dr. Carleton nor poor me so simple
or unskilled, as not to know the notation of the name (whether of Cares the
Tuscane town, or a carendo) and the general notion of the Nature of
Caeremonies. Well we understand it generally to denote any external rite of
religion. This also we conceive, that there were Caeremonies in this general
sense taken, in use amongst Jews, which sort sufficiently with the state of
the Gospel. There are natural Caeremonies, such as lifting up of hands and
eyes to heaven, bowing the knee, prostrating the body in prayer: Religious
rites apparently Natural, and by Natures instinct in use amongst Gentiles as
well as Jews. Neither much contend we, but there were some external rites of
Gods institution for Jews which yet are applicable to Evangelical worship.

But when we treat of Caeremonies contradistinct to moralities we mean and
explicate our selves of caeremonies Leuiticall, Mosaicall, or if you please so
to term them, Aaronicall Caeremonies. Whose style in Paul is universally,
elements, beggarly elements, Col 2.20.
shadows of heavenly things of things, to come; Gal. 4 9.
The law whereof was respective only of the Leuiticall Priesthood. Heb. 10.1.


And of these this is that we teach; 1. That they were all figures of things to
come. Similitudes of heavenly things; shadows of Christ and spiritual things
then promised, now exhibited.

2. Of these we have further learnd; 1. That they retained their virtue and
power of binding till the death of Christ. 2. That they were after his death,
for a time, liberae obseruationis, for more honorable bringing of the
Synagogue to the grave; as not the now reverend Bishop of Chichester, but that
old renowned of Hippo first spoke. Were also for that time to be tempered in
use by rules of Charity, in favor of weak Jews, till fuller preaching of
the Gospel.

3. Yet were after promulgation of the Gospel mortiferae, 1. 2. Quaest. 102.
Art. 4.
and could not, as Thomas speaks, be used sine mortali peccato. Will you hear
his reason because their use employed protestation of such faith, as who shall
now in days of new Testament profess, were worthy to be branded with note of
grossest haeresie, no less then Iudaisme. The faith of fathers before Christ,
and ours since him, is in the substance one; yet were th'Articles thereof to be
specified in terms different. Theirs, as denoting Christ then to come; ours,
as importing Christ already come. Proportionally their caeremonies were
ordained to signify things to come; and use thereof employed such protestation
in that people. As therefore he should sin mortally, whosoever should now in
profession of his faith by words, say, he believes in Christ, yet to be borne,
to die, to rise again: so no less mortally he, who shall use any real
protestation or profession in fact of such faith, as who so uses these
caeremonies, necessarily must do, I am non promittitur nasciturus, passurus,
Augustine. Cont. Faust. Man^h. lib. 19. cap. 16.
resurrecturus, quod illa Sacramenta quodammodo personabant: sed annunciatur
quod natus sit, and resurrexit, quod haec Sacramenta quae a Christianis aguntur
iam personant.

What trow you? Will our Arguments now proceed? Caeremonious ordinances
Leuiticall were all shadows of things to come, carrying analogicall
resemblance of what they signified, etc. Videsis.

1. Not so; for every man knows all Religions have some caeremonies of order
and decency; not all significant and mystical; And so might Tithes be
caeremonies of order, say also of decency if you please.

Answ. Surely, I doubt not but the whole Leuiticall service of God was carried
in the seemeliest fashion, and that there was strict observation of prius and
posterius in all their Cultus. 1. Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order, is a rule of the Law of Nature,
and bound Jews as well as Christians. Neither make I quaestion but Jews had
directions even for the order and outward fashion of their caeremonious
service, of Gods own praescript, that the modus might be (...). But Sir you
must remember, 1. That in the quaestion of Tithes, and the like, whether they
were Leuiticall Ceremonies or no, we inquire of the Materials of Leuiticall
service; and not of the modus and externe fashion of performance, which
commonly comes under the term of decency and order. 2. Next, I dare you to
instance in but one caeremonie of order, if it were properly Leuiticall, upon
condition to loose the benefit of this Argument if I evidence not, that it was
of mystical signification; and Typical of something belonging to Christ or
his kingdom. Be it then that they had their caeremonies of order, yet if those
also were shadowy and figurall, how helps your distinction to contradict our
proposition?

2. Yet one step further you will adventure to go; and its (...). I warrant
you. Not all shadows of things to come; for some were remembrances of things
past; some demonstration of things praesent.

Scot. in 4. did. 1.
Answ. Even so; we have long since learned of Mr. Iunius his Masters, that
signs are some Remoratiue, some demonstratiue, some prognosticall. But can you
name us the Leuiticall caeremonie, that was so commemoratiue of things past, or
demonstratiue of things praesent, that it was not also Typically prognosticall
of things to come? I dare not be over confident; memory decaies as age grows,
and I am suddenned to address this answer to you. But cannot bethink my
self, nor I (suppose) you, of any Leuiticall Caeremonie, whether sacrum or
sacrificium, or sacramentum, or observantia, but was withal shadow of
something to come. The passover, a remembrance of Angels passing over
Israelites, yet withal a 1. Cor. 5.
Type of Christ: The Manna reserved in the Arc, monument of the material
bread miraculously given from heaven; but was it not also Type of Christ, the
Ioh. 6.
living bread which came down from heaven? That spite of the pie it must be
true, which Paul has; Leuiticall caeremonies were all shadows of things to
come.

But say, I pray you, say soothely: do you think Tithes were Leuiticall
caeremonies if it be yielded, that their payment in old Testament was
remembrance of benefits received, and demonstration of a praesent thankful
mind? Think you all things done to God in remembrance of benefits received,
in testimony of a thankful mind, Caeremonious, and Leuiticallie
caeremonious? When Zachee offered that sweet smelling sacrifice, Luke 19.8.
half his goods to the poor, in part to demonstrate present thankfulness for
his late conversion, suppose you his fact a caeremonie, a Leuiticall
caeremonie? when the devotion of our forefathers, built Synagogues for our
Nation, and erected Hospitals in remembrance of benefits received from God,
suppose you their act Leuitically caeremonious? when Pater Noster, that is, not
Popery, but pore-blind devotion, gave Churches those large endowments of lands
and other revenues which our Father, our more cleare-sighted piety has stripped
them of, to rememorate pristine blessings, and demonstrate praesent
thankfulness, can you think their fact therefore Leuitically caeremonious? This
is my mind, in the maine of all my morality, its all by me done to rememorate
past benefits, to demonstrate my praesent thankful mind; yet can I not be
persuaded, I am herein Leuitically caeremonious. What then though it be
granted, Tithes were paid by Abraham and Jacob, and in the whole time of old
Testament in remembrance of benefits received, and to demonstrate a thankful
mind praesent; does

(...)
