HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
GOD save the KING.
A DECLARATION OF HIS M. Pleasure anent the Religion and praesent Kirk
governament.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of great Britanne, France, and Ireland:
Defender of the Faith; etc. To Our Loveds Messingers, Our Shirefs in that
part, conjunctlie and severallie specialie constitute; greeting, Forsamekle, As
WE are informed that now in the beginning of Our Reign, Some restles and
unquiet spirits popishlie disposed, have praesumed to disperse false bruites
and rumors, That WE intend to make some Innovation concerning the estate of
Religion, or at the least to give too much toleration and connivance to the
popish profession: And by that and others their seditious and factious
proceedings, They do what in them lies to disquyet the mynds of Our good
Subjects, And to possess them with some apprehensions and doubts of the
sincerity of Our disposition, toward the true Religion presently professed,
And by the Law established with in this Our Kingdom. And sicklyke that others
dis-conforme and Averse persons from the praesent governament of the Kirk, and
contemners of Our authority, by transgressing of the Orders established by
Acts of Parliament; have traveled to persuade sundry of Our good Subjects,
That WE intend to make some alteration of the Kirk governament, and Cannons
thereof happily established by Our dearest FATHER of blessed memory, And
that WE mind not to urge any more the observance of the Acts concluded at
Perth and ratefied in Parliament: Howsoewer WE do know that such foolish
rumors deserve not to be regairded: Yet least the unstable mynds of the
vulgar sort should be drawn to expect that which WE never intended, and
thereby be diverted from their due obedience to GOD and WS. And to the intent
that all such false and foolish rumors may be suppressed and the forder grouth
and progress thereof praevented. WE do hereby Declare, that as Our laite
dear FATHER of famous and wortthie memory, Did sincerlie maintain the true
Religion praesentlie professed in Our Kingdoms; Which even a little before his
Death during the time of his seiknesse, It was his special caire in a Pious
manner to make publicly known. So WE have resolved constantly to profess
and maintain the same, And to propagate and advance the same by Our Royal
Authority. And lykewayes that WE are so far from any purpose of Innovating
the governament of the Kirk now happily established, That if the same had not
allreddie been determined; WE would with all Our cair have advanced the same,
As knowing it to be the only best governament whereby a Christian Kirk can
be we will reuled in Monarchies and Kingdoms; And most conform to the best
times of the Primitive Kirk. And therefore WE have resolved to maintain that
governament and policy of the Kirk already established, and so far as Our
Laws do allow, shall punish any person that darre seek to disturb the peace
aither of Religion, or praesent Kirk Govername^t

OUR WILL IS heerefore, and WE charge you straightly and commands, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen Ye pass, And in Our Name and
Authority, Make publication hereof by oppen Proclamation at the market Croces
of the head Burrowes of this Our Kingdom and other places needful,
wherethrow none pretend ignorance of the same. The which to do WE commit to
you conjunctlie and severallie Our full power By these Our Letters,
Delyvering the same by you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet At Edinburgh the twenty sext day of Julie, And of
Reign the first year. 1625. Ordained to be published in Print. Per Actum D.
Secreti Consilii.
EDINBVRGH

Printed by Thomas Finlason his M. printer.


