A TABLE-BOOKE FOR PRINCES.

CONTAINING SHORT Remembrances for the Government of themselves and their
EMPIRE.

Wherein also respectively the several Members of State, and all sorts of
Subjects, may find matter worthy their observation.

By Patricke Scot, Esquire.

Nihil recte inchoatur, nisi post Deum fauerit Imperator, nec quenquam oportet
vel meliora scire vel plura quam principem, cuius doctrina omnibus potest
prodesse subiectis. Veget. in Prol. LONDON, Printed by BERNARD ALSOP, dwelling
in Distaffe-Lane at the Sign of the Dolphin, near Old Fish-street. 1621.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, the hopeful Prince of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
SIR,
IF PHILLIP of Macedon did yield no less thanks to his false gods, that his
Son Alexander was borne in the time of Aristotle, then in blessing him with
so hopeful a child: your Highness has just cause to celebrate the Name of
the true God, that you are the Son and Heir of a Mighty King, and of a
Religious, Wise, and Learned Father, who (besides the appointing of godly and
learned Tutors) in his own person, (exceeding Aristotle both in the Theoricke
and Practicke of Government) has so seasoned your Highness tender years,
with the (Giliadlike) odoriferous Balm of Divine and Moral instructions, as
the sweet perfume thereof has already ravished the hearts of all loyal
Subjects, with the extreamitie of joy; and one day (by Gods Grace) will make
known to the World, the happiness you have in your birthright, but the
perfection of happiness in such a Father, who has so emptyed the profound
Ocean of Divine and Humane learning, that (except borrowed from the rich
Treasure of his store, nothing that belongs to the true institution of young
Alexander, can either be found or added.

Wherefore SIR, I humbly beseech your Highness to censure these lame Essaies
of my barren brain (or rather crumbs fallen from the Princely Table of your more
then Salomon-like Father) as the Widowlike Symboll of my devotion; pleadge of
my Faith, or Subject to try your Highness, clemency in pardoning, or Justice
in condemning of me, who have rashly persumed to prefer my homespun labors to
so powerful a Mecenas, whose approbation or dislike may enrich me with the
fullness of content, or expose me upon the dangerous Rocks of untimely sorrow.
But SIR, either in life or death I shall be

Your Highness humble and true Servant, PATRICK SCOT.

TO THE GENEROUS READER.
KNowing (Generous Reader) that these ill digested labors of mine, shall be as
well exposed to the biting censure of base and envious Critics, (whose
perverse and obstinate disposition has taught them to detract from others, and
forget their own obliquities) as to the view of High borne, true, Noble, and
generous Spirits, (whose birth and education inuites them to look with a more
favorable aspect upon the weak endeavors of good meaning.) For thy better
satisfaction, I am to advertise thee; that at my first seizing upon this
Subject, (a task I grant far above my reach) I did not iealously suspect, but
altogether distrust my own insufficiency; and therefore did make choice
rather to loose my thus spent time, and commit my confused Papers to a fiery
trial, then to be the Herald of my own ignorance: hut when I had better
advised, I did find that the Supreme King is well pleased with the least dram
of true devotion: that his Vicegerents many great Monarchs, and brave Princes
have taken in good part, the smalest oblations of their meanest Servants: that
every good subject (amongst whom in loyalty I am inferior to none) are by the
most strict bonds of allegiance tied, to communicate their talent to the
service of their Prince and Country: then (I say) I did recall my
fire-threatning sentence, and was content that this obortiue birth should come
unto the world; But upon assurance (least thou should expect more then I
promise) that the Title of a Table-Booke might be Charactered upon the front is
piece thereof: which very name, enforces rather a necessitous use for memory,
then an elaborat entire debating, or methodicall disposition of the matter.

Since then I hold up my hand at the bar of thy judgment, I entreat that this
ensuing Treatise (blemished with the impollished ornaments of Art) may be
sheltered under the wings of thy favorable censure, and the rather because this
subject is more nearly aliyed to truth and sincerity, then to art and
affectation. So shall I remain

Thy constant welwiller, P. S.

AVTHOR LIBELLO.
EIa, age nunc, roseasque genas, frontemque serenam
Ostendas Coelo; licet immature, nec omni
Part, satis vel compte sinus, collecteue pulchram
Caesariem in nodum; tamen hand fortasse, libelle,
Monstrum immane tuens: te libertatis amicae
Munere te placita donabit sepe salute
Magnanimus Carlus; magni generosa propago
Patris, qui Centum numerans ab origene Reges
Omnes sceptriferos, omnes decora alta ferentes,
Bis fese quartum adiungit: Bodotria solum
Quem dominu^, Tamisisque colit. piscosaque bannae
Flumina, tu gratum venies caput omnibus illis
Queis mage sana bonus finxit praecordia Titan
Et non Antyciras opus est dare lintea: verum
Momorum damnanda, bonisque aduersa propago,
Et qui vipereum spirant ex ore venenum,
Zoilous, atque Theon, te sannis omnibus vnum
Excipient; durumque prement, liuoris acerbi
Morsibus* Interea tu qua licet, vtere sort
Suppliciter venerare atque admirare potentem
Parcere Subiectis and debellare superbos.
Et (si quem) solum submisso poplite Carlum
Qui (quanuis talem) vultu haud dignatur amico
Cernere te. Charis grates hinc soluere amicis
Sis memor: and labes veteres, fractique vigoris
disiectum robur, non inficiate, recedas.
Denique quae Momus iaculatur spicula, sorti
Sperne animo; neque vim quae ea dextra mittat atundo.
Vel spacium euadet totum: vel perforet ictum.
THE TABLE.
Sect. 1. OF the condition and true happiness of Princes. Sect. 2. What
benefit comes to a Prince, by good education and learning. Sect. 3. Of the
virtuous life of Princes: of the election of their Councillors, Officers, and
Servants. Sect. 4. What general observations the happy and quiet Government of
a Prince requires. Sect. 5. By what means the generous minds of Princes are
known. Sect. 6. Of Nobility. Sect. 7. Antidotes against the poisoning of
vain glory, and ambitious thoughts, that intoxicates the minds of young
Princes. Sect. 8. How Princes ought to moderate their power. Sect. 9. Whose
Image good and bad Princes represent: by what Epithetes they are known, and of
their several actions. Sect. 10. By what means a Prince may secure himself
in his Kingdom, and obtain the love of his Subjects. Sect. 11. Princes ought
to be easy in giving access, and ready to hear the complaints of the
oppressed and poor. Sect. 12. Of the necessity of Princes knowledge in the
affairs of their Empire, and presence (so far as is possible) in the
administration of Justice. Sect. 13. Of Laws and Justice. Sect. 14. Of the
wrath of Princes, when and how they should punish. Sect. 15. Of two sorts of
flattery, but chiefly of the last, that haunts the Courts of Princes. Sect.
16. To whom Princes may safely commit public functions. Sect. 17. Of secrecy,
in the managing of the weighty affairs of Princes, and what judicious policy
Princes may sometimes lawfully use. Sect. 18. Upon whom Ecclesiastical
functions, by Princes are to be conferred. Sect. 19. Of Church Controversies,
civil contentions, seditious Pamphlets, infamous Libels, and with what care
they are to be repressed. Sect. 20. Of the liberality of Princes. Sect. 21. Of
the mutual friendship and correspondence, that ought to be betwixt
neighboring Princes, and contiguous Kingdoms. Sect. 22. Of war, what
Princes are to consider before they enter in war: for what causes they may
lawfully take arms, and how to behave themselves in war. Sect. 23. Of
Soldiers, and military discipline. Sect. 24. Of the meditation and preparation
of Princes against the day of their death. Sect. 25. Of mourning for the dead,
and of Christian and Princely burial.
A TABLE BOOK FOR PRINCES.
SECTIO. I. Of the condition and true happiness of Princes.
THey are either blind or ignorant, Vulgus indoctum, and multorum illa capitam
bellua persuasam habet, magnos principes regno suo, velut in a maenissimo
quoda^ paradiso viuere, vbi dijs hominibusque plaude^tibus, omnia quae ad
delitias pertinent suppeditantur. Reinh. Lor. Hacla.
that (with the vulgar) estimates the happiness of Kings to consist in titular
honors, largeness of Empire, millions of Subjects, fair Palaces, multitude
of attendants, rich treasures, and other glistering shows: They never look
into the heavy burden and thorny cares of government, whereof a diadem is
composed, wherein the suppressing of vice, the exalting of virtue, equal
administration of Justice; immediately in their own persons, and mediately by
their deligates: the defense of the poor and oppressed, the careful
ouerwatching that neither in themselves, nor in orhers the laws be infringed,
are chief and inseparable companions of Empire, and annexed to Crowns, upon
no less peril then privation of all those worthy Epithets, which are due to
good Princes here, and of the eternal reward that is promised hereafter.

This kingly charge, outwardly glorious, Plut. in. vit. Solon. Plutar. an seni
gerenda sit respub. Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 16.
begun with cares, continued with fears, often times ended with sorrows,
rightly considered, will make Seleucus with sighs bewail the miseries of
Kings: Damocles leave to flatter Dionisius: Golden Craesus in sorrow and
admiration remember old Solon.

Let therefore all Princes, who are transported with the libidinous desire of
reign, or ambitious enlarging of their Dominions, wisely expend the reasons
following: First, O nobilem magis quam foelice^ pannum, quem si quis poenitus
cognoseat qua^ multis solicitudinibus and periculis sit refertus, ne humi
iacentem capere vellet. Val. Max. lib. 7. cap. 2.
the great charge that is imposed upon those to whom government is committed:
how difficill it is to exercise the same rightly: what wisdom is required of
Princes least they make shipracke of their private, and public state: how
far they ought in virtue excel others: that the public good is as peculiar
to Kings, as seeing to the eye, or hearing to the ear: That none ought to
aspire to that sacred seat, but such who in goodness imitates the Archking,
whose throne it is which they enjoy. Plut. de instit. Prin.
Est Principis Vnicum munus alijs prospicere and publicis consulere commodis;
id autem non potest nisi sapientia, vigilantia, animique integritate ceteros
antecellat.

Eras. de instit. Prin.
Secondly, they are to consider that sceptors are not given unto Kings
(tyrant-like) to abuse their authority, but to be strickt obseruers, of the
laws they imppose upon others: Principatus nihil aliud sunt quam splendida
ministeria. Eras. apo. 5.
That the duty of Kings and subjects (otherwise then in the dignity of
commanding, and that Kings are only countable to God) is mutual, Principi
populus censum debet, debet obsequium, debet honorem; populo viciscim Princeps
debet clementiam; debet vigilantiam. O King (says Agapetus to Justinian) since
there is none upon earth able to command thee, Ad Iustini. Caes.
impose an necessity of keeping the laws upon thy self. Plut. in ap
Augustus Caesar being exasperate by an offense of high quality (overcome with
the violence of his passions) did punish a young man, contrary to the law he
had made; and hearing him cry out, Crimen licet per se grave erat tum admissum
in Caesaris maiestatem, tamen Heroidoluit exacta non secu^dum legem propriam
vindicta. Suet. in Caes.
O Caesar I appeal to the law which thou have made, did so condole the
exaction of punishment, not due before legal censure, that he did forbear to
take food; until such time as he had fully testified the greatness of his
conceived sorrow: a notable example in a great Prince to whom the breach of law
he had made was so displeasant, that he studied rather to punish his own
error; then the offense of so high quality, Plut. de doct. Prin.
committed against his royal dignity: he did well know, that the law is the
sovereign queen of divine and humane government: that it is not enough to
make laws, but to keep them.

Principes ministri dei sunt ad cura^ and salutem hominum, vt bonaquae Deus
illis largitur, parum distribuant, pa^^^m seruent. Plut. de doct. Prin. (...).
li. 2. fol. 101.
Thirdly, let ambitious Alexander, and tyranous Dionisius (whose ruling
appetite, and cruelty, on world and humane blood cannot satiate) consider that
Kings are the images of God; that as God is goodness it self, and
distributes his goodness to all men: so Princes (Gods vicegerants) ought to be
profitable to their subjects: not to prefer their private gain before the
public good, but to draw their picture by the pattern of their Maker, and so
shine before their people, in abandoning of vice, and following of virtue, as
they exceed them in place and dignity. Si quispiam nauta modicum errauerit,
affert nauiga^tibus nocumentu^, sed si nauigator ipse delirauerit, totius
efficit nauig^j pernicie^ Agap. ad Just.
Let Princes wisely weigh that the helm of the Commonwealth is committed to
their charge, and that they are countable for the well or ill government
thereof: That there is nothing more contagious, or that sooner disperseth
through the body of state, then the example of Princes, whose lives are so
conspicuous as the sun, and therefore to the good of all men they must be the
best amongst men, or to the prejudice of all, and their own the most wicked.

Fourthly, the boiling desire of Empire will grow cold, Jacob. Mag. Brit. etc.
Rex: in Epist ad Carol. Prin. Suet. in Fla. dom.
if Princes set before their eyes, the infinite dangers to which they are
subject; to what burden they are tied, how full of thorny cares, and commonly
how short the life of greatness is. It was not without cause that Caesar did
complain, upon the misery of Princes, subject to perfidious machinations,
Conditio Principum miserima est, vbi timentur infidiae proditoriae^ frauds,
doli, editiones, inimicitiae, venena. Reinh. Lor.
detestable treasons, deceitful conspiracyes, and intoxicate poysonings: they
cannot in safety go abroad, without a guard, neither take meat before some
other taste it: they must in peace live armed, not only against the invasion
of foreign enemies, but intestine and domesticke friends: one betrays them,
another deceiues them: others flatters them: they are the subjects of all
discourse; the objects of all men's eyes: from all which the vulgar are secured:
Nulla enim aconita bibuntur fictilibus, tunc illa time, cu^ pocula sumas
gemmata, and lato sitinum ardebit in auro: Iuuenal. Sat. 10.
they are neither subject to fears, nor feared or envied of any: their earthen
cups yield them drink to quench their thirst, but not to extinguish their
life: hunger makes their brown bread sweet, labor their sleep quiet, small
fire keeps them from cold, course clothes shelters their nakedness, and an
innocent life crowns their death.

By which it is evident that Princes must either acknowledge the weight of
their office, what intricate difficulties and dangers are in the right
exercising thereof; that they are set upon the theater of the world, (...).
Epist.
or (tyrant like) resolve that the Commonwealth, must be the stage of their
insolent life, and wished for death. The continual toils whereunto Princes
are subject, made Caesar ofttimes wish to be exonered of so heavy a burden;
Reinh. Lor.
has been the cause that many wise and learned Princes have preferred,
private life, before public greatness.

Jacob. mag. Brit. etc. Rex de inaugurat. Prin. fol. 122.
Lastly, let the serious meditation of the strict account that Princes must
give, serve to curb the insolent affecting of government; the time will
shortly come (death sparing no more Kings than beggars) when he must yield up
his accounts (according to the greatness of his talent) before such a Judge,
Vidi mortuos magnos, and pusillos stantes inconspectu throni. Revel. 20.
from whom all the Monarchs in the world are not able to appeal; and whom
they cannot deter, deceive, or corrupt: what strickt account will he take?
what severe judgment will he pronounce against such as either have unjustly
usurped his authority, Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se crimen habet,
quanto mayor qui peccat habetur Iuuen. Sat. 8.
or being lawfully placed in his throne upon earth, have intruded themselves,
or not acquit them of the trust committed to them? Agapetus Iustinianum
admonuit, vt talem se prestaret erga subditos vt famulos, qualem Deum futurum
erga se exoptaret.

It is then manifest that good Princes (to whom the incessant care of then
charge is more dear, then the mad and foolish desire of pre-eminence) are not
happy by the external shadows of greatness, but by showing themselves great,
in ouerruling their disordered affections (which is none of the least, but
rather the perfection of humane actions) and then in the establishing and
keeping of good laws: Eras. instit. Prin.
in the administration of Justice; in rewarding the virtuous and punishing the
vicious: in exalting the humble, obedient, and beating down the proud
oppressors: in repressing of enemies and cherishing of friends: in punishing
treasonable practices, and detesting inposturing flattery: in chastising
detractions, and discountenancing hollow-hearted hypocrites: (...). Epist.
and finally to be such, as they care not who look unto their most secret
actions, or outward gesture.

These and the like be true kingly functions, the rich jewels that adornes
diademes, and are the happiness of Kings, not consisting in temporary,
momentary pleasures, or deceitful vices: but upon the never perishing
delights, that are builded upon the unremovable rock of virtue, unto which no
man can ascend, but by the steps of divine wisdom. 1. Reg. c. 3.
Solomon (in whose choice it was to ask what he pleased) did well know that
this was the ladder by which Jacob did reach up to heaven, and the life of
kingly majesty; therefore he did not ask riches, vain glory or worldly
pleasures; but wisdom; neither worldly wisdom, but such whereby in
uprightness and understanding he might execute his royal function. Eras. apo.
4.
Philip of Macedon was desirous that his son Alexander should not give his
mind to corruptible riches, but to the study of philosophy.

Reinh. Loc.
These great Princes did wisely inform themselves, that wisdom and learning
are the Herculian pillars of Kings, without which their condition (although
embellished with the glory of Solomon the Empire of Alexander, the armies of
Xerxes, the riches of Craesus, and other whatsoever vanities nature does
produce, or art invent) is more miserable then the poorest Codrus, Ludo.
Hills. lib. 1.
or despised Lazarus.

It is then religious wisdom, seconded by good education and learning, that
dignifies Princes in their youth, accompanies them in their life, and glorifies
them after death.

O vitae religio conseruatrix, tu coelitus demissa interris, animos vera
virtute imples; tu diuinarum humanarumque rectrix: tu imperia, sceptra,
iudicia, vt firma, vt legitima sunt facis: tu priuatorum fortunam moderaris: tu
populos in fide ac officio contines: in te vna been beateque viuendi
firmamentum existit: demum nihil in Principe nec populo praeclarum est, quod
non a te ortum ducat, tuoque illustratur splendore.

SECTIO. II. What benefit comes to a Prince, by good education and learning.
AS the most fertile ground, without culture, Eras de instit. Prin.
is not only barren in the production of wholesome fruits, but does ouergrowe
with thistles and hurtful weeds. So the mind of man without education, is
not only infertill in the propagation of virtue, but naturally inclined to
bring forth ignorance, voluptuousness, and all other vices. Prou. 22.15
Solomon says, that foolishness is tied to the heart of a young man, Nemo
nascitur sapiens sed fit. Senec. de ira
and cannot be untied but by instruction. There is no man borne good, neither
Prince, howsoever nobly descended, without wholesome doctrine, did prove
himself worthy of Empire.

It concerns therefore generous, high borne, and ingenuous Princes, Cic. 2.
Tusc. quaest:
to follow the study of good letters, to honor love, and retain the
professors of liberal Arts, and to be proficient in them: The benefits
thereof are many, the effects admirable, and the reward inestimable.

First, virtuous education begets a habit of virtue, Aelian: Lamp.
and hatred of vice, for there is nothing more certain, then that thereby a
man becomes more then a man, and participates in the divine nature; on the
other side, Plut. de educa puer.
if he be left to his natural ignorance, he degenerates to all wickedness,
and simpathiseth rather with the most savage and rude beasts, then with
reasonable men.

Lucurgus the Spartan lawgiver, made manifest the powerfulness of education,
by the diverse effects of two puppies. Duo catuli ijsdem parentibus orti,
caeterum diuersam vitae consuetudinem assecuti, alter gulosus, alter venator
euasere.

Secondly, although Princes so exceed all others in the abundance of all
things, Eras. 3. apo.
that learning may seem either to serve them to small use, or not necessary at
all: yet for many weighty considerations, the more powerful they are,
Principes opus habent multis praeceptis, vt sancte viuant; vt veterem cum suis
ad fectibus Adamu rerum copia luxuiante^, coerceant; ne voluptatibus
franfrangantur, and insolesca^t ad interitu^. Gregor. moral.
the less able they are, to govern either themselves, or their people without
knowledge and learning; being more ready to decline from the right hand of
virtue, unto the left hand of vice, then to keep the sure way, never known to
the ignorant and unlearned. Learning is that strong guard, that defends
Princes against the deceitful inticements of prosperity, power, honor,
riches, and whatsoever else praecipitates greatness (blindfolded in the
Cimerian darkness of ignorance) to an irrecouerable downefal: a Prince ought
not to measure his happiness by those false goods of fortune, but by the true
riches of his mind, Polib. lib. 7.
Gorgias being asked, whether he did think the Persian King happy or not,
answered, he did not know how virtuous and learned he was; for, said he,
there is no happiness in these things that may be taken away.

Libri muti magistri nescientes erubescere non conniuent, vt dignos haero^s
laudibus euehu^t; ita prauos dente theonino rodu^t. Quint. de lect. lib.
Thirdly, learning stirs up and excitates the mind and love of a Prince, to
the reading of books, wherein he may learn al things needful for himself, or
subjects. These dumb masters will praise him if he be worthy, or without
fear, with the Prophet tell him; Thou art the man: They will finally (without
blushing) admonish him of those things, his Courteors either will not, or dare
not: The want of learning is the cause that Princes reject the counsel of
their friends, and contemn the power of their enemies; ignorance caused
Cambises cruelly to murder the son of Praxaspes his servant, Senec. de ira.
for his faithful council; Tyrannous Dionisius to check Plato for his loving
advice. Plut. apo.
verba tua inquit Dionisius, otiosorum senum sunt, and tua inquit Plato,
tirannum sapiunt.

These and the like Phalarisme examples of tyranny, Reinh. Lor.
prove that the knowledge of learning is necessary for good Princes; that
thereby they become so much better, that they willingly embrace virtue, and
come to the knowledge of themselves. Omnes boni principes, de quibus legitur,
vel fuerunt per se studiosi, vel habuerunt sapientes ad instruendum eos.

Fourthly, although by descent, nobility of blood, and indulgence of fortune,
Princes are emine^t: yet to add a more shining brightness to their external
splendour, Eccles. 21.
learning is necessary, Doctrina est ornamentum aureum prudenti and quasi
brachiale in dextro. (...), learning is an honor to all men, Ex Doct. Gerh.
nomam.
says Meander: many famous Princes at home and abroad, have been more
reverenced for their learning, then honored for their greatness.

Fifthly, learning only brings with it lasting, Cicero in Senec.
and Prince worthy pleasures, the rest are but deceitful momentary, baits to
ensnare them: Gaudia falsa non remanent, sed fugitiua volant, quod leuius
videretur, si fugientia non relinquerent at ergo venenum. These false pleasures
are rightly named (by Architas) the most destroying plagues inflicted upon men.
Martial. l. 2:
Aristotle was wont to admonish his scholars not to look upon pleasures at
their coming, but in their going, for in the one (said he,) they show fair,
in the other they leave sorrow and repentance.

On the contrary, the delights that are begotten of learning and virtue, are
true joys, permanent pleasures, the ornaments of youth, the crown of age;
They adorn prosperity, uphold adversity, Cicero pro Arch.
at home are the best stewards, abroad the best interpreters, in peace the
vshers of idleness, in war the Marshals of camps, in company the ministers
of discourse, and alone private and true Councillors.

2. offic.
Noble Affricanus used often to say, that he was never less solitary, then when
solitary.

A Prince of Athens, being demanded what he did profit by Philosophy, Diog.
Laert.
answered; That at all times he could without offense, confer with himself,
and in every discourse draw a conclusion consonant to reason. Besides, said
he, the knowledge of Philosophy, makes me love wise learned honest men,
detest flattering Parasites, and fools.

Sixthly, Gelli l. 13.
learning adornes a Prince with courtesy, clemency, and meekness; The first
begets inseparable love, the second humane admiration; and the third divine
applause. The love of subjects, is the wall of kingdoms. Mercy establishes
the throne of a King, and meekness deifies him. Horat. 2. Epist.
Omnis eruditio mansuetos facit, nemo enim adeo ferus, vt non mitessere possit,
si modo doctrinae patientem praebeat aurem.

Seauenthly, in most desperate diseases (by learning a Prince finds matter of
comfort, and present help. This was the medicine that Marcus Tullius did
minister to his friend. Epist. Famil. lib. 6.
O Balbus, said he, if I could prescribe better medicine for our equal
griefs, Siquidem studia vt optime foolicitate^ extollunt; ita facilime
calamitates minuunt. Senec. de consol. ad Albinum.
I would; such as I can, I will: let the study of good letters, which for our
delight we have formerly embraced, be now the comfort of our miseries, and
last health: as they did advance our better fortunes; so they will mitigate
present sorrows, cure our wounds, and so expel melancholy passions, that the
sorrow of humane miseries, shall have no further entry then to the gates of our
weakest senses.

Since therefore humane miseries, are no less incident to Princes then poor
men, they ought by learning to arm themselves against the violent batteries of
adverse fortune. If Craesus had participated either in learning, or advise with
Solon, Quanto mayor est fortuna, tanto minor est secura. Arist. ethni.
in his flourishing estate, he had found more comfort thereby upon his
tragical theater, then in the millions of his golden treasures. Dionisius
(nothing inferior to Craesus in tyranny or presumption; Licet Regi affectu
fieri philosophu^. Plut. in apo.
but superior by learning; in his exile, being asked what he had learned by
Plato: answered, that by Philosophy he had learned to undergo equally the
estate of a Prince, and beggar. Gellius l. 2.


Eighthly, a learned Prince does willingly enolyne to wisdom and virtue,
Gellius l. 2.
he follows the one, and shunneth the other, not for fear, but for love of
themselves. The Cubiculars of the Persian Kings, were enjoined every morning to
put their master in mind of his kingly office, by these words: Arise O King,
and go about the public affairs: Heron. ad Heliod.
A learned Prince needs no such advertisement, Philosophi ponu^t ^uatuor
species perturbationum, dolorem, metu^, spem, Letitiam, quibus hominum vulgus,
vt procellosu^ mare fluctibus inquietatur Arist. pol.
before he goes to bed he premeditates the next days work, in his bed he
consults upon it, and at his arising he executes his settled designs; he is
neither overcome, with sorrow, fear, hope, joy, and other vulgar violent
perturbations, but willingly follows those wholesome laws he does enact for
others. Aristotle being demanded what he had profited by Philosophy, answered;
That he had learned to do those things willingly, that others did for fear
of the Law.

Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore,
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae.
Ninthly, giving of answers, Eloquentia principibus magno ornamento est Cic. 4.
de finib.
using persuasions, resolving of questions, discoursing of laws, conferring of
honors, defense of things proposed, or done, are inseparably annexed to the
office of a King: unto all which, he must be by learning enabled, lest he
expose himself to the censure of ignorance, or become the subject of smothered
laughter and future contempt. The words of a Prince are (like the oracles of
Apollo) no sooner spoken, Plato. de rep.
but taken hold of by all men: therefore great care is to be taken, that his
words, his orations, his answers and demandes, be consonant to the to the
dignity of a Prince. Plato did pronounce the state happy, where a wise and
learned King did reign; for said he, learning is the only and chief
happiness, and ignorance the greatest ill: upon the first depends all humane
felicity; Isocrates ad Demoniac.
upon the last assured misery. Aristippus made choice, rather to be a beggar,
then unlearned, because by the one he wanted only external and temporal
riches, but by the other humanity, knowledge, and endless wealth. Sola omnium
possessionum immortalis scientia.

Wherefore (to conclude this point) learning keeps states from returning to
their former Chaos of confusion; Cic. pro Arch.
Aug. super psalm. 101.
it is the sun that enlightens the mind of Princes, and being removed,
government by disorder, turns into tyranny, and is obscured with the dark
clouds of ignorance.

Alphonsus Aragonum Rex, cum audisset quendam dixisse non decere principem
scire literas, fertur exclamasse: eam vocem bouis esse non hominis, cum a
rationis iuditio non profecta, sed insulso belluinae ruditatis instinctu
fuisset effusa.

SECTIO. III. Of the virtuous life of Princes: of the election of their
Counselors, officers, and servants.
THere be three inseparable companions that ought to accompany Princes; Impera
tibi, impera seruis, and impera subditis. Sociad.
First, the care of themselves; Secondly, the care of their subjects, Thirdly,
the care and judicious choice of Councillors, Virtutes Principis per omniu^
imperiorum corpora diffunduntur. Senec. de Clement.
officers, and servants. The first is the rule whereby the second and third are
squared; the good life of a Prince, is the fountain from whence the waters of
life, of country, city, and court flow: The Prince is the head, they the
members, he is of no less force in their politic body, then the head in a
natural; which being crasie or diseased, imparts sickness or death to the
weaker parts; Princes are of star-like influence upon inferior bodies; If the
air be infected with an epidemicall quality, they that dwell therein cannot
be very sound: If Princes be given to goodness and virtue, the subjects and
servants like apes imitate them; if vicious, (...). Epist. Ex Plut.
they exceed in all licenciousnesse and insolency. This exemplary life of
Princes was the ground-stone whereon Platoes Republicke was builded; Fla.
vopisc. in aurel.
old Solons faithful counsel to Princes, was to go before their people in
virtue and goodness, which precedence is the maintainer of piety, honesty, and
obedience: Secundum iudicem populi sic and ministri eius, Eccles. 10.2.
says the Wiseman.

Philostrat. lib. 9.
The Annals of all nations demonstrate, that whatsoever virtues or vices Princes
have followed, such were the patterns from whence the life of subjects and
servants were drawn. Ex dione cassio. lib. 9.
Efficacissimum est exhortationis genus Principem hoc facere quod ab alijs
fieri velit.

As this personal care is the first royal wisdom, and the frame of good
government; Opera danda, vt and Princeps suos mores integros and incorruptos
praestet reipublicae and quoad licet omnes subditos, proceres, aulicos ac
ministros sui similes habeat. Eras. in stit prin.
so is the wise election and making choice of counsel and helps (for
supporting the heavy burden of a diadem) the next neighboring virtue. Certum
est Principem non posse sua scientia cuncta complecti, itaque conciliari eorum
quae inter homines sunt diuinissimum est.

Princes then are first to consult with that supreme King by whom they reign;
he is Magni consilij Angelus; admirabilis consiliarius: Esa. 9.6. Humana
consilia castigantur, qua^do Coelestibus praeferu^tur. Max. lib. 1.
without this counsel all other is erroneous and full of danger. David
consulebat dominum antequam facta ardua agrediretur.

Next unto divine consultation, the help of counselors and fit persons (for
seconding so weighty a charge) offers it self to the judicious view of
Princes, and wherein the following cognizances are to be observed: First, that
such as are admitted, to so honorable a place, be religious fearing God,
Ambros. 3. de offic.
and of upright life, Consiliorum gubernaculum lex diuina, and in consilijs
acquirendis plurimum adiungit vitae probitas: Secondly, Principi co^sule non
dulciora sed optima Solon. apud Laert.
that they be fidi rerum hominumque periti, faithful in counsel, skilful in
affairs and conditions of people. Thirdly, that they be free of flattery;
tantum nocet adulatio in consilijs, quantum veritas consilij. Fourthly, that
they may be wise, grave, well affected and seen in matters of State, of good
experience, and such as by their various fortunes have learned the art of
counselling: Joan. Pall. par. 1. ca. 9.
Mihi fortuna multis rebus ereptis, vsum dedit been suadendi, says
Mithridates. Fifthly, counselors must be calm and humble, (ever shunning
foolish ambition and downethrowing pride. Consulta^ oportet, operari velociter:
consulere autem tarde Arist. Eth 6. Consiliarij sint stabilitate solidi. ne
moneantur, timore: amore, vel cupiditate, in consilijs dandis, lib. 5. Histor.
tripart.
) But well advised and free in delivering their counsel, and full of courage
in the execution of those things, that do concern the weal of their
Sovereign and state. Sixthly, they are to be constant in their actions and
deliberations; Prudens and sapiens non semperit vno gradu, tamen semperit vna
via. Seventhly, that they be modest in their gesture and actions; Nullius
seruilis sententiae sponte authors, and quoties necessitas ingrueret prudenter
moderantes.

Adeo occultum tenebatur co^silium apud Romanos, vt arcana Patrum conscripta
multis seculis nemo Senatorum enunciauerit. Val. lib: 3. cap. 5.
Lastly, because secrecy is the key of the rich cabinet, wherein counsel is
enclosed, Kings are to be careful that their councillors be secret and
close in matters consulted upon. Taciturnitas optimum atque tutissimum rerum
gerendarum vinculum, quia res magnae non possunt sustineri ab eo cui tacere
grave est.

These be the rare rich robes, wherein councillors are to be invested; whereof
Princes are to take such notice that none be admitted to so eminent dignity,
without their wedding garments: Consiliarius tibi sicvnus ex mill Eccles. 6.
That (if it be possible) they may be either well known to the Prince, or by
his diligent inquiry tried by the touchstone of good fame. Singuli decipere and
decipi possunt, nemo omnes neminem omnes fefellerunt. Next unto the election of
councillors, succeeds the choice of followers, officers, and servants;
wherein there qualities, places, and number is to be considered: For the
first, Psalm. 101.
King David leads the way to succeeding Kings: Ambulans in via Domini mihi
ministrabit; Let them be of the faithful of the land, virtuous, diligent and
honest in the discharge of their places, bending all their studies promptly,
Plat. 7. de rep. Arist. 5. 6. Pol. Thucid. 6. Plut. in Pol.
carefully to advance the weal and honor of their Sovereign; they that are
in most eminent places, and nearest to the persons of Kings, as they ought to
be well educated, generously inclined, endued with wit and discretion: so must
they not think that all men are borne for them, and they for no man; but that
the love they owe to their country, ties them (as feeling members of one body)
modestly, and in a fit time to offer up the griefs, or reasonable suites of
such subjects whose condition, or place, admits them not to the presence of
Princes.

Lastly, wisdom advises all sort of followers of Princes, (from the Cedars
to the shrubs) to shun softness, delicacy, Et qui mollia gestant in domibus
regum sunt, Math. 12. Has pofundas vitioru^ radices euellat princeps. Et
Colloq. Ger. Nou. Agricol. in proverb. Ger.
and idleness; to abandon all such vices as are the poison of Country and
Court: Such are Atheism, blasphemies, voluptuousness, flattery, detraction,
hypocrisy, and other such stains of Court, as Agricola wishes to be far
removed from the Courts of Christan Princes; and which he points out thus:
Fides, honestas, humilitas, ac veritas
Pudor decens, and mentis alma castitas,
Simplex nitentis pectoris prudentia,
Integritas, and omne virtutis iubar:
Ex principum modo palatijs procul
Fugere quorum (proh dolor) vices gerunt
Fraus aetra, perfidia, procacitas, sales,
Calumniae, palpatio, ronchi, doli,
Naesuta sanna, scomma, ludus aleae,
Potationum crebra concertatio
Summi nihil dei metus perpenditur,
Curatur and nihil respectius vltimi
Fati, nihil tormenta dira tartari.


The last observation is in the number of attendants and servants, Quint. Curt.
wherein Princes (with Alexander) may more safely make choice of few and
sufficient, Ael. Spart. Minus iniucunda est aula, quam infinita famulorum
maxim seruilium capitum, parasitoru^, Lurconum and scurrarum multitudo
complet. Eras. de instit. Prin.
then (with Xerxes) of confused multitude of parasites, false lovers, or
ignorant followers, and the reasons be these:

First, as the most populous feast (although most suptuously prepared) is full
of clamors and incombrances, is troublesome to the master, and oftimes
ministers discontent to the guests: So populous courts are ever so interlarded
with servile, illiberall, thrasonicall, intruding and unprofitable spirits,
that for their own ends haunts the Court, and (although maintained with great
charge) are ever subject to quarrelling, wrangling, envy, and coffeehouse,
thereby enforcing Princes to leave their kingly Sovereignty, In infinita
aulicorum multitudin sunt Versipelles, exploratores, qui Latebras aularu^ omnes
excutiunt co^silia quae nouerint produnt. Petrar. dial. 22.
and become painful spectatours, diligent mediators over them, whom they
ought to command. Secondly, where there be many followers, the most secret
affairs of Kings are (by cunning of corrupt flatterers, spies, and
intelligenciers) exposed upon the rocks of discovery, and parat-like tongues
of the fame spreading vulgar. Thirdly, many attendants (by the prodigal
exhausting of revenues) so disables Princes, that (without emptying their
coffers, and impayring the public good) they can never satiat the waste and
inexpleble bellies of all such followers. Fourthly, Arist. 5. ex dione Cassio
Val. max. lib. 9.
Paucos seruos been regere difficile, plurimos impossible est: As it is
difficill to govern few well; so it is impossible to keep many within the
precinct of loyalty and obedience.

(...). li. 2. fol. 70.
To shut up all, the kingly structure of Court, ought to be a pattern of
virtues, is builded upon the exemplary virtues of Princes, strengthened and
vpholden by the faithful advice of honorable counselors; preserved and
garnished by true hearted subjects, and domestickes: is ruined or defaccd by
such of those, as make other use of their places, then that to which they were
ordained* of who^ Horace thus complains. Orat. 1. Epist. 15.


Pernicies, and tempestas, barathru^que macelli
Nos numerus sumus, and fruges consumere nati,
Sponsi Penelopes, nebulones alcinioque
In cute curanda plus aequo operata iuue^tus,
Cui pulchru^ fuit, in medios dormire dies, and
Ad strepidu^ citharae cessatum ducere cura^.
SECTIO. IIII. What general observations the happy and quiet government of a
Prince requires.
THese be the chief observations that are necessary for the right tempering
of the actions of Princes: Greg. apud Job.
and attaining to a wished calm amidst the tempestuous seas, wherein they
daily sail;

First, that their desires be consonant to reason, then which there is nothing
that more beseemes the dignity of Kings.

Cic. 1. offic.
Secondly, that they wisely estimate, the weight of matters in hand, lest more
or less care be taken then is needful.

Thirdly, that iudiciously they moderate those things which do belong to the
dignity, or indignity of affairs, neither coming short, or exceeding a
Princely decorum.

Fourthly, that they be courageous in suffering: free hearted in giving:
thankful in rewarding: merciful in pardoning, and (setting aside their
private respects) refer all to the public good: Plato. de rep.
Vt tutela sic procuratio reipublicae, ad vtilitatem eorum qui comissi sunt,
non ad eorum quibus comissa est, gerenda est.

Fifthly, that Princes manure the whole body of their Empire, by the equal
distribution of justice, lest by laboring to make one part too fertile, they
leave other parts barren: Totum corpus reipublicae cura, ne dum partem aliquam
tuearis reliquas deseras.

Lastly, Princes are to make use of the worthy counsel, that the Philosopher
did give to Candicius the Theban: which was, Epist. in ad. Eand. Epist. 9.
that men of mature age, gravity, and upright judgment, might be his
Deligates and helpers: that young men might go to the wars, or be otherwise
virtuously employed. That women might keep within doors: for (said he) if
old men sit by the fire: young men be given to idleness; and women go about
men's affairs, the Commonwealth shall never be without danger, neither thy
person without pain. Principis est, pro salute Reipublicae and noua
excogitare, and antiqua restituere.

SECTIO. V. By what means the generous minds of Princes are known.
ALthough Solomon says, Cor regis non perscrutabile sicut alitudo Coeli and
incomprehensibile, Prou. 25.
sicut profundtas terrae: Yet as the powerful planets of heaven, and the
fruits of the earth works upon, and nourishes inferior bodies; so be there
many heavenly influences and signs whereby the generous minds of Princes are
made known to their subjects: some whereof I will shortly touch.

First, the true generous mind, of Princes, is known by their due respect to
the Laws of their Maker and Supreme King: Solomon pe^tit a deo sapientiam ad
regendu^ populum dei, cui dedit Dominus, Cor sapiens and intelligens 3. Reg. 15.
with Solomon they are earnest with God, that their chief wisdom may be in
his obedience, their delight in his commandments, that in their own time
justice and peace may flourish, and that their posterity after them may be
worthy to sit in the chair of of David.

Secondly, the mind of true borne Princes, Senec. Epist. 15.
is not capable of base and sordid actions; but is delighted in high and rare
designs: Senec. Epist. ^9.
for as the flame of fire (whose nature is to ascend) cannot be depressed: So
the mind of such Princes, the more noble, Macrob: lib. 2. cap. 4. Alezander
nihil animo nisi grande concepit. Senec. de benef. li. 2.
the more inclined to Princely heroicke actions; ever contemnes those things,
which the vulgar holds most dear. Principis animus quo vehementior, eo
nobilior and actuosior est; number foelix qui ad meliora hunc impetum dedit, and
extra ius ditionemque fortunae se profusit; Contemptor eorum quae vulgus
admiratur: Their care is to be approved of the good, Eras. instit. Princ.
such they prefer, such are their counselors, such are always about them;
they are never (tyrant-like) cruel, nor vindictiue; nothing offends them more
then the spoil of unjust officers or corrupt judges. Pescennius imperator
Consiliarijs suis ne vel aliquam onerandi pauperes occasionem haberet, addidit
sallaria, dicens, iudicem ac officiarium nec dare debere nec accipere.

D^og. Laert.
Thirdly, such Princes suffer not good men, basely to prostitute themselves, or
seruily demand justice; but are willingly inclined to give access and hearing.
Aristippus, being reproved by his friend, for lying so long at the feet of
Dionisius; answered: I am not in the fault, but Dionisius that has cares in
his feet.

Bero^l de opt. stat. Baptist. Fulg. lib. 4. Cic. ad Brut.
This Princely mind is ever given to follow the works of light, as charity,
peace, meekness, goodness and temperance; is wholly addicted to shun vices
and follow virtue; wherein (ever keeping a golden mean) they are meek and
merciful; but so as by lenity they nourish not the vices of their people:
severe, not inclined to tyranny, but in repressing injuries, and terifying
others from offering them. Beroal. de opt. Stat.
Qui veterom fert iniuriam, inuitat nouam, si quis primus laeserat debitas
dedisset penas, caeteri ab iniuria temper assent. Chilon of Lacedemon advises
Princes so to moderate their actions, as they be neither fearful to their
inferiors, or contemned of their equals; the one savors of tyranny, the
other of pusillanimity.

Fourthly, the mind of Princes is given to true liberality: Prou. 10.
Goodness and truth vpholdes the throne of Kings, base auaryce is the (...),
chief of evils, and most distant from true noble minds.

It was written upon the tomb of queen Semiramis; Quisquis Rex pecunijs
eguerit, operto monumento quantum voluerit, Plut. in apo.
capiat: Covetous Darius having taken the city, (expecting great store of
riches) caused the monument to be opened, wherein he did find nothing, but
this following inscription, upon the other side of the stone, Ni vir malus
esses, and pecunia inexplebilis, haud mortuorum loculos moueres; whereof the
moral is, that Princes are not curiously to search, Eras. 7. apo.
neither affect perishing riches: Auarus Princeps, facultates suas non
possidet, sed ipsum possident.

Lastly, the constant high mind of Princes, is not troubled with unsettled
resolutions, Eras. instit Princ.
but at all times is armed with true fortitude: they are neither puffed up with
prosperity neither dejected with adversity, their maiesticall countenance is
ever one, at home or abroad.

Rebus aduersis animosus atque
Fortis appare, sapienter idem
Contrahe vento nimium secundo
Turgida vela,
This Princely mind simpathises with such as are of upright heart, constant
and true. Placeant regibus, Prou. 16.
labia iusta and veraces diliguntur. The true friendship of Damon, and Pithias
was so pleasant to Dionisius (although a tyrant) that he not only pardoned the
offense of the one, Val max cap 7.
but desired to be admitted into their friendship. A poor man exhibiting his
bill fearfully to Caesar, was by him thus checked, or rather comforted.
Ma^rob. lib. 2 cap 9.
An putas te assem dare Elephanto.

In one word, the kingly minds of good Princes, are free of all such taints and
violent passions, as praecipitates majesty; are endowed with true patience,
which is none of the least Princely virtues; and was so eminent in Augustus
Caesar, that he could abide the biting jests of his meanest subjects. Conuitia
si irascare agnita videntur, spreta exolesount. When Agathocles, Plut. in apo.
the son of a Potter (crowned with regal dignity) had besieged a certain
town, and entered the same, and had sold such for slaves, as had unjustly
depraved him; he did meekely tell them, (if they did so any more) he would
complain to their masters. Non homines occidit, sed ciuiliter illis exprobarit
and intempestiuam maledicentiam, and seruitutem maledicentiae praemium.

SECTIO. VI. Of Nobility.
WHere the seed of honor has a true descent from nobility of ancestors, a
ground of virtue, springing by noble deserts, continued with wisdom, and
maintained with care, a fruitful harvest, and plentiful winter cannot but
follow: for as subjects are most easily inclined to follow ancient nobility;
so oftimes virtue follows nobility of blood, (...). lib. 2. fol. 97
and is the chief means whereby Princes attain to the due respect of
neighboring friends and subjects. Yet this nobility of ancestors is not so to
be relied upon, as if it could add any thing (except seconded by goodness)
to the dignity of Princes: Salust. in Iul.
For nobility is the act of time, and dies with the Father, if the Son be not
alike virtuous. Chrysostom. in Math.
Nobilitas cognatorum non valet, nisi fuerimus nos ipsi boni; Nobility then by
descent (without virtue) is rather an imaginary and vulgar opinion, then real
and true nobility: Nam genus and proauos and quae no^ fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco.


It is a ridiculous and ostentiue humor, Francis. Petr. dial. 6.
to glory in the merit of others virtue; for certainly the splendor of
ancestors, is the greatest stain, that can taint degenerating posterity; the
very name of a Prince, imposes a necessity of well doing upon Kings; to this
purpose Chrysostom says well, Ille clarus, ille sublimis, ille tunc integram
nobilitatem suam putet, qui dedignatur seruire vitijs and ab eis non vult
superari. Iphicrates, the son of a Shoo-maker (preferred to Imperial
dignity) being taxed by degenerate Hermodius) for the baseness of his birth;
Eras. apo.
answered, I am the beginner of my nobility; but thou the extinguisher of
thine. Caius Marius did glory in the multitude of wounds he had received in
defense of his Country; not in the glorious monuments or images of his
Ancestors. Iuuenal. ^at. 5.
Iuuenall did hang Publius Plancus (who used to boast himself descended from
the noble family of Drusus) by the nose; intimating to all succeeding proud
glistering Thrasoes (that like Statues are good for nothing but to look upon,
or talk of the nobility, powerfulness, virtues and riches of their
Ancestors) that they are worthy to be laughed at. Frontinus gave charge before
his death, that no monument should be built for him: For, said he, if I have
lived virtuously, my memory shall not perish; Eras. 8. apo.
neither needs any Monument of Gold, Marble, or Brass: but if I dye
viciously I am worthy of none; they shall rather revive my infamy then
illustrate my memory. Qui vere clarus videri velit ne ostentet sculptas aut
coloribus ad vmbratas imagines, in quibus si quid verae laudis est, id pectori
debetur; sed potius virtutis monumenta moribus exprimat.

SETCIO. VII. Antidotes against the poisoning of vain glory, and ambitious
thoughts, that intoxicates the minds of young Princes.
ALthough greatness has ever many soothers in vice, Eras. instit. Prin.
persons of base condition, attending and hemming it round, with persuasions of
self conceit; yet is earthly glory a deceiuable picture drawn with false
colors, blemished with every breath, the work of fortune, blindly imparted to
the good and bad. On the contrary, the true survey of greatness, is a divine
work, and able to restrain the most powerful monarchs from the dangerous
paths of pride, tyranny, Plin. Paniger.
and ambitious aspiring. Supra non extra homines Princeps, non minus hominem se
quam hominibus praeesse cogitet. This serious examination has the true
original from the due consideration, what Princes are in their conception, in
their birth, in their life, and what they shall be after death: Is vitam aequa
lance pensitauerit qui semper fragilitatis humanae memor fuerit. Hiron. in Math.
They are (as all men) conceived in sin, borne naked, less able then many
more base creatures to take food, or help themselves: they live not only
exposed to humane diseases and worldly cares, to which private men are subject;
but to many miseries, from which the vulgar are exempted: after their death,
they must be food for worms, and again, (with all men) assume those same
bodies, and in them receive a correspondent reward, as they have used their
talent.

Princes are to consider, that all goodness is the free gift of God; Eras. in
Mil. Christ.
freely bestowed upon them, for the weal of them and their subjects: but every
disordered affection, proceeds from the corruption of nature, and enclineth
unto tyranny: They ought to think that their Vicegerency from God is their
greatest glory; Fortunam tua^ O Princeps, pressis manibus tene. lubrica, est,
nec in vito teneri potest; impone foelicitati fraenos, facilius eam Reges.
Curt. lib. 8.
that they are to exercise it but for a short time: that although they be
entitled to all such glorious titles as may exalt swelling pride; yet who
knows but to morrow they may be (where all kings before them are) the food
of Serpents and Worms. All flesh is but Dust and Ashes, and therefore has no
cause to be proud: It is like to the grass of the field, this day green to
morrow withered. Brittle is the greatness that fades in a moment. An ignoras
magnos arbores diu crescere, vna hora extirpari idem Curt.
If Princes had the wisdom of Solomon, the beauty of Absolon, the strength
of Sampson, the riches of Craesus, and the long life of Methusalem, what shall
all these failing vanities avail, except by a virtuous reign in this short
kingdom of cares, August. de natu. and gra.
they so dignifie themselves, that they may be entailed to an everlasting
kingdom of Joys. Where be the glorious shows of most powderfull Monarchs?
whose pride builded high aspiring Babylon, whose ambition one world could not
contain? Ambros. in exam.
where be the invincible Emperors that did overrule the world, the horse,
outlandish attire, number of attendants, leaders of troops and al other false
pleasures that did atttend upon pride? are they not turned into ashes? does not
the least push of death make shepherds and kings equal? was not the birth of
those great Cedars of Lebanon weak, their life inconstant, their death
putrefaction? look into their sepulchers, and discern who was a king, who was
a subject, who was rich, who was poor; find out (if thou can) the victor
from the conquered, the strong from the weak, the beautiful from the
deformed: or try some cause of humane arrogancy, Agap. ad Justin.
thou shall find pride and ambition neither amongst the counsels of the wise,
nor bodies of the dead. Factus es princeps in terra, ne ignores te ortum ex
terra ex puluere ad solium ascendere, atque in eundem puluerem discendere
necesse est.

SETCIO. VIII. How Princes ought to moderate their power.
THe due calling to mind that a Prince is homo (under which all worldly
miseries and vanities are comprehended) ought to bridle his power, and the
consideration that he is Deus, or, vice Dei, Gods vicegerent, ought to curb his
will. Memento ait mihi omnia in omnes licere. Suet.
Meminerit princeps non solum quantum sit tibi comissum sed quatenus fit
permissum. Quod libetlicet, is the dictum of a Tyrant, and the right mixture of
contraries, is the true temper of government, nothing being more hurtful to
authority, then untimely interchange of pressing and relaxing power. Vary
temperandum sceptrum and laxandae aut addendae imperij illae habenae. Plut. in
apo.
The arrogant presumption that all things are lawful, Diog. lat.
is the poison which once drunk, makes Kings abuse their authority and
incline to licentiousness and tyranny. Antigonus did severely check one of
his Courtiours who did suggest that all things were lawful for Kings. Not so
(by Jupiter) said he, only to tyrannous and barbarous Kings; but to me
nothing is lawful but that which is honest and just: authority is not given to
be the supplement of vice or the protection of tyrranny; but to be the defense
of virtue, and pattern of justice. A recte agendo vocati Reges, Greg. 11.
Moral.
quod recte agendo regale nomen obtinent amittunt peccando. The right tempering
of authority is sometimes to dull the edge of the imperial sword with leuitie
and mercy, Erasm. instit. prin.
which makes subjects more careful to offend. Other times kingly authority is
restrained from things that are lawful to others: (...). lib. 1. fol. 2.
errors in private persons are vices and blemishes in kings.

Finally, the affecting of justice, the flourishing estate of the commonwealth,
the modest life of subjects, contempt and hatred of tyrrannous liberty,
Argumentu^ recte gubernati regni, si subdito; videas locupletiores ac
vehementer modestos cura principis reditor. Rein. lor. Isocrat. ad Nicol.
voluptuous and superfluous abundance, wicked followers, and blindfolded
ignorance is the true extent of authority. Ne animum inducas tuum alios debere
honest vitam agere, regibus immodeste viuendi relicta licentia, sed ea sis
temperantia vt exemplum recte viuendi alijs constituas, compertum habens
subditorum mores prorsus ad similitudinem principis componi.

SECTIO. IX. Whose image good and bad Princes represent, by what Epithetes they
are known, and of their several actions.
Eras: 3. Apo
GOod Princes represent the image of God, Vt deorum cu^ sint optime natura
propriu^ est, benefacere omnibus, nocere nemini: ita princeps salutaris quo
nihil deo proprius, omnibus prodesse nemini stude incomodare. Plato. de repub.
ex Iulio polluc.
whose vicegerents they are; him they do imitate (to whom it is essential to
be goodness it self) in doing good to all, and incommodating none. They do
not (like wolves) prey upon their people, but cherish and protect them: they
punish but seldom, and then are unwillingly drawn to it; and therefore justly,
such Princes are entitled to the names, of fathers, religious, meek, gentle,
provident, just, humane, magnanimous, free, liberal, contemners of riches,
commanding and ouerruling their affections, of sound judgment, wise in
counsel, sober, Demost aapud Stob.
upright, firm, full of authoritity, princely Majesty and industry, careful
watchers over their people, ready to do good, slow to revenge, sure, constant,
inclined to justice, easy to give access, courteous in speech, loving the
obedient, lovers, procurers, keepers of peace, yet friends to soldiers, and (if
need be) can be both kings and captains. Such Princes are born to the good, do
live with the favor, and die with the regrate of all men.

On the contrary, if Apelles should delineate a tyrrannous wicked Prince, he
could not do drawit otherwise the^ by the pattern of the Prince of darkness, a
monstrous misshapen creature, an armed dragon with many eyes, Ex Erasm.
more teeth, sharp claws, insatiable belly, crammed with humane blood, every
way fearful, and offensive to all, but especially to good men, abusing his
power, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth. Such a Prince was Nero, such was
Caligula, such was Heliogabulus and many others, whose birth and life were
plagues to the world, and did justly merit the Epithetes of tyrants, ungodly,
cruel, savage, violent, auaritious, deuourers of their people: proud,
Tamerlanes Scitharum rex rogatus, quid tantum seuitiae indulgeret, toruo vultu
respo^disse fertur, anme hominem esse putas, an non potius dei iram ad hominum
perniciem in terris agentem. Sabel. de ir.
difficill in giving access, discourteous, irefull, terrible, slaves to lusts,
intemperate, inconsiderate, inhumane, unjust, light, unconstant, incorrigible,
contumelious, the authors of war, haters and disturbers of peace, borne to
be the ( Tamerlan like) scourges of the world, reigning with discontent, and
dying with applause of all good men.

As the Epithetes of good and wicked Princes are, so are their actions
different, Salust. in Caril.
the one aduances and Confirms the common good, preferres it to al private
respects: tyrrany aims altogether at their own private ends, neglects the
public good; either approving the detestable oath of Oliarchy, Plebem odio
persequemur and pro virili adnitemur vt illi sit male, Arist. pol. 5.
Or with arrogant Xerxes co^sulting upon affaiers rather to show their power;
then for the weal of their subjects: Eras. apo. 5.
Ne viderer meo consilio agressus contraxi, vos, interim mementote mihi
parendum magis quam suadendum. In a word the difference betwixt good and bad
Princes, is such, as is betwixt loving fathers, and rigorous Masters; the one
affectes the weal; and health of their children, the other the gain they make
by their slaves. Good Princes commands things that are profitable to the State,
Tyrants such as are pleasant, to their own humors. It is the glory of good
kings to follow virtue, of tyrants to embrace vice, of good Princes to be
secured by the love of their subjects, Isocrat de bell. fugien.
of tyrants by the strength of walls, and multitude of guards.

Finally, the frame, the actions and qualities of good Princes and Tyrants are
so unlike and different as God and Belial, Cicero offic. 3.
Light and Darkness, White and Black: so that there is no blessing under
heaven given to man more profitable then religious wise Princes, no greater
curse above hell, more pernicious then Tyrants, placed in authority.

I have insisted this far upon these diverse attributes and differences, that
thereby good Princes may be incited (at fit times) to peruse the Annals and
Histories of former times, wherein they may reap much fruit, (...). li. 2.
fol 93. Eccles. 1.
by conferring things past with things present, Nihil nouum sub sole, there
they shall find the true proportion, lively colors, and bright shining luster
of virtue, and the ugly deformed shape of black never dying infamy. Principibus
bonis nihil melius, contra nihil peius tyrrannis qui eius modi belluae sunt, vt
non alia sub sole portenta neque noxia, neque magis omnibus inuisa.

SECTIO. X. By what means a Prince may secure himself in his kingdom and
obtain the love of his subjects.
AS wisdom (which is the brightness of the everlasting light, the undefiled
myrror of the Majesty of God, and image of his goodness) is the sure ground of
the stately pillar of government: Prudentiae ad omnis res humanos vsus, sed ad
imperium maxim quod sine ea non solum infirmum sit sed nullum. Lip. lib. 3.1.
so is the favor of subjects, the maintainer of so glorious building, and the
kingdoms that are governed by the virtue of Princes, and love of subjects are
most quiet and firm. The most vndomeable beasts are made more easily mylde, by
gentle familiar usage, then by roughness or stripes; and the love of Subjects
(without which Princes can never be secured) is sooner conciliate, by
benevolence, then by unbridled authority and cruelty. Mat. 5.
Blessed are the meek in heart for they shall possess the inheritance of the
earth, Psalm. 36.
and shall be delighted in the multitude of peace, was not written in vayn, but
for the instruction of kings, and establishing of kingdoms, by the fruits of
wisdom, not by the effects of Phalarisme. Diog. lib. 2
Ciuibus placere stude, habet id multum gratiae, was the worthy sentence of
Bias: for (said he) if Princes should desire to equal or exceed Cecrops in
nobility, Policrates in happiness, Craesus in riches, Xerxes in armies,
Caesar in victories, and Pompey in tryumphs: Eras. in paneg. ad Philip.
no helps can so avail them as the united and true love of subjects, which is
the impregnable strength, and never emptyed treasure of kings; Claudiam in
uonsul. honor.
Non sic excubiae, non circumstantia pila quam tutator amor.

The Empire of kings over their subjects is compared to the command of fathers
over their children, or masters over their scholars: Senec. de Clement.
as he is no loving father that beats his son for every slight fault, and no
less cruel master that punishes his scholar for the natural defects of his
sight or hearing. So many rigorous precede^ts of punishment are no less
disgraceful to a king, Ferina est rabies sanguine gaudere and vulneribus,
abiecto homine in Siluestre animal transire. Rhen. Lor.
then many buryals to a Physician. Seueritas amittit assiduitate authoritatem.
The more remiss kings govern, the more they are honored, loved, and obeyed:
no virtue becomes them better then clemency; neither more surely binds the
hearts of people. What is more joyful then to rule with the applause of men?
Who dares imagine any harm against that Prince that is meek and merciful,
under whose sheltring wings Justice, Peace, Security and Honors flourish?
Eccl. 10:15. Luke 1.52. and 14.11.
Meekness and Mercy establishes the throne of a king: Pride and Cruelty
overthrows the seat of a Tyrant. Psalm.
Seeds diuum superborum distruxit D us, and sedere fecit mites pro eis. The
house of the wicked shall be ouerturned, but the tabernacles of the godly shall
flourish. Let the short reign and tragical end of Dionysius, Caligula,
Vitellius, and many others, (whose tyrrannous life hastened their wished, yet
immature death) confirm that no tyranny is of long continuance, that such are
much deceived that dreams stabilitie, Eccles. 10.10. and 18.19. 1. Sam. 2.7.8.
Thales Milesius interroganti. quid difficile sene^ inquit, videre tyra^num. ap.
Stob. Cic. 5. offic.
or security to Princes without goodness. Existimatum demum te tuto regnare
cum volentibus imperas: the Prince that wants the favor of his people has
lost his chief guard and that Prince that is fearful to many, must of
necessity be afraid of many. Non sunt adamantina imperij vincula quae
Dionysius Tyrannus dictitabat. ex Plut.
Dionysius the Tyrant excruciated with this fear, did make choice to suffer
the pain of singeing the hair of his beard with hot fire, rather then commit
his conscious life to the trust of a Barbors rasor. Acl. Soart.
Alexander Pharees never entered his Queens chamber before diligent seareh was
made, that no private weapon were hidden in it: yet (if we will wade into the
shallow brooks of the heathen) we shall find that the lives of these and
thousands more of heathen Princes was tyrannous, and their death miserable: but
we Christians learn our lesson from our maker. Mihi vindicta, vltio mea est,
ego retribuam, says the Lord. Deuteronomy. 32. Romans 11.
We must think our sins the just cause of our afflictions, and that God
sometimes sends wicked kings to the punishment of wicked people; Dabo reges in
surore meo. Osee. 13. Qui malum rectore^ patitur Deum non accuset, quia sui
fuit meriti, peruersi rectoris subiacere ditioni. Gre. sup. Job.
and as God gives them for the punishment of sin: so must Gods people only
by repentance and amendment, submit themselves to his pleasure, in whose hands
are the hearts of kings. It is not lawful to think an ill thought of kings,
far less to lay hands on the Lords anointed. Potestas omni, sieve bona, sieve
mala, a deo est, Itaque potest tibus sieve bonis, sieve malis honortribuendus
est. Augu. contra Manichae
Let not the hand but the heart of a traitor be acursed, let his flesh be
carnage to the fowls of the air, his bowels sacrificed to the hangma^, and
his memory eternised upon the tables of black infamy. But to come to my
purpose; Rein. Lor.
Isay a Prince has many gates to receive the favor and love of his people,
amongst which I shall shortly point at four.

First, because pride is hateful to all men; Eccles 10.7. Cic. de or^t. Senec.
Epist. 18.
Princes shall shun the envy that comes thereby, if they do not boast of their
high fortune, power, riches, or what else is more dear unto them, accounting
no otherwise of them, Plut. in. Pol.
then as of the uncertain goods of fortune; and that they can avail them no
further, but according to the good or bad use of them. Potentiae, in insuetudo
^ungatur, pi^l^ag apud ^^ob.
Modesty and humility are no less eminent in Princes then subjects, and are
the actractiue Adamants that draws the love of subjects to their king: Greg.
moral. 17.
we do see the motion of the Sun is most slow, when it is highest in his
Zodiake: So the more highly greatness is promoted, it ought to be the more
settled and calm. Solomon (to this purpose) gives advice; My son, Eccles. 3.
in all thy works embrace meekness, and thou shall be loved above the glory
of men.

Secondly, there be two things peculiar unto kings, of themselves just and
lawful, whereof the timely or untimely pressing avails much to conciliate
the love or dislike of subjects. The first is, imposing and raising of
subsidies for the public good, and maintaining of the great charges of kings:
although they be as due to them from their people, as justice, clemency, Rom
13.6. Mat. 22.21. Mar. 12.17. Luc. 20.
and protection is from Princes to subjects: yet are they to be imposed as
seldom as may be, (...). lib. 2. de fol. 99.
and only when the weighty affairs of Princes and state so requires. Jeroboam
by imposing heavy burthe^s and exactio^s upon his people was punished by the
cutting off ten tribes from his kingdoms; Pater meus cecedit vos flagellis ego
cedam vos scorpionibus. 1. Reg. 11.
whereby is intimated to future posterity that altaints of (tirantlike)
oppression and base avarice (ever liable to contempt) are from kings far to be
removed. Phil. Com. 10.
The other observation is in making of new, or reforming ancient laws or
customs crept into abuse, Xen. in Cir.
or removing such as at the institution were profitable, yet for the present
time, are either hurtful or not necessary: Legis legibus non recreatae
marcescunt. Plat. de leg.
in all which Princes are to keep such te^perate, mean, as their proceedings
may be warranted by the general consent of the most wise and best sort of
subjects, Arest. 5. pol
and freed from all suspicion of particular ends or rashness. Nouum omne, Dion.
22. Thuc. 6.
and quod incognitu^ est, suspectu^ est. The very name of nouelty is often times
more offensive to state, the^ the benefit that co^mes thereby profitable. For
this cause Princes sometimes tolerate such things as without the prejudice of
the Commonwealth, and their royal dignity, may be suffered: otherwise things
that have had long continuace are by little and little to be reformed. Si quid
eiusmodi erit vt ferri possit aut tollerare conueniet, aut commode ad meliorem
vsum deflectere.

Thirdly, if Princes show themselves affable and exorable not vindictiue and
severe in the rigorous execution of laws for every light offense; they shall
much obliege the favor and obedience of their subjects: for as impunity
begets contempt of laws: so frequent punishment ingenerates hatred,
senseless stupiditie, carelessness, and contentious repugnancie. Marcus
Antonius was so familiar with his subjects that he did lovingly name some
father, some son, according to their dignities and qualities. This Princely
familiarity made him so beloved, Quae hoc tempore habemus bona ob nullam aliam
causam adepti sumus, qua^ ob praestita^ obedientia^ principi. Pith. apud Stob.
Salust. ad Caesar.
in his life time and at his death so condoled with the brinish tears of his
sorrowful subjects, that it is recorded to his never dying praise: Cum
extremum diem clausisset, tantus illius amor, eo die regij funeris claruit, vt
nemo illum non plangendum censuerit.

Fourthly, because animaduersion in the lives and manners of people, even in
matters whereof penal laws takes little or no hold, is powerful in
conquering the love of subjects, and to eternise the memoryes of Princes with
true glory. They are carefully to curb blasphemy, luxury, Iuuenal. Sa. 6.
Tacit. 12 Anal.
Drunkenness, prodigality, idleness, and such other vices as are (in all ages
and sorts people) repugnant to godliness or good manners. Prauas arts malasque
libidines ab iuuentute prohibebu^t, a senibus eas voluptates quas eorum aetas
sine dedecore non attingit, ab vniuersa plebe otium. They are carefully to
preserve their people from bloodsucking usury, Vbi diuitiarum cupido inuasit,
neque disciplina, neque bonae arts satis pollent itaque merito princeps
pecuniaestudium tollet, aut quo ad res feret minuet, atque alligabit illud
vtbibus vetus, faenebre malum. Arist. pol. 7. Tacit. 6. anal Plin. paneg.
and exorbitant extortion, so often accursed in Gods sacred word, and accounted
(with traitrous Judas his 30. pieces) the price of blood. Lastly, Princes are
to forbid all sumptuous riot and prodigally profused charges in building: ne
nimis struant, aut instruant: in house keeping or diet: ne luxus mensae
profusis sumptibus exerciatur. That in clothing a deeent modesty amongst all
degrees, sexes and ages be kept, Ne vestis promiscua viris and faeminis,
nobilibus, and plebeijs, nam conuiuiorum luxuria and vestium, aegrae ciuitatis
indicia sunt.

SETCIO. XI. Princes ought be easy in giving access, and ready to hoare the
complaints of the oppressed and poor
THe hearing of the causes of subjects the just ballancing and determining
them, (...). lib. 2. fol. 35. Dives rogans in tormentis, non exauditur, quia
rogantem pauperem non exaudiuit in terris. August. hode diuit.
is the chief part of a kings office. Mercy and truth establishes the throne
of kings, but he that regards not the cry of the poor, shall cry and not
be heard. To this purpose S. August. advises Princes to be easy in giving of
access, and hearing of the complaints of all men, Quia inauditi atque
indefensi tanquam innocents pereunt. Moses did hear the people from morning
til evening. Exodus 18.19
Solomon did wisely determine the cause of a poor prostitute harlot. 1. Reg.
3.17
His father David did delight in upright judgment. Suet. in Caes
But to leave this divine Ocean, and come to the shallow rivers of the heathen;
Octauius Augustus did sometimes spend whole days, and best part of the night
in the administration of justice. Alexander Seuerus did the like, Acl. Spart.
and did severely punish such subordinate Magistrates as were found slack in
their office. Methridates did minister justice in 21. languages to the people
under his Empire. Imperatorem stantem mori oportet, hoc est in causis
audiendis, rebusque componendis strenuum and erectum vsque at extremum vitae
momentum oportere. As the people do much magnify and honor such Princes as
willingly do hear their complaynts and determine their causes: So do they
contemptuously (although secretly) hate those, whose pride, tyranous answers
and difficill access, do unworthily challenge the name of Empire. Amongst
these was Demetrius who (after two years attendance) did return the Athenian
Ambassadors without answer; and at another time did publish, Mulier quae dam
Adrianum Caesarem rogauit vtse audiret cui ille, otiu^ mihi non est, illade
inde clamans ait, noli ergo imperar. Ex Plut.
that upon a certain day ensuing he would hear the complaints of such as were
grieved: but when at the prefixed time he had liberally received their
petitions, he did throw them all into the river: Axis, by which careless
discovery of himself he did mightily exasperate and alieanate the hearts of his
people. Good princes are to direct their course (by the compass of a good
conscience) a quite contrary way they are not to throw the groans of their
subjects in the rivers of oblivion, Beroal. de opt. statu.
neither in the all consuming fire of carelessness, or commit them to such
persons who endeares more their own private gain then the public good: but
are to appoint them seasons of hearing, and return them loving and Princely
answers. Erasm. instit. princ.
If sometime multiplicity of state affairs withdraw them, they are careful
that their deligates neither carelessly defer hearing, nor coueteously exact
upon suitors. Persarum reges, domi abditi vita^ exigebant, omniaqueregni nego
tia rejiciebant in co^siliarios ac officiarios. Eras. ee instit. princ. Senec.
de clement.
The obscure life of the Persian kings, and committing all the affairs of
state, to subordinate persons, was never approved of the wise, and ever
recorded to their discredit. Lastly, (to trusse up al) it is the glory of kings
to imitate those famous Princes that did equally administer justice, give easy
access, loving answers, strengthening the weak, and rewarding the virtuous,
and punishing the wicked, and were careful that their Deligates did second
their expectation in the trust committed to them-This kingly function rauisheth
the hearts of subjects to their Prince, and freeth Princes from the
prophetical sensure. Eccles. 27.
Pricincipes tui infideles, socij farum, omnes diligunt munera, sequuntur
retributiones: Pupillo non indicant and causa viduae non ingreditur ad illos.

SECTIO. XII. Of the necessity of Princes knowledge in the affairs of their
Empire, and presence (so far as is possible) in the administration of Justice.
THe ancient Hierogliphicke description of Princes, Deus in coelo constituit
sole^, omnia fulgore suo per. lustrantem. ita inter homines principem, cuius
oculorum perspicacitas luceret in populo, cunctisque perspiceret colocauit.
Just. Caesar Homer. Illiad.
(picturing scepters with eyes) did mystically contain the most necessary
parts of the office of kings; whose quick seeing eyes must see into the most
dark corners of their dominions. The Sun is the eye of the world, but sees
not, but the king gives light to his subjects: must with Eagles eyes look upon
all subjects, pry into all Courts, observe Judges and Officers; lest the golden
cloaked reasons of the rich or corrupted ouersway the innocence of the poor.
Princes are the keepers, or (as Homer calls them) shepherds of their people.
Studeat imprimis princeps regionum ac ciuitatum situm, consuetudines, ingenia,
instituta; populos cognoscere. Erasm. de instit. princip.
Ne subditi a Deo optimo maximo sibi concrediti a lupis rapacibus deuorentur:
They are exactly to know the true estate and peccant humors of their people;
to which they may easily attain, by Geography, History, frequent progress,
and sure intelligence: by these they shall learn the situation of their
several Countries or Provinces, the customs, Princeps ta^ acute quam serpens
Epidaurus cernere debet, quid in cancellarijs, quid in dicasterijs agant, an
Justice iudicijs, iudicetur populus. Macrob. li. 2 Deligat princeps quosda^, vel
aulicorum, vel subditorum, non a^uaros, sed fide charitate conspicuos, quos
clanculu^ ad singulos regni terminos ableget, expiscatum and perceptum omnes
vel relaxationes vel agrauationes imperij. Arist. Pol.
lives and manners of their people. It is written to the praise of King Ierion,
that he had many hands, more feet, and but one mind, by which he governed
his people: That many other wise Princes have secretly employed such, of whose
integrity and love to the public good they were well assured, to take true
information of the remissness or strictness of government: in what estate
public and private affairs did remain: how the people were affected to
obedience and virtuous living: whether Judges, Magistrates and Officers were
inclined to Justice and upright dealing, to the public good, or their private
gain: that after true notice thereof, Presentia principis facit omnia iusto
ordine procedere Arist. Aeco^.
such mysty clouds as did over shadow their people, might (by the Sunshine of
reformation) be dispersed. But although this secret inquiry by others is
praise worthy, yet is the presence of princes (so far as is possible) of much
more consequence. Non tam feliciter procedunt, Si magna paruis licet componere,
vt oculus Cresini fertilissimum agrum: ita principis oculus paruam tempublicam
florentissimam reddit Agricol. in proverb. Ger.
quae oculis agis alienis, quam quae oculo domini praesente administrantur.
Cajus Furius Cresinus being accused for the practicing of sorcery, in
multiplying the increase of a little field of corn, answered, Omnia
instrumenta mea rustica in forum affero, venificia mea Quirites haec sunt: Then
laid he open his diligence, his pains and continual presence, Principe
dormitante, suboriri solent impostores fraudulenti, fenaeratores auari, and
exactores iniusti, qui suis stipendijs nunquam contenti, miseros subditos
concutiunt exhauriunt and perdunt. Rhein. Lor.
then which there is nothing more beseeming Princes in their royal office,
neither more profitable for subjects in the augmentation of their private
gain: for to what greater indignity or contempt can Princes be liable then to
cecity and senseless stupiditie? by which they do not feel the abuses,
whereby (under the veil of their princely authority) the poor are oppressed,
the sweat and often times the blood of the miserable and weak is exhausted, the
possessions, houses, fields, goods of widows and orphants (by these that in
wickedness and authority are powerful) are either deceytfully purloyned, or
violently bereft. By the strickt observation or careless neglect of this
princely suruay, many famous kingdoms have flourished, or been utterly
ruinated: amongst which I will illustrate this point, by a short view of the
causes of the large dominions, long continuance, and sudden overthrow of the
Roman Empire.

Romani propter oculatissimam in publices functiones intentionem atque
conseruatas iustitiae leges, Val. Max. lib. 4.
sapientissimi atque optimi duces vbique gentium caelebrati sunt; Rectores ac
domini totius ferme terrarum orbis floruerunt tantisper dum Iustitiae studium,
atque concordiae in imperio suo non emarcuerunt: at postquam ambitio, simultas,
luxus, ac pecuniae libido, (quae generis humani certissimae pestes) ingruerunt,
statim praepotens illud imperium, praeclara dignitas, atque gentis omnibus
stupenda Populi Romani maiestas, ad nihilum redacta corruit, in memorabile
cunctis mundi gubernatoribus exemplum.

SECTIO. XIII. Of Laws and Justice.
ALL humane laws may be reduced to a threefold division, viz. to the laws of
nature, Egip. de leg:
the laws established, and to the ancient costomary laws. That which the
ancients did call the law of nature (as to do good and shun evil, August. de
Ciuit. dei.
do to others, as we would others should do to us) needs no great learning,
because natural reason draws men to the knowledge of it.

Aul. Gel. lib. 5.
The laws established are such as are prescribed by Emperors and Kings for the
gouerntment of their people, and do consist, partly in reason, partly in
opinion.

Customary laws are such, as by little and little, Haelinand. lib. 7.
have bin brought among people, and have no other force, but in being well or
ill observed. In short, we call the law of nature that wbich reason commands;
the law established that which is written and confirmed: customary Law that
which has long been, and now is in use.

Other ancient lawyers subdiuides laws, Gratian, lib. 3.
in laws of nations, civil laws, consular laws, public laws, military
laws, Roman laws, and laws of Magistrates.

The law of nations is a law by all people generally observed: Papinian. lib. 3.
(as to seize upon that which has no owner, to defend their country) it is
called the law of nations, because amongst all nations it has bin generally
received and observed.

Justin. Cod: 4.
The civil law has the institution from the right instruction and prosecution
of process: to assign time, to answer, accuse, prove, oppose, cite, allege,
report, conclude, give sentence and to execute it, to the end that every one
might have their due and be defended from wrong. Consular law did enact what
men of life Consuls should be, what habit they should have, how they should be
accompanied, Trog. Pom. lib. 2.
where they should assemble, of what affairs they should treat, how long they
should sit, and what goods they should possess. Just. lib. 22.
This law was peculiar only to the Consuls of Rome. Leges Quiritum were Roman
laws or privileges, proper to four sorts of noble, ancient, and worthy Roman
gentlemen, Patricijs, veteranis, militibus, and Quiritibus: al which names were
imposed according to the variety of time: by this law they were priuiledgd to
sit in their temples, not to be imprisoned for debt; and if any of the^ were
seized by poverty, to be sustained upon the common good, to be liable only to
the Iudicatory of Rome, to be free of taxes and subsidies, and to have the
benefit of diverse other privileges, that none except the above named persons
enjoyed.

Lsges publicae were common ordinances or statutes, that all the people did
observe, as repayring of Temples, common houses, Capitol. lib. 3.
walls of cities, measuring of streets, providing of things needful to the
common use, gathering of taxes, impositions, and the like.

Veget lib. 7
Laws Militar were such as were made by those of judgment and experience, to
whom the ordering of military affairs was committed, and do chiefly consist in
denouncing war, confirming peace, making appoyntments, taking assurance, in
paying of souldyers, setting of guards, watches and sentinels, making of
trenches, assigning of battles, in giving the assault, making the retreat,
redeeming prisoners, appoynting of tryumphs, and finally, in whatsoever did
concern the government of military affairs.

The laws of Magistrates were laws made by diverse Princes and Consuls, and
had their names from the authors as Lex Caesarea commanded gates to be open at
time of meals: Corn. Nepos.
Lex Pompeia did assign tutors or curators for pupils: by the law Cornelia,
lands were divided. By the law Augusta, Augustus did impose tributes upon the
people for the public good. The Consul Falcidius enacted the law Falcidia, by
which fathers were holden to be careful for the education of their children.
By the law Sempronia it was enacted, that no father might disinherit his son,
not being a traitor to the Roman Empire.

But (because the variety of laws is impertinent to my purpose) I will come to
the most necessary considerations that princes are to lay before them in
making, disanulling, renewing, interpreting, and executing of laws.

First, in the making of laws (as the necessity of time shall require) kings
are to consider, (...) lib. 2. fol. 27. Ex tractat. de 12. abus. Omnium legum
est inanis censura nisi diuinae Legis imaginem ferat. Aug. de Cin. D. 6.
Possid. lib. 3 Plat. 4. de rep. 6. de leg.
that lex Dei, is, via regalis; quae nec ad dextram, nec ad sinistram declinat.
First, these things which do belong unto the true worship of God, are to be
confirmed: next, those things that are convenient for the commonwealth: then
those that are honest and commendable, and thereafter things profitable: the
laws made must be rather wholesome then many, that they taste not of
covetousness, oppression, or private gain.

Laws may be disannulled wholly, Arist. 1. in Rhet.
when they are repugnant to religion and policy: in part, when some things ate
to be changed which formerly the necessity of time, or some other causes have
tolerated.

In the interpretation of laws, August. de dic. Sapient
sanctity and equity, rather then the literal meaning are to be respected,
lest by wrested glosses, legitimate laws be bastardized, white be made black
and black white.

In the execution of laws, understanding what good is to be done, what evil is
to be repressed, is required, who are worthy of reward, Arist. 7. pol Plato.
2.10 de Rep.
who of punishment: for the laws are no less ordained to defend and prefer
the virtuous, the^ to punish the wicked. The execution of laws must neither be
ouerstrictly, or remissely urged, but enforced or moderated as occasion shall
serve, and offenders merit, (...) lib. 2. fol. 30. and 85. Seueritas nisi in
tra co^gurentes nocentium paeuas se coercet, saeua crude liuas est. Lact lib. 6.
Summum ius, est summa iniuria; when severity has his rigor often times it
pulls up many goodly plants; which (being manured with clemency) might
produce many excellent fruits of obedience, service and merit.

Lastly, Amor and odium, and proptium co^modum fac^iunt saepe Iudicem non
agnoscere veritatem. Arist. Rhet. 1.
the equal observation of laws and distribution of justice by Princes is
carefully to be looked unto least the mighty and powerful offenders escape,
and only the weak and poor be punished and wronged. Old Cato, Stoicall
Diogines, wise Anacharsis, and many others, did complain upon this error,
because they did well know that it is the height of injustice to execute laws
in equally.

Contingit sepenumero, vt qui parua tollunt depraehensi pendant, magnorum autem
raptores aut splendidi depeculatores (factis argento vijs) euadant.

Arist. apud Diog. lib. 5. Sine iustitia ne Jupiter quide^ principem agere
potest. Lud. Viues super Aug. Eurip. in Ores.
The Princely distribution of justice, is nothing else but suum cuique tribuere,
is the helm of government, the happiness of kings and people. From Justice
arises religion, peace, truth, innocence and true friendship: in it Princes
are to be noble, judicious, grave, severe, inexorable, powerful, and full of
majesty; neither enclining to the right or left hand, to the rich or poor,
but determining all matters under their censure, Ansel. super ep. ad Romans
Ambros. de offic.
as they look to be judged by that supreme Judge whose Lieutenants they are.

Finally, let subordinate Judges so administer justice, as they will be
countable to both their heavenly and earthly masters; assuring themselves
(howsoever they escape here) that there is, Vnus Iudex, vnum Tribunal
incorruptum, ante illud stabunt mortales, ea in sella quisque sedet qui
iudicat, vbi si unjust iudicabitur, nec pecunia, nec gratia, nec falsi testes,
nec deserti proderunt patroni.

SECTIO. XIIII. Of the wrath of Princes, when and how they should punish.
AS clemency, slownesse to ire, and proanesse to mercy, Greg. Moral. 5.
are the divine and kingly robes of good Princes: so furious anger, and desire
of revenge, are the tyger-like and deformed garments of tyrants by which
wisdom is banished, justice is forgotten, peace is overthrown, the
commonwealth ruinated, and the gates of cruelty unlocked and laid open: Eras.
de Just prin.
for this cause Princes are carefully (setting before them their fatherly
affection to their subjects) to restrain the impetuous and dangerous
inundations of such passions, as are prejudicial to themselves, hurtful to
their people, and unworthy the title and dignity of kings. Zelus and iracundia
minuunt dies, ideo vitanda non tantum moderationis sed etiam senectutis causa
Cotis king of Thracia (being naturally chollerick, Plut. in Apo.
and a severe punisher of offenses) having received diverse rare and curious
wrought (but fragile) vessels: (after he had bountifully rewarded the giver)
did break them all, and being asked the cause, answered; lest I should be
moved to anger, and severely punish my servants for breaking of them, I have
broken them my self. This worthy Prince did well know, that the fear of the
king is like the roaring of a Lion: Proverb. 20.
and he that provoke him unto anger, sins against his own soul: and
therefore did remove such combustible matter, as might set a fire his death
threatening fury. There is nothing more opposite to counsel and deliberation,
Ira atque cupido consulto^es pessimi. Salust. in bell. Iug. Quoties ira animum
inuadit, mente^ edoma, vince te ipsum, differ te^pus furoris: dum tranquilla
men's fuerit, fac quod placet. Greg. Mor.
the^ temerarious and sudden anger: therefore Bias Priaeneus prescribes delay
as a sovereign remedy against it: for by intermission, furious passions
languishes, and the mystie clouds that oppress the mind either do vanish or
become less. Anthenodorus the Philosopher did advise Augustus Caesar, at such
time as he was angry, to rehearse twenty four Greek letters.

In punishing Princes are to keep such golden mean and temperate mixture
betwixt lenity and severity, that the subjects be neither wounded by the one,
or become insolent by the other. Leones quos mansuescere volunt homines,
iubebat olim Phraotes verb ibus non cedi, nes rursus blanditijs nimium
leniendos putabat, quia sic nimium superbieuaderent opinibatur, itaque
blanditijs minis permix is facilius ad mores optatos posse deducere.

Lastly, in punishment (if necessity enforce Princes to draw the sword of
Justice) great care is to be had, that it be done unwillingly, as with weeping
eyes. Justice without Mercy is as cruel as Mercy without Justice is foolish:
Bern:
for although Justice does tell Princes, that not to punish an evil, is to
allow of an evil; yet Mercy often times pardons those that deserve it not:
wounds ought to be healed not hurt: Cic. 1. Offic.
only* incureable members are to be cut off: and punishment ought to be
agreeable to the fault, and without partiality; lest some be punished and
others escape: and finally, all private respects in punishment are to be
removed, Ambros. de vid.
lest under the shadow of Justice, cruelty and tyranny be sheltered. Si omnino
misso sanguine fuerit opus, considerandum est Principi ac sustinendum, ne vltra
quam sit necesse incidat, cauendum ne mayor paena sit quam culpa, and ne eisdem
de causis alij plectantur, alij ne appellentur quidem.

SECTIO. XV. Of two sorts of flattery, but chiefly of the last, that haunts the
courts of Princes,
THere be two chief enemies to virtue in all men, but are more specially
prejudicial to greatness: the first is, the inward (...), (...). lib. 2. de
fol. 93.
proceeding from homebred weakness, which daily suggests store of false
colored imposture. Adulator bonu^ quod est abscondit, and malu^ quod non est
mentitur, Greg. Mor. 65.
The second (whereof I am shortly to speak) proceeds from the oily trowell
of the smooth tongue of a monstrous man, called a flatterer. This last sort of
flattery, is a false praise of that which is not praise worthy, Plato apud
Plut. de amic. and adul.
or a smooth detracting from the merit of goodness, Bias apud Plut. ibidem
Demost. in Philip. decl. 3.
the waspish honey of an impudent tongue, the bondage of the ears, the feigned
friendship of a false heart, and the chief Anuil whereon the devil forgeth
his most poisoned weapons: or it is the Ioab or Judas like kiss of a smiling
countenance, the poison of truth, plain dealing and honesty, that
(Camelion-like) can turn it self into all colors, Plut. de did amic. and
adul
following the fortune of Princes and not themselves.

Plutarch (not without cause) gives warning to Princes, of the twofold cunning
of flatterers: First, (says he) they feign ignorance of all matters of moment,
whereof loyalty should oblige them, either freely to admonish or lovingly
advise: but in frivolous indifferent or light affairs, they show their care
and officiousness. If a Cobweb be in the Princes Chamber, or a Fustian
doublet (often times lined with more true loyalty and sufficiency, then such
glistering worme-spun statutes can contain) be in the chamber of presence the^
keeps the flatterer a stur, cries out upon his fellow servants, chamber keepers
and vshers: for as knauish Empirickes for curing a sore in the foot, August.
ad Cassal.
cutteth the hair in the head, or pareth the nails of the hand: so flattering
Mountebanks never touch those things which they ought, Beata men's quae nec
adulatur, nec credit adumilanti. Hier. de^^riten. In obsequio comitas ad sit,
adula^io omnium vitiorum nu trix procul amoueatur. Cic. in L^l.
and are only busy in matters pernicious or triuiall. It is music able to
make an honest man's teeth ache, to see a young Catecumenist flatterer, after
some short travels (bought perhaps at a dear rate) at his return, vent his
Matchiuilian foppery with a salutation of Monsieur ie base le vmbre de vostre
gartier: and at his farewell confirm it with per Dieu ie suis vostre seruitour
Monsieur: Emolliri adulationibus non solum fortitudinis non est, sed etia^
ignauiae. Xen. in Cir.
this he performs, not only to such great ones, in whose favor he would
gladly insinuate himself, but to his very corriuals, whose requiem eternam he
would gladly sing (for envy has ever murdring eyes) but that such Sinon songs
is the true Canaan language I much doubt.

Secondly, (man being endued with two faculties, Plut. de did. Amic. and adul.
Is. in Sym. Plato in Phedr.
rational and irrational) the one heavenly, delighting in goodness; the
other brutish, given to false pleasures and to the corruption of nature) the
flatterer either (Athiest like) contemnes the heavenly parts of the soul, or
takes no notice of them at all; the terrestrial other parts, he cunningly and
covertly foments, until such time as the use of reason is quite extinguished.

As wholesome meat (says Augustine) neither nourishes the body, August. ad
Cas.
nor strengthens the sinews, Princeps adulatores hosti^m numero ducat, and
fides existime^ amicos, ^on qui^ quicquid dixerit, aut fecerit. laudant, sed
qui errantem audent increpare. ^so ad Nico.
but leaves corruption in the stomach: so flatterers add nothing to wisdom
and virtue, but stir up vice. If Princes be angry, their flatterers bids them
be revenged* if they be jealous, they bid them believe it: if they be
covetous, they advise them spoil their people: if sometime Princes be
graciously pleased to admit to their presence a plain Country man (whose
education, modesty, or bashfulnesse has not taught him in Kings presence to
mask himself with a Brazen Face) then the flatterer laughes, scoffs, jests,
and takes exceptions at every wrong hair in his Beard.

It is clear then, (...). lib. 2. fol. 63.
that flattery is the pest of Princes, and the soft Bed whereon Princes lie,
in the Lethargy and unsure security of Vice; the Circean Music, that draws
them from the true Rule of Reason, and discerning of Truth: and the gilded
pylls, under which is hidden most deadly poison.

When Alexander in drunkenness had killed Clitus; Quin. Curt. Gell. lib. 17.
Plut. in Alex.

Victus Alexander pellacibus adula^orum Lenociniis, ita Matri scrips^t: Rex
Alexander, Iouis Ammonis filius Olympiadi Matri ^alutem dicit. Atr. in gest.
Alexand. Oros. lib. 2. Frequentissimum calamitaus initium securitas. Tacit. 4.
hist.


his flatterer Anaxarchus was ready to tell him, that he had justly deserved
his death. So long as Alexander followed the wholesome advice of Philosophy, so
long did Wisdom moderate all his actions; then did he throw Aristobulus
flattering Verses in the River Hidaspes: but when Flattery had once whispered
in his Ear, then Pride, Cruelty, Ambition, and Forgetfulness of Humane
Frayltie did intrude in the places of his former Virtues: Then did he kill his
true hearted Servant, bewail the want of Worlds, to satiate his aspiring
Mind, call himself the Son of Jupiter, and forget that he was the Son of
Philip of Macedon. Xerxes (whose Armies Graecia was too little to contain)
trusting in flattery, had an ignominious overthrow at Thermopylas: One told
him, that the Sea groaned under the heavy burden of his Navy; others, that it
was to be feared, that by escape of the Enemy he should lose the triumph of a
glorious Victory. Amongst many thousands one faithful Demaratus was only
found; this brave Courtier did tell him, that his confused Multitude had more
weight then strength, was ill to be governed, and not to be trusted.

Since then there is no such dangerous domestike enemies to Princes, as
Flatterers; it concerns them (after notice of such attendants, who by
flattery insinuates themselves in trust) nearly to distinguish such
Sicophants from honest men; to discountenance them, and not to prefer them to
places of credit: so long as they are fed, Agap. ad Just. Plutar. de Amic. et
adu. Petrar. lib. 1. Dial. 19. Eras. 6. ^po.
so long shall they magnify the Liberality and other Princely Virtues of
their Sovereign, but if he leave off, or be exposed to the least adverse
fortune, then shall cunning Proteus change his shape; when true attendants are
most obsequious in adversity, and more willingly follow those whom Fortune
has left. Tarquinius the proud (being in exile) did often times say, that he did
never know his true friend from his flatterer, Ael. Lamp.
till he was neither able to reward the one or the other. Alexander Seuerus did
so detest flattery, that he caused Thurinus, a corrupt Flatterer, to be
smothered with smoke; Let him (said he) that did sell smoke, dye by smoke.
Ageselaus did tender those as his most faithful followers, that did most
freely admonish him; true wisdom made his virtuous mind to bend rather to
that which was good in it self, then to that which by evil minds might be
judged good. Accepta eos qui bonorum conciliarum te admonitum esse volunt, non
eos qui adulantur.

SECTIO. XVI. To whom Princes may safely commit public Functions.
Xen. in Cir. Plato. Pol. Iso. de Reg.
THere is no man so careless, that will commit the charge of a Ship, or of
his Goods (although of small value) to an ignorant Steeres-man, or untrusty
Factor; neither wise Prince, that will commit the Government of the
Commonwealth, the Goods of his Cities, and Lives of his People to such, whom
Homer calls Deuourers of People. Homer. Iliad. 17.
The wrong election or suffering of wicked Officers, Negotijs, quae per te non
geruntur, viros eiusmodi praefice, tanqua^ omnium quae illi commiserint, culpa
tibi imputanda sit. Agap. ad Just. Non tanquam ad nundinas, and Macello eunde^
est ijs, qui sibi gubernacula reip. comm^^ volunt. Plat. in Pol.
makes Princes liable to their faults (the Censure being all one, whether
Errors be committed by themselves, or their Vicegerents:) for Princes must not
only answer to God (whose immediate Vicegerents they are) for themselves,
but for such whom they depute to any part of their charge. Wherefore (seeing
the good or bad estate of the Commonwealth depends chiefly upon this choice)
two considerations are worthy the observation of Princes, in preferring of
Delegates and Officers: First, that none make merchandise, or by Money incroach
upon public Functions, or wickedly hunt after them: that they be conferred
upon such, whose Life is vncorrupt, and their Knowledge sufficient to
discharge their places: for certainly, the love of Justice and Commonwealth,
is the least part of the aim of such who by Money comes unto preferment; their
chief designs are builded upon their private gain, and pillage of others:
Eras. instit. prin.
by raising such to Dignities and Offices, Princes wrong themselves, and
others; themselves, in promoting such as are not worthy; and others, in barring
those whose merit deserves preferment.

Next, because Covetousness is the most dangerous evil in a State, Caput sit
in omni procuratione negotij, and muneris publici, vt auaritiae pellatur etiam
minima suspitio. Cic. 2. offic. Ex Dione Cassio. Eras. 6. apo.
and draws men headlong into wickedness and misery: therefore it concerns
Princes to be careful, that Judges and other public Officers be not only
free themselves from disloyalty, bribery, or corruption, but their followers
and attendants also from the least suspicion thereof. Apollo Pithius (by
Oracle) denounces the overthrow of Sparta: O Sparta (said he) whosoever is
your King, Lady Pecunia is Queen, therefore your destruction is at hand. This
was a true Oracle from a false God, yet worthy the observation in the Moral.
Theopompus being asked how Princes might justly govern their people? Ex Plut.
answered, By giving his Friends no more liberty then is just, and by careful
watching, that subordinate Officers uprightly discharge their plaees. Augustus
Caesar often times did prefer his Friends to eminent places of Authority; but
they were such, whose sufficiency did answer his expectation in the
administration of Justice and good example.

Rhein. Lor. Suet. in Caes.
Secondly, it is necessary for Princes, by admonitions and loving exhortations
to recommend Justice and Uprightness to their subordinate Delegates; other
times, by threatening and exemplarie punishment check the least suspicion of
corruption. Agesilaus used often to exhort his Deputies, Plut. in Pol^
that they should rather study Justice and public good, then the insatiable
desire of Riches. Flauius Domitian did not only severely check suspected
Judges, Hinc Lex repetundarum promulgata, and strictissime conseruata fuit: Qua
repeteba^tur omnes res, vel dolo, vel vi ablatae. Sabell.
but did give way to all such as were wronged by the^, to enter suit against
them, and did severely punish such as were found guilty. Epaminondas hearing a
poor man (who had been long kept in suit of Law) complain of want, did send
him unto the Judge of that Court, where he was in suit, with a Warrant, to
receive a Talent of Money; the Judge did deliver it unto the Beggar, but did
humbly petition unto the King, that he would be pleased to show him the reason
why he had imposed such a great sum upon him? Because (said Epaminondas) the
man whom I sent, is poor, and honest; but thou art rich, and a robber of him
and the Commonwealth. A notable example for Princes, to look unto such as in
Magistracy have indirectly increased Riches. Salomons sentence against such,
was, Qui iniuria afficit pauperem, vt detescat ipse, dabit ditioribus and
egebit ipse. Acl. Spart.
For certainly, no punishment will so curb such as are corrupted, as
sometimes (for example, after lawful Trial) to seize upon their unlawful
Purchase.

Adrianus Imperator, quos pauperes and innocents vidit sponte ditauit; quos
calliditate ditatos summo odio habuit and ad paupertatem redegit.

SECTIO. XVII. Of Secrecy, in the managing of the weighty affairs of
Princes, and what Iuditious Policy Princes may sometimes lawfully use.
Secrecy is the best and most sure Guardian of great Affairs (to which there
is nothing more prejudicial Veget. de Re. Mil.
then immature discovery) and is recommended to Princes as a chief Pillar of
Empire. Diog. apud Stob. Omnium difficilimu^ areanum reticere, ex dog. Philos.
Vt Principis est, secreta non facile alicuj concredere: ita nemo prudens
studuetit indagine, consequi principum arcana: Eras. ^. Apo.
Counsel without secrecy, is like an abortiue birth, brought forth without
life; and therefore to be imprisoned in the Womb of secret thoughts. Solomon
to this purpose says, In absconditis conciliabitur. Because Secrecy is a most
difficill Humane action, the ancient Heathen did picture their Gods with one
hand upon their mouth; morallizing, that important Affairs by Princes are
only to be imparted to such, of whose secrecy and loyalty they are well
assured. Great Alexander having received a Letter from his Mother Olimpias;
giving it to his Secretary to read, did touch his mouth with his Signet;
thereby enioyning secrecy to him. Philippides the Favorite of Lisymachus,
being demanded by his Sovereign, what Benefit he desired to have conferred
upon him? answered; I refuse nothing, O King: only impart no secret to me; for
it is difficill to keep counsel, and dangerous to reveal the secrets of a
King.

Arcanu^ neque tu scrutabris vllius vnqua^, Horat. lib. 3.

Commissumque tegas, et vino tortus, et ira.
Augustus Caesar caused the bones of Thallus (who had opened a Letter committed
to his trust) to Suet. in Caes.
be broken, to the terror of such untrusty attendants. This secrecy (the
necessity whereof is known to such who are entered in the first elements of
State) is seconded by the wise choice of such whom Princes privately employ in
matters of weight: Plut. in Poll.
For sometimes, to good ends, both good and bad subjects are to be conciliate.
And although Princes do detest treacherous and wicked followers, yet make they
use of both sorts, for the effecting of good and commendable purposes. Est
quaedam honesta, atque commendabilis calliditas. Bas.
Which politic parts of Government (otherwise then they fall out) cannot be
reduced to a definite number, neither be better illustrated then by precedent
Examples, and are to be used according to the necessity of time.

Qui regnare volunt multis dormire sagaci
Multaque concilio dissimulare solent.
Hannibal having resolved to beleaguer Sagunth, Liu. lib. 2. Bell. Prin. 2.
did bring his Army against another City, lest his intention against Sagunth
should be discovered. Another time the same Hannibal did spare a field of Corn
that did belong to his enemy Fabius; Val. lib. 7. cap. 3.
thereby giving cause of suspicion to the Senate against Fabius. This cunning
clothed practice might have somewhat prevailed, if the Piety of Fabius and
Policy of Hannibal had not been well known to the Romans.

Sometimes Wisdom advises Princes rather to wink at capital Offenses,
Trebell. Pol. Dissimulat iniuriam callidus, at stultus statim prodit iram suam.
Pro. 12.13. Liu. lib. 3. Bell. Prin. 2. Omnia Hannibali hostium non secus quam
sua nota erant. Liu. 22.
then violently, in an unfit time, to bewray their justly conceived
displeasure. Marcus Marcellus hearing that some of his Council had private
intelligence with his Enemy Hannibal, did conceal his knowledge, till such
time as Hannibal was past hope of taking the City Nola: Then did he shut his
Gates, strengthen his Guards, and call the Conspirators to an account.

Amongst all these, and many other Policies, there is none more profitable for
State, then to have good intelligence of the Affairs of Enemies, or of such,
of whose friendship Princes are least secured; to pry into their Strength,
Intentions, and Preparations. The Carthaginians fearing the Power of Alexander,
Fron. lib. 1. cap. 2. Plut in Pos. lib. 2.
did send a Citizen of courage (as banished) to entreat the protection of
Alexander; who being retained, did skrew himself into the council of
Alexander, and discover his Intention to the State of Carthage. These, and the
like, be the wise Policies of Princes: all which are ever to be warranted by a
safe conscience and good ends.

Vbi Leonina pellis non pertingit, oportet Vulpinam (sed semper ad bonum finem)
assuere.

SECTIO. XVIII. Upon whom Ecclesiastical Functions by Princes are to be
conferred.
THere be three inseparable companions whereupon the sole felicity of
wel-gouerned Co^monwealths do depend: Greg. in Regist.
The first, is the right education of Youth; the second, Religious and holy
Pastors; the third, Upright and Just Magistrates: Without the first, the second
and third cannot subsist; and without the second, the first and third are
without effect: for without good education there can be neither holy Pastor,
nor just Magistrate: without religion Learning and Justice are improfitable:
for this cause, Episcopi sacris literis eruditi sint, Patres non Domini Hier.
ad. Paul. and aduers. Luc. and Epist. Paul.
Princes are carefully to provide, that the care of the souls of their people
be not committed to wicked or ignorant Pastors. Causa sunt ruinae populi
sacerdotes mali, quoniam peccatorum participes fiunt qui ministeria, quod
aiunt, portantibus asinis curam animarum crediderunt, aut ineptos homines
exemplaria posuerunt. Church benefices are not rashly to be conferred upon
every one, but upon such, who in good works, Tit. 1.6. 2. Paral. 17. 1. Tim.
1. Pet. 2.3.
sound doctrine, and irreproueable life are worthy of so high a calling. Good
king Iehosophat is a pattern for succeeding Princes, in making choice, and
preferring men learned and holy: Princeps dignos solu^ and in via domini
probatos eliget, ac beneficijs ornabit, no^ currentes euehet lupos hiantes.
Isidor: Etym. cap. 2. Nauis praelatorum tribus lateribus compacta esse debet,
cordis puritate conscientia bona, and fide non ficta. Bernard. in fest. Magd.
Sermon.
for none can preach except they be sent; and none are sent who by simony,
pride and ambition, or other indirect means intrude themselves into the Lords
harvest, seeking their private ends, and not Gods glory.

Finally, as Plato did think no man fit for government, but such who did
unwillingly undergo the heavy burden thereof: So Princes are to prefer none
to Ecelesiasticall functions but godly, learned, and honest men, whose merit
rather then desire of dignity challenges such place. Princeps imprimis eos
suspectos habeat, qui se negotijs ingerunt ambitiosi, qui sua quaerunt, non
quae Dei sunt, qui denique voti compotes, vel praece vel praecio fieri
contendunt.

SECTIO. XIX. Of Church controversies, civil contentions, seditious Pamphlets,
infamous Libels, and how carefully by Princes they are to be repressed.
ALL Controversies may be reduced to Ecclesiastical or Civil: such as
concern the Church are either touching the true worship of God, or high
mysteries of salvation, of which it is true. Non seruatur vnitas in credendo
nisi eadem sit in colendo: Or they are of matters of discipline, Church
policy, and indifferent; the first are broached and entertained, either by
Athiests, Idolatrous, suspicious Heretics, or conceited Schismatickes; the
second are set on foot and vpholden by seditious, Sunt quos ambitio impell^:
qui priuatim degeneres, in publicum exitiosi, nihil spei nisi per discordias
habent Tac. 11. Anal.
ambitious, singular or ignorant persons, who prefer fishing in turbulent
waters and their own private ends to their duty to Princes, their obedience to
their superiors, to the care of their flock, or peace of the Church,
accounting it their chiefest honor to call in question things indifferent, and
by refractory, repugnancy, Art contra dicendi omnia in dubium vertere. Plato
de scient.


I will not enter into the first sort of Church controversies, because they are
sufficiently convinced by the sacred scriptures, and many orthodoxall Councels.
The controversies themselves of the second sort are also already determined by
the general consent of the Church, and writings of many religious and no less
learned: neither do I intend to plow the spacious fields of civil
contentions, I leave them to the wisdom of Princes, Tit. cap. 3.10.
and to such grave and learned Judges to whom the subordinate determining of
causes amongst subjects is committed: I will only (in few words) touch the
several parts of my division.

First, Athiests, Idolatrous, superstitious heretics, and obstinate
schismatickes, are either by sound doctrine and charitable persuasions to be
reduced to the right way, Tit. cap. 3.10.
or (as tares from the wheat, or the sour leaven of the Pharisees) to be
distinguished and separated from loyal and dutiful subjects, lest the good be
corrupted, or the whole lump infected. The others, who affects certain
cognizances and badges of curiosity, Anarchie, confused parity, or false named
purity, (ever holden dangerous in all sound government) and seeks to correspond
amongst themselves and be separated from the church (not knowing, or not
seeming to know, tam sunt mores quidam schismatici quam dogmata schismatica) I
leave them to the care of such provident Princes as (without doubt) in a fit
time will obuiate such evils as with draws the obedience of subjects, or
disturbes the peace of the Church. If my request might have due respect amongst
such persons, Satagunt inquirentes and quae subter ter^am sunt and supra
coelum. Tacit. 4 Anal. Joan. 19.23.
I should sincerely wish that they would wisely perpend, that the supreme
Bishop did recommend peace unto the Church, that whosoever sowes dissension in
the Church, rents the seamelesse coat of the Lord of the church: that without
brotherly love, Qui secundum Deum est zela a superna potentia dependet, and
diuina quadam a^ moderata concinnaque ratione gubernatur. Niceph. Greg. lib. 6.
Chrysostom. sup. Johan. hom 7.
blind zeal does not profit, but leads to destruction: Vbi zelus and
contentio ibi inconstantia and omne opus prauum. That the bonds of religion are
our faith, our baptism, and not our ceremony, our policy: that such who are
given to unfruitful and unnecessary controversies, vnswadles the church of her
bonds of peace, opens a gap to all disorder and scandal, 1. Cor. 7.12 25.11.16.
gives advantage to the common enemy to make music by their discord. Let the^
remember that insanae disputationes a Satana suggeruuntur. That they would do
much better to leave the turbulent and ouer-weaning Opinions of these Times,
and revive the blessed proceedings of the Apostles and Fathers of the Primitive
Church, which was in the like or greater cases, not to enter into assertions
and necessitous positions, but to deliver counsels and aduices. Saint Paul was
content to say, Ego and non Dominus secundum concilium meum. Lastly, Sine
imperio nec domus vlla, nec ciuitas, nec gens, nec hominum vniuersum genus
stare, nec rerum natura omnis, nec ipse mundus potest. Cic. 1^1 de legibus.
my earnest desire should be, that all such as have lost the characters of
love, and by firebrarnds of inconsidered zeal have abused the patience of
Princes, by stirring up needless controversies, and have neglected superior
powers, by contemning the authority of their mother the Church might wisely
consider, that hominis est errare, sed nullius nisi insipientis perseuerare in
errore. That where offenses are incorrigible, the slownes of Justice is
retaliated by the severity of punishment. That scepters have eyes, and Princes
long hands that will see and ouer-reach their most secret and far distant
actions of this quality.

The civil dissentions that do concern Princes to look unto are either betwixt
subject and subject upon some inueterate malice, or new conceived quarrel, and
are to be appeased by loving admonitions or royal authority: or they are
propter meum and tuum, for titles to goods or lands, and are to be determined
according to equity and law, the right use whereof is suum cuique tribuere, and
rather to determine matters of weight then to authorize, Plut. in Demet.
multiplicity of wranglings, unbrotherly contentions, and endless suites
a-amo^gst subjects: whereby their estates are either weakened or ruinated. Iam
quidem omnino delictum est in vobis quod litigiosa iudicia habetis inter vos.
1. Cor. 9 7.
This uncharitable going to Law, and endless end of Law has ever been
esteemd the fruits of Athisme, contentious spirits or idleness and eminent
badges (howsoever cloked) of corruption and injustice: For this cause, the
checking and abridging of the impertinencie and delay of Suits belongs unto
supreme Magistrates and subordinate Judges. (...). lib. 2. fol. 92.
Lis de rebus facile corruptibilibus celeriter debet terminari vel res vendi,
ne legibus fundata ciuitas, legibus euertatur.

From the infected Fountains of Church-controuersies, civil contentions and
factious courses by them arising do flow the poysonable Rivers of Envy, Cic.
in Catil 2. Tacit. 1. Histor. Salust. orat. fill. No^ est subditorum temere
vitam regentium iudicare. Greg. Mor.
Malice, Discontent, Uncharitable censure, seditious and infamous Libels, not
only against the persons of private men, but against Princes and superior
Powers, against whom we are not to think an ill thought, al which
machinations, and ( Catiline-like) firebrands, are to be censured as the
monstrous births of Parricides and Traitors, or the intemperate extrauagant
councels of light persons, (that thrive best in the mutations of state) and are
liable to the severity of exemplary punishment to be inflicted upon the
Authors, deuulgers keepers or allowers of such hellish trash as infatuates the
hearts of the foolish light vulgar, Multitudo omnis sicut mare mobilis est
quibus in seditionibus, in pace turbae sunt. Liu 28
with a sinister misprision of best actions, and brands the authors with all
such taints as disgrace may acumulate upon such disloyal subjects. The
contagion of this disease (as the waters that gain a breach) is to be stopped
at the first, least such inundations ouerflow the fields of dutiful subjects,
and bring contempt upon authority. Omne malum nascens facile opprimitur:
inueteratum fit plerumque robustius.

SECTIO. XX. Of the liberality of Princes.
PHilip of Macedon being advised to punish Nicanor (who had unjustly detracted
from the merit of so worthy a Prince) answered, Nicanor non est Macedonum
pessimus, Ex Plut.
videndum est igitur ne nos cessamus in officio: This wise Prince knowing
Nicanor to be poor, did presently give order that a gift should be sent
unto him; Tutius Principi munificentia and benificentia sibi consiliare
beneuolentia^ hominu^ and amariquam metui. Eras. apo.
some few days after (by the same informer) it was told to Phillip that
Nicanor did much magnify him: You see then, said he, that it is in the power
of Princes sometimes to cure the diseases of scandalous tongues.

As God is liberality it self, is bountiful to all men needs not, nor
requires any gain, only affects the sacrifice of a true penitent and right
thankful heart: so true liberality not only conciliates the love of subjects
but makes (in some sort) the faces of Princes, to shine with the goodness of
their Maker, in the distribution of their goods without respect of retaliation
or gain. They do use their people as good Shepherds their sheep, they feed
them upon the green and wholesome pastures of munificence and liberality,
Xen. in Cir.
and do not suffer them to range in the barren deserts of poverty, to be torn
with thorny brambles, neither to be a prey to devouring Wolves. Instabiles
d^uitiae fluu^orum imitaritur cursum. Agap. ad Just.
Wolves. They do well know that earthly riches are uncertain, not permanent,
but perishing, temporary and daily transferred from one to another, gotten with
care, Beneficentiae thesaurus stabilis est possidentibus cum Beroal. de Op.
kept with danger, and left with sorrow; but munificence and liberality are
firm permanent and perpetual, purchased by virtue, exercised with joy, and
recorded upon the table of in obliterable true honor. This due consideration
will make liberal Titus Vespasian bewail the day wherein he had done no good.
Alexander Seuerus inuit the poor and indigent to be beholden to him. Cum sit
vbique v^ (...) modus, aeque peccat quod excedit, quam quod descit Sense. de
benef.
But although long discourse embellished by a revived Demosthenes with all the
ornaments of art could add nothing to the perfection or due praise of this
Princely virtue: yet lest the poor virgin liberality become prostitute and
common, she is to be confined within her own limits, and tied to the
following circumstances. First, (because virtue consists in the mean) Princes
are iuditiously to examine their ability lest they give more then they may,
Diog. apud Stob.
or less then they should. They are not to give too much, lest in watering the
channel they empty the spring: nor too little lest they empayre their royal
dignity. They are not to give to all men, because the insatiable belly of the
multitude can never be satisfied. Si passim, si omnibus quis finis? Their
liberality must be chiefly extended, Virtute preditis indigentibus, aut been
merentibus; to the upright virtuous that stands in need, or to the well
deserving: if sometimes they give to the vicious it is in commiseration of
their wants or in hope of their amendment, Benificium ab homine duro and aspero
datum panis lapidosus est, qu^m e^urienti excipere necessarium, est tamen
acerbus Senec. de benef.
and not to add matter to their insolent life, Qui homini nequam dat, non
homini dat sed humanitati. Next the time of giving (consisting in timely
giving, and not keeping suitors in suspense) is worth the observation: Bis dat
qui cito dat: timely liberality shows a free and true noble willingness, and
delays do discover a refractary consent, loses the gift and the
thankfulness of the acceptant. The place of giving is rather to be private
the^ public, Beneficia non sunt reu^landa nisi cogat necessitas nec
exprobanda apud memores: true liberality can never abide pharisaicall
ostentation, neither do goodness and charity participate with hypocrisy,
hope of gain, or glorious shows. Id pie just humaniter fit, Recte facit qui
silentio tegit opus suum, and necessitatibus singulorum occulte sub uenit. Amb.
1. offic.
quod sine spe recipiendi fit. Lastly, the benificence of Princes is to be of
their own goods, not unjustly taken from one and conferred upon another, least
the grudge of the wronged, exceed the love of receivers. Qui alijs nocent, vt
in alios liberales sint non benefici nec liberales, sed perniciosi iudicandi
sunt.

SECTIO. XXI. Of the mutual friendship; and correspondence that ought to be
between neighboring Princes and contiguous kingdoms.
Solomon prefers a friend that is near to a brother, Proverb. 27.10.
that is far of, Chremes ille Terentianus in propinqua amicitiae part ponit
vicinitatem Plut. in apo.
intimating thereby that neighberhood and vicinitie of place, has a chief
interest in the degrees of frie^dship: Themistocles having a parcel of ground
to sell, gave order to the Crier to make it more vendible, to add the
co^mendations of his neighbors. The doleful experience of many famous nations,
noble houses by bloody wars and dissentious, now ruined and desolate, Atrox
pestis vicinus malus, contra maxima commoditas. Hesiod. de Agricul.
do demonstrate that the intertaynement of neighboring friendship and mutual
respect, is a redoubled strength of kingdoms, and maintayner of families:
Omnis vis vnita plus est, quam multiplicata. Aetoli and Acarnani inter se
mutuis cladijs euerterunt. By discord the noble families of Scillans and
Marians, Caesarians and Pompeians were overthrown. But if I had the pensill of
Apelles I should never be able to give the due proportion and lively colors
to neighboring friendship: but (leaving the Art that far transcends my reach)
I only do commend vicinitie and united strength, Nihil tuarum rerum facile
inter ib it, si habeas vicinum bonu^ qui statim in periculo succurat. Hesiod.
as the chief humane blessing imparted to Kings or people: First, by the utter
euersion or irrecouerable loss of such famous kingdoms and honorable
families as now (by bloody wars and iarres) are either desolate or not
scarre-cured. Discordia atque seditio omnia oportuniora facit insidiantibus
Liu. decad. lib. 4.
And secondly, by the multiplicitie of benefits and the most wholesome fruits
of peace, plenty, love, free intercourse, and common society: all which by
scissure and and disrenting of the hearts and affections of such whom the maker
of all things has framed in one mould (ever opposite to humane policy,
Dissentiones nunqua^ debent amari, sed aliquando aut charitatem probant aut a
charitate nascuntur. Aug. Epist. 87.
and liable to divine censure) are quite overthrown and extinguished.

For these and many other causes (which I might aleadge) good Princes are
careful (if it be possible) to be at peace with all Christian Princes, whom
they use as their brethren and friends, conciliating them by Princely offices,
(...). lib. 2. fol. 55.
mutual correspondence, ever doing to others, as they would others should do
unto the^: but more nearly they tender the benefit of such who lives within
the precinct of their territories and command, them they strive to unite in
religion, laws, and hearts. Facile coit amicitia inter eos quos lingua
communis regionum propinquitas, ingeniorum ac morum similitudo consiliat.

SECTIO. XXII. Of war: what Princes are to consider before* they enter in
war; for what causes they may lawfully take arms, and how to behave
themselves in war.
ALL war may be divided in royal, civil, Isid. lib. 2.
more then civil and personal war. I call that royal war which is be
betwixt king and king, kingdom and kingdom, which (as some do affirm) was
begun, Lucan. lib. 1 Genes. 14.16. Varro. Diod. Sic. Quint. Cur. de gest. Alex.
and had the name of Bellum from Belus son to Ninus and did begin in Assiria:
others that Chedelaamor king of the Elamits; others affirm that Prometheus was
the first that took arms. Such royal war was betwixt Alexander and Darius,
Rome and Carthage. Civil war is betwixt neighbor and neighbor, city and
city, such was betwixt the Hannonians and Asdrubal; in Rome betwixt the
Pompeians and Caesarians. More then civil war is betwixt father and son,
Tit. Liu.
cosen and cosen, uncle and nephew; such was betwixt Herod Ascalon and his
two sons, Alexander and Aristobulus, betwixt Caesar and Pompey at the battle
of Pharsalia, where did lie dead the father killed by the son, Joan. Car.
the brother by the brother, and the cosen by the cosen; and if we will come
neereer such bloody war was in England, betwixt the house of Lancaster and
York now happily united. Seru. in. Ae. neid. Virg.
Personal war is the debating of some matter of consequence, and sometimes for
the maintaining of matters of small moment, betwixt prince and prince, subject
and subject, and of al other sorts of war ( David's fight with Goliath, 1. Sam.
17.50.
and the like excepted) least warrantable amongst subjects, Quint. Cur.
far less amongst princes upon whose safety depends the public good)
whose persons are not to be committed to singular hazards: such war was betwixt
Alexander and Darius for the marriage of Sabina Heretrix to the kingdom of
Albanie, betwixt the Emperor Constantinus and Maxentius. But I will leave the
curious division of war, Omnis pax a deo est Greg. lib. 17
and shortly speak of that war which is royal. I do confess that peace is
the Nurse of all happiness, and the arch blessing that (by the Almighty) is
imparted, Pacis bono omnia bona constant Aug. de ciu. dei. c. 19. Eccles. 3.
either to Princes or people, yet can I not deny that there is a time of war,
wherein Princes may lawfully take arms: Duo sunt decertandi genera vnum iure
legum, alterum per vim, confugiendum est ad posterius, si non satis est vti
superiori; when reason is extinguished then force may succeed: Bonus princeps
non facile prouocabitur ad bella gerenda, sed prudentior expendet qua^tum
intersit inter hominem paci ac beneuolentiae natu^ animal and inter feras
belluas predationi genitas. Rhein Ler.
yet before attempting war, Princes are wisely to expend the difficulties and
bloody dangers that do attend war. That they truly inform themselves of the
causes which move them, of their ability to uphold so sumptuous a charge: they
are seriously to meditate with themselves, and debate with their Council upon
the irrecouerable losses, the chaos of confusion, the multitude of miseries,
the inhumane cruelties, the shipwreck of conscience, the spoils, rapes,
tyrannies, murders, cares, dangers, losses, cries of fatherless and widows,
and upon the Ocean of evils that do accompany al-deuouring war; they are
wisely to consider the endless charges, that vpholds it, the increase and
multiplying of it, the easy beginning, the difficult and uncertain issue of
bloody war, and that they must not seek to obtayn that with blood and shame,
Quam calamitosa and res scelerata bellu^, hinc malorum omnium quasi mare
quoddam exundat semelque cuncta quamcunque peruaserit calamitatum fluctibus
operit bellum. Erasm. inpaneg. ad phil.
which they can neither get nor keep, without sin. These and the like evils
are able to check the inordinate desires of ambitious enlarging of dominions,
of vayn glory, or tyrannous revenge. Princes are to call to mind that innocent
blood is botled in heavens treasure; that there is a strict account for the
least drop of humane blood, spent in their default. To this they may add the
fraylty of the life of man, the millions of diseases, hourly accidents, and
fatal blows that daily besides war assaults the ruinous Cottage wherein the
life of man is enclosed.

Secondly, let them descend to the true causes of war, (from which are to be
excluded the ambition of Alexander, the confidence in the number of Xerxes,
Bella suscipienda vt iniquitatis causa tollatur and propter pacis necessitatem.
Aug. contra Faust.
the covetousness of Cr^sus, and private ends of Caesar.) Gods glory, the
defense of kingdoms from forrayne injury and enjoying of peace, are the true
causes that ought to sound the trumpet in Sion, and vnsheath the regal sword:
Ex Plut.
these moved David to put his hand to the sling: Judas Machabeus boldly go
against Gods enemies; many brave Princes to contemn death in his face, for the
honor of their supreme King, and safety of their Countries. Augustus Caesar
did say that war ought to be commanded by the Gods, justified by
Philosophers, maintained by Princes, and executed by wise Captains* and
courageous Soldiers. (...). lib. 2. fol. 55.
Princes then for the above named causes (after they have lawfully denounced
war in public and honorable form) may lawfully take arms; wherein they
must be religious, provident, judicious, just, politic, vigilant, skillful,
strict obseruers of discipline, and merciful. So long as Moses lifted up his
hands, so long had the people victory. Provident Scipio did scorn to say non
putarem, I did not think it should fall out thus. Judicious Alexander made
rather choice of few skillfull, In alijs rebus si quid erratum est potest post
modum corrigi, prae^orum delicta emendationem non re (...). Veget. lib. ^
then of confused multitudes. Just Seleucus did rather share in one Eye with
his son, then to be taynted with injustice. Politic Sertorius was more
confident in counsel then strength. Pescennius did watch when his soldiers did
sleep. Skillfull Hannibal did range his battles to disadvantage his enemies.
Val. Max.
Alexander Seuerus did so strictly observe Military discipline, that he did
punish the least contempt thereof. Merciful Mithridates did not insultingly
triumph over his vanquished enemies.

Next, in the hazards of war Princes are to be neither carelessely nor
timerously suspicious of the event which may sinisterly succeed, Optimus locus
inbello est medius. quia fortes tenent locum medium inter timidos and audaces.
Arist. polit.
but jealous and head-full in dangers, stretching and tentering their wit upon
the rack of invention, till their settled and steele-armed resolutions may
boldly adventure the chance of Dice, and attempt their fortune. The Emperor
Lucullus used to say, se malle vnum militem suume manibus hostiu^ eripere, quam
vniuersas hostiu^ copias sibi vendicare. Hannibal to this same purpose says,
Se magis cunctantem and acquiescentem Fabium, quam pugnantem Marcellum
formidare. It has ever been the wisdom of greatest Captains rather by
policies, stratagems, Ael. Spart.
and wisdom to overthrow the enemy, then by hazards and uncertain battle,
Eutrop. lib. 3. Caes. de bell Isoc. ad Nicocl. Reg.
and rather by council then by force. Lacones si quando stratagemmate, hoc est
Callido consilio hostem superassent, Marti bouem immolabant, sin aperto praelio
gallum; hoc pacto consue facientes belli duces, vt non solum fortes essent ad
praelium verum vt callidis potius consilijs aduersus hostem instructi,
victoriam incruentam consequerentur.

In war also magnanimity and courage in most eminent dangers is requisite;
because the quality of war is such, that the fearefulnes of one, discourageth
others. Wherefore base fear (the badge and terror of peasants) does not
beseem commanding Princes: Plut. in Pol.
for certainly where fear is, there can be small hope of victory. Judas
Machabeus (environed by the multitude of enemies) was advised to turn back.
1. Mac. c. 9.^0.
God forbid (said he) that we should do this thing to fly from them if our time
become let us dye manfully for our brethren, and let us not stain our honor.
Alexandrias captain of the Spartans, being demanded why his people did make
choice, Suet. lib. 5.
rather of death then to yield to the enemy; because (said he) it is a law
observed amongst them, rather to offer their bodies to death then to
captivity. Bias (having war with Iphicrates King of the Athenians) being
surprised by an unexpected ambush, Val. Max:
and seeing his people abandon him did thus encourage or rather check their
cowardice: Trog. Pom.
tell you, said he, to the living, that I your Captain do die fighting; and I
shall tell to the dead, that you did leave me like cowards. The strength of the
Assirians was in the courage of their commander Belus: of the Persians, in
Cirus: of the Thebans, in Hercules: of the Hebrews, in Judas Macchabeus: of
the Grecians, in Alcibiades: of the Trojans in Hector: of the Egyptians, in
Ogiges: of the Epirotes, in Pirrhus: of the Romans in Scipio: of the
Carthaginians in Hannibal.

By these and the like it is clear that more famous victories, and more
prosperous success has happened, by the wisdom, dexterity, and courage of
Princes and Commanders, then by the strength of soldiers arms.

Lastly, because war (as all humane actions) must have an end, the several
issues of war present a threefold consideration: First, if Princes attain
to the most fortunate succes that can be wished, they are modestly to curb
their immoderate joys, insulting pride, and inhumane cruelty, remembering
Ezechiels wheels (counterfeited by the Poets, in rota fortun^e) whereby is
denoted the volubility of worldly affairs, that the event which falls this
day to the victor, may fall the next to the vanquished. Fortuna vitrea est cum
splendet frangitur. When David did hear of the death of Saul, Plut. Quin. Cur^
Salust.
Julius Caesar see the head of Pompey, Great Alexander, Darius dead in his
presence; Marcus Marcellu, Siracuse burned; Scipio Numance destroyed; and
Hannibal behold the prostrate Ambassadors, sorrowful widows, and
fatherless children at Cannas. These great Princes did testify by (their
co^miserate plaints and bitter tears) the sorrow they did conceive at the fall
of their most obstinate enemies; for pitiful respect of the miserable, is the
sister of mercy, and compassionate sorrows are able to extract tears from
stone-hearted cruelty: Much more from such good Princes as are secondary
patterns of clemency and mercy. Epimanundas cum alias hilari vultu solitus est
in publicum prodire, Basil. in Epist. Ambr. ad Vercel. Ep.
postridie eius diei quo feliciter pugnatum est in leuctris, processit
squalidus and submissus; amicis causam sciscitantibus, nihil inquit, sed heri,
Hier. in Glos. sup. Math. 5.
sensi me plus aequo mihi placuisse, eius gaudij intemperantiam hodie castigo.

Secondly, if the victory incline to the enemy, wise and courageous Princes are
neither to contemn matter of such importance, Eurip. in Phaenis. Demost. ex
arg. lib. Plato apud Stob.
neither to be (cowardlike) dejected; effractis rebus violentior vltima
virtus: they are to recollect themselves with the remembrance that unconstant
war sometimes exalts the conquered and subdues the Conquerors: Grauissimae
sunt morsus irritatae necessitatis; therefore they are to use the best means
in their just causes, to recover their losses, or prepare the way to an
honorable peace, or with their reunited forces, try the more favorable aspect
of death-thundring Mars. Demost. in or. ^uneb. Cic. ad seru
Time admits not many words where danger knockes at the door: Omnia experire
more anguium, qui capite obtrito cauda minantur.

The third and last consideration, is in binding up of peace, wherein Princes
are to show themselves confident in arms. Sub Clipeo melius succedit pacis
negotium: They are so to negotiate that their laying down of arms, Plato. de
Rep. Cic. 2. Phil. 2. Veget. lib. 2. Liu. lib. dec 10.
may be upon sure and honorable conditions. Vt vere pax easit, non pactio
seruirtutis. But when Princes know their own weakness, and the powerfulness
of their enemies, wisdom advises them to yield to such conditions, as by the
dextrous managing of matters of such importance they can procure. Sit pax
aliquando, ^emachus apud Plut. in apo.
quauis tuta condition, nam gubernator vbi naufragium timet, licet iactura,
quicquid sanari potest redimit, necessitati parendum, quam ne dij quidem
superant:

SECTIO. XXII. Of Soldiers and Military discipline.
THe name Miles, or warrior (after the building of Rome) was by Romulus, given
to a thousand select men, and called Milites, quasi vnusex mill, Polib. lib. 7.
aut vnus mill valens, one out of a thousand, or one worth a thousand. The
name of a soldier, is a name of honor and labor, says Polibius. In making
choice of soldiers the ancient Romans did chiefly observe two things. First,
they were careful, Non minus in milite modestia^ and contine^tiam, quam
virtutem animi magnitudinem desidero. Caes. de bell. Gal. lib. 7.
that they were young, generously and virtuously enclyned. Iuuentus dat vires,
virtus idoneum militem facit, and verecundia dum prohibet fugere sepe facit
esse victoerm: the one gives strength, the other adds courage, the champion of
victory. Veget. lib. q. cap.
Secondly, such as were elected had their oath (by Lucius Flauius and Caius
Varro Consuls) these words, iurabant se fugae, aut formidinis causa non
abituros, neque ex ordine recessuros, nisi teli petendi aut hostis feriendi
causa, aut ciuis seruandi; that they should not go away, or leave their
stations, except to take up a dart, hurt an enemy, or save a friend. This oath
was thought so necessary, that sine electione nemo conscribebatur; sic sine
sacramento nemo nomen militis aut officium sorti us est: as without election
none were enrolled: so without the oath, none did enjoy the name or place of a
soldier. Marcus Cato sending his son to the wars under the command of
Pompilio, did by his letters solicit, that he should not be admitted unto
the army till he had taken his oath; and his reason was, Militem non credebat
nisi eum qui sacramento in militiam consecratur; vt Deo primum fides debita,
deinde Principi and reipublicae seruetur in columis. Because he did not believe
any worthy the name of a soldier, but such who by their oath had consecrated
themselves to warre-farre, that their faith to God and loyalty to their Princes
might be safely preserved. In this election the making choice of foreign
auxiliary soldiers, has been by many debated, and by some iniustly
altogether disabled: from whom I do the rather dissent, because I do find both
in ancient and modern wars that foreign helps have with the like (if not
with greater) valor and faith mantained their reputation, then the natives:
yea I may safely affirm; that foreign courage and strength has repaired the
losses of such Princes and states, who now allows their merit no other
Chronicles then their own wounds: howsoever, Nichol. Match. in Princip.
that Matchiuell-like inference of Nicholas Matchiuell does not hold good,
wherein (to disprove the help of alients) he presents David upon the stage,
refusing Saules arms to fight with Goliath: but certainly David was encouraged
by an higher power then all the subtillty of Matchiuels wit could reach: and if
he had not (vpholden by that same power) been more confident in his own
arms, he would not have refused Saules offer. But because I do make haste to
speak somewhat of military discipline, I will only recommend these cautions
to Princes in the admission of auxiliary strangers. First, that they admit no
more, then they stand in need of, may command, and are able without mutinity to
keep in pay. Next, that they choose the^ of such neighboring Countries as
stands well affected to their state. Joseph lib. 1. Auli. Pius 2. apud Plat.
lib. 2.
These two observations being kept Princes may safely (if their own forces
be not sufficient) make election of foreign supplies.

Next, unto the election of such whose bodies, Veget. lib. 9 Val. lib. 1
minds and faith are answerable to their charge: the second care is, that by
discipline they may be made skillful, conformable to good laws, and obedient
to the command of their Princes. This military discipline does consist
chiefly, Aug. apud Diog. lib. 5.
in exercitatione, in abdicatione voluptatum, in cohibitione commessationum
rapinarum otij and innobedientiae. By exercise soldiers become skillful in their
arms, strong in their bodies, and courageous in their minds. Demet.
In omni praelio, non tam multitudo and virtus indocta quam ars and exercitium
solent praestare victoriam: Ofttimes skill and exercise effect more in war
then multitude or virtue without skill. On the contrary, Socra. apud Stob.
Zenon apud Diog. lib. 7. Pith. in suis praecept.
idleness (as it does to all men) does infect the bodies and minds of
soldiers, with a senseless security, and dullness to do good, and stirs
them up to all such vices as may offend others, and are the stains of
reputation and breach of good laws; and therefore great Captains can never
be assured of exspected success, without keeping of soldiers in daily
exercise. Although Asia had no use of ships yet lest the soldiers might be
dulled or corrupted by idleness, order was given to build ships: for (one
wittily says) homo sanus otiosus, quam febricitans multo miserior est: a man
that is in health idle is in a more dangerous estate, then he that is in an
ague.

Secondly, luxury of soldiers makes them become senseless of reputation,
effeminate and soft, and is to be choked in the birth, lest enchanting Circes
change Ulysses followers into swine: or luxurious Campania, blemish the famous
victories of Hannibal, and in the end deliver him up as a subject to adorn the
Trophes of his most contemned enemies.

Thirdly, by discipline soldiers are to be restrained from rapes, ryots, and
disorders. Marcus Cato did enact that the hand of him that committed theft,
should be cut off. Lycias that whosoever did offer injury, ryots, or abandon
his place without command, should be severely punished. Manlius Torquatus
filium quod ipso ignorante ad dimicandum discenderat, Val. Max.
mactari iussit satius iudicans patrem forte filio, quam patria militari
disciplina carere: This great Captain did prefer the care of discipline to
his victorious son: but as in all other rigorous execution of Justice: so in
military discipline severity is to be inflicted, first, Emendandi causa, that
the party punished may be thereby bettred: for sometimes severity cutteth off
many, that thereafter might prove profitable members in the body of an army.
Veget. lib. 5 Plat. Epist.
Secondly, severity is to be used, cum dignitas eius in quem peccatur tuenda
est, ne pretermissa animaduersio contemptum pariat: When neglect of punishment
begets contempt against the person of commanders and good laws. Thirdly,
Salust: ad Caes. de rem ord.
punishment must have its force, vt metu penae ceteri terreantur, that
examplary punishment upon corrupt and incurable members may terrefie others.

The necessity of military discipline is demonstrate, Pub. Mim.
by the benefit that comes to Princes by it, and by the losses that
idleness confusion, and the neglect thereof do beget, Alexander Macedo
exiguam manum militarem a patre suscepit, Val. Max. Quin. Curt
sed doctam, qua asuefacta militiae orbem terrarum aggressus, innumeras hostium
strages fudit: the small but skillful force that Alexander did receive from his
father, did challenge the whole world, and subdue infinite number of enemies.
The Roman Empire was begun, augmented, and continued by military discipline
and observation of good laws, Polib. lib. 6. cap. 7.
utterly euerted by luxury, idleness, and the like, consuming plagues. The
fearful name of Xerxes (by foolish confidence) was ecclipsed by two shameful
overthrows given him at Thermopilas and Salamine, where too late he did
complain, Se habere multos homines raro autem disciplina tenaces.

SECTIO. XXIIII. Of the meditation and preparation of Princes against the day
of death.
AS there is nothing more certain the^ deaths never failing arrest, neither
more irreconciliable terrible and dangerous enemy to the corrupt sons of Adam
then death: Greg. Mor. 18.
So is there no more heaven pleasing care, then the watchful attendance for
death, no truer badge of fortitude then the courageous defiance of death, and
no such glorious victory as in the triumph over death.

This due meditation and preparation against the coming of death is the Anuill
whereon the arms that must conquer him are forged. Bernard. Moral. 18.
The victorious ouercomming of death is the crown of a good life here, Aug. de
mort.
and the earnest of assured happiness hereafter; and ought to be common to all
men and proper to Princes. First, least greatness, honors, riches, power, or
other deceitful vanities transport them, and make them forgetful of human
condition inuegle the eyes of their souls with security of long life, or make
the remembrance of death bitter, O mors quam amara est memoria tua homini pacem
habenti in sulstantijs suis. Proverb. 8.31. Eclles.
Solomon (who had long enjoyed honor, riches, and whatsoever else might
dignifie and exalt him) did in end draw the short conclusion, that all things
under heaven are vanitas vanitatis, that the only true comfort in this earthly
kingdom is in exspectation of a better hereafter: and that the soul
staruing-pleasures after which he had formerly hungered, were but vanities and
vexation of spirit. When sickness or old age (the harbengers of inexorable
death) such Princes to yield nature her due, they may thus meditate and reason
with themselves: Aegritudo and senectus mortis nuncij sunt. Chrysostom. hom 5.
death is not to be feared where a good life has prepared the way: to hear of
death is no nouelty: that they with all men are borne to dye: that all their
ancestors are by death dissolved: what numbers of Monarchs are before them,
and that all shall follow them: that death is the end of miseries, and entry to
true happiness in heaven, where incorrupt treasure abides them: that the
mercie-Master the true Samaritan, and great Physician of souls has a salve
for every sore; that he did cure the woman whose faith was great, saved his
Apostles whose faith was little and has promised (by the similitude of the
Mustard seed) to receive in his kingdom the widows mite, Math.
8.25.26.13.31. Si possemus super talem ascendere speculum de quo vniuersam
terram sub pedibus cerneremus iam tibi ostenderem mundi ruinas, ge^tes
ge^tibus, reges regibus, regna regnis collisa: alios torqueri, alios necari
alios absorberi fluctibus, alios in seruitutem trahi, hic nuptias illi.
planctum illos nasci istos mori. Hieron. ad Heled.
or the least dram of saving faith. To these meditations may be added the
weakness, shortness and frailty of the life of man, subject to sickness,
poverty, injuries, violence and millions of downethrowing miseries: yea
miserable man is daily tormented with the chief pleasures of life. Delicacy of
meats begets cruditie and indigestion; strong drink palsy and trembling;
lust, stupidity, weakening of the body: riches envy in possessing of them, and
sorrow in leaving of the^: in one word, every Joy has his ensuing sorrow, life
is blind, doubtful and full of troubles; honors swells it, sorrow
extenuates it, heat exsicates it, surfets oppress it, sadness consumes it,
solitude imprisons it, security duls it, young age exalts it, youth profuseth
it, old age makes it feeble, and death ruins it: what a foolish frailty is it
then to fear death, when in each or most of these calamities of life, we wish
death should cease upon us.

Wherefore seeing the body of man is but the ruinous cottage wherein the soul
of man is imprisoned, and daily assaulted with never ceasing enemies: the best
way to avoid a more glorious and sure dwelling place for so heavenly a guest,
is timely to teach the soul to despise the body, that she has no interest in
it; is a stranger, a pilgrim, and a wearied guest, traveling toward her long
wished home, and unwillingly detained within the dungeon of corrupt flesh: that
because death is the way whereby she must arrive at her long wished heaven, she
must willingly acquaint her self with death; to discover the dangerous
ambuscadoes, and ensnaring traps that are hidden under the ouershadowing groves
of greatness and prosperity.

This serious meditation of death, the familiar conuersing with death, and
timely disjunction of the soul from the body is the right preparation to dye,
and when death comes, boldly with a kingly courage, triumphantly demand him in
the face, Death where is thy sting? Maximilian the Emperor caused his tomb
five years before his death be carried whersoeuer he did go, Ex orat. funeb.
Sueu.
that by the remembrance of death he might dislodge ambitious, foolish,
deceitful, wordly, affections, and be ready with old Swan-singing Simeon to
receive his safe conduct, Luc. 2.25.26.27.28.29.30.
and say, Now Lord let thou thy servant depart im peace for mine eyes have
seen my salvation.

Secondly, death is carefully to be premeditated, because the forgetfulness of
death increases the horror, and augments the fear of unexpected death. Aug.
de mort.
Omnia repentina grauiora sunt, sed premeditatio futurorum malorum lenit eorum
aduentum.

This consideration of the uncertainty and unexpected coming of death and
careful provision for his coming is able to withstand the furious assaults of
fearful rebellious flesh, Petrar. dial. 28.
ambition and down throwing pride of the most powerful Princes; Luc. 21.29.
These. 1.5. Revel. 3.3.
is a careful servant for the coming of the master: a never sleeping watch,
attending the thief and a provident Oeconomus for laying up of true store.
Remember O king, said Agapetus to Justinian, that death fears not the
spenldor of honor or greatness, Eccl. 12.7.
but impartially d^uoures Kings and Beggars: therefore before his coming lay
up provision in heaven where no corruption shall have entry but shall return
to dust and ashes from whence it did come, Job. 1.21.7.5.
and man borne naked shall go hence naked, death shall find him as life
leaves him, and judgment shall find him as death leaves him. A^g. de doct
thist. Lact. lib. 3. ^ 19.
Non potest male mori qui been vixit and plerunque mala mors est, quam mala
vita praecessit, nam sicut vita ipsa bonum est cum virtute viuitur malum si cum
scelere; Ita and mors ex praeteritis vitae actibus ponderanda est.

SECTIO. XXV. Of mourning for the dead, and of Christian and Princely burials.
LEt such Critickes who condemn mourning sermons, Christianorum iustoru^
defunctoru^ corpora (quibus ta^quam organis ad bona opera vsus est spiritus
sanctus) officiosa pietate curanda exequtae caelebrand ae^ sunt. Aug. in Pat.
and funeral honors to the praise of the faithful departed; consider that
ignorance or singularity is the mother of their error, and as it is true, that
Christians translated from this life: Non sunt omissi sed praemissi, so is it
as true fidelibus defunctis debito honor ac funebri oratione parentare, nulla
vnquam pietas aut religio vetuit. The redoubled groans of our Savior at the
death of Lazarus demonstrate that mourning for the dead is a true sign of the
piety of the living. John. 11.33 38.
Stephani Martyrium maximis Christianorum planctibus and gemitibus fuit
coronatum. Act. 8.2.
Ieremias did bewail the death of king Ics^^s in the assembly of the people.
Abraham his wife Sarah: Genesis 23.2.
the whole house of Israel did mourn for Moses and Aaron thirty days. Deuteronomy.
29.8.
King David did lament for the death of Absolon his son, Sam. 2.19.18.
and for the death of Saul his enemy. The holy fathers did bemone the death of
their Princes and others their friends. Ambrose did most richly garnish the
hearse of Theodosius with a learned Sermon and eloquent oration. Gregorius
Nazianzenus mortuum fratre^ Caesariu^ laudauit eiusque memoriam posteris
funebri oratione commendauit. Greg. de Sepul. Hier. in pan.
Jerome Damascen and all the ancient pillars of the Church did honorably
regard the funeral and last honors done to the Christians deceased.

I cease to speak of honors done to Princes after their death by the
Philosophers and ancient heathen: it is dolefully registered, that at the
tragical funerals of Achilles and Patroclus killed by the Trojans, Homer Illi.
Lachrimis non solum arma lugentium rigarentur, sed and arenae quoque
madescerent. Old Solon did delight to be beloved in his life time, that at his
death the sorrowful complaints of his friends might accompany him to his
grave. Ex dic. Phil ^. ^.
Julius Caesar questor Iuliam Amitam vx remque Corneliam pro rostris laudauit.

All laws do warrant such offices as are done at the funerals of such as have
been profitable to the commonwealth wherein they did live, to be iusta and
iure acta, Just.
and the least defacing of sepulchers of the dead, or touch of reproach has
been holden an offense of higher quality then the ruinating of the houses of
the living or spoken against their persons in their life time, In iuris
prudentia quotiescunque leges viuentium pugnant cum legibus po-sthumilijs
semper preualent posthumiae omniaque iuris priuilegia fulta fauore publico
cedunt and vincuntur ab vna sola action funeraria.

The ancient Christians did account it the extremity of persecution that they
were compelled (sine supremo honor canticorum and himnorum) to bury their
dead in silence. Dion. apud. Stob.


I should exceed the limited breuity that I have enjoined to my self, if I
should recount the various and superstitious funeral rites observed amongst
the heathen, or the sumptuous and unprofitable charges bestowed amongst some
Christians. Egyptij condiebant, Persae cera circum linitos condebant mortuos
eosque domi seruabant vt quam maxim permanerent diuturna corpora. Magoru^ mos
erat non humare corpora, nisi a feris antea fuisse^tlaniata. Messagetae
cognatos and propinquos mortuos deuorant, ducentes honestius ac rectius a se
quam a vermibus commedantur.

I leave the funeral fires wherein anciently, Sepulturae Pompa magis est,
Solarium vinoquam mortuorum praesidium. Aug. de cura promort.
and yet, the bodies of the dead have been and are consumed to ashes: neither
will I speak of the precious jewels, rich clothes, gold, silver, servants,
horse, and other conceited fooleries, Joan Boem. de morib. omn. gen-
wherewith in diverse Nations, Princes are interred. I do only allow of such
honorable burial of Princes, as is observed amongst Christians, and which is
rather accompanied and condoled with the presence and tears of al good
subjects; sermons funeral orations and charitable alms (thereby in citing the
succeeding posterity to imitate the virtues of the deceased prince) the^
defaced by superstitious rites or prodigal profusion of superfluous and
unprofitable charge. Ecclesia fulgeat in parietibus, sed ne egeat in
pauperibus, lapides auro induantur, non vt Ecclesiae filij nudi deserantur:

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 2. marge capitum, persuasum. p. 11. line 16. r. and l. 20. r. their p.
21. l. 15. r. sapiunt. p. 23. l. 7. r. atergo. p. 25. l. 14. r. establishes.
26. l. 17. r. melancholius. p. 37. l. 20. 21. semper it. p. 45. l. 8. r.
Alcinoique. p. 49. l. 6. r. prosunditas. l. 5. altitudo. p. 55. l. 13. r.
contrahes. p. 62. l. 3. r. pictori. p. 63. l. 9. r. preesse. p. 92. l. 6. r. ad
p. 98. l. 2. put out and. p. 100. l. 7. r. leges, p 183. l. 19. r. Marcellus*
p. 148. l. 10. superstitious. p. 152. r. zelus. p. 172. l 4 r. Aenas and
Turnus. 214. l. 1. r. condiebant. in marge r. viuorum.


