A Threefold Preservative against three dangerous diseases of these latter
times.

1. Non proficiency in grace. 2. Fals-hearted hypocrisy. 3. Backsliding in
Religion.
Prescribed in a Sermon at S. Paul's Cross in London, September, 17. 1609.

By William Sclater, Batcheler in Divinity, and sometimes fellow of the Kings
College in Cambridge.

Heb. 3.12, 13. Take heed, brethren, lest at any time there be in any of you an
evil heart, and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God. But exhort
one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. Imprinted at London by S. S. fox Richard
Bonian and Henry Walley, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the spread
Eagle, near the great North door. 1610.

To the right worshipful, Master JOHN COLLES, Esquier, at Wilchcombe in
Sommerset, mercy and peace be multiplied.
SIR, I have often catched at some opportunity, to give public testimony of my
thankful remembering your deceased Fathers kind every, performed to me. A duty
it was, to present freely: to me a Kindness, that I was selected. The
recompense expected I have carefully made good, by instructing my people; with
what industry, God knows: with what fruit (I thank God) many souls can
witness. This kind of testimony I the rather embraced, for that it afforded
occasion, to clear my self of some fond imputations, and of stopping the
mouths of unreasonable men, that (even for pains) have made me their byword.
It were long, to reckon up all slanders of the malicious. These are the chief,
Unlearned, singular, turbulent, factious. As touching Learning, I never much
vaunted; but by the grace of God I am that I am. He knows much, Phil 3 10 1.
Cor 2.2 Act. 7.22
that knows Christ crucified and the virtue of his resurrection: yet, had I
the learning of Moses, who was skilled in all the learning of the Egyptians,
yea, the knowledge of men and Angels, I would endeavor in preaching to obscure
my self, that the power might be known to be of God For Singularity, this is
mine Apology; single I may go, (more shame for those should keep me company:)
singular, I am sure I am not, since neither I affect lonenesse (would God all
the Lords people were Prophets, all Prophets, laborers!) and the course I
held, is prescribed with a thundering adiura^ion, having ever also been holden
by all faithful Pastors. The way of travel is indeed least traveled, Genesis
49.15.
and Issachar loves his ease: yet thus I resolve; rather then lose heaven, to
go alone; and never to be so good a fellow, as to run (with Idlers) to hell for
company. My Turbulentnes, let these things witness; my parting with many rights
for peace sake: disgesting injuries, I say, not only without Revenge, but even
without seeking for just defense: raylings, slanders, assaults, hazard of life,
indeed what not? and unless they will indite me for not admitting sicam totam
into my bowels, Cic. pro Rosc. Amerin.
I know not what show of turbulentnesse they can accuse me of. For Faction, let
my courses speak: in regard of the Church, for doctrine I teach none but what
she professes: for discipline, throughout conformable to the orders
prescribed. If this be the matter, that the multitude is divided, the cause
would be inquired, whether mine, or Gods. Not where dissentions are, there
presently is the Preacher factious. It has ever been one Accidental effect of
the Gospel, to work separation: Luke 12.51.
shall I say, betwixt a man and his neighbor? nay, betwixt a man and his
child: nay, betwixt a man and himself. And let others please themselves in
their peaceable Ministry, I shall never think he knows the use of the
Fan, Mat. 3.12
that is, always tossing, and makes no separation. My comfort is in the
midst of these trialls: Mat. 5.12
Thus persecuted they the Prophets that were before me. Concerning this present
Sermon your Worship may thus use it with profit: as 1. a spur to Proficiency.
2. a whip for Security. 3. a preservative against Apostasy. The Lord grant you
and yours, me and mine, the whole Church of God a right use of it. And thus
judge of the Author; He wishes you more good, then he can do you, and rests
ever,

Your thankful and obseruant favorite, William Sclater
From your Pittmister: October, 10. 160^.
A THREEFOLD preservative against three dangerous diseases of these latter
times. 1 Non-proficiency in grace. 2 Fals-hearted hypocrisy. 3 Backsliding in
Religion.

Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. 1. For it is impossible that they which have been once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers
of the holy Ghost:

2. And have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come:

3. If they fall away, should be renewed again to repentance; seeing they
crucify again to themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him.


THIS Scripture was of old perverted by Nouatians, to the establishing of their
desperate heresy, denying pardon and place for repentance to men falling
through infirmity after baptism: Ambros. de Peniten lib. 2. cap. 2.
and at this day, through misunderstanding, has proved the rack of many a
weak conscience: herein Nouatians against themselves, that they think pardon
cannot be obtained for any sin against knowledge and conscience. Bellar. de
just. lib. 1. Cap. 14. Hun^ius vbiqu^.
Of late it has been wrested to prove, that even cast-awaies may be by faith
united unto Christ, truly justified: as truly sanctifi^d as Gods own
children, prepared to g^ory: with this difference only, permanency of
penitency, or recouerablenesse in the elect, instability in reprobates. And
with as great confidence, though less probability urged to prove, that Gods
children chosen to salvation, called according to his purpose, may (at least
for a time) fall from the state of grace, lose justification not only in foro
conscienciae, and in respect of feeling, but even before God: lose
sanctification, both in respect of exercise and measure, as also the very
habit. The more diligence is required of us in the unfolding of it. For the
context therefore, it lies thus. Cap. 5.12. etc. is set down a sharp
reproof of the people, for their non proficiency in knowledge and obedience:
that having had so long time, and plentiful means of bettering themselves in
grace, they still stuck in the rudiments, and very elements of Christian
Religion. In this Chapter verse 1. is an exhortation to greater progress: Let
us be led forward to perfection. The Argument persuading it, is laid down in
this text, taken from the danger of standing at a stay: for hereby they hazard
themselves to utter Apostasy and falling from grace received. And how fearful
that state is, it here shown, even desperate and past recovery: wherefore to
avoid it, they must haste^ to perfection. In form thus, If by not proceeding
we incur dang r of reuolting, then must we be led forward to perfect^on. But
the first is true. Therefore etc. The proposition is omitted, and in stead
thereof, the proof is set down, verse 4.5.6. The assumption taken for
granted: the conclusion expressed, verse 1.

Before particulars be pressed, suffer a little to clear the text from glosses
of Nouatians, and others. What their heresy was, is not hard to collect from
Saint Cyprian, Augustine, Epiph. lib. 2. cap. 59.
Epiphanius, and others. Epiphanius most briefly thus expresses it: Men
falling after baptism can never find mercy or pardon with God. The mitigations
that some have sought out of Ambrose and others, I mean not to si^^, all being
in the issue equivalent. What they speak of de^ying penance and pardon by the
Church, was a mere shift and evasion, whereto they were driven by force of
argument: besides that, the Lord ordinarily binds and loses by Ministerial
power of the Church. Now I hold it a good rule for judgment of expositions,
that is ordinarily given by Divines: where we find a sense crossing any truth,
taught in plain texts of Scripture, of it we may say, it was never the sense
intended by the holy Ghost. Being we now this gloss and inference to this
touch. Cyp. Epist. lib. ^. Cap. 2. and Epist. ad Nouati. Aug. t^m. 4. d^ vt ^q.
mixed. Psa. 89.32.33.
Saint Cyprian and Augustine thus re^soned against Nouatians, from plain texts
of Scripture my purpose is not to recite their word^, lest I waste time. Their
reasons are these. First, from the promise of God made to David, (perhaps with
referen^e to Salomons fall) If any sin, I will visit with the rod, but not
remove mercy. Secondly, from the nature of GOD in comparison to earthly
parents: was there ever father found so void of fatherhood, who^ the tears of
a penitent prodigal has not made to melt, and that has not embraced the
humbl^ submission of the most graceless son? Mal. 3.17 Psa. 103.15. Isa.
49.25.
I will spare you, as a father spares his own son: as a father has
compassion on his children so the Lord on them that fear him. If any father be
so obdurate, can a mother forget her child, and not have compassion on the
son of her womb? Though they should forget, yet will not the LORD forget
his. Thirdly, from examples of GODS dealing with his children repenting; David,
Peter, Israelits. 4. From the fact of God inuiting to repentance such as were
fallen. The Church of Ephesus fallen from her first love; Apo. 2.4, 5, 20, 21.
of Thyatyra, that had committed fornication, and eaten meats sacrificed to
Idols, suffered Iezabel to teach and to deceive: yet are invited to repentance:
shall we say, and not promised pardon? Miseranda fraternitatis irrisio, says
Cyprian. Cyp. Epist. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Oh miserable mockage of the brethren, thus to inuit to practice and deny the
fruit of repentance; As if a man should say to a husbandman, Go to, use thy
best skill and pains in tilling and manuring thy ground, sow thy seed: but
harvest look for none. He blunts the edge of industry, through despair of
recompense. Veniam negando incentiuum auferu^t penitentie. Ambr. de Penit. lib.
5. Cap. 1.
And by denying pardon, these take away the greatest inciteme^t to repentance.

For this Scripture know we, there is Lapsus (falling,) and Prolapsio (falling
away:) the place not understood of particular slips, but of universal
relapsing to a course of impiety.

See we now the second inference, and in the same order examine the gloss.
Reprobates (they say) may be justified, sanctified, what not, except saved?
Behold a monster in Divinity; that ever reprobate should be justified in Gods
sight, Cata doran cata diathesin cata meros.
or truly sanctified by his Spirit! It is true, something they may have like
it: so like, that themselves and others may think them sanctified. Secondly, a
disposition and preparation that way they may attain. Thirdly, some parts of
it they may partake: Romans 8.30 1. Pet. 2.2 2. These. 3.13. Ioh. 17.9.19.10. etc.
11.27.28. Poculum immorcalitatis, quod confectum est de inf^rmitate nostra, et
virtute diuina, habet quidem in se vt omnibus prosit: sed si non bibitur, non
proficit. Aug. ad artic. salso impos. Art. 1.
but to be justified in Gods sight, or truly sanctified, and yet be
reprobates, these are as^^^ata (me thinks) in Divinity: for, 1. justification
and renouation depend upon election: and they are terms conuertible, elect and
sanctified; sanctified and elect. Secondly, what mad man would once dream,
that they can ever be justified by Christ's blood, for whom he never
intentionally shed it? We have a distinction of sufficiency and efficacy:
ancient I confess and true. The saying of Augustine is most true: The cup of
immortality that had its confection of humane infirmity and divine power, has
in it sufficiency to benefit all; but if it be not drunken, it profits nothing.
But what is this to the question? The question is touching the intention of
Christ, in laying down his life for a price of redemption, and of God the
father, in sending his Son into the world, whether ever he had such a meaning
as to save a reprobate: and (me thinks) it is inconceivable, that the Lord
should from eternal decree not to have mercy, and yet send Christ into the
world with purpose to save a castaway. Besides, I hold it a true position,
that for whom Christ merited remission of sins and the favor of God, for him
also he merited the donation of the Spirit, and the grace of perseverance,
these being all equally parts of his purchase. Thirdly, who can imagine an
influence of grace from Christ the head, where is not real and true union with
him? and who will undertake to prove, that ever reprobate is united unto
Christ, fith he lacks first, bond of union, the Spirit; secondly, instrument
of union, lively faith; thirdly, fruit of union, Ioh. 14.17. Act. 13.48. Ephe.
5.23. Ioh. 17.21.22.
everlasting life. It is true, that Christ is head over reprobates in respect
of eminence, not so in regard of influence. And the gifts they partake from
Christ, they have from him as a rich Lord adorning his Church; not as members
of his body, by deriuation from the head.

As touching this text, some gifts are here mentioned, illumination, etc. but
not such as necessarily imply renouation by the Spirit. The maine is wanting,
viz. renewing of the heart to unfeigned love of God in CHRIST, which I could
never believe to be in a reprobate.

As to the third inference, that Gods elect children called according to his
purpose, may lose righteousness, sanctification, etc. that is more improbably
deduced out of this text, then either of the former. I will not trouble you
with those usual distinctions of reality, and sense habit and exercise,
substance and measure. Their meaning is, that even such may wholly lose Gods
favor, righteousness, sanctification for the time. Now surely if this were
so, yet this text of all others is most impertinently alleged to that
purpose, no place affoording plainer proof of their uninterrupted abiding in
the state of grace. For thus I reason: It is impossible for any man enlightened,
etc. and wholly fallen from grace, to be renewed by repentance: and shall we
say, it is impossible for an elect child of God to rise by repentance? Then
sure it were possible they should never be saved, Mat. 24.23.
but not possible that Gods child should be deceived so, as to fail of
salvation. It remains therefore that they never fall wholly from grace
received. What needs more proof? 1. Ioh. 3.9. 1. Pet. 1.23. 1. Cor. 1.8.
The spirit is in them semen manens and immortals. Immortal? why so? Forsooth
(according to these men's glozing) because dying, he reuiues. A strange gloss,
nay rather, because he never dies in them: for so we say, the soul is
immortal, because it dies not; the body mortal, though it rise again. Shall
I add more reasons? take these from the actions of God. First, confirmation,
and establishment in grace eos telous, unto the end, without interruption. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. 2. Cor. 12.9. 1. Cor. 10.13. De Not. et dig. An^. di. Cap. 6. 1.
Ioh. 3.9.
Secondly, liberation from evils, by prevention: in evils, by sustentation:
out of evils, by giving issue.

Would you have the judgment of Ancients? I confess they write (most of them)
doubtfully in this point: yet who so desires their sentence, let him read what
Austine has De bono perseueranc. soundly for this purpose: and Bernard (if
that book were his) de Not. et dign tate Anidiui. alleging to this purpose
the place of John: He that is borne of God, sins not, etc. Because, says
he, such a man patitur peceatum, non facit: and preventing that objection from
the falls of David and Peter: of David thus, Charitatis in eo nequaquam facta
est abolatio, sed quasi quedam seporatio. As Christ speaks of the woman in the
Gospel, She is not dead, Theo. in Luc. 12.
but sleeps. And Theophilact thus paraphraseth the speech of our Savior:
Quamuis breuitempore concutiendus sis, habet tamen recondita fidei semina: si
solia abiecerit spiritus inuadentis, radix tamen ^iue^, et non deficiet fides
tua. He lost his leaves, not his root.

Lyra. ad locum.
For this Scripture some thus answer: impossible, that is, difficult. That good
father Latimer much pleased himself in this evasion. And it is true, that
impossible with Aristotle has yt acceptance; but to my knowledge Scripture
never so uses it. Amb. de pen. lib. 2. Cap. 2.
S. Ambrose a little otherwise; impossible to man, not to God: that is,
impossible it seems to us to obtain, yet possible through Gods gift: Heb
10.26, 27, 28.
but neither does Ambr. himself stick to this answer, and the Apostle in
another placed, serves the weakness of it. Some thus: supp^sitio^s are no
positions. And its true, that copulatiues sometimes have force of conditionals.
2. Pet. 2.
But saint Peter plainly affirms a possibility of reuolti^e* and I think we
may yield, these words are no empty bugbeares to aff^ight us with all, but such
as intimate a possibility of reuolting: for some men, no question for some
enlightened etc. for none truly regenerate. And we shall a^on hear, that none
of these graces (...) true renouatio^ by the Spirit of God. Thus much in the
^o^^rim for clearing of the text.

Let us now see the particulars of it. They are chiefly these three. First,
necessary of proficiency. Secondly, progress of a Reprobate. Thirdly, peril of
Apostasy. For the first, The first particular in the text.
Let us be led forward to perfection; For it is impossible, if we fall away,
ever to be renewed to repentance Fulminat, me thinks, non loquitur His words
are not words, but thunderbolts to rouse (...) beck^; taking it for granted,
that there is no medium, (...) seeming sufficiency and certain Apostasy, videt
scala^ Jacob, says Bernard: et in scala Angelos, Jacob in a vis on saw a
ladder, and on it Angels: B^rnar. epist. 255.
where was none seen sitting or standing still: but all either ascending or
descending: to give us to understand (Its Bernards gloss) that in the state of
this mortal life, there is no mean betwixt profection and defection: but as we
see our bodies always on her growing or decreasing, so must the Spirit always
either better it self, or be impaired. But what though the^e be defect o^s?
Beloved, me th^nks, we should (...) e^^ble at the mention of them. Its
impossible that (...) such men should be renewed. Behold a most miserable
condition. It had been better never to have known, then knowing to turn
back. There is no sin done in ign^rance before calling, but is capable of
pardon: Paul* blasphemy, 2 Pet. 2.21.
Manasses his cruelty, Abraham's idolatry, Mary Magdalens adultery. But for
Apostasy, that is a sin irrecouerable, no place for pardon or repentance: God
in his just judgment giving over to hardness of heart, and impossibility of
repentance.

Let me add one other reason. Its an undoubted character of all graces, where
they are in soundnes, that they are growing. 1. Pet. 2.23. Ezekiel. 47
If you have tasted how sweet the Lord is, there will be a desire to increase
more and more. There issues from out the sanctuary waters, even the waters of
life: see their increase. First, to the uncles, then to the knees, then to the
loins, afterward a river that no man could pass: The trees growing by this
river, that bring forth new fruits according to their months. What should let
to interpret, not only of the progress of the Gospel, but of the efficacy
of Gods Spirit in the hearts of his children? And for particulars, Romans 1.17.
Clem. serom. log. ^.
search and see whether there be any grace sound that grows not. From faith to
faith, says Clemens: The Apostle seems to speak of a double faith, or rather
indeed of one, but increasing continually, even to perfection. Infinite might I
be this way: wherefore if either we would prevent the danger of Apostasy, or
provide for our present comfort by assurance of soundnes, how needful is it to
be led forward to perfection?

Aug. de verb. Apostol. Ser. 5.
Give leave then to exhort with S. August. semper add etc. Be always adding,
always walking, always profiting. And in any case take heed how we take a
stand in this holy way of the Lord, or ever admit of one thought of going
backwards. Lots wife, even for casting an eye back toward Sodem, became a
pillar of salt, an everlasting monument of Gods wrath upon Apostates. The vices
then here noted, are: First, standing at a stay. See Heb. 12. And let me apply
it to these slowback times. Vbi sunt, says Bernard, qui descere solent, ^et.
vbi supra
sufficit nobis? etc. Where are they that say we have enough, we will be no
better then our fathers? O monache, non vis proficere? Non Vis ergo deficere?
Nequaquam: What then? Where I am, I will hold my self. Nec peior fieripatior,
we melior cupi^, etc. Beloved, he could not have spoken fitlier to the state
of these times: Nee peior fieri patior, nec melior cupio. Would God it were not
the Emblem of our Church. But I leave this Polypus, and come to our people.

Marvelous has God been in his mercy toward us in this kingdom, granting us
means of knowledge, such as our fathers desired to enjoy, but could not enjoy
them. And as Paul speaks of this people, for the time we might have been
teachers: and would God it were not so, even in congregations where the word
has been most plentifully preached, that they had need to be taught again
the very first principles and rudiments of Christian Religion. I will tell you
strange things, yet true; in places where the Gospel has long been taught,
are people notwithstanding found so grossly ignorant of Christ Jesus, that
they know not either what he is, or why sent into the world, what he wrought to
procure redemption, or how they may be partakers of him. Neither need we wonder
there should be weakness, where is so gross ignorance, after such plentiful
instruction.

What then should be the reasons, Impediments of proficiency
of this so little or no bettering in grace? One is, Opinion of sufficiency,
Semper tibi displiceas, says Saint Augustine. No marvel, if there be so
little care of proficiency, where there is so proud a conceit of perfection. I
strive forward to perfection, Phil. 3.13
says the Apostle; what was his spur? Opinion that he was not perfect. A
second is, Comparing of our selves with inferiors or equals, where yet means
of bettering are not equal. Our fathers with their modicum (say some) were
saved; why not we? I will tell you in few words, where men commit much, Luke
12.48. Pro. 4.18.
they expect the more; where less committed, less is expected.

Proceed we, The way of the righteous shines as the light, that shines more
and more to the perfect day. It was a wonder in Joshua his time, that the Sun
stood still: a greater, Ios. 10.13. 2. Reg. 20 11. Gal. 5.7. Apoc. 2.4.
which befell in the days of Hezekiah, when he went back so many degrees.
Strange, that our Church should stand at a stay; more wonder (me thinks) and
horror also, that she should go backward. You did run well, (says the
Apostle) who did let you? I have a few things against thee, that thou have lost
thy first love. Me thinks, when I but mention these things, we should judge our
selves the people here meant. For, what is become of that ancient detestation
of Antichrist, and his corruptions? while we begin to think, we may separate
too far from Antichrist, as Antichrist; and to study (as some to-fore)
compounding of the two Religions: Cassander
when as soon shall we compound light with darkness, Christ with Belial, as
CHRIST with Antichrist, Gods pure worship with Popish superstition. Shall I
add this one particular further? let it not be offensive. Time was, when we
knew to put difference betwixt professed enemies, and friends to us in
affection, though peaceably dissenting from us in some small points of
judgment. And then severity ran her course against the greatest and most
Capital enemies. How is it now, that Justice knows no epiegcegan toward
friends, and is so full of conniuence toward obdurate enemies? Me thinks yet,
the sword of Magistracy, should be distomos, two-edged; and if it pearce so
deep as the flesh, and bones of friends, it should be sheathed in the bowels
of unreconcilable adversaries.

1 Thessalonians. 5.13. 1. Tim. 5.17. Mortmaine.
Let me come now to our people; That singular love to Ministers, for their works
sake, what is become of it? that double honor for them, that labor in the word
and doctrine? Moses of old was feign to proclaim a Sufficit, and statutes were
once made with us to restrain ouerlauish contribution. Those were the times of
giving, these are of withdrawing. And (brethren) at yt first rising of the
Gospel amongst us, how did the kingdom of heaven suffer violence? The word of
God was precious in those days. 1. Sam. 3.1.
As the Israelites when they first saw Manna, cried out in wonder, Man-hu: what
is this so excellent food, that the Lord has vouchsafed us? so we of the
Gospel, admiring the rich grace of God, that began to shine unto us in the
face of JESUS Christ. How are we now sated with the plenty of it, and cry out
contemptuously, Nothing but this Manna, The world pestered with preaching* To
say nothing of that temper, which many of us begin to hold even in Moralities;
and to be half persuaded, there may be, Virtutis nimium, too much precizenes
even in moral duties, and abstinence from evil. But leave we these ulcers,
and come to the second thing in the text. The second member of the text. The
first step of a Reprobate.
The progress of Reprobates, for so I judge it, because their fall is without
recovery. Their degrees are five, First, Illumination, that whereas naturally
men know not the things of GOD, nor can know them; walk in the blindness and
vanity of their minds, embracing error for truth, darkness for light, the
Lord thus far vouchsafes grace even to Reprobates, that they see and
acknowledge the truth of Religion, distaste errors, discern, acknowledge,
approve that which is truth in Jesus Christ. That Castawayes go thus far,
Peter plainly affirms, speaking of some men, 2. Pet. 2.18, 20.
clean escaped from those, that are wrapped in errors, who yet are entangled
again and overcome. What need many instances? Come not very Reprobates in the
last day professing, that they have prophesied in Christ's name? Mat. 7.22 Mat.
10.1
and was not Judas, as his fellows, instructed in the truth of the Gospel,
when dismissed with the rest to preach the Gospel? I might be infinite this
way.

How then is knowledge by our Savior made a pledge of eternal life? Ioh.
17.3. Ans. Knowledge of God in Christ, admits sundry differences, according to
Measures, Manor, Efficacy. First, there is a confused knowledge of 2. Pet. 1.9
Mu^paxontes.
which men poare-blind have of things far distant. Such for the most part is
the knowledge of Reprobates. To hear how fluently those men can discourse of
the secrets of Nature, how distinctly they utter things, which natural reason
apprehends, it many times breeds admiration in the minds of the hearers. But
when they come to speak of the mysteries of Religion, alas, how confusedly
tumble they out their little or no apprehension? that every man may see they
are but smatterers in the secrets of Christ. The knowledge of Gods children is
much more distinct.

Secondly, there is a general knowledge of CHRIST another particular. In
generals some castawaies go far, perhaps beyond the Elect children of GOD.
But to Jobs knowledge never came Reprobate.

I know that (my) Redeemer lives. Job. 19.25. Gal. 2 20 Ps. 66.16. Phil. 3.10
to Paul's never, Christ loved (me) and gave himself for (me.) never to David's,
I will tell you what he has done for (my) soul. Thirdly, there is a Knowledge
consisting in Theorie; there is another which sense and experience; when we
know and feel the power of Christ's death, Phil. 3.10
and the virtue of his resurrection. In the Theoricall excel the wicked, not
so in the Experimental.

Idle and unfruitful Knowledge; there is again a Knowledge that is mother of
holy obedience. 2. Pet. 1.8 1. Ioh. 3.3
And this distinct, particular, experimental, practical Knowledge is that,
that undoubtedly accompanies salvation.

Let me apply it thus to these times, full of science, void of conscience;
wherein how many bless themselves in this that they know, and yet know not, in
what point of knowledge they outstrip a Reprobate? Try the^ the light which is
in thee, whether it be more, then may be in the children of darkness. For
which purpose, to the former distinctions add also these two characters. Look
first, If Humility be joined with Knowledge. Knowledge (vn-sanctified) puffs
up the heart, 1. Cor. 8.2
and makes it swell with contempt of our Brethren. Now would God there were not
too evident footsteps of this uncharitable despising our brethren! How are our
papers stuffed with contemptuous speeches of them? English divines, Nouices,
Abecedaries in divinity, are now the best speeches we can afford our
fellow laborers, perhaps less traveled in the Ancients than our selves, yet
as fruitful in their ministry, as they, yt to them selves seem greater
Clearks. Alas (beloved) who has separated thee? or what have thou, which thou
have not received? either what piety teaches, to vpbtaid with Ignorance those,
who have not reached to thy measure of scorning Knowledge? Ignorance (if any)
would be pitied, not insulted over, especially in Brethren. Pro. 10.21.
Consider secondly, whether there be in thee a desire of Communicating. The
lips of the Righteous feed many, says Solomon: and again, Pro. 15.7.
The lips of the wise spread abroad Knowledge* and knowledge, where ever it is
in sou^dnesse, is as new wine in vessels desirous of vent. What then may be
thought of those Seraphicall Doctors (as they would seem the only Gnasticks
of these times, for whose profound learning, no one soul can say he is the
better?

But I hasten to the next step. The second degree.
Have tasted of the heavenly gift. To omit the conjectures of others: This
heavenly gift I take to be Jesus Christ, with those treasures of wisdom and
righteousness, which the Lord has stored up in him, and tenders to every of
us to be received by the hand of faith. If thou know the gift of God, and
who it is, that says unto thee, etc. Ioh. 4.10. These latter words some take
exegeticos, intimating that this gift, noted with that exoke, is Christ Jesus
himself, made to us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. Compare herewith Romans 8.32. This then is the thing, which the
Apostle affirms, that even Reprobates attain unto; viz. An ouerly
apprehension of the excellency of Christ Jesus, and the blessed estate of
those, that are made partakers of him by faith: they may see, what is the
comfort of remission of sins; of a conscience sprinkled with ye blood of
Christ; of free access with confidence to the throne of grace. As Agrippa
having heard Paul deliver the sum of the Gospel, the humiliation and glory
of Christ, the benefits thence accruing unto us, as one ravished with the
excellency of these things, cries out: Act. 26.28.
Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. And Balaam, that wretch,
beholding the blessed estate of Gods people, desirous to partake with them in
happiness, passionately thus prays: Oh that my soul might dye the death of the
righteous, Number. 23.10.
and my latter end be like his!

What is then the difference, betwixt the sweetness, which Gods children find
in Christ, and that which the Heirs of perdition apprehend? Ans. A child of
God, seeing the excellency of Christ Jesus, values him at so high a rate,
Scobala, Phil. 3.8.
as that for winning of him, he accounts all things dung and dr^sse, what ever
profit it lose him, what ever trouble it gain him, he strives as for life and
death to be partaker of him. Ep^st. 1. ad Isehodor.
That pious cruelty, Saint Hierome speaks of, you shall see in him; If father,
mother, wife, children, any thing lie in his way to hinder him from Christ he
treads all under foot for Christ's sake, and loves not life unto death, having
once tasted of the sweetness of his blood, desires to drink deeper of it, yea
though much bitterness of the Cross be therewithal mingled. With Hypocrites it
is far otherwise: if wishing would win him, they would not want him: or if
together with him they might enjoy the pleasures of their sins, nothing
should be more welcome. But to sell all for Christ and his Cross, to exchange
the treasures of Egypt for his rebuke, this is an hard saying: no Reprobate
can endure it.

The third degree.
The 3. step in their progress follows. Partakers of the holy Ghost. Some
hereby understand Renewing: I would believe, Ioh. 14.16. Ioh. 4.14.
but that Christ tells me, He the Renewing spirit abides for ever, is immortal
seed, a Well of living waters, springing up to life eternal. What then is the
holy Ghost here mentioned? and how far are they partakers of him? Ans. What
if we understand it of those extraordinary gifts of the spirit, whereof in the
history of the Acts is frequent mention? Learned Interpreters seem not to
dissent. But let me add something more: Other gifts of the Spirit there are,
which Reprobates partake; of kin (perhaps) to sanctification, but yet not
sanctification. 2. Tim. 1.7. Romans 8.15. Heb. 12.17.
1. That spirit of Compunction and Fear how many Cast-awaies are possessed
withal, howling even with the voice of Dragons for their sins, as causes of
that horror wherewith their Consciences are surprised? 2. Out of this Fear
flows an excellent measure, External reformation and restraint; so powerful,
as (were it not the Issue discouers Hypocrisy) thou would swear they were
true Nathaniels, right Israelites indeed. 3. Yea more then this, A wonderful
seruency of zeal for the Lord of Hosts. Come with me and see the zea e that I
have for the Lord, says halting Iehu, 2. Reg. 10. 16. 4. And to conclude) with
how many holy motions are such men inspired? how often hear they that voice
behind them, Is 30.21.
This is the way, walk in it? yea purposes also conceived, to follow the
spirits guidance?

In this point therefore, wherein do Gods children go beyond them? Ans. That
always is accomplished in the Saints, which S. Paul prays for the
Thessalonians; that they are sanctified throughout; in their whole spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and soul and body, and that especially in them is eminent, Their hearts are
renewed to an unfeigned l^ue of God in Christ Jesus; so that whatsoever they do
in Gods service, proceeds from this fountain, Love of God in Christ, 2. Cor.
5.14.

Follows their fourth staire. The fourth degree. Luk 2.10. Romans 10.15.
Have tasted of the good word of God. I like that exposition. The good word of
God, that is, the Gospel, that tidings of good things, and great joy to Gods
people. For herewith are the wicked affected even to rejoicing. They receive
the word with joy, Mat. 13.20.

Now (briefly) the differences betwixt them and Gods children in rejoicing are
these. 1. Grounds of joy in the deep mysteries, things nouellons and rare much
affect them, as Athenians, Act. 17.20. Mar. 12.37. 2. Misunderstanding: the
promises ravish them, the Conditions are distastefull; Restraints
uncomfortable. As to malefactors in prison, the tidings of a general pardon
after a Parliament, how welcome is it? the preface especially runs merrily;
It pleases the King of his merciful inclination, to pardon all faults, and
offenses. But when the restraints come in the after-clause, Except murder,
Treasons, and Burglaries, etc. how is all that joy turned into mourning, and
murmuring at the grace of the Pardoner, from which they are excluded? 3. This
joy arises suddenly, like a flash of lightning: Mat. 13.20.
Incontinently (says our Savior) they receive the word with joy. Whereas
never was child of God suddenly brought from Hell to Heaven, from the
discomfort of a wounded conscience, presently to suddenly wrought, so as
suddenly and irrecouerably lost; whereas the joy of the Saints Ioh. 16.22. 5.
This sweetness once tasted by a child of God, by an heart seasoned with grace,
so affects them, Pro. 23.23.
that all things are sooner parted with then the Gospel. An Hypocrite likes
well of the word, ad haras vsque, till it touch him in his earthly profits*
howbeit, rather then the s^ine should perish, Christ himself shall be entreated
to depart out of their Coasts, Mat. 8.34.

The last degree. Caieton ad locum.
The highest pitch, they can reach unto, remains. Tasted of the powers of the
world to come. Caieton (me thinks) well aims at the meaning. To taste of the
powers of the world to come, (says he) is, when a man for the world to come,
for the future resurrection, and the last judgment, begins to set up the
regiment of the soul over the body. Thus speaks he like a Philosopher, of
flesh and spirit. Let me add something for more distinct explanation. Men are
said to taste of the powers of the world to come, when as the meditation of the
life to come, beginning at the last judgment, works powerfully in their
hearts. How powerful this meditation is, Luke 13.24.
we may see in many seeking to enter, but not being able. Take for insta^ce
those poor souls in ye Church of Rome, drunken with the wine of that harlots
fornicatio^s. What volu^tary macerating of the body, distributing their goods,
abandoning the world, see we in them, and all to purchase their heaven? Never
were the Priests of Baal more zealous for their Idol, then these for
themselves, to win salvation. And shall we say they enter? If any man so
think, Romans 9.31, 32.
I may commend his charity, but shall never approve his judgment. Hear the
Apostle, Israel, which followed the law of righteousness, attained not to the
law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as by
the work of the law.

The application is easy. And though I will not say, but that some man holding
justification by works in theft, may perhaps be saved: yet this I think I may
be ^old to affirm, whosoever holds it in hypothesi for his own particular, a
Jew, or Infidel may be saved as soon as he.

What is then the odds betwixt Gods child, and a reprobate in this behalf?
Ans. A Reprobate makes himself the only or principal term of his intention
in all his performances; nor otherwise can desire Gods glory, then as
subordinate to his own benefit. A mere mercenary affection shall you see in
all such: no one thing done of love toward God, or with sincere desire to
glorify his name. Gods child, though he uses meditation of salvation as a
spur to obedience, yet beholds something beyond it, more to be desired; that
is, That God in all things may be glorified. And if ever the question could
come betwixt Gods glory and the salvation of his soul, whether should be
preferred, Romans 9.3.
rather had he be Anathema from Christ, then that the glory of GOD should be
impeached. Its an excellent speech of Bernard, Bernard. de diligendo Deo. cap.
3.
Non sine praemio d ligitur Deuteronomy, etsi absque praemit intuitu di^gendus sit.
and again, Vacua ^amque vera charitas esse non potest, nec tamen mercenaria
est. And this is the undoubted character of our adoption, and regeneration to
that immortal, undefiled, and neuer-fading inheritance, reserved for us in the
heavens.

Now (brethren) for closing up of this point, Application. 2. Cor. 13.5.
give me leave to exhort, as the Apostle does; Prove your selves whether you
be in the faith or no; examine your selves. He doubles the exhortation,
because its a matter weighty, and of most difficult performance* and Peter, 2.
Pet. 1.10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. Beloved in Christ
Jesus, its no so ordinary a grace, as we commonly imagine, to be assured of
salvation, or adoption. For behold, how many great things even Reprobates
attain unto! Knowledge of the mystery of Christ; apprehension of his
excellency; worthy gifts of the holy Ghost; rejoicing in the Gospel; many
powerful effects of the world to come; and yet are neither chosen to
salvation, nor indeed truly regenerate to a lively hope in CHRIST JESUS. Alas
(beloved) how many are there amongst us, boasting of undoubtful assurance of
salvation, that never reached to this scantling of Reprobates!

I say therefore again, Prove we and examine ourselves, sift we these
deceitful hearts of ours to the bottom, that we may attain some measure of
well grounded assurance, that we are the sons of God. Let this also be the
touchstone which the Lord seems to commend unto us. Compare we our measure of
grace, with that we find Reprobates to have attained; nor let us ever please
our selves in any one, till we can say of every one, Herein yet I go beyond a
Reprobate: Thus far could never castaway ascend. What if we have the
knowledge of Christ? what if faith, so that we could remove mountains, and
want obedience? Can that knowledge save us? can that faith assure us? Behold,
even Reprobates allege for themselves; Lord, Mat. 7.22
have not we prophesied in thy name? and in thy name cast out Devils? yet
hear their uncomfortable dismission, Depart from me, I know you not. What
though we have seen the excellency of CHRIST JESUS? can wish, as Balaam, our
souls may dye as the righteous? what if we lament, with Esau? take thought
with Judas, and wish our sins had never been committed? yea, what if our
outward life be reformed and amended, and actions performed, sauouring of
uprightness and zeal for the LORD? have not Reprobates (I pray you) gone even
thus far?

Nor let any man say, that this is a desperate and an uncomfortable doctrine;
It is so, (perhaps) to presumers, while such: but tends in the issue to the
greater and stronger comfort and consolation of GODS chosen elect. He has
comfort indeed, that has such as will hold out in the day of their temptation
and trial. I never liked that Academicall Acatalepsy in this point of Gods
love and purpose to save; for men to hang like meteors in the air, betwixt
Heaven and Hell, doubtful hope and slavish fear. Bernard Ep. 190.
Academicorum sint astimationes istae (says Bernard) quorum est dubitare de
omnibus, scire nihil. Let us leave these thinkings to Academicks, whose
profession is to doubt of all things, and to be certain of nothing.

They may make men hypocrites, can never work sound and sincere obedience. We
love God, 1. Ioh. 4.19. Romans 5.5.
because he loved us first. And it is impossible to love him, till we have his
love shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost. And let men say what they
will, that it destroys all care of good life, this yet is the truth; Thou
never begin rest to live well indeed, till thou know, Heb. 11.6.
that thou and thy works are accepted with God, and shall certainly be
rewarded. Then runns a man chearefully in the race of Christianity, when he
knows he runs not at uncertainties. 1. Cor. 9.26.
And it dulls the affection in well-doing, while we are ignorant, or doubtful
of our reward. But yet there is another rock, as dangerous as this, at which
many a soul makes shipwreck; that is, Presumption. Yea I dare say, more
perish by presuming, then ever did by despairing. Therefore I say again with
Peter, Be diligent to make thy calling and election sure; and know, it is
possible to attain assurance, but thou had need be diligent; God is not
prodigal of such graces, as do accompany salvation.

The last thing remains; namely, The peril of Apostasy. The third special
branch of the Text.
It Is impossible for men thus enlightened, etc. and falling away, etc. to be
renewed to repentance. Let us first weigh the terms, Falling, Impossibility,
Repentance.

Of fallings there are three degrees. 1. Lapsus; particular slips, or foiles,
that even Gods servants take in wrestling against sin. Secondly,
Declinations, or ebbings, (as I may term them) of GODS grace in their hearts.
Thirdly, Relapsing and falling away to a course of impiety.

Gal. 6.1.
As touching particular slips, which Paul calls Paraptomata, we heard before
what Nouatians taught, that even these after Baptism were irrecouerable. Being
pressed with diverse instances of Gods Saints, of whose repentance we read, as
well as of their falls, and with those Scriptures, which testify our common
infirmity, and Gods readiness to show mercy; at length they begin to restrain
it to some particulars; as 1. Fornication. 2. Idolatry. 3. ^eniall of Christ in
persecution. These they taught, to be sins of so high a Nature, as admitted
no pardon, nor possibility of repenting. S. Augustine thus dealt by instance
from point to point. Lib. quest. de vtroq. testa. mi^^m.
For fornication we have (says he) David's example. He might have said, for
in^e t itself Lot. And lest any man say, This was in the old Testament true,
not so in the new; besides that (as Augustine observes) it is incredible, that
in this day of grace Gods mercy should be scanted; 2. Cor. 2.7, 8. 1. Cor. 5.5.
what say we of that Incestuous person, for whose restoring again into the
Church, Paul himself becomes a Petitioner, and testifies, that his delivery up
to Satan was to this end, that his spirit might be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus?

As for Idolatry, the same Father thus reasons from the Lords fact, inuiting a
people deeply engaged in this sin to Repentance, and proclaiming pardon: Quos
vtique ad paenitentiam Dominus non horta^etur, (says the blessed Martyr,
Cipri. ep. lib. 4. ep. 2. ad Anton.
and Bishop, Saint Cyprian) nisi quia poenitentibus indulgentiam pollicetur.
The Lord would never exhort unto Repentance, were it not that he (not only
purposed, but) promised also pardon to them repeating. He might have added, as
in other places, the promise of God to the Jews, Ezekiel. 36.25.

And for denial of Christ through infirmity, how plain an instance have we in
the Apostle Peter, Mat. 26.
denying, yea abiuring Christ Jesus through fear of persecution, yet brought
to Repentance, ^mb. de P^it. lib. 1. (...) 3.
and received to mercy? And as holy Ambrose speaks, Numquid eadem est causa
eius qui sponte negat, et eius quem tormenta inclinauerint ad sacrilegium, non
voluntas? Again, Vicit eos poera non auertit perfi^ia. Idem ibid. cap. 4.
Item, Ipsius Diaboli de huiusmodi lap is si requiramus sententiam, nonne
videtur dicere, Populus hic labits me honorat, cor autem eorum long est a me?
Gal 6.1.
And what means the Apostle, to bid Restore those that are overtaken by infi
mity, if there be no hope of restitution? And the beloved Disciple, hese things
I write, that you sin not; 1. Job 2.1. Epi t. qua supra.
but if any sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, etc.

To leave therefore this same Caninam herein, as Cyprian terms it, indeed the
murderer of the Brethren: Sins in this question we must learn thus to
measure, not so much b^ the quantity of the matter, wherein they are committed,
as by the greatness of that malice whereout they issue. The se ves blasphemy
was therefore unpardonable, not because ^lasphemy, but because ex maleuolentia,
says Augustine iudicially. Aug. vbi sup.


A second degree in falling, which is also recouerable, is that, which I
termed Declination, or Partial decay of the graces of God for a time, in
respect of their sensible operation. Hereof read what the Spirit speaks to the
Church of Ephesu; Thou have left tby first love, Apoc. 2.5, 6.
he means that fervor of affection, which before they had euidenced. Yet
repent and do thy first works, there is hope of retaining thy Candlestick.
Phil. 4.10.
Paul saw a winter of the Philippia^s love, yet lived to see their care spring
and blossom afresh. And who is there, even of the most perfect, that feels not
these ebbings and slowings of Gods grace within him? What then is that Falling
so desperate, here mentioned? Ans. It is that total Relapsing from grace
received. I cannot in fewer or more pithy terms express it, then Master
Iunius has done before me, thus; Parallel. lib. ^. Cap. 6.
when as a man falls, 1. Totus, 2. Ex toto, 3. In totum: The whole man in
judgment, will, affections, actions, from all grace, to all impious
enormityes. Saint Peter thus, When a man turns away from the holy Commandment
given unto him, 2. Pet. 2.21, 22.
is again entangled and overcome, returns like the Dog to his vomit, and with
the Sow to her wallowing in the mire. The Repentance of such men, so falling,
is impossible.

Impossibility is of 2. sorts: one Absolute: the other ex hypothesi. Absolutely
impossible it is not, they should be renewed; for what contradictio^ implies
it? But supposing the unchangeable will of God to ye contrary: so it is
impossible they should ever repent; because ye righteous Lord has determined
thus to punish their malicious desertio^.

Repentance.) they may come perhaps ad metamelegan: so did Judas; Sap. 5.4.
and if the damned in hell befoole themselves for impiety, why may not these
men come to such an after thought-taking, and wish, that their sins had never
been committed? But to a godly sorrow and change of their minds, ad metanogan
it is impossible they should ever be renewed. 2. Pet. 2.21.
Therefore says Peter; It had been better never to have known, then after
Knowledge to turn back: And their latter end (because more hopeless,
therefore) worse, and more discomfortable then their beginning, that is, then
their state before Calling.

Will you now see the equity of this will in God? weigh 1. their fact in it
self. 2. Compare it with ye courses of me^, such as we all hold equal. For
their fact, They crucify to themselves again the Son of God, and expose him
to infamy.

The Scripture uses to implead our actions, not so much considering their
event, which the Lord by his power usually disappoints, as waighing our
intentio^s, and the nature of our deeds, in themselves considered. Example. 1.
Cor. 8.11.
By thy meat shall thy weak brother perish, for whom Christ died. Understand
it not of the event, but of the Nature of the action. So here, the Lord Christ
(indeed) risen from death, now dies no more, but lives for ever clothed with
majesty and honor. Yet, for that their facts in themselves considered, are
semblable to the cursed cruelty of the Jews, they are said again to crucify
the Son of GOD. What? to make Christ our pack-horse for our wilful sins? to
frustrate (as much as in us lies) the end of his death? to draw him down
again from Heaven, to make new satisfaction for our presumptuous rebellions?
to fill the mouths of Pagans with blasphemy of that holy name, after which we
are named? What had the Jews cruelty more execrable in it? Such Mis-creants,
who will not say, but they are justly deprived of the benefit of Christ's
sacrifices and perish eternally in fearful expectation of vengeance, Heb.
10.26, 27.
and of violent fire to devour them? Again, Compare the Lords dealing with
that, which we all count equal amongst men.

When a man has spent the utmost of his pain, and cost, and s^ill in manuring
his ground, hoping to reap benefit by his industrious and costly husbandry,
yet finds no crop, but thorns and briefs; say we not of such soil, that it
deserves not the second pains of the owner, but to be left as a Desert, and
dwelling for wild Beasts? yea, to be accursed for ever, and devoted to the
fire? And when the Lord has labored with such barren hearts, ploughed up
their fallow ground, sown the seeds of eternal life, watered them with the
dew of heaven, looks (as justly he may) for fruits of obedience, reapes none
but the cursed fruits of contemning his graces and wilful Apostasy; is it not
equal with the Lord, to give hardness of heart? to destinate to destruction,
never to be recovered? This is the righteous Lords dealing with Apostates; this
the recompense he reapes, for all his pains bestowed on them. Holy therefore,
and just, and equal is this will of God, in giving up such to hardness and
impossibility of repenting.

Now (Brethren) we have heard the meaning of the Text, we have seen the truth
of what is here taught, Application.
with ye equity of this judgment of God upon their souls: Let me now exhort
in the Apostles words, Heb. 3.12.
Take heed (I say again take heed) lest there be in any of us an evil heart,
and unfaithful, to depart from the living God. Surely, except the Lord should
presently send us down to the place of our iniquity, where is pain endless,
easlesse, and remediless, he could not inflict a greater judgment, then thus
to permit us to Apostasy. And let no man say, this caveat concerns not him:
If any man seem to himself to stand, 1. Cor. 10.12.
let him, (of all others) take heed, lest he fall. Yea, I would to God, there
were not too evident tokens, I say not of Apostasy, but of declinings at least
to a worse condition, in many of us. There is beside this universal reuolting,
another kind of Apostasy, which we call partial, a fearful incliner to this
irrecouerable condition: And it is of three sorts. 1. in Judgment, 2. in
Affection, 3. in Practice.

In Judgment, when a man, in some particulars, falls from the soundnes and
sincerity of judgment. The Apostle lays this to the charge of the Galatians;
that having bin rightly instructed in the means of justification and
salvation, Gal. 1.6. and 3.3.
they were presently carried away to another Gospel; and having begun in the
spirit, would be perfected in the flesh. And are there not evidences ynow of
such Declinings in many of us? We were wont to have our Schools and pulpits
ring of this truth, Apoc. 18.4.
The Pope is Antichrist, Rome Babylon, and that whosoever will be saved, must
forsake communion with her. Of late we have be thought our selves of a new See
for Antichrist: new Rome, rather then the old; a new City, set on seven hills,
never dreamt of till of late, discovered by Popish Geographers. But blessed be
God that has directed the heart and pen of our learned Sovereign, M^^it.
pref. prefix. Apol.
so graphically to be be paint him by his place, properties, time of revealing!
etc. So that now (I doubt not) Antichrist shall again be Antichrist, Rome
Babylon, and our people exhorted, not so much to bethink themselves of
returning to Rome, as their mother, as to fly from that scarlet whore, made
drunk with the blood of Gods Saints. We were wont to be taught justification by
faith only, without works of Nature, Law, yea or of Grace it self. Shall we
not say, they decline apace, that will have works enter Justification, tincta
sanguine Christi* died red in the blood of Christ? Auricular Confession we were
justly taught to detest, as a snare of men's Consciences, a burden not to be
endured by Christians. How then say some amongst us, there needs no more but a
modification? separate some few abuses in the manner, the thing may well be
restored in the Church. These are strange declinations: GOD grant, not
forerunners of greater Apostasy.

In affection, when the heat of our zeal for God, and love Apoc. 2.4
I have a few things against thee (says the Lord to the Angel of Ephesus)
that thou have left thy first love. Shall I say, the Lord has a few things,
and not rather many against the Church of England, for leaving her first love?
where it that ancient severity and strict hand over Papists? of whom I may well
say, They are generally of the slauishest nature of any me^ under the Sun;
the very children of Hagar; a little of her Masters indulgence what insolency
works it? longer then she feels the rod of her mistress, ouer-insolent. And
who ever saw the fruit of lenity this way, that the number has bin any way
abated, and not rather increased by forbearance? How odious once was that Idol
of the Mass? when, if men would needs adore it, Ezekiel. 8.12. Hos. 4.13.
it must be in the chambers of their Imagery, made in the walls. Now (if Fame
be not too foul a lier) on every hill, under every green tree, may the
lovers of the whore commit their fornications; yea, eue^ in London, the eye of
the Land, no where more frequent.

In Practice: when in manners we grow more dissolute, Isa. 1.6.
The whole head is sick, and the whole heart heavy; from the crown of the
head to the sole of ye foot there is nothing sound, but all full of swellings
and putrified sores. The Court and City full of effeminate delicacy; the
Country of hellish profaneness; Magistrates shameless in bribery; Ministers
even benumbed with idleness; the people generally become Libertines in
Religion. Gal. 5.7.
Beloved, ye did run well, who has let you (still) to obey the truth?
Courtiers were wont to account Religion their glory, and he was of old esteemed
most honorable, that was most careful to promote the Gospel. How now begin
they to cast lots for Christ's coat, and to share amongst them the portion of
Leui? Genesis 47.22.
things which amongst the barbarous Egyptians were accounted holy? And when
(till now) lacked the English Court some Tribunes of the people, careful to
keep from the^ ouer-grieuous impositions? How do all men seek their own?
Mich. 3.2. Is. 1.21.
and almost pluck off the skins of the people? How is the faithful City
become an harlot? It was full of judgment, and Justice lodged there; but now
they are become murderers; their silver is become dross, their wine mixed
with worse then water. It was wont to be reckoned the blemish of Germans, to be
given to bowzing; Is it not so, that what was wont to be their shame, is now
accounted our glory? to be mighty to drink wine, and strong to power in strong
drink? To say nothing of that presumptuous and even defended profanation of
the LORDS Sabboths; that rifenes of Oaths, Ie. 28.10.
even in these days, when the land mournes for them. Are not these then
apparent evidences of our declinings? And as I said ere-while, God grant they
be not harbingers of greater mischiefs.

Preservatives against Apostasy* Special.
I will draw now toward conclusion, some few preservatives only against this
fearful downfall shall be prescribed, and then an end. These, some of them
concern men of public place, Magistrates and Ministers; some, every of us,
even private Christians.

For Magistrates.
As touching Magistrates, they are or should be, pillars of the people, and
means especially to support the^. And first, by vigilance. That charge of the
Apostle given in general to Gods people, belongs by an exoche to men in
authority. Heb. 12.15.
Take heed that no man fall away from the grace of God. see another caveat
Subordinate, Let no root of bitterness (whether in doctrine or manners spring up
and trouble you, lest thereby many be infected. Know you not, Gal. 5.9.
that a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump* says he again, pointing at
corruption in doctrine, which same sentence is also applied to evil example in
life; 1. Cor. 5.6. Beloved, these are the things, requiring the special
vigilance and care of Magistrates. We have bin taught, not by Tertullian only,
but by the Lord himself, 2. Tim. 3.16.
to reverence the fulness of the Scriptures. If any now shall arise, and deny
the sufficiency of them for determinations of all controversies in substance or
circumstance of Religion, let ye Church officers hold and censure him, as a
Destroyer. We were wont to exhort our people, old, young, men, women, to
diligent conuersing of the Bible: If any shall attempt to make enclosure of
this common benefit to the Clergy, let him taste the severity of
Ecclesiastical discipline. These are Gangrenes (indeed) in the Church, and
such speeches as will increase to more ungodliness. 2. Tim. 2.16.


The like I say of evil examples in life; if any such arise, thither let the
Magistrate hasten to restrain them. Corruptions in judgment slow commonly
from neglect of good life. 1. Tim. 1.19.
They have put away good conscience (says Paul) and then as concerning faith
make shipwreck. This exhortation is often used to the Magistrates of this
place; We heard the last day of 4. capital sins, raging amongst you: my
purpose is, to insist in one only, which (if any other) is the bane of all
grace in the heart: that is, Adultery. whoredom and wine, etc. steal away the
heart. And it is true, Hos 4.11.
Adultety and Idolatry, they are contiguous vices: they were the very bane of
Solomon, the wisest King that ever reigned over Israel. And if my little
observance deceive me not, the great sin, as of this Land in general, so of
this City especial. I come not often into your City; yet let me tell you what I
saw in my very entrance upon your suburbs: A woman, right of a Courtisans
behavior, as Solomon describes her; Pro. 7.
at whose gates (alas) how many young spend-thrifts wait, as weary of their
patrimony and souls salvation? Right honorable, might it please you to be
advised, to observe the ways of such strumpets: These are they which, of all
others, increase transgressions amongst men: these the Devils very netts and
snares, wherein (alas) how many are entangled even to destruction? and for this
(no doubt) is the Lords dreadful visitation still upon us, Ier. 5.7, 9.
because men committed adultery, and assemble themselves by companies in the
barlots houses.

The Country likewise swarms with idle, ignorant, scandalous Ministers. yea, I
am persuaded, all those Emissary Seminaries, that have come unto us from Rome,
never did half that harm in alienating our people from the truth, that these
have done by their enormous behavior. It Is thought, our petite dissensions are
great causes of hardening in Popery: It may well so be. Howbeit this I dare
affirm, they were never so great obstacles to the course of the Gospel, as
the loytering, unlettered, dissolute amongst the Clergy. Now Lord, that ever
Brownists should have cause to say of our Church; She held it a piaculum, not
to wear a surplice, and a venial sin, to be a lewd-liued Minister!

Shall I add (since I have begun) one thing more, that may concern Authority?
2. Par. 17.8, 9.
Of I^hosaphat it is said, that when he went to plant Religion amongst the
people, and to prevent Idolatry, he sent Levites abroad into the cities of
Judah, to teach and instruct the people in the ways of the Lord. Beloved, we
have a good will (it seems) to stop ye spreading of Popish superstition; many
good proiects we hear of (to our great comfort) for that purpose: sospitet
Deus! I pray God prosper them! yet give me leave to advise, that the principal
be not neglected, I mean, furnishing our Congregations with able and
industrious teachers. I may boldly speak it, It Is neither severity of
discipline, nor acuteness of writing, nor ought else preuailes so much to
root out these stinking weeds of superstition, as the pains and diligence of
learned and well-liuing preachers. Let me therefore with reverence advise my
Superiors, that care may be had to furnish our people with able Pastors, that
may feed them with knowledge and understanding, and if the present store of
Conformers serve not, might I not (in compassion of the Churches necessity)
wish some conn^ue^c^ at those, that dissent from us in judgment, for matters
of circumstance, whilst yet they carry themselves peaceably in the Church? The
Lord would not have Canaanites at once cast out, Exodus 23.29.
lest the wild beasts should increase upon his people. Suffer me then to plead
for Israelites, that it may suffice them to lack living, and the Church not be
deprived of their pains: at least let them help to be are our burdens, and
draw water for the people out of the wells of salvation.

I come to the Ministry: and first, For Ministers.
for our Brethren dissenting from us in judgment of Ceremonies imposed; let me
entreat as in the bowels of Jesus Christ, seeing Apostasy is so much feared by
them, that they would be well advised, how they forsake their Mother in this
her seeming necessity: and not so wholly please themselves in their judgment,
to refuse peaceable Conference for their better information. I counsel no man
to do ought (no not in things indifferent) with a doubting conscience;
fearful are the examples of such, as vn-resolued yield to practice.
Notwithstanding, this let me propou^d as a matter to be deliberated, whether
should not this be a Ministers resolution, To lay down his Ministry for
nothing, for which he ought not also to lay down his life? And whether with
comfort may a man leave life, rather then we are a surplice in the Church of
England? teaching (as no doubt, she does) and practicing Gods pure worship,
detesting Idolatry, urging Ceremonies not for ornament, much less necessity of
Gods service, but for order and policy only, and as a mean to test^fie
subjection to the lawful power of the Magistrates?

For us, who by Gods blessing retain our standings with comfort and fruit,
Romans 14.
howsoever it please some (whose servants we are not) to censure us of
insincerity for this very point of Conformity, 2. Tim. 4.2.
let us be exhorted to preach the word, to be instant in season, out of season.
for the times surely are come prophesied of the Apostle, wherein that itch of
the ear is rise amongst our people. And we hear also often vpbraidings with
the praeualence of Popish leaven, how many thousands have they perverted, since
his Majesty's happy entrance into this Kingdom; and for my part I do partly
believe it: Mat. 13.25.
For what marvel, if the Enemy sow his tares, whiles the servants sleep? I
know not, how it is with you in this part of the Kingdom; in other places I am
sure, scarcely one of six Congregations has ordinary preaching, or almost
rude Catechizing of the people. yea, so odious is paines-taking grown amongst
Ministers also, that very painfulnes is censured of precisenes, and ordinary
preaching enough, to bring upon any man the crime of Puritanisme, though never
so conformable to the discipline established. Now, Brethren, consider if this
be to be precise, to labor in the word and doctrine, ought not all Gods
ministers to be thus precise in Action, not in Faction? said one once
elegantly. Be therefore exhorted (and but high time) to greater diligence, and
let the vaunts of Papists be unto us as the voice of Nehemiah to the Jews; You
see our misery: Neh. 2.17
Come and let us build the walls of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach.
And for matter, and manner, 1. Pet. 2.2.
let it be that same adolon gala, the deceitful milk of the word, without
mixture with contrary or inferior matter: for this only yields found
nourishment unto the soul. Is Fame a liar? or is it true, that those and the
like places of eminency in this Kingdom, sound with little else, but Frierly
conceits and allusions? We were wont to plead strongly for Fathers, that they
might have their audience in the Pulpitt, and for my part, I never envied them
their due respect. But if we become a Patribus, ad Fratres, from Orthodox
Fathers to doltish Friars, and feed our people with the froth of their wits,
what shall we say? God grant their conceits of wit prove not a snare, to draw
down the more poisonous and bane-full drugges of their Popish heresy.

And here I had thought with reverence to have exhorted the reverend Fathers of
the Church, that as they are in highest places of dignity, so they would be the
forwardest in this great work of the Ministry. The rather would I have
presumed to have bin their Monitor, for that I have observed, the Religion
especially of our Vulgar people, to hang (all-most all) on their sleeves: we
petit Ministers (alas!) are the scorn of our people, in our most weighty and
serious exhortations. Their words are held as Oracles, their lips alone thought
to preserve Knowledge. Sundry reasons I meant to have pressed it withal;
first, from the Excellency of this work, above all other acts of the
Ministry. For, for my part I must profess, I cannot yet see, what that great
and important business of the Ministry should be, to which it may beseem
Preaching to give place. I am sure not Sacraments. Christ sent me not to
baptize (says the holy Apostle) but to preach the Gospel. He might as well
have said, 1. Cor. 1.17.
not to govern, not to do any thing, in this sense, comparatively, as he
desires to be understood. Secondly, Is there any thing, more honorable? Hear
the same Apostle, 1. Tim 5.17. Chrysostom. ad locum.
The Elders, that rule well, are worthy of double honor. Call it Reverence or
Maintenance, or both; how ever, a specialty in it belo^gs to them, that labor
in the word and doctrine. and sure it is, more sound honor is there to be
gained in the hearts of our people by preaching, then by all outward helps
whatsoever. Thirdly, what said I? honor amongst men? yea, more comfort to our
Consciences, and glory in Gods Kingdom. Hear Solomon; He that wins souls,
Pro. 11.30. Dan. 12.3.
is wise* and Daniel, They that turn others to righteousness, they shall
shine as the stars in the firmament, and Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.
What is our hope, our joy, our crown of rejoicing? are not you it in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? What comfort like this, when
a Minister comes before the Lord the great Shepherd of the Sheep, with the
words of Isaiah, Is. 8.18.
applied to our Savior? Lo me, and the children, that thou have given me!
the sons and daughters, which by thy blessing I have begotten unto thee in
the Gospel! Fourthly, I would have added hereto the example of their worthy
predecessors. Beloved, I am so far from thinking that there were Lay Elders
in the Ancient Church, having the care of Church discipline, that I begin to be
of opinion, they were all Preaching-Elders, that had to do in ordination, and
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. The Apostles (we know) from whom our Reverend
Bishops have more then probably derived their succession, were all laborious
this way. One of them, on whose shoulders lay the care of all the Churches, 1.
Cor. 9.16.
yet cries, Woe to him self, if he preach not the Gospel. And Timothy, I
presume, was a Bishop; yet has that charge laid on him with an heavy
adiuration, 1. Tim. 4.1, 2.
To preach the word. And for succeeding ages; those Reverend Bishops, S.
Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, etc. what monuments have they left us more
venerable then their pithy Sermons, and exhortations to the people? Let us all
therefore, even Superiors, be exhorted, so much as infirmities of age, and the
weighty affairs of Church-gouernment will permit, to stir up the gift of God
that is in us, that if it be possible, we may strengthen the weak knees; and
keep that which is halting from being turned out of the way.

General preservatives for all.
I come now to private Christians, that they also may have wherewith to preserve
themselves from this fearful and discomfortable estate of Apostasy. Their
most sovereign antidotes, are these.

Obedience according to their measure of knowledge received. This is the
Christian built on the Rock, Mat. 7. ad fin.
that hears the word of God, and does it. On such a man let the winds blow,
the floods beat, the rain fall, he stands nevertheless immovable; for he is
built upon the Rock. Our Adversaries boast much of their thousand Proselytes:
I am persuaded, if they were enquired of, they should be found such, as never
made any Conscience of their ways. Now sure, we are beholden to them, that
they have received (like a Draught) the Excreme^ts of our Church. Let them
rejoice, and applaud themselves in their Thousands; for this yet take my
warrant; They shall never win credit to any Religion, whatsoever it is they
profess.

Syncerity and uprightness of the heart before God. Beloved, I never knew
right Nathaniel, true Israelite indeed, that proved a Revolt; Nor ever could
read of Hypocrite, but became Apostate, if ever trouble arose for the Gospel.
It Is a true position, He that begins Religion in hypocrisy, ends in Apostasy.
2. Par. 25.2. Verse 14.
Amaziah did many things sauouring of uprightness in the eyes of the Lord, but
not with a perfect heart. What was his Issue? Returning from the slaughter of
the Edomites, he brought the gods of Se^r, and set them up to be his gods, and
worshipped them, and burnt incense unto them. There is an Art in these times,
that has more Students, then any other of liberal or Manual sciences; the
Art of seeming, especially in Religion. City and Country, almost nothing but
vizars. Now would God we could remember what Chrysostom says; Hypocrite is it
good, to seem good? in Matthew. oper. imperfect.
it is far better to be good. Is it evil, to seem evil? it is far worse,
to be evil, etc. and the saying of Christ (me thinks) should not be forgotten,
To him that has shall be given, Luke 8.18.
and whosoever has not, from him shall be taken even that which it seems
that he has.

Labor for assurance and certain persuasion of the Truth in especially, for
yt which is armor of proof against Apostasy, Experimental sense of Gods holy
truth. Phil. 3.10
Thou shall never fear infection in the point of Justification, if thou know
the practice and experience of Justification. As on the other side, when men
rest only upon the authority of their Teachers and governors, having no
better reasons of belief and worship: no marvel, if they turn with the wind,
and run current with the Current and stream of the times. And this is the
lamentable vnsettlednes of our people, that they look no farther for proof,
no not of faith and worship, then the Authority of the Magistrate. Now blessed
be God, that has given unto his Majesty a right judgment in matters of
Religion; and the Lord that has begun that good work in him, perfect it unto
the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. But if (which be it far from us to surmise)
if, I say, the Lord should suffer him to fall, To cagro dou leuontes. me to
Kurio, Rom 12.11.
or in his wrath deprive us of his government, if he should permit us to a
Popish Ruler, who sees not, how indifferent our people are? such temporazing
is even now rife; and that reading best pleases; serving the time, not the
Lord.

Fors^ke not the assemblies and gatherings together of the Saints, Heb. 10.25.
1. These. 5.19. Exodus 27.20.
as the manner (says the Apostle, and we may say too) of too many it. Quench
not the Spirit; would thou not quench him? Despise not prophesying. that is
the holy oil for the lamp of the Sanctuary: not being supplied therewith, thou
shall soon perceive it to grow dim, and by little and little to an utter
extinction. Now (brethren) to omit both Popish and profane Recusants; Is it not
to be lamented, that amongst those, who seem most to bewail the declinings of
our Church, there should be some found, so either nice or humorous, that they
refuse to arm themselves against that, which they so much fear and pity in
others, by diligent attendance to the work of the Ministry? One (forsooth) is
too learned; another too plain; a third too elegant; or else too rude; some
too formal; some too scrupulous: none pleases, but some one, whom our
parciall conceits have made our Idol. So wanton are we grown with abundance!
God grant, the day come not upon us, when we would wish to run from sea to
sea, to hear, and shall find no means. When children begin to play with their
bread, discreet^ Father^ take it from them, or keep them shorter; and let us
fear, lest this delicacy bring on us a scarcity of hearing the word of God.
Home-deuotions are comfortable, if used in their seasons; but we know who has
said, Pro. 28.9
The prayer of him, that turns his ear from hearing the law, is abominable.
And if we would avoid Apostasy, take heed how we forsake the gathering
together of the Saints.

Beware, how the garishnesse of the world dazzle thine eye, 2. Tim. 4.
Demas overtaken with the love thereof, forsakes Paul. And, Love not the world
(says the beloved Apostle) the fashion thereof passes away; ^ cos nos
paragetas: 1. Ioh. 2.17.
or as some render, the glittering show thereof withdrawes and steals away the
heart from God. How many have our own eyes seen, mirrours of holy carriage in
their mean estate, whom the love of advancement, and the enjoying thereof has
made over dissolute? would God, not also scandalous to their profession.

Keep good conscience precisely, neither allow thy self Romans 14.22.
Blessed is he which condemns not himself in that which he allows. As
blessed he, that allows not himself in that which his heart condemns. Herein
therefore be precise, Do nothing, no not the least, with a doubting or
recoyling conscience. The stroke of Conscience neglected in small things, it
grows by insensible degrees to swallow greater, without reluctation. Fearful
are the instances we have daily in this kind; But I spare to trouble you. One
reason only I will annexe, to set edge on this exhortation, and then shall be
the end. Beloved in Christ Jesus, The Lord has long been amongst us, by the
heauiest of his temporal judgments. Those arrows of his displeasure, Famine
and Pestilence, have been made almost drunken with the blood of our slain. And
yet (behold!) the wrath of the Lord is not ceased, but his hand is stretched
out still. Wonder we at this, that the Lord should walk thus stubburnly
toward us? More wonder it is (but that his mercies are endless) that we have
not bin utterly consumed. For that which Isaiah speaks of Judah, Is. 1.5.
is it not true of us, That we fall away more and more? I can well remember,
since the one half of these miseries has brought us on our Knees in
sackcloth and ashes, in prayer and fasting for our sins, that have drawn
down the wrath of God upon us. And a man would think, these Afflictions
should have that effect in us, which the Lord teaches to be the end of his
Judgments, Hos. 5.15
To make us seek him the more diligently. Oh, that it were not true, that we
harden our hearts the more, continuing and increasing our Apostasies, scarce
ever bethinking our selves of humiliation! As if we meant, to stout it out with
the Lord, and to dare him to do his worst. Oh, Job.
remember who has said, Has any bin fierce against the Lord that has
prospered? and what himself threatens, viz. Leu. 26.
to walk as stubburnly toward us, as we can do against him; and to increase
our plagues seven times more, except the lighter prevail to humble us. Some
course therefore betimes let us take, to stop ye fierce wrath of the Lord, that
is gone out against us. It Is a fearful thing (says our Apostle) to fall into
the hands of the living God, who is in his wrath a Consuming fire. If our
houses had taken fire, we have this wisdom to think, one bucket of water may
do more good to stop the flame, then almost a river, when it has begun to
gather strength. Would God, we were as wise for our lives and souls, as we are
for the trash of this world! Surely, more preualent to quench the fire of Gods
displeasure (in the beginning) is one tear, then a whole shower and stream of
them, when it is once inflamed. Other mean the^ this I know none, to stop ye
course of Gods wrath. 2. Par. 7.13, 14.
If I send pestilence among my people, If my people, among whom my name is
called upon, do humble themselves, and pray, and seek my presence and turn
from their wicked ways, then will I hear in heaven, and be merciful unto
their sin, and will heal their land. Right honorable, why are not you a
petitioner to those in authority, that a Fast may be proclaimed? Stay you, til
you come again to your thousands in a week? Alas, how agrees that with
Christian compassion to those, that in the Interim lose wives, children, those
that are dearest unto them? and what a servile and Pharaoh like resolution is
this, never till needs must, to send for Moses and Aaron, to intercede for us
unto the Majesty of God? I beseech you therefore in the bowels of Christ
Jesus, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy; fulfi^l my request:
importune the performance of this duty; prove the Lord with these things, see
if he rebuke not the Destroyer for your sakes. If you consent and obey, Is 1
19, 20.
you shall eat the good things of the land. But if ye refuse and be
rebellious, God grant I prove not a true Prophet, you and your children, and
your people shall be devoured of the Pestilence. If these things prevail not
with authority, let me yet admonish every of us, that in our houses, by our
selves and our families, we may be careful this way: we shall then see that
gracious promise performed to us and ours, when thousands fall at our right
hands, Ps. 91.7.
and ten thousands at the left, it shall not come nigh us. Ezekiel. 9.4. A mark
is set (by commandment from the Lord) on the forheads of th^se that mourn
for the abominations that are done in the mids of Jerusalem. And let us be
assured of the same LORDS protection for us and ours, if we be such, as from
our hearts mourn for the detestable things are done amongst us.

Now the God of all grace, that has called us to his eternal glory by Jesus
Christ, make us perfect, confirm, strengthen, and stablish us, that we may be
kept blameless unto the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. To him be glory and
dominion for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

