A SERMON PREACHED AT the last general Assise holden for the County of
SOMMERSET at TAVNTON.

By William Sclater Batchelar in Divinity, and Minister of the Word of God at
PITMISTER.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Henry Fetherstone, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Rose. 1616.

To THE WORSHIPFVLL M. JOHN COLLES Esquire, High Sheriff of Sommerset, Mercy
and peace be multiplied.
SJR, J here tender to your view my Sermon preached at your instance, heard
with your best attention, pressed to the Press by importunity of friends:
occasioned by those many abbreuiations, whereto the iniunction of brevity from
superiors forced me. The sum of the whole is this: Therein see you your
station in the Commonwealth warranted by Gods ordinance: the rich Grace of God
in your advancement to so eminent dignity: withal, the duty the Lord expects
from you in respect of your advancement. To prevent pride, you are remembered of
humane frailty: to procure uprightness in proceedings judicial, the terrors
of the Lords judgment are offered to your meditation. Use it as your direction
to these ends: and thus think of the Author, he had rather be deemed any thing
then unthankful. So with my prayers to God for continuance and multiplication
of all heavenly and earthly blessings upon you, J rest

Your thankful and obseruant welwiller, WILLIAM SCLATER.
From Pitmister, July 25. 1616.
A SERMON PREACHED AT the last General Assise holden for the County of
Sommerset at TAVNTON.
PSALM. 82.6.7.




THe Prophet, whether Asaph or David, having taxed the injustice of the Judges
of that time, and addressing himself to denounce Gods judgment against them,
in these words seems to preoccupate the secure thoughts of their pride. Gods
they were by office on earth, without control therefore of men; and, as they
seemed to conceit, exempted from censure of God himself.

The answer is in the person of God: 1. by concession, Its true, I have said ye
are Gods: 2. by correction, but ye shall die as men.

In the words are two things obseruable: 1. the dignity of the Magistrates
office; 2. the infirmity of their persons: their dignity amplified, 1. by the
author, God, I have said; 2. by the eminence, ye are Gods.

Their infirmity noticed in their death, in their fall; both amplified by
similitude or paritie; ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes.

First of the author: I have said. This dixi of the Lord for Magistrates
office, sounds aloud in Scripture, in nature, in heaven, hell, the creatures,
man's nature and conscience.

Pro. 8.
By me Kings reign, says Gods essential wisdom: he means not only by the
secret disposition of his providence, but by express warrant of his ordinance.
The Apostle in new Testament (to prevent the idle exceptions of Anabaptists)
Romans 13.1.
There is no power but of God: Aug. contra Faust. Manich. lib. 22. cap. 7.
Sieve iubente, sieve sinente, says Augustine, by Gods either commission or
permission: that's Augustines gloss: the text adds more: The powers that are,
are (...), ordered and ordained of God. Theophylact. in Romans 13.
The persons are sometimes intruders, as in case of usurpation; sometimes
abusers of their authority, as when they tyrannize: but the powers themselves
have God for their author.

S. Peter indeed calls them 1. Pet. 2.13.
humane ordinances; but he speaks of the several forms, not of the
substance of government.

In nature it self are found impressions of this ordinance: in heaven amongst
Angels are Ephesians. 1.21.
principalities and thrones. And there is an (...), Michael the Jude 9.
Archangell. Amongst the Spheres, there is one first moveable commander of all
the inferiors with his motion. Amongst Stars, there are greater and lesser
lights, rulers amongst the rest. Yea such a power there is of this dixi, that
the sound thereof has pierced down to hell. Devils have their principalities,
not only over other creatures, but respectively amongst themselves: therefore
it is said, Mat. 25.41.
the Devil and his Angels, and Mat. 12.24
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

To say nothing of bruit creatures, amongst which yet Philosophers have
observed a perfect form of regiment and policy: in man that (...), how does
every thing plead for government? his constitution, his inclination, his
conscience. So has God tempered him in his fabric and constitution, that we
shall see in every part of his nature something that rules, something made to
be ruled. In the composition of his body there is an element predominant; the
soul has over the body Imperium (...); the mind over the affectuous part
Imperium politicum. If nothing else euince it, that awful submission to
regiment, which conscience suggests to savages, sufficiently proves it. As
far as that principle is heard of, that there is a Rex Regum, and Dominus
Dominantium; where ever its known that there is a God that judges the earth,
its known also and received, that there are nominall Gods on earth, with
reverence next to the supreme Majesty to be adored. Amongst the barbarous
Nations of late discovered, has been found, as some religion and worship of
God, so some form of policy and civil government. Let it be true that Tully
has in commendation of his Oratorie, that it first drew into civil communion
the dispersed and brutish companies of men: yield that that others have, that
fiction of divine visions procured authority to laws: let these be means;
some principle there must be acknowledged in man's nature, fit to acknowledge
equity of such constitutions. Arist politic. lib 1. cap. 2.
Aristotle says there is in every man (...), an affectuous and no less then
impetuous inclination to such society. And if any be unfitted for that state,
he is (...), a bruit; if any need it not, he is (...), God. But over and above
all this, it more then seems that natural conscience, amongst other common
notions, has received the impression of this principle: how else comes it,
that (a few extrauagant natures only excepted) such awful submission is found
in all, to men of our own mould? yet in our apprehension clad with such
venerable majesty, that the culpable scarce behold them without trembling; and
the guiltless yield willing reverence to their persons. So every way has God
pleased to make known his ordinance for magistracy.

It were wonder such a principle should find opposition in the nature of man,
by nature the most sociable of all sensible creatures: more strange, that
amongst Christians (as they would be esteemed) this constitution should be
thought either Heathenish, or Jewish. In a word, two sorts of men we find
opposite to this ordinance: First are they that out of a vicious disposition of
their hearts, desire to live as Job says they are Job 11.12.
borne, like the wild Asse-colt in the wilderness: and for none other thing
dislike government, save only that it restraines their unbridled corruption.
That brutish strumpet in the Poet quarrels at Gods providence, that having set
no bounds to the lust of beasts, has taught men to reverence the bond of
blood. A generation fitter to be confuted with a clubbe then with an argument.
There once was such a state of Gods people the Jews, living without control
of authority: see to what extremities corruption breaks forth,
notwithstanding all the revelations of Gods will from heaven, and the fresh
memory of his vengeance upon the Canaanites: the grossest Idolatry, and most
unnatural lust they are carried beadlong into. The reason is noted: Judge. 17
5.6. Judge. 18.1.30. Judge. 19.1.22.
In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did what seemed
right in his own eyes. And it was a prudent observation of that Statesman in
the remissness of Nerua his reign: Its better to live where nothing, then
where all things are lawful.

The second sort is of them that under pretense of I know not what Christian
perfection, have abolished Magistracy amongst other Jewish constitutions, and
limit all precepts of subjection given in new Testament, to Magistrates
heathenish. Let us see a little whether the ordinance were in likelihood
temporary. First, we know no transient ceremony that had place in man's
innocence; and have reason to teach, that even in innocence there was a
subordination of one to another, though without pain as now it is. That reason
of the Apostle, Man was 1. Tim. 2.13.
first formed, of him and after him the woman, had place in state of innocence.

Besides, we hold it a rule, what ever ordinance knits man to God, man to man,
is of perpetual use to the Church of God: and so much only of Jewish
ordinances we think abolished, as alienated man from God, or man from man.
Therefore of difference of meats, we say it was temporary, it was part of the
E^h 2.14.
partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile: therefore of rigor and justification
of the law moral, its also abrogated, because it maintained separation betwixt
God and man. So we tremble to think of Magistracy.

To be short, if the ordinance were Jewish, what is the reason Paul reckoning
up the gifts of God for right ordering of the Church of new Testament, amongst
others mentions 1. Cor 12.28.
governments, that is, gifts of government? Questionless he saw, that even in
state of greatest perfection among Christians, there were that should need
restraint by government; and whose best safety should stand in this, that they
were assigned to the regiment of others. Let us see whether in likelihood the
authority be limited to Magistrates heathenish. The title of Magistrates is,
to be Romans 13.4.
Ministers of God; their end and use, the good of the Church. According to this
gloss of Anabaptists, the honourablest place of service to God is appropriated
to Ethnickes, and therein Christians without intrusion cannot meddle. Their
end, the good of Gods Church, which who can but absurdly imagine, should flow
more kindly from heathenish, then from Christian Magistrates?

Paul's counsel is to 1. Tim. 2.1.2.3.
pray for Kings, and those in authority, that they may be converted; withal
he intimates the good issues flowing from their conversion, peace, honesty,
godliness, to the people of God. It were strange that from Princes heathenish
we should expect furtherance in godliness and honesty, and not rather from
them converted to Christianity: nay, why pray we for their conversion, if
from their Ethnicisme such gracious furtherances may be expected?

Its promised as a blessing to the Church of new Testament, that she should
have Isa. 49.23.
Kings her nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers. Never saw the
Church Christian this promise accomplished, till the happy conversion of
Constantine to Christianity; except to suck the blood of the Church, were to
be nurses to the Church, such favor never tasted she from heathens. It
remains then, that notwithstanding those cauilsome exceptions of licentious
Anabaptists, magistracy has Gods ordinance to commend it to the perpetual
use of the Church to the end of the world.

This comfort arises to Magistrates from this meditation; that they know their
standing warranted by Gods ordinance.

Thus of the author of their authority: let us consider their eminence.

Ye are Gods.] The impertinencies of Hierome and Augustine in their
Commentaries, extending the dignity to all Christians, the circumstances of
the text apparently discover. To Magistrates, not to all Gods children, its
said, ye are Gods: Gods, 1. by analogy: 2. Gods by deputation: 3. Gods by
participation. The expositions have some show of difference, but are all
coordinate. The analogy stands in semblance of actions and employments to
those of the great God of heaven and earth. As he has his seat for judgment,
so these their Tribunals and judicial Thrones, wherein to judge of the actions
of men: Theodoret. in Psalm. 81.
tanquam in hoc Deum imitantes, says Theodoret. There is Iac. 4.12.
one Lawgiver, says S. James; he means primarius. And yet of Princes, says
the wisdom of God; Pro. 8.15.
By me (that is, by my allowance and inspiration) Princes decree just things.
Romans 12.19.
Vengeance is Gods, he will repay it; yet Magistrates are Romans 13.4.
Ministers of God to execute vengeance on those that do evil. I am loath to
make them transcendents; yet such sure is their authority on earth supra
seriem: without control of any, save of that Rex Regum. Tertullian. ad
Sea^^^^m.
Colimus Imperatorem (says Tertullian) vt hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid
est, a Deo consecutum, solo Deo minorem. We reverence the Emperor as a man
next unto God, and as one that has whatsoever he has from God; inferior to
God only. It behooves thee, says Agapet. in parae^ ad Justinian. Imp.
Agapetus to the Emperor of his time, to charge upon thy self a necessity of
keeping the Laws, as having none on earth that can compel thee. So stand the
Analogy.

Gods by deputation, 2. Par. 19 8
ye judge not for men, but for the Lord, says Iehoshaphat, the Deuteronomy. 1.17.
judgments is Gods says Moses. Magistrates are his mouths to pronounce, his
hands to execute it. Kings and Princes are Gods vicegerents on earth, by whom
as by second causes he gouerns the world. Therefore Samuel being contemned in
his authority, when he puts up his complaint to God, receives this answer,
The people had not rejected him, 1. Sam 8.7.
but God Cuius scil. vices gerebat, says Aquinas, de regimine principum.

Gods by participation; Augustine. in (...) tractat. 48.
Participando fiunt Dij says Augustine, tanquam luminaillum*inata. As stars
participate their light from the sun, the primum lucidum; so these their
authority from the supreme majesty. The glorious majesty of God has pleased
to cast on them, some beams of his own excellency, to make them venerable in
the eyes and hearts of men. Ye have heard your dignity; I beseech you take
notice of your duty.

Its true I confess, this eminence of dignity is originally in the supreme
Magistrate, yet is there a stream thereof derived to his delegates, which ye
are. Thus think, the higher the Lord has advanced you, the more he expects to
be honored of you. The rule is Leuit. 10.3. God will be sanctified in those
that come near him; either by a more then ordinary measure of holiness in
their lives, or by his extraordinary vengeance. Ye utterly mistake the matter,
if because ye have the moderation of humane Laws, ye think your selves
exempt from strictest observance of the Laws of God. Kings themselves have
charge, Deuteronomy. 17.19
to read in the Law and to fear that God that has so highly advanced them.
And sure it is, whatsoever we think; sins take their greatness in part from
the greatness of the persons by whom they are committed. The sheckle of the
Sanctuary, was double in weight to the common sheckle; to peize as well the
sins of the Priests, as the offerings of the people. The expiatorie
sacrifice, for the sin of the Priest, Leuit. 4.
was as great as that for the whole congregation. The reason I think is all
one for the Magistrate. Gods mercy as great to him in his advancement; his sin
in the issues as pernicious.

If that prevail not, weigh well how every way quarrel-some at the lives of
Magistrates the people are. Plutarch in precept Reipub. gerend.
Cimon at Athens was taxed for this, that sometimes he drank wine. Romans,
that could find no other fault in Scipio, made his sleep a matter of
imputation. In Pompei the great it was made matter of criminous observation,
that he scratched his head with one finger. And generally you shall find it
true that Plutarch observed; As the least blemish in the face, be it but a
wart, is more conspicuous and troublesome, then were deformed scarres in the
rest of the body; so the moates of rulers lives, seem beams in the eyes of
the people.

Consider also how preualent your examples are, either in good or evil: if
good, none so effectual or wholesome; if ill, none so pernicious for imitation.
Says Paul to Peter, Why Gal. 2.14.
constrainest thou the Gentiles to be circumcised? what compulsory work had
Peter over Gentiles? how constraines he them to circumcision? his gifts, and
gracious carriage, had won him esteem in the Church of God, and his example
seemed a Law; therefore said Jerome truly; Coegit non verbo sed exemplo. As in
sailing, says Agapetus, Agape. qua supra.
the error of an ordinary ship-man brings little detriment to the burden, but
the mistake of the Steres-man, or Pilot hazards the whole voyage: So in the
Commonwealth, the sins of the vulgus do little harm by infection; but the
evil example of eminent Rulers, are no less then pestilent and banefull. Now
blessed be God that has inclined your hearts, to more then wonted conscience
of the Sabbath; my hope is, former neglects have been lamented. Gods people, I
dare say, bless his name for the amendment. But this I assure you, howsoever
the odds be great betwixt the important affairs of a Kingdom, and the base
pleasures of the multitude; yet more prevailed the example of you mortal gods
to encourage to profaneness then the example of the great God of heaven and
earth, propounded Exodus 20.11
in the precept, to persuade the sanctifying of the Sabbath.

If none of these move, weigh well, how according to rules of Scripture, the
sins of others, committed by any our occasion, become ours by just
imputation. What evil is this that Nehe. 13.17
ye do in breaking the Lords Sabbath? said Nehemiah to the Rulers of
Jerusalem; that sinned, not by personal commission, but by partial
conniuence, and toleration of the sins of others. Now, God be merciful to
the sins of our persons. If thou shall be extreme to mark what in our own
lives we do amiss, Psalm. 130.3
who shall be able to abide it? To these, if the burden of other men's sins
be added, committed by any our occasion, how can our souls but sink under the
weight to the bottom of the nethermost hell?

Pardon my length in this admonition: the hearts and lives of your Lordships
are to me unknown 1. Cor. 135.
charity binds me to think the best; and I have learned of Solomon, Eccles.
10.20
not to blaspheme eminent Rulers, no not in my secret thought. Your wisdom I
presume has learned to interpret admonitions, not always as imputations, but
when we are guiltless, as preuentions.

But shall I tell you what is observed in our petty gods? our Dij minorum
gentium: Mentior, if their lives proclaim not, that they think authority an
immunitie from obedience to the Laws of God: and so live, as if they fancied
no other happiness in their dignities, then that they bring with them license
to sin without control of any. Tully tells of one, Augustine. de ciuit. Dei
lib. 5. ap 27.
Qui peccandi licentia foelix appellabatur, had gotten him Foelix almost for
his surname, because he was a licentiate in sinning. O miserum, said
Augustine, cui peccare licebat. Wretched man that had license to sin. Let
that happiness betide that person with whom God is angry for ever.

And generally ye shall observe, even superlatiue sins prove diminutiues
when they fall into great persons. As the audacious Augustine. de C uitat. Dei
lib. 4. cap. 4.
Pirate challenged by Alexander for infesting the sea, made answer freely;
Because I do it in a Fly-boat I am called a Pirate; because thou in a great
Navy, thou art called an Emperor. That which we silly men call the language of
hell, profane daliance with Gods name in common swearing, amongst our gallants
has the esteem of Retorique; and oaths they reckon amongst the ornaments and
flowers of speech; they serve to fill up the hiatus of their broken sentences.
Voluptuous living, to eat, drink, sleep, and rise up to play, we in our
simplicity term the life of a beast. That bonum pecudum, great ones count
their felicity, and have closed it now in their definition; what is a
Gentleman but his pleasure? Cicer Tuscu. quaest. lib. 1.
Vox pecudis non hominis, says Tully truly, As if they were made in the earth,
as Leuiathan in the sea, for nothing but to take their pastime therein. What
should I speak of that gluttonous bouzing, taken up in great houses, as part
of their devotion? as Ambrose notes the beastly custom in his time. Ambrose de
He^i^ and Ieiunio cap. 17.
Bibamus pro salute imperatorum, and qui non biberit, sit reus in deuotione.
Let us drink to the health of the King, who so pledgeth not his health, let
him be culpable in point of devotion. O obsequie of pious devotion says Saint
Ambrose, ironically, or rather o foolishness of men, that think drunkenness
a sacrifice to God; as if the God we serve were as Bacchus the Idol of the
heathen, to be propitiated with intemperance. 1. Tim. 2.1.
Oremus pro salute Regum, pray for the health and salvation of Kings, that is
Paul's devotion. If such be your lives, this your observance of that God that
has so highly advanced you, take heed it prove not your portion at the last,
that the wise man has; Potentes potenter tormenta patientur, mighty men shall
be mightily tormented.

One thing more let me add on this ground, as more nearly concerning your
Lordships: Analogy you have in dignity to the great God of heaven and earth:
I beseech you be careful in your executions to maintain the proportion.
Iehoshaphat has particularized it in his charge to the Judges of his time,
upon this ground, either of analogy, or deputation: 2 Chronicles. 197.
Ye judge not for men, but for the Lord, therefore let the fear of the Lord
be upon you; take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord,
nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. The charge runs often for
impartialitie in judgment: ye shall judge the small as well as the great, and
have no respect of persons in judgment; not fear the face of the mighty, nor
esteem a poor man in his cause: not favor the person of the poor, nor
honor the person of the mighty. Know it for surety, iniquity dwells not all
in cottages, but finds entertainment in sieled houses. I would they were not,
some of them, as its said of Shinar, Zech 5.11.
the land where wickedness is settled as upon her own base. Jeremy in the
search he made in Jerusalem for a man, found goodness as rare among Ier. 5.5.
the great ones, as amongst the vulgus. The state of our time and Kingdom is
not much unlike. My counsel is this only: Let never cauillers have cause to
say of our laws, as Anacharsis spoke tartly of those of Scythia, they are as
spiders webs, the great flies break through, the smaller only are holden.

For gifts, how professes the great Judge, that herein requires your
imitation, a holy scorn of them? Mic. 6.7.
Thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, none of these so
precious in his eyes, as is the preservation of justice. Let the same mind be
in you. What Peter speaks to Simon Magus, say you to corrupting bribers; Act.
8.20.
Thy money perish with thee, that think so sacred a thing as justice, may be
perverted by money. Withal forget not what Augustine admonishes, that there
is something equivalent to a bribe, as much tainting the soul with guilt of
injustice, whether it be done prece or pretio, timore or amore, the sin is
the same. Pilate perhaps could wash his hands of bribes, not therefore of
Christ's blood. The fear or favor of Caesar, suggested by the people, ( Ioh.
19.12.
Thou art not Caesar's friend) was equivalent to a bribe, and swaied him against
justice to condemn an innocent. The 1. Reg. 21.9.10.11.12.13.14.
Judges of Israel that sentenced Naboth to death, we read not to have been
corrupted with bribes; but there was something equivalent, for which their
souls to this day fry in hell, except they repented; whether it was fear of
Iesabels violence, or hope of favor and preferment by her, that procured their
cruel obsequiousness to her bloody mandate. My Lords, he that said ye are
Gods, requires you in judgment to put off all partial humane affections, and
to frame your proceedings to those of the great Judge of heaven and earth: so
doing, his promise is to be 2 Chro. 19.6.
with you in the cause and judgment. Give leave now a little to direct my
speech to those of inferior rank employed in this service: they have also
their meditations naturally affoorded from consideration of your dignity.
Consider it seriously, beloved Christians, you that have to deal, whether by
way of information, or testimony, or howsoever. They are Gods by office and
deputation, before whom ye stand; and the great God of heaven and earth Psalm.
82 1.
protests his presence in the assembly of his Vicegerents. Know for a
surety, ye have God a spectator, a witness, a Judge of all your proceedings.
The obligation of an oath is sacred, wherein you 2. Cor. 1.23.
contest the divine Majesty, and engage your souls to his wrath, in case you
deal falsely or fraudulently before his Deputies. Let the fear of the Lord be
upon you. Tremble to play with the name of God in an oath before his
Vicegerents. The sins of the Country you cannot be ignorant of, they are
grown clamantia, and the sinners of no less then Sodomiticall impudency:
Isa. 3.11.
They declare their sins like Zodom, and hide them not. The modesty of Paul's
times is long since worn out of use. It was wont to be said, 1 Thessalonians 5 7.
They that are drunken, are drunken in the night: and the speech was once
prouerbiall, He that evil does, Ioh. 3.20.
hates the light. Deeds of darkness are now done at noonday; and gluttony
is now no longer matter of Romans 13.13.
chambering, the very streets are filled with filthy vomitings.

I could wish it were matter of inquiry by your Law, the horrible dalliance
with Gods name in vain swearing; and can but wonder, how in a Christian
Kingdom, a sin of so great impiety has so long wanted restraint by penal
laws. The names of Princes we are justly tender of, and the reproachful
traducing of their persons is in some cases capital. For my part I could wish
Moses Law revived, Who so blasphemes the Ruler of the people, shall be put to
death: but withal cannot but lament, that the dreadful name of the Lord of
hosts should be so freely permitted to the profane abuse of every godless
miscreant; and shall never think the Kingdom secured from Gods wrath, till
such time as we have learned to Eccl. 9.2.
fear an oath. Because of oaths Ier. 23.10.
the Land mournes. And questionless that damned crew of mercenarie periuers
issues out of this damnable crew of common swearers. Through too much
familiarity with oaths, Gods name is grown into contempt; and whilst men
make no conscience of swearing vainly, they grow at length to make as little of
swearing falsely.

That of Recusancie I know is commonly matter of inquisition; and yet to this
day, the several sorts of Recusants are either unknown, or winked at. There
are besides our superstitious Recusants the Papists, and the curious Recusants,
the brethren (as they would be called) of the unbrotherly separation, a sort of
profane, I know not whether I may say Recusants or Negligents: men that our of
a godless disposition, in very contempt of all Religion, Heb. 10.25.
forsake our assemblies. The living God is scarce served with such devotion in
his Temple on the days of assembling, as Bacchus the Idol of the heathen by
these men upon their Ale-bench. I beseech you that have to deal by way of
information, of all others let not these profane persons be forgotten. We
wonder much without any cause of wonder, at the multiplying of Recusants. Know
this for a rule, Popery has a natural issue out of profaneness. And we
have no reason to marvel that men should fall from atheism to superstition,
from profaneness unto Popery. Its Gods just judgment on them that have not
1 Thessalonians. 2.11.12.
received the love of the truth, to send upon them strong delusions to believe
lies, that they all might be damned that believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.

Lastly, (that no sort of men may lack their portion) are they Gods
Vicegerents that are authorized to judgment? Me thinks then they should
tremble that have to deal by way of aduocation or pleading, to give patronage
to an evil cause. How true it is I say not; but its vox populi, that Lawyers
in their covetousness are of Absoloms mind in his ambition; 2 Samuel 15.3
Every man's cause is good, it lackes but indifferent audience. Its an ill
cause, they say, that admits no color, that finds no advocate; a rough stone
sure, that some men cannot make smooth. But Isa 5.20.
woe to him, says Isay, that speaks good of evil, or evil of good: and Pro.
17.15.
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the righteous, even they
both are abomination to the Lord. Proceed we now in the text: And ye are all
the children of the most high.

There is a child by generation, the express character of his Fathers person:
so Christ the (...), Vnigena, the Ioh. 3.16.
only begotten Son of God. There are sons by creation, and specially of
resemblance in purity; so are Angels called Job 1.6.
the sons of God.

Sons by adoption and regeneration; so all the Ioh. 1.12.
faithful: it were comfortable if so were also all Magistrates.

Children by semblance of majesty and glory, as Gods lively 1. Cor. 11.7.
images in authority: so Magistrates and whomsoever God has invested in the
glory of ruling power.

Are they all in this sense sons of the most high? What say we to the case of
impiety? Suppose them impious, said Quaestion. Armenic. lib. 10. cap 4.
Amarcanus. All title to dominion has foundation in the grace of justice and
charity; therefore impious men have no lawful dominion, but by impiety make
forfeiture of their authority.

Thus we distinguish: Its providence, not grace, that disposes civil titles:
grace, not providence, that makes them comfortable. It is true in a sense,
impious men are all usurpers in whatsoever they enjoy: the air they breath in,
the earth they tread on, the meat they eat, the clothes they are warmed with,
1. Cor. 3.22.23.
are not theirs; I mean by spiritual right, that can give them comfort before
God: yet have they a title indefeisible amongst men, by birthright,
succession, election, or if there be any other course that providence has
chosen, thereby to deuolue such titles upon them. Therefore we say as Austin
truly: Augustine. de C^^^^at. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 1.
Qui dedit Mario, ipse and Caesari; he that gave the Empire to Marius, gave it
also to Caesar; he that to Augustus, the same to Nero; he that to the
Vespasians the father and son, those sweet Emperors, the same to that most
cruel and bloody Domitian. And in a word, he that to Constantine the
Christian, the same to Julian the Revolt. 1. Tim 2.
Pray for Kings, says Paul, yea though they were such as (...)
gentiliter vixerunt, said Optatus M^^euitanus.

What say we to the case of tyranny? Suppose them tyrants; retain they still
their honorable title and function?

Answer. If by tyranny they mean usurped regiment, perhaps its true that
Albertus has; subjection may be performed, quoad sustinentiam; needs not be
performed quoad obedi ntiam: our patience may bear their tyranny; our
conscience seems not bound to yield them obedience. If by tyranny they
understand ordinate power degenerating into cruelty by abuse, howsoever
Papists and some other Divines give liberty with cautions to throw off the
yoke, yet vetera vera: 1. Sam. 26.10.11.
The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come, or he shall descend into
battle and perish. But God forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand
against the Lords anointed, says David of Saul, a tyrant by abuse of power,
though not by usurpation. Their unction makes them sacred: the hurtful touch
of their persons makes the subject sacrilegious. They are flagella Domini, as
is said of Ashur, the Lords Isa. 10.5. Verse. 12.
rods to chasten the security and disobedience of his people: yet so his rods,
that the Lord only has authority to cast them into the fire.

What think we of the state of incorrigible heresy, attended with
excommunication? Popish divinity is known: the subject (they say) is absolved
from his allegiance.

I mean not to enter the question, whether Kings be subject to that censure:
its probably disputed both ways. Yield that Ambrose did justly with Theodosius
in that Theodoret. ^^st. Ecclesiast. lib. 5 cap. 18.
abstention; for I profess I am yet to learn whether it were a complete
excommunication: but yield it ex abundante.

The sentence of our Savior is direful; Sit tibi sicut Ethnicus: Mat 18.17.
Let him be to thee as an heathen or Publican. Grauius est, says Augustine;
(...) 1. c p. 17.
Its more then if a man were slain with the sword, or consumed with fire, or
cast to wild beasts to be devoured: yet is it but a tanquam, not a plusquam.
It make them as Ethnickes, not in worse case. Suppose them therefore in case of
Ethnickes being excommunicate: is not loyalty to be performed to Ethnicke
Kings? What was the state of Emperors and Kings when the Apostles gave those
precepts of subjection, but heathenish? yet is it their constant rule, Romans
13.1.
Be subject to the higher powers. And says the Lord by Jeremy, Ier. 29.7.
Seek the peace of the Land whither I have caused you to be carried captives,
and pray unto the Lord for it. And who but he that has sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of God, dares teach, that excommunication makes
parricide lawful to the child? or that children are absolved from duty to
parents lying under the sentence of excommunication? Or why should we think
it brings more detriment to authority in the weal public, then to that in
private families? To shut up the point: That spiritual sword depriues of
spiritual rights, that concern the kingdom of Heaven, depriues none of his
civil rights, which he has as a member of civil society. Mat. 16.19.
The keys are given to the Church, to open and shut the kingdom of heaven,
meddle not at all with the kingdoms of the earth.

I conclude it with that admonition of Solomon: My son, Pro. 24 21.
fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not on any pretense with them that are
seditious. Are they impious? pray for their piety? Are they tyrannous? pray
God for thy patience, and their inspiring with clemency. Presumes any to
excommunicate? Know first, if any such power be given unto men over Kings and
Princes, yet is it invested in the persons of their own Pastors. 2. If it be
not regularly done, a nullitie there is in their conscience, and ought to be in
thine esteem. 3. If never so ordinately, it depriues but of spiritual, not of
civil titles.

The last thing remains, the infirmity of your persons: ye shall die as men.
The original is as Adam, which Jerome takes properly, Hieron. in locu^.
others appellatiuely; the sense is both ways the same.

The sentence some conceive a commination, some only as a monition, the latter
clause is no doubt a threatening; this former best interpreted a monition. It
comes in, me thinks, as that stake in Paul's flesh, after his extraordinary
revelations, least he should 2. Cor. 12.7.
be exalted above measure: or as the voice of the crier following the
tryumphers Chariot in Rome, eftsoons ringing that in the ear, memento te esse
mortalem.

A meditation necessary for all men; most for them of highest dignity: how
prone we are to conceit in our very nature something more then humane, because
our persons are clad with divine dignities, we see in plentiful experience.
Herod in his magnificence admits the applause of the people, The Acts
12.21.22.23.
voice of God and not of man, till he learned by experience that the worms
should eat him. That monster of men in Rome, puffed up with success of
victories, attempts to imitate thundering Jupiter. Seneca scoffeth at his
pride: but so true it is that the Psalmist has; Psalm. 49.20.
Man being in honor has no understanding, nor so much as remembrance of
humane infirmity.

I confess, I seldom read of any that could hope for immortality upon earth.
But the absurd desires of some I have heard of, wishing, if it were possible,
to perpetuate a miserable life in this sinful state upon earth; rather then to
adventure their souls upon uncertain hopes (as to them they seem) of a
better state in the life to come. I marvel not at it. Its their profession;
this life they know, that other they know not. A speech sauouring of the little
relish of the things of God: and euidencing their no title to the comforts of
Gods kingdom. This life they know; would God they knew it, either as Apuleius,
or but as Augustine describes it. Aug de verb. Dom. secund. Matthew. ser. 1.
Inter casus ambulamus: We walk amiddest a world of casualties. Si vitrei
essemus: Yet were our metal but as glass, less reason we had to fear
mishappes; but its much more frail. Falls by mishaps we fear for those brittle
vessels: but age or sickness we fear not in respect of them. Man therefore
more frail them they; who besides the many casualties that have continual
intercourse in his life, lies open to infeebling by age and sickness; for
suppose no casualty betide us: yet tempus ambulat, vitat homo ictum, numquid
vitat exitum?

I am sorry we should have cause to teach by instruction, that which fools
may learn by experience. Bernard. de conuers ad cleric. cap. 14
Death pit^eth not poverty, nor reuerenceth riches; spares no man's birth nor
quality, nor age, the ods is this only ^etwixt old and young, Se^ibus in
ianuis, adolescentibus in insidijs est. My purpose is to be your remembrancer,
no teacher of mortality.

This only I beseech you consider with me, Wha^^oeuer eminence of dignity
God has clothed you withal, ^ee has not exempted you from condition of
mortality* Ye shall die like men Agapet. in ^are^^. ad Iusitian Imperat.
(...), in the eminence of dignity, ye are like unto God; (...), in the
essence of your body, of the same condition with meanest men. The principles of
your constitution alone; (...). Clay we have all the first father and founder
of our generation; (...): As well the Prince in his throne, as the beggar under
the bush, our genus is lutulentum; dirtie, at least dustie; and our end
resolution into the same principles. Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed to all men once to dye. Remember the consequent; after that
comes judgment. Thus think even when ye sit Judges of other men's lives, ye
have not arbitrium, no not of your own. There is Eccles. 8.8.
no man that has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit, neither has
he power in the day of death, neither is there discharge in that war. When
thoughts of pride, or perverting justice shall arise, thus think; My Isay 2.22.
breath is in my nostrills: What if the Lord should cite me to his tribunal,
even now when I think of abusing justice, a thing so sacred? Eccles. 11.3
As the tree falls, so it lies; so as we die, so are we presented to judgment.

It is an error of man's pride, to think they shall have esteem at that day,
according as they were more or less cladde with dignities in this life. Death
strippes of all dignities, and we are presented naked to the Lords tribunal.
Apoc. 14.13
Blessed is the man that dies in the Lord; his works follow him; Psalm. 49.17.
his pomp he leaves behind him. Yet hearken to a course whereby ye may
perpetuate judicial dignity, and at the great day sit on Thrones judging the
Tribes of Israel. Not dignity, but sanctity makes us Christ's Assessours. The
1. Cor. 6.2.
Saints shall judge the world. This sanctity manifest in your lives, in your
callings, my soul for yours, your resurrection shall be glorious. In case it
be neglected, hear what, not I, but the Lord by his Prophet threatens; ye
shall fall like one of the Princes.

They are witty and industrious niceties that Hierome has, Hier. ad loc. m.
enquiring the sense of this commination. This one of the Princes he conceiues
to be the devil, that prince of the air, Lucifer the prince of the devils,
the prime devil amongst the Legions of infernal spirits. As Lucifer, so shall
ye fall. Non potest Angelica dignitas mortem recipere, sed tantum ruinam. The
devil died not, but fell from the dignity of his creation. Thus Hierome; with
whom accord Augustine and Theodoret. Augustine. and Theodoret. ad locum.


Thus rather conceive the Prophet, upon hypothesis of their injustice
impenitently continued, to threaten the ruin of their thrones, and destruction
of their persons, by some special hand of God. And the better to set before
their eyes the horror of their fall, and withal to prevent the security
might arise from their present greatness, he remembers them of Gods wrath and
powerful destruction poured out upon the Princes of the Nations, which the
Lord had cast out before their eyes, suppose upon Psalm. 83.11.
Oreb and Zeeb, Zebah and Zalmunnah, whose overthrow to like purpose the
Prophet mentions in the next following Psalm.

The point here to be noticed is the judgment of God against injustice and
cruelty, threatened and exemplified. Consent of Scriptures for like threatenings
read at your leisure, Mich. 3.9.11.12. Zeph. 3.3.4. Ezekiel. 22.27.31. Others
many you may observe as you read. Executions perhaps will more move; and in
this kind stories abound. 1. Sam. 4.18
The downfall of Eli, a dear servant of God once Judge in Israel, for
conniuence only and foolish pity, 1. Sam. 2.12.23.24.25.
(where bowels of nature might seem, if not to dispense with severity, yet to
excuse his lenity) Scriptures have registered for our warning and terror. For
higher degrees of injustice, records are plentiful: few tainted with that
sin have died the common death of men, or been visited with the common
visitation of all men. Of Pilate write Eutrop. lib. 7. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. li.
2. ca. 7.
Eutropius and Eusebius, how under Caius the Emperor he was miserably
tormented, and in the anguish of his soul chose this compendium of his
tortures, to be his own deaths-man. Tertullian. ad Scapulam.
Vigelius Saturninus President and Judge at Carthage, the first (says
Tertullian) that drew sword against us, lost his eyes. Claudius Herminianus
President of Cappadocia, after many cruel vexations of Christians, stricken
with the pestilence, was eaten up of worms. Henry. de Erford.
Antiochus President and Judge under Aurelian, whilst Agapetus the Martyr is
in his torments, falls suddenly from the judgment seat, and crying out of the
burnings he felt in his bowels, gives up the ghost. These you will say were at
the highest point of injustice, persecuting to death Christ in his members. But
remember, 1. that in injustice as in other sins, the downfall is headlong,
and men once giving reins to themselves in evil, know no stay till they come
to extremities. 2. Besides, where the fact is not so foul in it self,
circumstances may make the injustice as damnable in us. These are examples of
Gods immediate executions: there are others wherein he has used men as his
instruments. The A. Gellius Noct. Attic. lib. 20. cap. 1.
Roman laws of the twelve Tables appointed death for that Judge that should
be convicted to have perverted justice for money: according thereto were their
executions, till such time as corruption growing into great personages, they
mitigated the severity, and exchanged it for banishment and consiscation of
goods. Tit. ff. and C. ad leg. Full. repetund.
Cambyses King of Persia, having detected the corruption of a Judge in his
kingdom, commands him to be put to death, his skin to be plucked off, and
spread upon the judgment seat as a carpet or hangings, his son to sit in the
fathers Throne so adorned, that he and al posterity might fear for ever to
pervert justice, and to deal untruly in judgment.

My Lords, of these whether immediate or mediate judgments of God, thus think
as Paul advises: 1. Cor. 10 11
They happened to them as ensamples, and are written for your warning, to make
you cautionate how ye fall by example of like injustice. I say as Ambros. de
Nibathe Iezraelit. cap. 11.
Ambrose when he closes the Story of Achab and Iezabels fearful end: Fuge
ergo dives huiusmodi exitum. Sed fugies huiusmodi exitum, si fugeris huiusmodi
flagitium. My Lords, tremble at such ends, and be careful to avoid them. Such
ends ye shall avoid, if ye carefully fly from such like injustice. Faxit
Deus. Cui gloria in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

FINIS.

