C decorative border, showing a lion rampant, a rose surmounted by a crown, and
a unicorn R

THE LAWFVLNESSE OF OUR EXPEDITION INTO ENGLAND MANIFESTED.

Printed, first in SCOTLAND, by Robert Bryson, and now Reprinted in ENGLAND, by
Margery Mar-Prelat. 1640.

THE LAWFVLNESSE OF OUR EXPEDITION INTO ENGLAND MANIFESTED.
AS from the beginning till this time, we have attempted nothing presumptuously
in this great Work of Reformation, but have proceeded upon good grounds, and
have been led forward by the good hand of GOD, so now, from our own persuasion
are we ready to Answer every one that asks us a Reason of this our present
Expedition, which is one of the greatest and most notable parts of this
wonderful Work of GOD, beseeching all to lift up their minds above their own
particulars, and without prejudice or partiality to lay to heart the
Considerations following.

I. As all men know and confess, what is the great force, of necessity, and
how it does justify actions otherwise unwarrantable, So can it not be denied,
but we must either seek our peace in England at this time, or lie under three
heavy burdens, which we are not able to bear. First, we must maintain Armies
on the Borders, and all places nearest to hazard; for the defense and
preservation of our Country, which by our laying down of Arm, and disbanding
of our Forces should be quickly over-runne by hostile, Invasion, and the
incursions of our enemies. Secondly, we shall want all Trade by Sea, which
would not only deprive the Kingdom of many necessaries, but utterly undue our
Bo^^rowes, Merchants, Mariners, and many others who live by Fishing and by
commodities exported, and imported, and whose particular callings are utterly
made void by want of commerce with other Nations and Sea-trade. Thirdly, the
Subjects through the whole Kingdom shall want administration of Justice: and
although this time past, the marvelous power and providence of GOD has kept
the Kingdom in order and quietness without ordinary Judicatories sitting, yet
cannot this be expected for afterward, but all shall turn to confusion. Any
one of the three, much more all of them put together, threaten us with most
certain ruin, unless we speedily use the remedy of this Expedition. And this
we say not from fear, but from feeling: for we have already felt to our
unspeakable prejudice, what it is to maintain Armies, what to want traffic,
what to want administration of Justice, And if the beginning of those evils be
so heavy, what shall the growth and long continuance of them prove unto us, So
miserable a being, all men would judge to be worse then no being.

II. If we consider the nature and quality of this Expedition, it is defensive,
and so the more justifieable. For proof hereof, let it be remembered: 1. The
Kings Majesty misled by the crafty and cruel Faction of our adversaries, began
this years war, not we. When Articles of Pacification had been the other
year agreed upon, Arms laid down, Forts and Castles rendered, an Assembly
kept and concluded with the presence and consent of his Majesty's High
Commissioner, the promised ratification thereof in Parliament (contrary to the
foresaid Articles) was denied unto us. And when we would have informed his
Majesty by our Commissioners, of the Reasons and manner of our proceedings they
got not so much as presence or audience. Thereafter his Majesty being content
to hear them, before that they came to Court or were heard, war was
concluded against us at the Council table of England, and a Commission given
to the Earl of Northumberland for that effect: The Parliament of Ireland and
England were also convocat for granting Subsidies unto this war against us,
as it not our: plots have been hatched, and military preparations made against
us! many invasions by Sea, which have, spoiled us of our Ships and goods: Men,
Women and Children killed in Edinburgh by his Majesty's Forces in the Castle:
Our enemies therefore are the authore and beginners of the war, and we
defenders only. 2. We intend not the hurt of others, but our own peace and
preservation, neither are we to offer any injury or violence* And therefore
have furnished our selves according to our power with all necessars, not to
fight at all, except we be forced to it in our own defense, as our Declaration
bears. 3. We shall retire and lay down our Arms, as soon as we shall get a
sure peace, and shall be satisfied in our just demands. Upon which ground even
some of those who would seem the greatest Royalists, hold the wars of the
Protestants in France, against the King and the Faction of the Guisians to have
been, lawful defensive wars, because they were ever ready to disband and quiet
themselves when they got assurance of peace, and liberty of Religion. Now this
present Expedition being in the nature of it defensive, hence it appears,
that it is not contrary, but consonant to our former protestations,
Informations, and Remonstrances: In all which, there is not one word against
defensive war in this cause: but strong reasons for it, all which militat for
this Expedition. Our first Information sent to England this year, though it
accurseth all offensive or invasive war, yet shows plainly, that if we be
invaded either by Sea or Land, we must do as a man that fights himself out
of prison. If a private man when his house is blocked up, so that he can have
no liberty of commerce and traffic to supply himself and his Family, being
also in a continual hazard of his life, not knowing when he shall be assaulted
by his enemies who lie in wait against him, may in this case most lawfully
step forth with the Forces which he can make, and fight himself free: Of how
much more worth is the whole Nation: and how shall one and the same way of
defense and liberation be allowed to a private man, and disallowed to a Nation*

III. Thirdly, we are called to this Expedition by that same divine providence
and vocation which has guided us hitherto in this great business. We see the
Expediencie of it, for the glory of GOD, for the good of the Church, for
advancing the Gospel, for our own peace, after seeking of GOD, and beging light
and direction from Heaven, our hearts are inclined to it, GOD has given us
zeal and courage to prosecute it, ability and opportunity for under-taking it,
Instruments fitted for it, unanimous resolution upon it, scruples removed out
of minds where they were harbored, encouragemets to atchieve it from many
passages of divine providence, and namely from the proceedings of the last
Parliament in England, their grievances and desires being so homogenecall and a
kin to ours, we have labored in great long-suffering by Supplications,
Informations, Commissions, and all other means possible to avoid this
Expedition: It was not premeditate not affected by us (GOD knows) but our
enemies have necessitate and redacted us unto it, and that of purpose to sow
the seed of National quarrels; yet as GOD hitherto has turned all their plots
against themselves, and to effects quite contrary to those that they intended:
so are we hopeful, that our going into England, so much wished and desired by
our adversaries for producing a National quarrel, shall so far disappoint
them of their aims, that it shall link the two Nations together in straiter
and stronger bonds both of civil and Christian love, then ever before.

And that we may see yet further evidences of a calling from GOD to this
voyage, we may observe the order of the Lords steps and proceedings in this
Work of Reformation. For, beginning at the gross Popery of the Service Book,
and Book of Canons, he has followed the back trade of our defection, till he
has reformed the very first and smallest Novations, which entered in this
Church. But so it is that this back trade leads yet further, to the Prelacy
in England, the fountain whence all those Babilonish stream issued unto us:
The Lord therefore is still on the back trade, and we following him therein,
can not yet be at a stay. Yea, we trust, that he shall so follow forth this
trade, as to chase home the Beast and the false prophet to Rome, and from Rome
out of the world. Besides, this third consideration resulteth from the former
two, for if this Expedition be necessary, and if it be defensive, then it
follows inevitably, that we are called unto it, for our necessary defense is
warranted, yea commanded by the Law of GOD and Nature, and we are obliged to it
in our Covenant.

IV. Fourthly, the lawfulness of this Expedition appears: if we consider the
party against whom: which is not the Kingdom of England, but the Canterburian
Faction of Papists, Atheists, A^^inians, Prelates, the misleaders of the Kings
Majesty, and the common enemies of both Kingdoms. We persuade our selves, that
our brethren and neighbors in England will never be so evil advised, as to
make themselves a party against as by their defense and (...) of our enemies
among them, as sometime the Benjamites made themselves a party against the
Israelites, by defending the G^^tachites in their wicked cause, Judge. 20. We
pray GOD to give them the wisdom of the wise woman in Abell, who when Ioab
came near to her City with an Army, found out away which both kept Ioab from
being an enemy to the City, and the City from being an enemy to him, 2 Samuel 20.
As touching the provision and Furniture of our Army in England, it shall be
such as is used among Friends, not among enemies: The rule of humanity and
gratitude will teach them to furnish us with necessaries, when as beside the
procuring of our own peace, we do good offices to them. They detest (we know)
the churlishnes of Nabal, who refused victuals to David and his men, who had
done them good and no evil, 1 Samuel 20. And the inhumanity of the men of
Succoth and Penuell, who ^^nyed bread to Gideons Army, when he was persuing the
common enemies of all Israel, Judge. 8. But let the English do of their
benevolence what humanity and discretion will teach them; For our own part, our
Declaration shows, that we seek not victuals for naught, but for money or
security: And if this should be refused (which we shall never expect) it were
as damnable as the barbarous cruelty of Edom and Moab, who refused to let
Israel pass through their Country, or to give them bread and water in any
case, Number. 20. Judge. 11. and this offense the Lord accounted so inexpiable,
that for it he accursed the Edomites and Moabites from entering into the
Congregation of the Lord unto the tenth generation, Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4.

V. The Fifth consideration concerns the end for which this voyage is
under-taken. We have attested the searcher of hearts, It is not to execute any
disloyal act against the Kings Majesty, It is not to put forth a cruel or
vindictive hand against our adversaries in England, whom we desire only to be
judged and censured by their own Honorable and high Court of Parliament; It is
not to enrich our selves with the wealth of England, nor to do any harm
thereto. But by the contrary, we shall gladly bestow our pains and our means
to do them all the good we can, which they might justly look for at our hands,
for the help which they made us at our Reformation, in freeing us from the
French, a bond of peace and love betwixt them and us to all Generations. Our
Conscience, and GOD who is greater then our Conscience bears us record, that
we aim altogether at the glory of GOD, peace of both Nations, and (...) of the
King, in suppressing and punishing in a legal way of those who are the
troublers of Israel, the firebrarnds of hell, the Korahs, the Balaams, the
Doegs, the Rabshakah^ the Hamans, the Tobiahs and Sandballats of our time,
which done we are satisfied. Neither have we begun to use a military Expedition
to England as a mean for compassing those our pious ends; till all other
means which we could think upon have failed us, and this alone is left to us
as ultimum and unicum remedium, the last and only remedy.

VI. Sixthly; if the Lord shall bless us in this our Expedition, and our
Intentions shall not be crossed by our own sins, and miscarriage, or by the
opposition of the English, the fruits shall be sweet, and the effects
comfortable to both Nations, to the Posterity, and to the reformed Kirkes
abroad: Scotland shall be ^^^med as at the beginning, the Reformation of
England long prayed and pleaded for by the Godly there, shall be according to
their wishes and desires perfected in doctrine, worship, and discipline,
Papists, Prelates, and all the members of the Antichristian Hierarchy, with
their Idolatry, Superstition, and humane inventions shall pack them hence; the
names of Sects and Separatists shall no more be mentioned, and the Lord shall
be one, and his Name one thoughout the whole Hand which shall be glory to God;
honor to the King, joy to the Kingdoms, comfort to the posterity, example to
other Christian Kirkes, and confusion to the incorrigible enemies.

FINIS.

