T^^ Course of Conformity As it (...) proceeded, Is concluded, Should be
refused.


PSALM. 94.20. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with me, which
frames mischief by a law. Printed in the year 1622.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IN the restless revolution of this troublesome (...) driving every person
and purpose to their app^ (...), all being under vanity, one generation passe^
(...) other succeeds with as many grievous novelti^ (...) ^ge alterations:
Mutation the inseparable companion of ^^^^on, like a Princess presuming upon
the kingdom, kirks, and families of the earth. But by the sovereign
providence of that unchangeable God, who directs the steps of man, and ^^th
put in his own power the time to plant and the time to pluck up that which is
planted, is so oversweyed and in the most variable and different humors of men
so limited, that some as the scoffers of the last days, laughing at mutation,
say, Where is the promise of his coming: Others to wit, the wicked man in his
prosperity, persecuteth the poor, saying he shall never be moved: A third
sort, viz. the slavish time-server, like soft wax, flexible to every n^w
form, boweth to mutation, making her variant colors his crown and
contentment: And the best sort, the wise Christian, hating change, and loving
constancy, striveth to walk circumspectly, redeeming the time from the
dangerous current: All these, and others whatsoever, whether by sin
irregular, or by grace sincere and straight, by supreme wisdom, are so
disposed that they must needs serve the holy proiects of Justice and Mercy for
the honor of God, and salvation of his chosen.

In this continual course Mutation so prevails upon succeeding generations,
that as they are distant from the first times, they decline from primitive
innocence, and as they approach to the later days, they participate of their
evils. Yea so forcible is Defection (the daughter of this Mutation) in the
congregations of the faithful, that the vacant places of the righteous
departed are seldom or never filled again, their labors follows them, and
they are forgotten. If the kirk be in Egypt, Joseph dies, and there arises
a new king there who knew not Joseph. When the people enters into the land,
Joshua and that generation is gathered to their fathers, and another generation
arises up after them which neither knows the Lord, nor the works which he
had done for Israel by Moses and Joshua, in Egypt, at the red sea, in the
wilderness, and at the entrance into the promised land. And in the land it
self, after Athaliahs troubles Ioash, whose life was saved by Iehoiada, and in
whose days he did that which was righteous in the sight of the Lord, after his
death h^arkneth to the Princes who make obeisance to the King, and leaving the
house of the Lord God of their fathers, serve idols, but Ioash remembers not
the kindness done by Iehoiada, but slays his son.

As by these strange alterations fearful eclipses were brought upon the face
of common honesty, likely to banish religion out of the earth, so under the
ends of the world surpassing the preceding generations in love decayed, and
iniquity multitiplied, if it were not the rich mercy and undeserved love of
the Lord not to suffer the rod of the wicked to rest upon the lot of the
righteous, but now and then in the midst of confusions brought on by
Mutation, to refresh them under the sweet shadows of peace and prosperity,
the very elect could hardly escape. If adversity bear the sway, the people of
God are in hazard to put out their hands to evil: and if prosperity prevail,
then the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man who sowed good seed in his
field, but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat,
which may not be gathered up till the harvest, lest the wheat also be rooted up
with them. When the Lord his field shall be once infected with such venomous
mixture of false teachers, and their foolish disciples, renouncing their own
liberty, and slavishly submitting themselves without trial to follow their
seducers in lasciviousnes and avarice for atchieving their own vicious hopes,
if Israel were not poured from vessel to vessel, they should freeze upon their
dreggs like Moab, and so loose not only their comely countenance, but the
health and life of their substantial estate: the deceitful colors of these
supervenient weeds so dazzling the eyes of the common sort, for the most part
more natural then spiritual, and either veiled with black ignorance, or blind
hypocrisy, that religion in her native simplicity and purity seems to them
an handmaid rather then a mistres, if she be not busked with some new guise of
one alteration or other.

In this change, if a Priest or a Levit, or any of the ancient shall happen to
weep for the first Temple, by the means of mutation thus d^faced, or enquire
for the old way, by ignorance in the reasonlesse multitude, by pride in high
places, and perversitie of reputed learning, he makes himself a prey, a
troubler of Israel, and not meet to live. There arises no small stir about
that way, whole cities are filled with confusion, and the cry goes up for the
Diana of the time. If Paul himself were gotten, he would not pass with
pestilent fellow, but stone him to the death before he be heard; yea when the
fury of Mutation inflameth the minds of Barbarians, if they see a viper of
adversity on a man's hand, they say surely he is a murderer, and if no
inconvenience follow, he is a God. So madly are the hearts of men set in them,
privily to blind themselves with the beams of their own particulars, and the
world with open show of seeming zeal for justice and religion.

The toils and tossings of these Circaean changes, are ever so unsavourie to a
man of a quiet spirit, that if the wronged innocence of a just cause,
shameless violence done to the rights and privileges of religion, and the
intolerable pride practiced against famous kirks unheard, could be closed up in
any tolerable silence, honest men knowing very well that the railings of
reprochers never wounds a good conscience, could rather choose to sustain a
legion of bitter aspersions, for peace to preach the Gospel, then either to
interrupt their own tranquillity, or give the least cause of suspicion to any,
that they were brought from the sweet course of their pure, peaceable, and
simple wisdom, to contend for their impured fame and reputation, and so to
hinder the preaching of Christ. For what matter is it though men be despised,
disgraced and scorned, so long as the Lord may be honored thereby. But when
the night of security shall be so dark, and shameless pride ascend to such a
height, that not only the lower sort, but men of great spirits and places can
with a deaf ear pass by the wrongs done to sincere professors, faithful
ministers and martyrs of good memory, but by a sort of brutish patience,
suffer a substantial truth to be borne down, and blasphemed, and for a
forlorn tradition, or worm-eaten ceremony shamefully shot forth; yea a settled
form of godliness by long and happy experience universally approved, to be
displaced for far-fetched devices of needless novelties; and the best
subjects, walking in knowledge of their duty, and conscientious conversation,
without any just cause openly traduced, that they are not Caesar's friends, in a
false policy to make the righteous cause odious to authority. If there be any
children of Moses, to esteem the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the
treasures of the world, or of zealous Elihu, to have his wrath kindled against
violence done to a just cause, and wrongs to harmless men otherwise deserving,
with what ears shall he hear the terror of that trumpet, Jf we deny him, he
will also deny us, and the spirit of grace with courage raising his blast by a
sweeter inforcement, If we suffer with him, we shall also reign together:
especially now in th^se backsliding days, when men who not only seemed most
forward to root out Papists, but zealous that reformation then professed by
themselves, and praised as the work of God, might stand and grow; have now by
some secret (but strange) inspiration of enchanting Mutation, not only
sharpened their tongues, that their words might be as the pricking of a sword,
but also dippped their pens in gall to write and speak against their brethren;
and for a muddy and mystical conformity (who can tell to what) but abhor^ed
in Scotland ever since reformation, as the rest of the Roman trash; howsoever
of late, without shame of contrary practices in men's own persons, hurled in
again to be the wall and tower of new Episcopacie, cunningly brought in by her
Intrant the constant Moderator, and solemnly set up to remain the Atlas of
their kingdom, with full power of Lordly domination to be exercised over the
kirk for the five Articles, the fundamental laws of that usurped authority,
and to put forth and hold forth the lawful and necessary assemblies of the
kirk, as enemies to the power of Princes. But contrarily both reason and
experience making plain, that the kings of the earth were never pressed down
with any lawful assembly Ecclesiastical or any way disseysed of kirk
Jurisdiction, with which the Lord originally had possessed them: but
Episcopacie, as time has favored her insatiable desires, by dispossessing and
bringing down both kings and kirks, has set up and holds up Papistrie, ever
evil masters, like fire and water, but never better servants then treacherous
slaves lying in wait to oppress their masters.

It may be that the Patrones and urgers of this course wittingly aim not at
the reducing of Papistrie, and for any thing yet known, charity would they
should not be misdeemed in that gross sin. Nevertheless, as a certain
learned man says of some of the Ancients, that unwittingly, and against their
wills, they made a way for Antichrist: so it may be feared of some so diligent
to catch occasions, by envy to exclude and degrade them that are good and
painful, and so ready to defend their own fault, that rather then they will
leave them, they pain themselves to devise how to raise up troubles in the
kirk, and drive men from it into conventicles and corners, very far different
from the wise Pilot, when the tempest inforceth, emptieth the ship of some
things to save the rest, but they cast out the Pilots of the ships themselves,
to save these Romish wares, trifles and customs, as they term them: and
again so negligent to censure great corruptions in such as are praised for
their readiness to admit by implicit faith whatsoever is offered, and to stand
in contention about men's traditions, likely to say the kirk waste. Although
they do not intentiuely seek to bring in Papistry, yet whiles in a desire thus
to uphold their own Lordships over Gods heritage, they press their own
traditions more then the weightier matters of the law, the practice of the
ceremony more then the observation of the Lords day, kneeling at the receiving
of the sacrament out of the Ministers hand, more then the catechizing of the
people, and true meaning of the Lords institution, praising the conform
hypocrite, ignorant or senseless, above the wise Christian rooted and grounded
in the Gospel, they give a great hope to the limbs of Antichrist to settle
their tottering kingdom, and a more easy entrance for the whole body of
abominations, then they are aware of. England feels and fears already, and
Scotland has cause to fast and pray, that the opinion and practice of these
ceremonies may be removed as far from them, as busking and balling should be
from chaste women. It is a prodigious presage, that statutes such as they are,
and procured as they were in favors of dangerous novelties, should be more
vehemently urged, and with greater rigor put in execution against the true
servants of God for modest adherence to a truth never condemned, and for
refusal of needless rites never proved to be lawful by Gods word, nor by any
good appearance like to prove profitable, then all the good statutes standing
in force against idolatry and Idolaters, blasphemers and murderers, and open
contemners of the Lords word and his service, as if the whole obedience of a
Christian subject were enclosed in the practice of certain rites justly cast
forth of this kirk in the ignominious dust of other errors: or Christian
charity were confined to the divided brotherhoood of indifferent things..

State Divines think better of government once received, then that it should be
tossed and interrupted with all the contrary tides of rituall controversies.
Wisdom (say they) will rather tolerate some evil in a tried form of
government, then in a government untried. Yea though a thing be well done, yet
it loses the credit, if it savor of noveltie. If a man might say with an
upright heart, that which I maintain is the doctrine of the holy fathers, I
have their witnesses at large, taken out their own books, if for such a cause
he be casten out, he may say in the joy of a good conscience, I am cast out
with the Fathers. This is the case of the Ministers of Scotland standing
against the Hierarchy, and the props thereof. And for this cause, with many
veh^ment out-cri^s are they shamefully charged with the blind accusations of
disobedience to King and Kirk, of ignorance in matters of God worship, of
Puritanisme, of popularitie, of foolishness, striving for trifles, indifferent
things d^terminable and determinate by the Prince, of schism tending to
heresy, of trouble and s^dition, of scrupulositie of conscience after all
possible cours^s taken for resolving of doubts, of zealous but ignorantly so
called, of hypocrisy, of nicen^^^^ and obstinacy, wishing to have entered in
the n^w way at first, and blushing now to change after stand^ng so long: and
^o^ th se and many more foul imputations unworthy to b ^am^d among Christians,
peremptorily judg^d by such as hau^ their insilogismes in their h^^les, less
tolerable in the kirk and country. Let them be charged with contempt or
disob^di^nce, that can give no good reason of their doing, the world has se^n
the reasons of their doings th^s^ 60 year^s and above, and the matt^r it s^lf^
speaks. The least b^ook of Papistry must be avoyd^d by such as would not
perish in the great rivers th^reof: small dropps make great floods: through
small rifts the water soaketh in, the pumpe is fill^d, and ^h^ ship is drown^d.
Though the c^remonies b^ small, yet the evils that rise of them, are not
small; If they be small, there is the less hurtin leaving of them, and the
more wilfulness in disgracing the service and the servants of God for them. It
is to be remembr^d, what Julian once said, Jf it be enough to accuse, who shall
be innocent? not Moses, not Ezra, not Nehemiah, not the prophets, not Christ
himself, nor his Apostl^s upon whom all these and many more slanders lay, But
God forbid that the servants of God should do such things; with whomsoever
those things are found, let him die, and let the rest of his brethren following
or favoring his course, be bondmen: But if the servants of the Lord thus
slandered be sakelesse, and yet men have risen, (...) to persecute them, and to
strange from them, y^^ to inflame (...) Majesty's heart, the hearts of his
nobles, Judges, Barons, and people against them, let the souls of his servants
be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord their God, and the soul of their
enemies shall God cast out, as out of the middle of a sling. It is a dangerous
case to be carried with a bent resolution to defame, and to rake together foul
untruths, not considering what may be spoken most truly, nor what may be
ratled out most disgracefully like a swelling brook that soon gathers much
filth. These slanderous calumnies are like a thorn standing in the hand of a
drunkard; it is hard to judge whom they shall hurt. They are but a pretended
quarrel against honest men by prejudice to condemn their cause before it be
heard, according to the proverb, He that would have his dog killed, gives
forth first that he is madd. If these be real crimes, they are far above the
omission of a ceremony; let them be truly libelled, carefully cognosced,
wisely discerned, and condignely punished. If undeserved calumnies, let the
Lord impute them to none, and let no man impute them to the Lords people, their
own consciences witnessing before God, that such things they never thought,
but rather let them be rejected as senceles scoffings of Sarcasticall bitterness
crossing Christianity, and contrary to gentleness and love. To bury them in
silence had been their best condition, but when all means are sought to make
the faithful even to stink among the inhabitants of the land, it can no wise
beseem the ministerial calling to secret the truth, and by a cowardly kind of
modesty to betray a good cause maliciously wounded through the sides of honest
men, craftily burdened with scandalls for bearing down their cause in a
dangerous time. When so many not only commons in the profession, and novices
in the ministry, but some great Pastors fall away no less from their wonted
faithfulness, then from the ancient order whereby they were kept in the course
of their ministry, are now by the force of time become otherwise minded,
undertaking by their public teaching and example, by their private conference,
and all other means, not only to persuade this new conformity so far
contrary to the form whereunto they were delivered, but also with great hate,
and unkindly carriage to their brethren and old acquaintance, to carpe and
quarrel, what can be most truly and modestly said or writt^n in favors of
the truth, which they best know, as if they were become their enemies, because
they hold on the good way which they have left, most unjustly confining faith,
love, and all Christianity, within the dark region of conformity, wherein
dwells the divided brotherhood of that untried stranger.

Again, when good people of tender hearts are boasted, allured, and every way
tempted to blot their consciences with things they never knew to be profitable,
nor comely in their profession, are heavily disquieted for lack of cl^are
information to strengthen their resolution for standing in the truth against
errors.

Moreover, when after better sight, and more sound advisement, they who have
been stolen off their feet, may ris^ and rep^nt, and by the mercy of God
return again to the right way.

Or when a public testimony may be given the Pentriers like Antipater writing
against Carneades and the Champions of this time, who have sweat so much to
cast down the holy Discipline, and to set up the Hierarchy with her
ceremonial train.

Or when at the pleasure of God they that now live, and such as shall come
after, may be helped to see the harvest, and taste the fruit^s of necessary
labors now to be taken against the shadow^s of Papistry, which we must
detest, as the body and substance of that ugly heresy. If in such a n^cessarie
time all the men of God should only lay their hand upon the hurt place, and
secretly mourn, it were childish and ridiculous, the good cause being in
danger, and the faithful in hazard of vntimous silence.

There is here from a ready mind and a good will, the wise man's aneugh, a word
of peace and purity lossed, Indifferency found, and Conformity urged, to
hold out old Unity, to enlarge affected indifferency, and to set up the
children of absolute Conformity in the stately chaires of both kirk and
kingdom. The full history and ample treatise of the birth, education, and
high promotion of this respected couple Indifferency and Conformity, with the
controversies brought in Scotland, and increased thereby, requires larger
volumnes then any Aurelius of this time will be nicknamed Pupillus for
necessary charges to such a work, while better occasion. This Scotized
conformity for the present must stand at the pains of Archippus and Epaphras,
two honest Epitomists, and venturing themselves upon the stage to be glowred
upon by every evil eye, or rather casting themselves upon thorns, to be gored
by every sharp tongue. They are both good Patrons where ever they be.
Archippus must take heed to the ministry which he has received of the Lord,
that he fulfill it, and Epaphras a servant of Christ labors fervently for
you in prayers, and by all means that you may stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God. Archippus desirous to strengthen himself by learning, and
Epaphras ready to lay out his Talent to exchange, have diligently survayed the
history of the Kirk of Scotland concerning the forenamed particulars, and
painfully searched the doctrine of indifferent things, shooting up in a short
abridgement their best observations for present use, and clearly showing, how
conformity came in by little and little without feeling, like Popery coming
to perfection by Ceremoniousnesse and Ambition, the ceremonies furnishing her
with a seeming beauty to allure, and Ambition an irresistable power to afray.
They intend no way to prejudge or extinguish the worthy volumes of the learned,
but rather to spur men of good conscience, and meet gifts to search and set
forth fully and in perfect order these worthy purposes according to their great
zeal to a sound religion so long professed, and by the blessing of God upon
their labors, to gain such as respecting their conscience more then their
credit, with virtues tincture shall blush after the sight of the evil they
have committed, with hearty repentance turning their praise of men to the
praise of God to their joy and comfort, as Augustines Retractations are the
glory and crown of all his writings. So much the rather as the causes of
their yielding have been, in some lack of acquaintance and sight of the matters
in question: in others simplicity, presuming that nothing would be required,
but that which they might safely yield unto: in a third sort, a desire to be
employed in the service of the kirk, thinking it more easy to bear these
corruptions, then to abide rigor: and a fourth sort deceived by policy,
thinking that their yielding with protestation should limitate to them the
ordinary form whereunto others are tied, without altering at least in many
inconveniences that may ensue upon the obedience required. It were a work of
singular love to help such, and many others under the restraints of fear and
other infirmities, who undoubtedly, if they were permitted to use their own
liberty without hazarding themselves upon the pikes of the law, would with
great joy return to their best beloved profession, and by their happy
repentance quickly bring to confusion the rejoicing of Papists and Atheists,
braving Ministers and professors to their faces, and saying plainly, that they
hope ere it be long, to see them all either come to them, or come to nothing.
But fear them not, they are lying Prophets, evil men and seducers they are,
and shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived: but continue thou
in the things that thou have learned, and been assured of.

In this case of good Christians falling by infirmity, and proud enemies
bragging of their hopes, let it not be thought strange, that the lovers of the
primitive beauty of the reformed kirk, earnestly wish to have it restored
again, and for that cause modestly shrink at a new statute standing in the
contrary. First, he breaks the band of obedience, says one, who does it
without cause. If the refusers have not alleged causes justifiable in the
consciences of any, who will debate the matter between God and their own
souls, let them be better taught. Authority may crush them, it cannot persuade
them. 2. The first act an^nt kneeling, whereupon the alleged disobedience is
grounded, is to be better considered, at least in the doctrinall part, where by
the words of the Psalm, as it forces the text, it makes kneeling necessary,
and not indifferent, contrary to the judgment of the most inclinable sort,
who openly profess, that if authority would be pleased to favor the former
order of the kirk, they would gladly return thereunto. Again, it is granted,
that the kirk of Scotland has used since the reformation of religigion, to
celebrate the holy communion to the people sitting, where the true reason
moving them so to do, viz. (The table of the Lord is then most rightly
ministered, when it approaches most near to Christ his own action: but plain it
is at that supper Christ Jesus sat with his disciples: and therefore do we
judge that sitting at a table as most convenient to that holy action) is
omitted, and another convoyed in, to wit (by reason of the great abuse of
kneeling used in the Idolatrous worship of the sacraments by the Papists) which
indeed should be granted to be a reason of very great weight. But how weak a
removal of this reason is insert in the act to cast out sitting and bring in
kneeling, let them declare in the presence of God, that have changed upon such
a reason, and urge others to do the like, if all memory of bypast
superstition be passed out of Scotland, or if it be not rather renewed and
increased. But in these matters for good reasons, men must sparingly speak. 3.
It has never been, neither can be proved by Scripture, that the Magistrates
commandment simply and nakedly considered, without some warrant of the word of
God, can be reputed a true spiritual guide to lead the conscience of a subject
in a matter of religion, or action of Gods worship in such assurance, that he
may say in the presence of God, my opinion is sound, and action acceptable,
because the magistrate has commanded it, men being assured that Magistrates
may err in their injunctions; and assemblies convened by the kings majesty's
authority, may command and inact things unlawful and unprofitable. Ask the
scripture, whether ever the good Kings among the Jews, or else where, brought
in any special action or ceremony into the service of God, without some
special warrant from himself, or whether they did devise ought, or received
the devices of ecclesiastical assemblies in their dominions, and impose the
one or the other upon the Levits, or upon any bearing office in the sanctuary,
restraining them from their public function without obedience to it; or
whether ever by any of the messengers of God, the people were taught, that for
the outward form and circumstance of Gods worship, a civil statute or
constitution of the kirk, without further searching of the scriptures, might be
their ground, upon which they might build their obedience unto God, without
further inquiry. 4. It is a received rule of Christian liberty, at least
should be in reformed kirkes, that the ordinances of the kirk are presented
unto Pastors and people, not with necessity of believing, but with liberty of
trying, according to the rule, Try the spirits. It is the Lords own privilege,
that his injunctions are to be received without questioning. It is likewise
permitted by royal provision, that where the law was otherwise, men may not
only content themselves soberly and quietly with their own opinions, but also
press by patience, and well-grounded reasons either to persuade all the rest
to like of their judgments, or where they see better grounds to incline
thereto. It is the part of a temporizing hypocrite, of the servant of men, and
not of the servant of God, to frame their actions to that which is commanded
without any conscience of a truth, whether they know it or not, polluting the
world with a brutish obedience, whiles without any reason in him that obeys,
and whiles against the knowledge, whereby God has enlightened his own mind.

In this ensuing treatise persons are spared and sundry things hieroglyphically
and summarily set down which must bring to readers less acquainted with these
matters some obscurity, but be not offended. Soberly and quietly peace is
sought without prejudice of any person or purpose, so far as the clearing of
the truth may suffer. You have here to remember that old caution propounded by
a Father to the Emperor, Take away the peril of the statute, etc. It is
permitted to the maintainers of novelties, to use a continued, plentiful, and
running speech, which here is not to be found. For if the entising speeches of
man's wisdom were true tokens of wisdom indeed, the swallows as they are
swifter, may justly be said to be above man in wisdom. Paul for the truth is
rude in speaking, his presence weak, and his speech contemptible. But Tertullus
pleading against him in a mask of eloquence, is admired for his pompous style.

The matters in question every where are so backed with all, means of credit
in the hands of the one party, and so borne down by vehement cries in the
weakness of the other. Mutation having now turned up-side-down, that where
before the truth had favor to be spoken and heard without fear. In companies
now a man must needs lay his hand upon his care for hearing the party absent,
or fall in folly and shame to answer a matter before he has heard it. The
truth is not to be measured by the means of them that speak for it, and all
calumnies are but swines flesh, though they be dressed after a diverse fashion.
The cause in controversy wronged by the violence of the time, may justly
complain of impar congressus in respect of worldly helps in the particulars
following, and many more. The new course has the countenance of the world: But
it fares with the ancient profession, as with the Gospel it self; Have any
of the rulers believed in him. Excepting always the honorable Peers of the
land, whose love is more large then their credit. 2. The most part of the
ancient ministers and professors, are removed either out of this life, or out
of their former mind, and many out of their places, and such as arise up, and
are admitted to the ministry, must swear and subscribe to maintain and
defend privately and publicly the alterations enforced. 3. There is very few to
be found having courage for the truth, to honor God with their credit and
riches: such receive the Gospel with a provision of safety to their own
estate, and the poor who receive the Gospel, are willing, but not able both
to do and suffer for the truth. 4. The pations and proctours of this new plea
are richly rewarded with a fat b nefice, or great sum of the taxation and
benefic s promised: but the defenders are ready to be respected with Deprive
and Confine. 5. They have a strong assistance, but the other are few and weak,
and if they be permitted to remain in their places, they are tied to the daily
pains of their callings, and ca^e of their families; and if they be thrust
forth, they are forced to provide for their own necessities, having no time
for these matters, but stolen hours. 6. The one party has liberty to meet
with full help of all requisite means, few or many, where and when, at their
own pleasure. The other if two or three of them meet upon their lawful
affairs, it is a scandal of Conventicle, and a matter of challenge. 7 They
are judges of their own cause, and have at their right hand the power of Kirk
and policy; but the cause of the other is like the widow and the fatherless,
no man will hear it. 8 To them all the Presses are open and expenses
furnished: Printers beyond sea are troubled upon suspicion of having the copies
of the other. 9 Their assertions are probations: the contrary cause
acknowledged for a found truth in secret, is in public respected as an error.
10 Threatened dangers makes men afraid to read, write or print in favors of
the one; all may be done to the advancement of the other with great
commendation. 11 For love of peace and lack of means, necessary purposes, as
the answer to a rabble of untruthes known to a many yet living, hatched by Joan
Fani Andrea Arch ep, and favored with a latin complexion of some despised
Doctor, and idle for lack of patients, and presented to the world under the
triumphing title, Refutatio libelli de regimine Ecclesiae Scoticanae. The
answer to the Doctors, Lyndesay, David Brechin, and Michelson, their bragging
and begging pamphlets: The answer to Mercenary Tilen his pragmaticall
paraenesis etc. are hid from the light, while necessity call for them.

Finally, were there a change made of the prosperous case of the one cause with
the adversity of the other, or would the world but smile or frown equally on
both; they would not busy the Printer and Reader so much. But the aequivalent
of that old truth, poor Luther made many rich, is in some sort verified in
this cause: and that which preaching substance against Papists could not
procure, pleading for ceremonies against Protestants has procured. The
Defenders have no other comfort, but that they deliver their souls, discharge
their consciences and serve for witnesses (...) the truth, and least they be
witnesses also against thee, Take h^ed to thy self; be not one of those who
either for love of the world will not like a known truth, or who fear to read
and know the truth, lest they find themselves obliged to follow it, and so
either be moved to change their present course, which may seem unprofitable, or
else be v^^ed with a crying conscience for keeping it, and that will prove
unpleasant. Think not their labors like the circlings made by Archimedes, when
Marcelius was on the sea and nigh unto the ports of Syracuse, except thou
remember also that by his weak means the City was a long time defended
against the Roman enemy, albeit at albeit last with the loss of his life.
Neither be thou over wise to say, they might have been like the good
Geographers, who seldom trouble themselves with the description of small
Brooks, but wait on till by confluence they make great rivers, and are
disburdened into sea. For had the riverets either been dried up in time, or yet
were drained in several channels, the maine stream would not swell so big, nor
the great Whore, that sits upon many waters prove so stately amongst us.
Only first, for stirring up thy own soul, think with thy self how like the
times of our Kirk may prove unto the darkness of the ninth Centurie after
Christ, which the Centuriatours observe to have proceeded of four pregnant
causes: 1 the excessive love of m^ns writtes with the neglect of Scripture: 2
the praeeminence of some persons above others: 3 the multiplication of
ceremonies and humane inventions: 4 persecution and oppression of the most
sound in heart and judgment. Secondly, for judging of the Defenders part,
consider that howsoever they be commanded to love such as hate them, and pray
for such as persecute them, yet how small reason they have to believe that they
who persecute them, think that in so doing they do God good service. And
thirdly, for thy own resolution, remember that the sentence of Christ's throne,
and the voices of men in the world are far different. Thy times and ways are
in the Lords hands. Set thy self in his presence; view the course as it began,
proceeded, has been resisted, should be refused, and may end, and see whether
it shall be any grief or offense of heart unto thee on that day, that thou
have kept thy self in the love of the truth from the beginnings of defection,
the end whereof no flesh can see, and every heart may justly fear that it
shall be beyong English Conformity, in so far as their lukewarm nesse has
been toward the hot, and ours is after it toward the cold. The Lord give
wisdom in all things. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and
to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory, with exceeding
joy, To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and maj^ste, dominion and
power, now and ever. Amen.

The Course of Conformity
I. As it has proceeded in times by past, wherein consider 1 The incomparable
goodness of God at the Reformation. 2 The open malice of Satan to set up
Idolatry again. 3 The faithfulness of the ministry, maugre all opposition,
preserving their 1 Unity, 2 Authority. 3 Order. 4 Purity of external
worship.
4 The wiles of Satan, bringing in by degrees 1 For unity Division, which 1
Entered at Perth 2 Increased at Dundie. 3 Prevailed at Montrose. 4 Brought forth
many Tragedies deploted at 1 Bruntvland. 2 Haly^udhouse

2 For authority Anarchie Begun about the Assembly of Aberdene, and continued
sensine.
3 For order Episcopac^ by 6 steps. 1 Vote in parliament at Perth 2 Perpetual
moderation at Linlithgow. 3 High commission. 4 Power Eccles at Glasgow. 5
Consecracation brought from England. 6 Ratification in Parliament at Edinburgh.
4 For purity of external worship, Antichristian Ceremonies in 5 articles. 1
Motioned at Aberdene. 2 Urged at Saint-Andrewes. 3 Enacted at Perth

5 The diligence of the Defenders by continual -- 1 Preaching. 2 Suplication.
3 Protestation. 4 Information. 5 Reasoning. 6 Admonition. 7 Suffering.

II. As it is now concluded in parliament whereof consider 1. The preparation
during the space 1. Of 3 years. 1 Let time try and work. 2 The names of the
kings service and conformity. 3 Rumor that the wise and learned are for it. 4
Urged in Synods. 5 Enforced by the high Commission. 6 Practiced by some, and
defended by others, who never yet practiced. 7 After many storms against
pastors and professors, a calm for a Parliament. 8 A meeting for supply to the
King of Bohemia pretended. 9 A Parliament which was intended, judged more
convenient.
2 Of 2 months. 1 The Parliament continued. 2 All dispositions sounded. 3
Fair promises made. 4 Great terrors threatened. 5 Simple ones deluded. 6 Great
wits tempted to look too.
3 of some days before the Parliament 1 Private and public meetings of the
plot-masters. 2 Ministers commanded by open proclamation to leave the Town.

2 The proceedings The first day. 1 Diligence used, that no minister enter in
the house. 2 Search made if any had entered, to remove them. 3 Orations framed
for the purpose. 4 Lords of the Articles cunningly chosen, and the seven
officers of estate joined to them.
2 the days following. 1 The kirk dispossessed of her place. 2 The toleration
at length disputed. 3 The five articles suddenly concluded. 4 The Lords of
Articles set to hauking, hunting, etc. till the way was prepared for voting in
public. 5 Emissaries for trial of wits and hearts. 6 Arguments fitted for
every disposition.
3 the last day. 1 Absents made prresent by Proxeis wherethrough was made to
vote. 1 Strangers. 2 Some who had their lice^ces passed. 3 some against their
own minds.
2 Some who had refused commission, to vote notwithstanding. 3 They who were
present made absent 1 Some moved to leave the town. 2 Some dealt with not to
ride. 3 Some not to vote who had ridden.
4 The entry of the house kept that no Minister enter. 5 Pithie speeches 1
exhortatorie. 2 Apologetick. 3 Declaratorie. 4 Promissorie, mixed with terrors.


3 The conclusion. 1 Confusion in voting. 1 All the Articles hudled up in one.
2 Negative voices noted for affirmative. 3 The distinction of the three Estates
suppressed.
2 Ratification denied to the negative Burroughes. 3 Gratulation for great
success. 4 Contradiction from 1 The Ministers by supplications, protestations,
informations, etc. 2 The hearts of the actors within. 3 The good people
without. 4 The Heavens above. 5 The judgments sinsyne.


III. As it should be refused against 4 Difficulties: 1 Of appearance that the
controverted ceremonies seem not to be matters of faith, but indifferent,
removed by showing that that be 1 Three degrees of matters of faith -- 2
Answerably as many degrees of Infidelity. 3 Three sort of things indifferent. 1
Indifferent by comparison made among things -- 2 In respect of the effects and
consequents in this case 3 In their nature and quality, where distinguish
betwixt a naked action, and an action clothed with circumstances, from divine
determination, which is threefold:

2 Of religious and reasonable pretexts removed by showing the like for 1 The
foulest faults. 2 The greatest Heresies. 3 The grossest Idolatry.
3 of promise, that no more shall be urged, 1 The times give reply. 2 The
mystery still prevailing. 3 Against 1 The judgment of Prudence. 2 The course
of Gods dealing. 3 Satan's subtle working.

4 Hard success upon the Defenders. 1 Duty is ours, success is Gods. 2 It
may be better then is expected, if we fall not away. 3 More grievous Croceis,
and odious aspersions upon the worthiest.


1 Of the foundation, the principles of religion. 2 Upon the foundation, their
necessary consequents. 3 About the foundation, whatsoever is in Scripture,
ceremonies should be of this degree.
condemns.
1 Ignorance in the first sort 2 Error in the second sort 3 obstinacy in the
third sort
1 Of the same kind Thus sitting best. kneeling worst. standing, midway.
2 Consisting in our knowledge. Thus sitting best. kneeling worst. standing,
midway.

1 Deplored. 2 To the worst and to the weakest evil spiritual, 3 To the best,
evil natural, oeconomicall, civil, Ecclesiastical.
1 Moral and universal, removing Indifferency from the controrverted
ceremonies, if ye consider 1 That circumstances are of the substance of an
action. 2 That the ten commandments be not taken literally, as ten words, but
largely as the common heads of all moral duties.
2 Ceremonial and National among the Jews. Controverted ceremonies compared
with theirs in 4 periods of time. 1 Before the giving of the law. 2 Before the
death of Christ. 3 Before the destruction of the Temple. 4 To the end of the
world.
3 Evangelicall and christian, where distinguish betwixt 1 Divine institutions.
2 Ecclesiastical constitutions to be made Human inventions, such are they. 1
Upon matters in their nature indifferent, known by 2 rules and their 3
consequents, all removing indifferency from the controverted ceremonies. 2
According to the Apostolic rules transgressed by them.


THE COURSE OF CONFORMITY as it has proceeded.
Archippus. I Begin no sooner to think upon the progress of my short time in
the Ministry, but I remember of the Students of Athens, who the first year
were wisemen, the second year Philosophers, only lovers of wisdom; the next
year Rhetoricians, no better then babblers; and the last year Idiots. At the
first I seemed somewhat to others, and more then somewhat to my self; like
many in these times, at whose blind boldness, out of mine own experience, I
would smile, were it not a subject of compassion. But afterward the Lord in his
great mercy, opening my eyes to see, and touching my heart to blush at my own
insufficiency and naughtiness, I began to deny my self, to unsecret my
soul to you: and at the first poured out all my former fantasies and present
thoughts into your bosom. At which time my reverend Epaphras, I received
happy information, in some measure to be that indeed, which I was before in
appearance; and many times since have I been with great delight, exercised
with you in heavenly contemplations for the furtherance of Gods work: But now
my harp, with Jobs, is turned to mourning, and my Organ into the voice of the^
that weep. Through the iniquity of the present Polemicall times. I am led
aside to Controversies, which are not in the high way to heaven wherein we were
walking before: All my former delight is changed into an earnest desire to be
thoroughly informed concerning the division which has happened in this our
mother Kirk, so renoumed in the Christian world for perfect reformation,
through the late alterations wrought at the last Parliament holden at Edinburgh
in August, 1621, for the ratification of the five now famous Articles of Perth
Assembly; Since which time the whole quarters of this Kingdom has been
universally filled with dinn and diversity of motions and speeches. Some like
Haman when the letters of revenge were published against Mordecai and his
people; some like the Israelites when they sat down to eat and drink and rose
up to play; Others like the Jews themselves when they were in perplexity and
great sorrow: The fourth sort equalling the first in misery of scene-serving
sycophants, who finding the religion before them, and not within them, are
ready to serve God or the devil, as the company will. Three things demanded
con ern ng conformity
And finally some so petted and empacque, that they suspend both their
judgment and practice, till they see which side shall prevail. As therefore I
never went from your society but either wiser or better, so must I now in my
great need, importune you for my comfort and quietness of my mind, to give me
some satisfaction in these three particulars, all linked in one chain. First,
out of your old experience; what has been the method of this mystery of
iniquity from our reformation to this time. Secondly, out of your diligent
observation, by what means, and after what manner past it in an Act in the
late Parliament. Thirdly, after conclusion past in Kirk and Parliament, out of
your grave direction, what is to be done of us, especially in the case of man's
immediate opposition, of the Necessity of Conformity or Deprivation:
Promising for duty to follow after you in the straitest ways of passive
obedience, so far as I find truth going before you, and leaving the success
with cheerfulness, to his high providence, who makes all things work together
for good to them that love him.


Epaphras. And no sooner think I upon my long course in the holy Ministry,
begun about the flourishing times of our first temple, but with incredible joy
of heart I call to mind the goodness of my God, where with in a time of so
great defection, I have escaped the danger of the proverbiall speech of the
Hebrews, first uttered of Balaam, who seeking preferment lost the gift of
Prophecy; Camelus coruna quaerens aures amisis. Drus.
The Camel seeking bornes, lost his ears. Had my care been to have lift up my
horn on high, my gift of Prophecy in public, and grace of giving good
counsel in private, had long since perished: And so by this time I am sure
(whatsoever is become of others, whom I judge not) I had been troad on as
unsavorie salt; a burden to my self, and unprofitable to you, and all others
of your disposition, who for your invinceable courage are worthy of the oracle
of Counsel. Il ne perd rien qui ne perd Dieu.
And therefore albeit my mediocritie cannot promise full satisfaction, because
your demand requires a deep knowledge of things past, present and to come; with
the height of the highest spirit, not only prepared to break the neck of his
present fortune, but also overlooking all casualties; and equally armed for all
events: And in a word a man that knows much of the world and cares little for
it: Yet because all that I have I owe to God and his people, by his grace in
whom I am preserved, and who is able to keep me that I fall not, I shall assay
what I can, with this premonition, that in case the historical part of my
answer, concerning things past and present, shall happen to halt in some
places, and to walk upon one foot, ^r^p achepte le miel qui sur espines le
leche.
not daring to set down the other in the midst of so many thornie purposes,
wherein all the verity would not, may not be heard; let a word now and then,
albeit covertly uttered, be enough to your wise ear: And let it be my
imputation that, of the twofold commendation of a good history, No truth
unspoken, Nihil Verum non, nihil non Verum.
no untreuth spoken, Charity has made me to be content with the latter till
I come to the third point where I shall set down both my feet, and without
danger of so great offense walk with greater liberty.


Archipp. Your mind I perceive malices no man, (...). A threefold consideration
for satisfying of the first Demand.
and your meaning according to your fashion of conference, which was ever more
material then personal, is rather tovvard then to give a blow. My desire also
(albeit an hieroglyphicall history be half dumb) is not so much after men as
matter; persons as purposes: let me only know by things past from whence we
are come, and by things presently done and in doing, where we now are, that my
course in time to come may be the more sat and sound.


Epaph. All prefaces are song to the greedy hearer. To begin then with your
first Demand, the length thereof reaching from the first reformation through
manifold alterations to the last Parliament, shall be abridged to a threefold
consideration: First, what Christ did for us in the beginning of his
undeserved love: secondly, what Antichrist did against us in his unquenchable
malice; and thirdly, what the true members of the Kirk did in their sincerity
and faithfulness.


Archipp. That project punctually pursued, will delight any true Scots heart
to hear, and will give eye to me borne out of time to see, as that I had
lived then, that which I both fear and love to know: first then, what was
that incomparable love vouchsafed on us.


Epaph. Our Savior Christ did plant a vineyard in this land, as in a very
fruitful hill, he hedged it, The first consideration.
and gathered out the stones of it, and planted it with the best plants, he
built a tovver in the midst of it, and also made a vvine-presse therein, and
after many years, and diverse troubles and travells (according to the truth
uttered by a dear servant of God when the gospel first began to shine among
us) the realm was illuminated with the light of Christ's Evangell as clearly
as ever was any realm since the days of the Apostles: The house of God was
builded in it; yea, it did not lack (whatsoever the enemy imagine in the
contrary) the very coapstone: the jurisdiction and liberty of the true Kirk,
General and Provincial Assemblies, Presbyteries, Sessions and Discipline were
brought to their perfection: all laws of idolatry abrogate; all presentations
of Benefices directed to the particular Presbyteries, with power to put order
to all matters Ecclesiastical within their bounds, Hic fuit vnit^s sine
schismate, ventas sine haeresi and bonitas absque hypocrisi.
according to the discipline of the Kirk. But all this fair and flourishing
estate is tied to it own condition of contrary change; if the people shall be
after unthankful, then fearful and terrible shall the plagues be.


Archipp. That truth of the man of God, I must confess, meets us this day in
our face, for as the love has been great, the people have proved unthankful,
and the plagues are already begun: The Lord looked for grapes, and behold
nothing but wild grapes; why should he not then lay his vineyard wast, and
command the clouds that they rain no more rain upon it: But what secret would
you have me to consider upon the Antichrist his side.


Epaph. Antichrist inflamed with the furious zeal of his cursed Kingdom, and
enraged by his inveterate malice against our profession, Secondly what
Antichrist did.
as a burning light to discover his damnable darkness, never ceased to resist
the grace of God among us, to his uttermost possibility: sending forth, as he
might command, the armies of cruelty, his wild Boares and roaring Lions, with
open mouth and ready paws to threaten and proclaim their enmity, as in that
bloody enterprise of the 88, when God showing his might, no less against
these mortal enemies, then for the Kirks and Kingdoms of this Island, redeemed
his own people mightily from the teeth of the Dog; and ruined these Unicorns
as mightily in his wrath: But that mavelous overthrow from the heaven above,
and the waters beneath, conspiring to repress the pride of that tyrant, did no
wise move him to forsake his bloody purpose, but within few days thereafter,
assaying to practice by craft which he could not perform by open cruelty,
like a sworn enemy to the oath of Allegiance, he treacherously enchanted,
and miserably perverted diverse of this Kingdom to negotiate with him and his
Emissaries, Jesuits and seminary Priests, for subversion of this whole state.
You may read and remember the execution of ^entrie, the Bridge of Dee, and the
unnatural and treacherous attempt of the 93, etc.


Archipp. You seem to me if you would follow forth that discourse in speaking
of the times past to point at the present; and to tax the treachery of living
men in their persons who are long since dead But I rest content for the present
with your pointing at that Spanish spring from whence the streams have been
coming northward this time by past which now overflow this Kirk and Island: and
desires to know what was done at that time for resisting of Antichrist.


Epaph. The watchmen of the Lords house and sincere professors as they were
directed and assisted by grace, Thirdly, how Antichrist was resisted.
resisted the violence of open enemies, and diligently searched the hid
wickedness of lurking vipers, intending to sting to the death, and after trial
taken of the venomous heads of those Romish monsters, who spared not to
adventure themselves, their friends and whole estate in that foul and
unnatural trick, they proceeded against them, and put them under the highest
censure Ecclesiastical, and thereupon procured their deserved forefalture.


Archip. Those Satanicall supposts of that Italian Priest and Indian Pluto
deserved no less: And now it seems that the Kirk and the Country are well
purged of such Antichristian and disnatured spirit.


Epaph. Had the success been answerable to the censure, the fire had been
quenched, and we quit of them and their adulterous generation multiplying in
midst of us to this day: But the general Assembly holden at Edinburgh 1594
declares the contrary in these words of Inscription. The dangers which
through the impunitie of the excommunicate Papists trafiquers with the
Spaniards and other enemies of the Religion and estate, are imminent to the
true Religion professed within this Kingdom, his Majesty's person, crown and
liberty of this our native Country. And at more length in Eleven Articles, of
which number the first is: It is certain, that the Spaniard who with so great
preparations in the 88, did interprise the conquest of this I Will, remains as
yet of that same intention, and waits only upon a meet occasion to accomplish
that his devilish purpose, as clearly appears in his continuing in this
intertainment of intelligence and traffiquing with the foresaid excommunicates
ever since the dissipation of his Navy. And the last: whereas his Majesty and
Estates at the first discovery of their conspiracies apprehended a very great
danger to true Religion, the Kings estate and crown, and liberty of the
Country; and notwithstanding that the same cause of danger as yet remains
whole unremoved, their is no apprehension of any danger, nor earnest care to
withstand it, it is evident that their is an inclination and purpose to cover,
extentiate and bear forth the evil cause, wherthrough they will not see: or
else the Lord in judgment has blinded and hardened the hearts of all estates
to grop in the mid day at that which they cannot see, which is the greatest
danger of al, and a most certain argument of the wrath of God, and his heavy
judgment hanging over the land, and so much the more to be feared, because
there is no cause of fear apprehended.

Archip. But what could either the civil or spiritual sword do more for the
good of the kirk and country against their unnatural malice.


Epaph. When you tempt me after that sort, ye forget my protestation in the
beginning: I will only show what the kirk (now holding the wolf by the ears)
resolved to do, out of the apprehension of so great danger for preventing of
ensuing evils, and for purging the realm from open offenses ready to draw on
higher wrath; They begin carefully to mark the corruptions of every state and
calling, earnestly recommending to all unfeigned and timous repentance: and for
that effect public humiliations were kept, a covenant renewed with God first
in the general Assembly holden at Edinburgh the penult of March 1595, and
thereafter in the Provincial Assemblies, Presbyteries, and Sessions for
stirring up and moving all more carefully to cleave to their comfortable
profession. In great plainness and zeal sounded the Pulpits against papistry
and their resetters. The Assemblies of the kirk were frequentlie kept,
delinquents without respect of persons admonished and censured, Residence of
Ministers earnestly urged, and all men and means, as they had grace and place,
were set a-work for reformation of abuses, and defense of the kirk against her
bloody enemies.


Archip. The holy courage of the ministry, and spiritual happiness of the
kirk in that time, puts me in mind of that which is in the Canticle, Thou art
beautiful, O my love, as Ti^za, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with
banners.


Epaph. But while the faithful servants of God were thus set to cure the wound
lately received, and to prosecute the reformation of corruptions; the persons
standing under both civil and ecclesiastical censure of the unnatural crimes
before named, without shame or fear, yea in great boldness, durst presume to
show themselves openly within the country.


Archip. What could be done in that case of so proud contempt and manifest
danger.


Epaph The messengers of God were set with fresh courage, as became their holy
calling and vigilant care to provide new remedies for that so deadly malady.
But as they assayed to cure that disease, a more dangerous sore brake out. A
woeful question was moved about the marches of the kirkes Jurisdiction, and
certain ministers were pursued before civil Judges for matters of doctrine. By
those and other unhappy occasions, were the ministers of God taken off the
pursuit of the enemies of religion, and intended course for reforming
corruptions, and constrained to bestow their thoughts and endeavors in defense
of themselves, and liberty of the Kirk; but with what success the event will
declare.


Archip. That policy has at all times proved pernicious to the Kirk, and
advantageous to the enemy. But my ignorance makes me to marvel more how the
kirk having authority for her, could be forced to take her to the defenders
part: And therefore I pray you make this part somewhat plain.


Epaph. Machiavell will never be plain to a prentise in his craft, albeit he
were a master in other Arts. In those days there fell out a coffeehouse
amongst Statesmen: the Octavians and the Chalmermen went in factions, according
to the customs of such times. The kirk then being somewhat, and the credit
thereof not a little respected, what could curry favor was suggested to chief
ministers in such measure, and by one of them so apprehended for extremity and
present danger, as he was then in a high place of the ministry, and now as
high in credit but in a new mould, was not affraied in great boldness to affirm
in a place of chief respect, as he repeated himself in a public conference
concerning the difficulties then in hand, That the Kirk gat but fair promises,
and words without effect, and the enemies gat the deeds. It were but sorrow to
remember, and pitiful to repeat the lamentable broils of October, November,
and December of the year 1596, each one following another like the heads of
Hydra stricken off, or the abominations of Ezechiels Temple, after the sight
of some, still more. By these unexpected hurly-burlies, the unity of the
faithful and careful concurrence for offices due to the necessities of
religion, was strangely shaken; and they by proclamations, the terrible
trumpets of authority, scattered like the ships of Tarshis. Upon this untimous
distemper of a body whole in appearance, and well compacted to the eye, but
secretly racked in some principal members, witty wickedness quickly began to
lay the foundation of a cursed Babell, and first to divide Hippocrates twins,
and then to charge the kirk with sedition, insurrection, as Archenemie of
common peace, and likely to disquiet all ranks and persons, as indeed the
remedies against enemies of the truth, and reformation of notorious
corruptions, if they had been prosecuted, as honesty required, and without
respect of men's persons, would have made some sort of stir amongst the
masters of strange plots. But in few days the kirk lost the smiling surmises
of those discontented or rather dissembled factions. These cunning
controversies were quickly composed, and they set aworke to compass the way of
peace for the excommunicats, as did appear at Fackland and Dumfermeline: and
thereafter in the process of their relaxation, and many favors secretly
insinuated, and openly showen in the form thereof, and before and after the
same, not only by civil m^n, but also by some provincial assemblies, and
sundry ministers. In this uncouth rite and mystical form of dealing, the mouth
of the Canon was turned from Babylon the mother city of force and falsehood,
desperately set to snare the world to her subjection, and the generation of the
wise found it was high time, every man inviting another, Come, let us work
wisely with the kirk, least that they increase and we decrease: for at that
time Jerusalem was a strong city: her Motto then was, Unity strengthens the
cause, her wall was discipline and her assemblies, her sword the sword of the
spirit, plain pertinent and powerful doctrine: her glory, the favor of God,
manifested in her manifold deliverances, flourishing estate and still triumphing
over her enemies; Then did she constantly hold that such was the cruelty of
Rome, that she is the second beast thirsting for the Saints blood. Pax cum
hareticis este non potest, bellum (...). Catholici non patiuntur in suo grege
ullos qui oftendunt ullo signo externo so fauere Lutheranis Bell. de Laicis l.
3. c. 19.
Upon their side, As many as will not worship the image of the beast, shall be
killed. The fiery Fathers of Trent, All Lutherans, Calvinists, and such as are
of the new religion, shall utterly be rooted out. Bellarmine the oracle of
Rome: The Catholics suffer none in their society that by any outward sign
give evidence of their favor to Lutherans. And upon our part, it should be a
great height of unthankfulness in us freed from the Roman bondage, not to
stand out against the present kirk of Rome, but to yield ourselves to plots of
Reconciliation, so long as they cry. What care we for the same creed? No peace
with Rome. etc.


Archip. That Italizing craft of Scottish windings, and secret underminings,
brings me out of the element of my simplicity, into an uncouth world of
policy, and remembers me of the comparison of Epiphanius, likening an
heretic to a modiwort or brok, working hid under the ground, and making the
earth above her to swell and to move: yet I see not how these earthly moles can
shake a city builded upon a rock.


Epaph. To this time the kirk notwithstanding all oppositions external and
intestine, did stand whole and sound in the unity of her ministers, authority
of her assemblies, order of her ministry, and purity of divine worship. But
there was the beginning of her calamity. The enemies being frustrated in the
year 88. and not finding after that time how they shall (like Caligula) cut
the throat of the whole Kirk and religion at one stroke, they resolve to be
still working the maine conclusion by degrees, and to maime her of her members,
that in the mean time the Kirk may be still decreasing in beauty and
strength, the ministry may be more exercised in their own defense men in
their pursuit. At last they or their posterity may bring the purpose to an
end. And it may be, that by some intervening occasion, the work may be made
short. Working and waiting will do the turn in the end.

Archip. God has not plagued us finally with that occasion as we have
deserved, and they desire. Defection of the kirk in four essential degrees.
But we may all see division in the kirk for Unity, for Jurisdiction and
authority usurpation and tyranny, for order Episcopacie, and for the purity
and power of worship, polluted and perfunctorious service. Albeit I cannot for
my self marvel enough upon what side of a city so compact in it self they
could make the first assault, and desire to know if, as I perceive now, that
the weed has grown so in former times, ye did see it to be growing, and by
what means.


Epaph. Know ye not the maxim, Divide and overcome: The first degree,
Division for Unity.
The kirk at that time was so respected for a strong estate, that scarcely
durst any without help from her own hand, enterprise her hurt; and therefore
her enemies dealt with her Cassander like friends to divide the Ministry: And
for this end a quarrel was professed against the great liberty used in
application of the doctrine. Item, against diverse points of discipline: and for
remedy of that pretended disease, there was offered to the ministers a bond
restraining the power of their office in doctrine, application thereof, and in
discipline. And diverse ministers were called and accused (as multitudes yet
living may well remember) but that band was modestly and happily refused upon
reasons unanswerable for the time, and no cause found in the ministers
sufficiently to ground the change intended.


Archip When that course failed what was next assayed? Begun at Perth.



Epaph. With a better luster there were penned and printed 55 questions, to be
resolved by the estates and general assembly to be holden at Perth the last
Febr. 1596. And what pains was taken there by some of a far other mind
now both to direct the ministers in their studies and sermons, and to repel
these questions by strong and well prepared answers, their old papers, and
their old conscience will best record in time and place, as the judge of the
world shall think meet.


Archip. I would understand something of the keeping and proceedings of that
meeting.


Epaph. Upon the day appointed at the same Borough, a great number of ministers
from all the Presbyteries of this realm (but specially from Aberdene, Murray
and Angus) as they were required by his Majesty's missiue, did convene, and
some two days after came a number of the Nobility. In that meeting the
ministers being as yet all of one mind, refused a mixture of the Nobility and
Ministry to make up an Ecclesiastical or rather confused meeting. But after
some days spent in secret conference betwixt some Civilians and some of the
chief Ministers, a course was taken for opening the door to Division, that
she might as should be thought meet, weaken unity, and make way to the
proiects in hand.


Archip. In what particulars were the ministers divided at that meeting?


Epaph. In these four especially: first, an^nt the nature of the meeting, some
holding that all general assemblies were either ordinary, or Pro re nata
consisting of commissioners authorized with commission, and directed from
Provincial assemblies or presbyteries to meet in a certain time and place
appointed by the kirk with his Majesty's consent, and having Moderator and
Clark according to the institution and custom of the said meeting, which were
no waves here to be found: Others holding, that in respect of the missiue it
was lawful, which allegiance was so far granted as it concerned the
liberty of the persons met; but denied to be a sufficient vvarrant for them
to perform the duties proper for a general assembly. But in the end, it was
born away with strong hand, that it should be called an extraordinary general
assembly. Secondly, about cerain answers given more liberally then advisedly to
these 13 articles proponed to that meeting, as a favorable ease of the 55
questions, which of reason should have been seen and considered at length in
inferior assemblies before they had been concluded to be the ground work of
such a strange building as now is raised upon the^. Thirdly, an ample
commission granted in favor of the excommunicats, from the ministry there
met, to certain of their own number, as inclined to accept, as they were prone
to give, notwithstanding of the troublesome condition of that time, and
informality of that conuention. And lastly for presuming to alter the order of
calling the roll, and marking the votes usually observed all times before.


Archip. By what means could so many worthy and wise men be separat from
their brethren, and depart from their own stedfastnes.


Epaph. The means are best known to themselves, body seminatum est venenum
aspidum in Ecclesia Dei. I may say of them that which was said of flattering
Gregorius in the beginning of the Roman Hierarchy. That they were the vvorst
amongst the best, and the best amongst the worst. That the schism by which
many now are called Schismatickes, began at this time on their side: and that
they carried away the ignominious victory not by their own valor, but by the
modesty of their brethren, and over great reverence toward them for their
courage and good carriage in former times.


Archip. And perhaps it would trouble their wits now to answer speeches and
arguments used and uttered by themselves then, no less then it would have
busied the brain of the same Gregorius raised from the dead to answer his own
argument in the days of Bonifacius the third, Whosoever will be called
universal Bishop, is the forerunner of Antichrist. etc.


Epaph. Yet Bellarmine has found out two shifts for Bonifacius, and they
twenty for themselves. But being baited on this beginning, they not only grew
want on themselves, and ran away with the harrowes, but wrought upon others by
terrors and promises as they thought to prevail; and the course once inclining
to the dounwith and growing calm, men fell away by heaps: the sweet name of
peace being made a visor to cover the ugly face of a strange monster.


Archip. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water, Prove. 17.14.
And you seem to have said that our present inundations did begin at that
breach.


Epaph. It was so indeed: 1 May 1597. Continued and increasing at Dundie.
for in the next assembly holden at Dundie the water becomes broader, and the
schism begun at Perth, grows greater: 1. by difference of judgment anent
the confirmation of the former assembly holden at Perth: 2. by diversity of
opinions concerning the setting down of some notes in form of declaration of
certain of the acts concluded at Perth, explaining his Majesty's and the
assemblies meaning for the satisfaction of such as then were not acquainted
therewith, and now to be registered in this assembly at Dundie, to remain, etc.
but like the gloss of Orleans: 3. by indulgence, for duty, directed in a new
commission carrying greater favor to the excommunicats and their vassals, their
insinuating care of the dangers of the Kirk imminent from a higher cause: 4.
from a new form of commission drawing power from the general assembly to a
few number of persons, and aiming them for execution of some of the dangerous
articles rashly yielded to, as did appear in diverse attempts. Lastly, about
excommunication and other points of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And again
the spait of division swells to a great height, the floods increase and
prevail in the assembly holden at Dundie the 7 of March 1597, 1. by certain
greeves put in Articles by brethren of diverse quarters of the country; and
given in against the the proceedings of the commissioners anent alterations
made at Edinburgh and Santandros and form of casting out and putting in
ministers: the which greeves behoved to be buried, otherwise no peace for the
Kirk. 2. for the commissioners presumption taking upon them without express
and particular warrant from the Kirk to treat with the parliament holden at
Edinburgh the 19 of December 1597. anent the Kirkes vote in parliament, she
standing as yet in doubt if it should be thought leesome that the ministers
should succeed in the prelates places for voting in Parliament. 3. About the
diversity of Judgment anent the conditions of the said vote, some holding
that the Kirk should be declared the third estate of parliament, and authorized
with all lawful privileges, and having liberty as Barons and Burgesses have,
to choose their own commissioners, others ready to take the same in what sort
and upon what conditions it might be had. 4. About that woeful commission
continued and enlarged with a seeming, but sore clause for keeping the
Ministers free of offenses.


Archip. Your waters are like to grow to a sea vvherin the course of
navigation loses the sight of the one pole, and enters in some degrees of
elevation of the other. Beware of shipwreck of religion in the end.


Epaph. The truth is, the division prevailing at Dundie, becomes a great sea
at Montrose, Prevailing at Montrose
and brings in that Trojan horse so pleasantly palliat with a fair mantle
of fine caveats, and even then greedily gaped for by some, foresmelling their
own wealth and honor in that Ecclesiastical Tragedy, but constantly refused
by others foreseeing and fearing more sorrow to the Kirk in the conditions
annexed, then apprehending good in a seeming benefit so violently offered. In
that general assembly the 18 day of March 1600, after many combats and
braulings about the cautions restraining the commissioners voters in Parliament
from corruption frowardly, as it might be, the caveats, the lurking deceit of
hierarchy were finally set down.


Archip. These palliative caveats are in form and effect much like the
professions set out by Foegadius and Servatio, to save the Kirk as they
imagined from Arrian perfidie, but in event a furtherance to their blasphemous
haeresie and cruel victory. It were better to hold thieves at the door,
then wait upon them in the house that they steal not. I would know before I
proceed, what miseries followed upon this unhappy division and alteration made
in these four assemblies begun at Dundie, and concluded at Montrose.


Epaph. Evils ensuing upon the former division.
The tongue and pen of another Nizianzene were not sufficient to deplore and
express them to the full. In the general assembly holden at Bruntyland the
next year 1601 May 12. and at Halyrood-house the year following 1602,
November 10. these are pointed at: Defection from the purity, zeal and
practice of true religion proceeding from the just wrath of God for
dishonouring of our profession, the negligence of the Ministers against
Papists, the desolation of diverse parts of the country for lack of Pastors,
the neglecting of places of chiefest importance to the interest of religion, in
not planting them with sufficient Pastors: the ouer-hasty admission of men to
the ministry before their sufficiency be known: the negligence of Ministers
in reading the Scriptures, and controversies betwixt the reformed Kirk and
enemies thereof: the uncomely carriage of Ministers framing themselves
excessiuely to the humors of men in communications, intemperance, and light
apparel, the distraction which is supposed to be from some of the
ministry, and of themselves from themselves, the desolation of the Kirk of
Edinburgh, the great favor shown to Papists, and their great credit by that
means, in negligent education of noble men's children, the impunitie of Sailors
transporting and bringing within the country Seminary Priests and Jesuits
with their coffers and books, that men suspect in religion when they are
challenged, have access to court during the time of their process. That the
late reconciled Papists are not urged to perform the conditions agreed to at
their reconciliation to the Kirk; All which were either caused or occasioned
by the former division.


Epaph. It had been high time upon these evident dangers and pitiful cries of
the Kirk, to have repented of the former division, and to have returned to
their brotherly unity and Philadelphian profession, Nec enim vllum maius
concordiae vinculum quam timor externus.


Epaph. Multi clerici sunt progenies viperarum, Policy did foresee that that
happy course would not satisfy the burning lust of Hierarchy: Second degree
of defection, for Jurisdiction usurpation.
and therefore they are so far from once looking back to brotherly agreement
upon equal conditions, that esteeming the fire of division to be the most
natural element for their purpose, they add fresh oil by laboring to abolish
the Jurisdiction of the Kirk, and giving a dead stroke to her chief
privilege of holding of general Assemblies ordinarily once in the year, and
after pro re nata, which is the second essential degree of our defection.


Archip. I have seen the rent of unity, I beseech you to be as plain in this
point, that I may be informed upon what occasion and by what means the Kirk
was deprived of that awful power and fair liberty.


Epaph. According to the order usually observed, Assemby at Aberdine.
the Assembly at Halyrood house 1602 appointed the next general Assembly to
be holden at Aberdene in the year 1604 by reason 1 of the insolency of
Papists in the North country, 2 a purpose to plant Noblemens houses and chief
places with sufficient ministers, 3 to prosecute the remedies of defection
remembered in the assembly at Bruntyland, 4th at the late reconciled Papists
might be urged to perform the conditions agreed to by them. Lastly, to follow
out the common affairs of the Kirk. Notwithstanding these and other
intervenient causes that diet was not kept, but the Assembly continued once and
to be continued again: Whereupon the Provincial Assemblies and Presbyteries
considering that the Parliament was approaching for which Articles were to be
dressed in the Assembly, according to the order continually observed since the
reformation, that the people were begun to delude the censures of inferior
Assemblies by appellation to the general, that all the forenamed evils were
daily growing greater; and thinking upon the necessity of that rare benefit
so deerly bought, and fearing the loss thereof so many ways apparent, as 1 by
abridgement, or deprivation of wonted liberty to convene: 2 by division of the
members thereof, begun at Perth, and now come to so great height: 3 by terrors
and strange imputations against their Ministers, their meetings and assisters:
4 by often changing of appointed dyets, and at some times bringing the
Assembly within the palace: 5 by a cunning, but woeful commission drawing
from the wisest counsel of the Kirk, to certain Ministers, the credit and
guiding of the greatest affairs: 6 by continuations multiplied as prejudicial
to the Kirk, as Papistrie, profannesse, and other corru^^^^ns did se^sibly
increase, conform to the order and custom of the Kirk ratified by the laws
of the country; they directed their commissioners to meet at Aberdeen the 2 of
July 1605 for holding the General Assembly, as was formerly appointed: of
these commissioners a certain number kept and the rest were absent, and so
nothing was done but Call and Continue for safety of the privilege, by
appointing a new Diet, a silly Seminary, but of many and grievous troubles:
the men were first called, and for a long time put in prison, thereafter
proceeded against by course of law, found guilty of high treason, returned to
their several prisons, and thereafter banished. Since that Assembly we have
had the name of General Assemblies, but no more, according to the maine maxim
of policy, that the name be as little changed as may be, though the thing
be changed.


Archipp. Third degree for order Episcopacie, advanced by 6 steps. First step
of Prelacie vote in Parliament.
When unity and authority are now gone, I marvel not that Hierarchy comes
the greater speed. But I would know the rest of the ways of that Ambition, and
therein see the third step of our defection: For as yet I see it rises upon
the ruins of the Kirk, and proves like the melt in the body, as it swells
and waxes great the strength and beauty of the body decays.


Epaph. Neither was this Rome builded the first day: The first great step of
their blind-winding stairs, whereupon they are lifted by all the former
engines and preparations was, their vote in Parliament. For upon the former
calamities, as wishes before the wind of their great prosperity, a Parliament
was appointed and kept at Perth the first of July 1606, where they having
croppen into Bishoprics, without respect to Calling, Commission or Caveat,
were horsed upon the highest honors of their Episcopal dignity. At that
beginning they looked somewhat modestly as new come from the school of old
ministerial paritie, and as novices in their new world, would have been glad
of the countenance of their old acquaintance: but since that they have learned
to walk in state and soft raiment, as little respecting the greatest seculars
as they were regarded of all honest men before: but gay clothes and great
places will make Monkies to seem Monsicures, and forgetful fools to say, this
cannot be I. At that berrie market of Kirk livings by that common interchange
where havocke bears sway, Take thou this, and I that: for the purchase of
thirteen dilapidate Bishoprics forth of the hands of civil men, to the use
of civilized Ministers, the Kirk did loose the greatest part of her rent
destinate for the service of the Gospel, and ad pios usus. And without all
fear to follow such sacrilege, Restitutio ad integrum was deerly bought what
by erections of Ecclesiastical rents in temporal Lordships, and eversions of
Kirk privileges by Hierarchicall domination.


Archipp. It had been easy to bring them down again from that first step;
neither at any time before or since could the opportunity be greater: before,
the working was secret under the ground, and denied; now the monsters of
ambition and avarice set out their heads, afterward they became stronger. A
shame that the watchmen are now all fast asleep, that all the friends of the
Kirk have dealt treacherously with her. A pity that there be none to speak a
word in season for her against her enemies.


Epaph. Soft I pray you, be not so passionate, breath a little, there was no
neglect of duty; for the ministers of the Gospel having commission from their
Provincial Assemblies and Presbyteries to convene there for the weal of the
Kirk, apprehending her hurt, and having neither place nor power to resist did
solemnly and humbly protest in the manner and words follovving.

The earnest desire of our hearts is to be faithful, Protestation against vote
in Parliament.
and in case we could have been silent and faithful at this time, when the
undermined estate of Christ's Kirk craves a duty at our hands; we should have
locked up our hearts with patience, and our mouths with taciturnitie, rather
then to have impeached any with our admonition: But that which Christ
commands, necessity urges; and duty wringeth out of us to be faithful
Office-bearers in the Kirk of God, no man can justly blame us to do it;
providing we hold our self within the bounds of that Christian moderation
which follows God, without injury done to any man, specially those whom God
has lipped up within the skirts of his own honorable styles and names,
calling them Gods upon earth: Now therefore (my Lords convened in this present
Parliament, under the most high and excellent Majesty of our dread Sovereign)
to your Honors is our exhortation, that ye would endeavor with all
singleness of heart, love and zeal, to advance the building of the house of
God: reserving always into the Lord his own hands that glory which be will
communicate neither with man nor Angel, to wit, to prescribe from his holy
mountain a lively pattern according to which his own Tabernacle should be
formed: remembering always that there is no absolute and unbounded authority
in this world, except the sovereign authority of Christ the King, to whom it
belongs as properly to rule the Kirk, according to the good pleasure of his
own will, as it belongs to him to save his Kirk by the merit of his own
sufferings. All other authority is so entrenched within the marches of divine
commandment, Heb 12, 25 28.29.
that the least overpassing of the bounds set by God himself, brings men
under the fearful expectation of temporal and eternal judgments. For this
cause, my Lords, let that authority of your meeting in this present
Parliament, be like the Ocean sea, which as it is greatest of all other waters,
so it conteyneth it self better within the coasts and limits appointed by God,
then any river of fresh running waters have done. Next remember that God has
set you to be Nourish Fathers of his Kirk, (...). 49.23.
craving at your binds that ye should maintain and advance by your authority
that Kirk which the Lord has fashioned by the uncounterfaited work of his own
new creation (as the Prophet speak th) he has made us, Psa. 100.1
and not we our our selves, but not that she should presume to fashion and
shape a new portrature of a Kirk, and a new form of divine service which God
in his world has not before allowed, because that were to extend your
authority farther then the calling ye have of God does permit. As namely if
ye should (as God forbid) authorize the authority of the Bishops, and their
preh^minence above their brethren, ye should bring into the Kirk of God the
ordinance of man, and that thing which the experience of preceding ages has
testified to have been the ground of great idleness, palpable ignorance,
unsufferable pride, pitiless tyranny, and shameless ambition in the Kirk of
God: and finally to have been the ground of that Antichristian Hierarchy which
mounted up on the steps of pre-eminence of Bishops until that man of sin came
forth as the ripe fruit of man his wisdom, whom God shall consume with the
breath of his own mouth. 1 Thessalonians. 2.^.
Let the sword of God pearce that belly which brought forth such a monster; and
let the staff of God crush that Egg which has hatched such a Cocatrice. And
let not only that Roman Antichrist be thrown down from the high bench of his
usurped authority, but also let all the steps whereby he mounted up to that
unlawful pre-eminence be cut down and utterly abolished in this land. Above
all things (my Lords) beware to strive against God with an open and displayed
banner, by building up again the walls of Jericho, which the Lord has not
only cast down, but also has laid them under a terrible interdiction and
execration: so that the building of them again must needs stand to greater
charges to the builders, then the reedifying of Jericho to H^el the Be the lit
in the days of Achab. For he had nothing but the interdiction of Joshua, and
the curse pronounced by him to stay him from building again of Jericho. But the
Noblemen and States of this Realm have the reverence of the oath of God made
by themselves, and subscribed with their own hands in the confession of faith,
called The Kings Mai^^tes, published more then once or twice, and sworn by his
most excellent Majesty, and by his Highness Nobi^^tie, Estates and whole
subjects of the Realm, to hold them back from setting up the dominion of
Bishops. Because it is of verity that they subscribed and swore the said
commission, containing not only the maintenance of the true doctrine, but also
of the discipline professed within the Realm of Scotland. Consider also that
the work cannot be set forward without the great slander of the Gospel,
defamation of many preachers, and evident loss and hurt of the peoples souls
committed to our charge. For the people are brought almost to the like case as
they were in Syria, Arabia and Egypt about the 600 year of our Lord, when the
people were so brangled and shaken with contrary doctrines, some denying and
others allowing the opinion of Eutiches, that in the end they lost all assured
persuasion of true religion; and within short time thereafter, did cast the
gates of their hearts open to the devil to receive that vile and blasphemous
Doctrine of Mahomet. Even so the people of the Lord are cast in such admiration
to b^^ne the preachers, who so openly damned this stately pre-eminence of B sh
ps, then within a few years after accept the same dignity, ^ompe and
superiority in their own persons, whi h they before had damned in others, that
the people know not which way to incline, and in end will become so doubtful
in matters of religion and doctrine, that their hearts will be like an open
tavern d^re, patent to every guest that likes to come in. We beseech your
honors to ponder this in the balance of a godly and prudent mind, and suffer
not the Gospel to be slandered by the behavior of a few number of preachers;
of whom we are bold to affirm, that, if they go forward in this defection,
not only abusing and appropriating that name Bishop to themselves only, Act
20.17 28. Phil. 1.1. 1. Tim. 3.1.2. P^t. 1.5.7. 1. Pet. 5.1.2.
which is common to all the Pastors of God his Kirk, but also taking upon
themselves such offices that carry with them the ordinary charge of governing
the civil affairs of the country, neglecting their flocks, and s^^king to
subordinate their brethren to their jurisdiction. If any of them (We say) be
found to step forward in this course of defection, they are more worthy as
rotten members to be cut off from the body of Christ, then to have superiority
and dominion over their brethren within the kirk of God. The pre-eminence of
Bishops is that Dagon which once already fell before the Ark of God in this
land, and no band of iron shall be able to hold him up again. This is that
pattern of that Altar brought from Damascus, but not showed to Moses in the
mountain, and therefore it shall fare with it as it did with that Altar of
Damascus; It came last in the Temple, and went first out. Likewise the
institution of Christ was anterior to this pre-eminence of Bishops; and shall
consist and stand within the house of God, when this new fashion of Altar shall
go to the door. Remember (my Lords) that in time past your authority was for
Christ and not against him, ye followed the light of God and strived not
against it, and like a child in the mothers hand ye said to Christ, Draw us
after thee. God forbid that ye should now leave off and fall away from your
former reverence borne to Christ, in presuming to lead him whom the Father has
appointed to be a leader of you, and far less to traile the holy Ordinances
of Christ by the cords of your authority at the heels of the ordinances of
men. And albeit your Honors have no such intention to do any thing which may
impair the honor of Christ's Kingdom, yet remember that spiritual darkness
flowing from a very small beginning does so insinuate and thrust it self into
the house of God, as men can hardly dis^ern by what secret means the light is
dimm, and dakenesse creeping in got the upper hand, and in end unawares all is
involved within a mystie cloud of horrible Apostasy. And least that any should
think this our admonition out of time, in so far as it is statute and
ordained already by his Majesty, with advise of his estates in Parliament,
that all Ministers provided to Prelacies should have vote in Parliament: As
likewise the general Assembly (his Majesty being present thereat) has found
the same lawful and expedient. We would humbly and most earnestly beseech all
such to consider, first that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the Office bearers
and Laws thereof neither should nor can suffer any derogation, addition,
diminution or alteration, besides the prescript of his holy world, by any
inventions or doings of men, Civil or Ecclesiastical. And we are able by the
grace of God, and will offer our selves to prove, that this Bishoprie to be
erected is against the word of God, the ancient fathers and Canons of the Kirk,
the modern most learned and godly Divines, the doctrine and constitution of
the Kirk of Scotland since the first reformation of Religion within the same
country, the Laws of the realm ratifying the government of the Kirk by the
general and Provincial Assemblies, Pres^yteries and Sessions; also against
the weal and honor of the Kings most excellent Majesty, the weal and honor
of the Realm and quietness thereof, the stablished estate and weal of the
Kirk in the doctrine, discipline and patrimony thereof; the weal and honor
of your Lordships, the most ancient estate of this Realm; and finally against
the weal of all, and every one of the good subjects thereof in soul, body
and substance. Next, that the Act of Parliament granting vote in Parliament to
Ministers is with a special provision that nothing thereby be derogatorie or
prejudicial to the present established discipline of the Kirk and jurisdiction
thereof in General and Synodall Assemblies, Presbyteries and Sessions. Thirdly
and last, the general Assembly (the Kings Majesty sitting, voting, and
consenting therein) fearing the corruption of that office has subscribed and
bounded the same with a number of Cautions. All which together, with such other
as shall be concluded upon by the Assembly, were thought expedient to be insert
in the body of the Act of Parliament, that is to be made for confirmation of
their vote in Parliament, as most necessary and substantial parts of the
same. And the said Assem^ly has not agreed to give thereunto the name of
Bishops, for fear of importing the old corruption, pomp and tyranny of Papal
Bishops, but ordained them to be called Commissioners for the Kirk to vote in
Parliament. And it is of verity that according to those Cautions, neither have
those men now called Bishops, entered to that office of Commissioners to vote in
Parliament, neither since their engyring have they behaved themselves therein.
And therefore in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ who shall hold that great
Court of Parliament to judge both the quick and the dead at his glorious
manifestation, and in name of his Kirk in general, so happily and well
establ^shed within this Realm, and whereof the said Realm has reaped the
comfortable fruit of peace and unity, free from heresy, schism and
dissension these 46 years bypast; also in name of our Presbyteries, from which
we have our commission, and in our own name, office bearers and Pastors within
the same; for discharging of our necessary duty, and disburdening of our
consciences in particular, We except and protest against the said Bishoprie and
Bishops, and the erection, confirmation or ratification thereof at this present
Parliament: Most humbly craving that this our Protestation may be admitted by
your Honors, and registered among the Acts and Statutes of the same, in case
(as God forbid) these Bishoprics be erected, ratified or confirmed therein.
Archip. I bless the Lord for the demonstration of his power in the liberty
of his servants, and thinks the course should have halted there, if the
protestation had been made good by reasons. But they ever object unto you
froward affections, and great zeal, with small knowledge and little actions;
strong protestations and conclusions upon weak probations, and feeble premises.


Epaph. A Disputation is one thing and Protestation is another: Reasons of the
Protestation.
They had no place the^, nor I pupose now to reason the matter yet for stopping
your mouth, and the mind of the adversary, I shall give you a view of the
reasons that were at that time penned against that first step of Prelacie,
according to the heads and order proponed in the protestation, wherein ye will
perhaps behold a copy of the plain, pertinent and pithie simplicity of the
Ministers of that time: and how new wits with their quiddities, are as far
degenerate in knowledge as in affection.


CHAP. I. That the Office of this new sort of Bishops is against the the word
of God.
Argum. I.
THat the Ministers of God, separate from the common affairs of the world,
sanctified and consecrated to the service of God and salvation of his people,
should have a public office and charge in the Common wealth and worldly
affairs is flat repugnant to the word of God, and particular places of
Scripture following, Numb. c. 3 v 4445, And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying,
take the Levites for all the first borne of the children of Israel, and the
Levits shall be mine, I am the Lord. Numb. c. 18. v. 6. For lo I have taken
the Levites from among the children of Israel, who as a gift are given to the
Lord to do the service of the congregation and tabernacle thereof. Deuteronomy. 18
12. The Priests and the Levits shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel,
for the Lord is their inheritance, as he has said unto them. Deuteronomy. 10 8 The
same time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi to bear the Arc of the
covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord, to minister unto him and to
bless in his name unto this day. Act. 13 2. Now as they ministered unto the
Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the
work whereunto I have called them. Romans 1 v. 1. Paul a servant of Jesus Christ
put a part or separat to preach the Gospel of God. These and many more places
of Scripture proves the proposition. Then to assume: But so it is, these
Bishops are ministers of God by their profession, are counselors in the Common
wealth, Lords in Parliament and conventions of the estates, Lords of Towns,
Barons of Lands etc. They run to Court leaving their Ministry, to get
Bishoprics which they have obtained with all privileges of the old
Bishoprics which they pride them in, publicly in the sight of all, and
presence of the greatest: Therefore all against the word of God.

Argum. II.
That the Ministers of Christ should be distracted from preaching of the word
and doctrine, is direct against the Scripture, namely these places. Deuteronomy. 33 8.
And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy holy one, whom
thou did prove in M^ssah, and did cause him to strive at the waters of
Meribah: who said unto his father and unto his mother, I have not seen him,
neither knew be his brethren nor his own children, for they observed thy word
and kept thy covenant. They shall teach Jacob thy Judgments and Israel thy
Law: they shall put incense before thy face, and the burnt-offrings on thine
Altar. Luke 9 59. Christ said to one, follow me, who answered, suffer me first
to go and bury my father: Christ answered, Let the dead bury the dead, and
go you and preach the Gospel of the Kingdom of God. Another says, Master I
would follow thee, but let me first go and take order with my house, Christ
answered, no man that puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is meet for
the Kingdom of God. Act 6 2 Then the twelve called the multitude of the
Disciples together, and said, It is not meet that we should leave the word of
God to serve the tables. Now the Arguments from these places concludes most
strongly, a comparatis. For if most necessary natural oeconomick, yea even
Ecclesiastical offices, as of Eldership and Deaconship should not distract
from the preaching of the word such as has the gift and calling thereto, much
less should civil and worldly offices and affairs. But yet to insist with
strait command and charge and most weighty exhortation and attestation out of
the word Job. 21 15 16 17. So when they had dined, Jesus said to Simon Peter,
Simon son of Jona love thou me more then these? he said unto him, yea Lord
thou know that I love thee; he said unto him feed my Lambs: he said unto
him the second time, Simon the son of Iona love thou me? he said unto him,
yea Lord thou know that I love thee, he said unto him feed my sheep. He
said unto him the third time, Simon love thou me? Peter was sorry because he
said unto him the third time love thou me? he said unto him, yea Lord thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee, Jesus said unto him feed my
sheep. 1 Timothy 3 16 Take care of these things till I come, give attendance to
reading, exhortation and doctrine, these things exercise, and give thy self
unto them, that it may be seen what thou profits among all men: Take heed to
thy self and to doctrine, continue therein, for in doing this thou shall both
safe thy self and them that hear thee, Again I charge thee therefore before
God and before the Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and the dead at
his appearing, preach the word, be instant in season and out of season,
improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. Watch, in all
things suffer affliction, do the work of an Evangelist, make thy ministry
fully persuaded, viz. to be a faithful and good Minister to all. If then the
love of Jesus Christ be in the hearts of Ministers, if the care, attendance and
whole occupation and exercise of them ought to be in reading exhortation and
doctrine for the saving of themselves and others if they should preach the
word, improve, rebuke, exhort in season and out of season, and make all times
seasonable therefore: and no time rightly spent without that. And finally, if
they think to stand before that great judge in that fearful day of his
appearance in glorious and terrible majesty, as such as have fully approven
that ministry, to their own conscience, and the conscience of others in the
fight of God: let them see how they may be distracted with civil offices and
affairs: and if so to be, be not directly against the word of God; seeing
they should be singers and chief fathers of the Levits in the chambers of the
Lords house, having no other charge but to be occupied in that business day
and night, 1. Chron. 9.33.

Argum. III.
To make and esteem the charge of souls so light, that therewithal another
office and charge civil, public and worldly, may be joined and borne, is
direct against the word of God, and particular parts thereof subsequent. But so
do the Bishops, Ezech. 34.^. And the word of the Lord came unto me saying. Son
of m^n, prophecy against the Pastors of Israel, and say unto them, Thus says
the Lord God, Woe be to the Pastors that feed themselves, ye eat the fat and
cloth you with the wool, but ye feed not the flock, the weak have ye not
strengthened, the sick have ye not healed, neither have ye bound up the
broken, nor brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought
that which was lost, etc. The flock were scattered without a shepherd, and
the sheep wandered. Zach. 11.17. O idle shepherd that leaves the flock, the
sword shall be upon his arm and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean
dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened. Act. 20.20. I have kept
nothing back that was profitable, but have showed and taught you openly, and
throughout every house. I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the
blood of all men. Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the
holy Ghost has made you overseers, or Bishops to feed the Kirk of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood. Watch and remember that by the space of
three years I ceased not to warn every one both night and day with tears. 1
Pet. 5.2.8. Feed the flock of God, caring for it with a ready mind. Be sober
and watch, for your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour. 2. Cor. 2.15. For we are unto God the sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that periso, to the one we
are the savor of death unto death, and to the other a savor of life unto
life. And who is sufficient for these things? For we are not as many, who make
merchandise of the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God in the
sight of God speak we in Christ. Heb. 13.17. Obey your guides and be subject
unto them, for they witch over your souls, at such as should give an account
of them. We may then boldly of these Scriptures, and many more, evidently show
and conclude, that they never knew what the charge of souls meant, that would
join therewith a public and politic office and charge: or if they knew it,
they never weighed and felt it: they are strangely blinded, benumbed, and
miscarryed by Balaams wages.

Argum. IIII.
The mixing, jumbling, and confounding of jurisdictions and callings in one
person which God has distinguished in persons and manner of handling, is
against his word. But so it is, that the office of Bishoprie confounds the
spiritual and civil jurisdictions and callings in the person of one. Ergo.
Numb. 18. verse. 4.5. Ye shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of the
congregation for all the service of the tabernacle, and no stranger shall come
near unto you, the stranger that comes near shall be slain. The ministers
then of Gods service, and the civil rulers are strangers one to another, and
should not be confounded under pain of death. 2. Chron. 19.11. Behold Amarith
the Priest shall be chief over you in all the matters of the Lord, and
Zebadiah the son of Ismael a ruler of the house of Judah, shall be for all the
Kings affairs. Deuteronomy. 22.9. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard with diverse sorts
of seeds, least thou defile the increase of thy seed, which thou have sown,
and the fruit of thy vineyard: Thou shall not plow with an Ox and an Ass
together, thou shall not wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of woollen and
linen together. Does God play the Gardener, Ploughman or Webster here, or is
not this a ceremonial command to eschew all mixture and confusion in the Lords
vineyard, field and shop, which is his Kirk and people. This also the Apostle
(1. Corinthians. chap. 9.) teaches us, citing that Ceremonial command, Thou shall
not mussell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, for the provision
of the Ministers of the kirk with things temporal. And finally, our master in
the Gospel distinguishes expressly. Betwixt the things pertaining to God and
to Caesar, saying, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that
which is Gods.

Argum. V.
That the Officers of Christ's Kingdom should meddle with things not pertaining
to the kingdom of Christ, is (...) to be busy bodies in matters impertinent
to them against the Scripture. But civil and worldly offices and matters
pertain not to the kingdom of Christ, and yet are meddled with by these
Bishops, therefore against the Scripture, John. 6.18. Jesus then knoing that
they were come to take him and make him their king, be withdrew himself into
the mountain alone. Ioh. 18.36. Jesus answered and said unto Pilat, My
kingdom is not of this world. Remembering the which confessions, that Christ
was a king, but his kingdom was not of this world, the Apostle Paul gives a
charge unto Timothy, I charge thee, says he, in the sight of God who quickens
all things, and before Jesus Christ, who under Pontius Pilat witnessed a good
confession, that thou keep this commandment, meaning anent the whole
discipline and ruling of the whole kingdom of Jesus Christ, that is not of
this world, set down by the Apostle in that Epistle, 1. Tim. 6.13. Ioh. 8.11.
Jesus said to the adultresse, neither do I judge thee, go and sin no more.
Luke 12.13.14. And one of the multitude said unto him, Master speak to my
brother that he may divide the heritage with me, be said unto him, O man, who
made me a judge over you? The civil and worldly offices then have nothing to
do with the kingdom of Christ in their persons, and are such as neither
Christ nor his Apostles ever took on, or would take upon them.

Argum. VI.
That Christ's ministers should bear worldly pre-eminence, bru^k ambitious
styles, and be called gracious Lords, is against the word of God, and special
scripture underwritten. But the office of Bishopric brings in all these wherein
they pride themselves against the scriptures. Mat. 23.6. The Scribes and
Pharisees love the first rooms at feasts, and the chiefest rooms in the
Synagogues, and salutations in the Markets, and be called Rabbi: But be ye not
called Rabbi, for ye have one master, and ye are all brethren. Let him that is
great among you, be a servant: for whosoever will lift himself up, shall be
c^ften down, and be that will humble himself shall be exalted. Luke 22.15.
There entered a contention among them, who should be greatest; But he said unto
them, The Kings of the Nations bear rule over them, and are called gracious
Lords, but ye shall not be so, but he that is greatest among you let him be as
the least, and he that is the guide as the servant. And in very deed,
experience proves that these ambitious styles wherewith they are honored by
Heralds, flattered by a great number, and scorned by far more, makes them (as
the Apostle speaks of widows) to grow vvanton against Christ, miskenning
him, them selves, and their calling, to despise their equals, and to presume
over their superiors.

Argum. VII.
That the Soldier of Christ should be involved in the affairs of this life,
and one bound to serve two masters, is flat repugnant to the word of God. But
this office of Bishopric involveth them, etc. Ergo. Numb. 4.3. From thirty
year old and above, all that are meet to take on this warfare to do the work
in the tabernacle of the congregation. 2. Tim. 2.3.4 Thou therefore suffer
affliction as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen
him to be a soldier. It is evident by all these Scriptures, and a number more
which may be brought forth, that the office of these Bishops is repugnant and
direct against the word of God. As for Episcopal corruptions in usurping
authority above the Pastors of the Kirk, and arrogating to them the government
of the kirk, which appertains to the common care and counsel of the Elders in
Assemblies and Presbyteries by the word of God, because they dare not defend,
I insist not to lay it out plainly, but think it enough for the present, to
quot these places of Scripture and Fathers following, till we hear it brought
in question. 1. Tim. 4.1. Tim. 3.1. Tit. 1. Act. 20. 1 Cor. 12. 1. Tim. 5. Romans
12. 1. Cor. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Heb. 13. Math. 5. and 18. Act. 15. and 21. Math.
16. Ephesians. 4. 1. Pet. 5. Math. 23. Luke 22. Phil. 1. Ioh. 20. Act. 14.23.
Tertul. Apologet. 39. Hieron. l. 2. c. 3. Origenes Hom. 7. in Iosuam. Irenaeus
ad Victor. Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. and lib. 6. Epist. and 9. Ambros. sermon. 11.
Epiphanius contra haereses here is. 75. August. de cor. and gratia c. 5. Eusebius de
vita Constantin, l. 3. Prosper. de vitand. corrup. l. 10. cap. Chrysostom. de
sacerdotio, etc.

CHAP. II. That such a Bishoprie is against the ancient Canons of Kirk, and
Councels.
THAT the Pastors and Bishops of the Kirk should set themselves to politic
administration, and court affairs, and be occupied in secular and worldly
matters, leaving their flocks and follow the puffed up pomp and glory of the
world, is against the ancient Canons of the Kirk, namely these following, which
as epitomes of many other to the like effect, we are content with for the
present. Amongst these most ancient Canons, called the Apost. the 80 Canon 1^,
Dicimus, quod non oportet Episcopum aut Presbyterum politicis se
administrationibus, immiscere sed vacare and commodu^ se exhibere usibus
Ecclesiasticis: anima^ igitur inducito hoc non facere aut deponito, Nemo enim
potest duobus dominis servire. Synod. Nicaena. and Constant. Nemo clericus vel
Diaconus vel Presbyter propter causam suam quam libet intret in curiam, quoniam
omnis curia a cruore dicta est; Et si quis clericus in curiam introeat anathema
suscipiat nunquam rediens ad matrem Ecclesiam. Synod. Chalcedon. oecumenica
confess. 15 Ne Episcopi aut Clerici rebus se politicis implicent aut praediae
aliena conducant. Sexta Synod. univers Constant. Can. 8. Episcopis non competit
Ecclesiastica aut politica eminentia, Episcopus aut Presbyter milit^ae vacans,
and volens vtrumque ^rinci^atum humanum, and sacerdotalem dignitatem,
deponitor. N^m quae Caesaris sunt Caesari, and quae Dei Deo danda. Ex Epist.
Concilii Afri^am ad Papam Caelestinum. Ne famosum ty^hum seculi in Ecclesiam
Christi quae lucem simplicitatis and humilitatis videre ^upientibus auf^rt
videamur inducere. Synod. Macrensis. Ne rex Pontificis dignitatem, ne Pontifex
regiam potestatem sibi usurpare praes^mat, sic actionibus propriis
dignitatibusque a Deo distinguuntur ut and Christiani reges pro aeterna vita
pontifi i^us ind^g^r^nt and Pontifices pro temporalium rerum cursa regum
dis^ositionibus uterentur, quatenus spiritualis actio a carnalibus distaret in
cursibus, and ideo militans Domino minime se negotiis saec^daribus implicaret,
ac vicissim non ille rebus divinis praesidere videretur. Synod 4
Carthaginensis, Vt Episcopus nullam rei familiaris curam ad se revocet, sed ut
lectioni and orationi and verbi tantummodo praedicationi vacet. Synod. Romana.
Vniversis clericis interdicimus, ne quis praetextu Ecclesiasticae libertatis
suam de caetero jurisdictionem extendat in prejudicium justitiae saecularis, ut
quae sunt Caesaris reddantur Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo. In the end and
conclusion of this point, we would beseech our brethren, who hunts for these
Bishoprics, and pretends much for them Antiquity, to weigh the words of
Damasus, one of the old Bishops of the incorrupt Kirk of Rome, approved in the
Council of Neocaesarea and Antiochia in anno 371. Damasus and concilium
Neocaes. and Antioch. anno 371. Epis opi qui saecularibus intenti curis greges
corepiscopis vel vicariis commendant, videntur mihi meretricibus similes
quaestatim ut pariunt infantes suos aliis meretricibus tradunt educandos quo
suam citius libidinem explere valiant. Sic and isti infantes suos ^i. populos
si^i commissos aliis educandos tradunt ut suas libidines expleant ^i. pro suo
libitu saecularibus curis inhient and quod unicuique visu^ fuerit liberius
agant. Pro talibus enim animae negliguntur, morbi cres^unt, haereses and
shismata prodeunt, destruuntur Ecclesiae, sacerdotes vitiantur and reliqua mali
proveniunt: non taliter Dominus docuit, nec Apostoli instituerunt, sed ipsi qui
curam suscipiunt ipsi peragant and ipsi propros manipulos Domino repraesentent.
Nam ipse ovem perditam diligenter quaesivit ipse propriis humeris reportavit,
nosque idipsum facere perdocuit. Si ipse pro ovibus tantam curam habuit, quid
nos miseri dicturi sumus qui pro ovibus nobis commissis curam impendere
negligimus, and aliis eas educandas tradimus Audiant quaso quid beatus Jacob
dixerit socero suo, vigenti annos sui tecum, oves tuae and caprae steriles non
fuerunt, ariet^^ gregis tu^non comedi nec captum a bestia ostendi tili: ego
damnam omne reddebam; and quicquid furto ^ecierat a me exigebas; die noctuque
aestu vrg^bar and gelu, fugi^bat somnus al oculis meis; Si ergo sic laborat and
vgilat qui pascit oves Laban, quanto laboriq^an sque vigilus debet intendere
qui pascit oves Dei Sed in his omnibus n^s instruat qui dedit pro ovibus suis
animam. Let these Bishops then in time bite upon this, who for one preaching
made to the people tides forty posts to Court: for a days attending on the
flock spends months in Court, Council, Parliament and Conventions; And for a
thought or word bestowed for the weal of any soul, cares a hundredth for their
apparel, their trayns, fleshly pleasure and gowkit glory sine: Or they shall
be bitten eternally with that worm that never dies, when Christ shall come and
call them to account of their dispensation.

CHAP. III. That such a Bishoprie is against the doctrine of the fathers and
Doctors of the Kirk ancient and modern.
THeir books are full of this matter consonant to the holy Scripture, and
ancient Councels and Canons of the Kirks only therefore a few testimonies for
examples sake. Tertul. de Idolatria cap. 18. Si potestatem nullam ne in suos
quidem exer^^it Christus q^ibus so^dido ministerio functus est, si regem se
fieri ^onscius s^i reg^i, refugit, ^l^nissi^e dedit formam suis de reiiciendo
omni fastigio and suggestu tam dignitatis quum potestatis, quis enim magis his
vsus fuisset quam Dei filius? quales enim fasces eum producerent q^^le aurum de
capite radiaret ni^ gloriam saeculi alienam and sibi and suis indicasset.
Cyril. in Joan. l. 3. c. 20. Honor and gloria mundi fugienda sunt ^is qui
velint gloriam dei consequi. Ambros. in 2 Timothy 2. Eccl^siasticus idcirco Deo se
probet ut hinc devotus ^fficium impleat quod spopondit in Dei rebus solicitus a
saeculari negotio alienus. Non enim convenit vnum duplicem habere professionem.
Bernard. de consideratione ad Eugenium Papam l. 2. c. 4. Apostolis inter
dicitur dominatus I ergo tu vsurpare aude, aut dominus Apostolatum, aut
Apostolus dominatum* Si utrumque simul habere voles perdes vtrumque. Idem, non
monstrabunt, ubi quisquam Apostolorum aliquando judex sederit hominum ^ut
divisor terminorum aut distributor terrarum: stetisse denique Apostolos
judicandos, sedisse judicantes non lego. But to save the strip of this little
Treatise, out of the great Ocean of the ancients, leaving Gregorius
Nizianzenus, Basilius and Epiphanius of the Greek, and Hieronymus with
Augustine chief of the Latins, I will conclude with Gregorius the great
Bishop of Rome, who at the first entry of the Hierarchy in the Kirk, and of
the tyranny of the Antichrist, terms John of Constantinople his forerunner,
because that he usurped presumptuouslie above the rest, taking to him the
style of universal Bishop. Gregorius ad Theotistam soror^m Imperatoris, de
onere curae pastoralis li. 8. Epist. 5. Miror quod in me collatas dudum
continentias vestras ex hac moderna pastoralis, officii continentia
distraxistis, in qua sub color Episcopatus ad saeculum sum reductus, in qua
tantis terrae curis inservie quantis me in vita Laica ne quaquam deseruisse
reminiscor, alta enim quietis meae gaudia perdidi, and intus corruens
ascendisse exterius videor. Nem quis inter tot terrenas curas valeat de
miraculo praedicare, quum jam mihi difficile sit saltem recolere, pressus enim
in hoc honor tumultu saecularium negotiorum ex iis mihi esse videor de quibus
est scriptum, dejecisti eos dum allevarentur. Neque enim dixit, dejecisti eos
posequam allevati sunt sed dum allevarentur, quis pravi quique cum temporali
honor suffulti foris videntur surgere intus cadunt. Allevatio ergo ipsa ruina
est, ut quia dum gloria falsa subnixi sunt, a gloria vera evacuantur, hinc
iterum dicit, deficientes ut fumus deficerent, fumus quippe ascendendo deficit
and sese dilatando evanescit, hinc rursum scriptum est, Deus mi pone illos in
rotam, rota quippe ex posteriori part tollitur and anterioribus cadit,
posteriora autem sunt nobis bona praesentis mundi quae relinquimus, anteriora
vero sunt aeterna and permanentia ad quae vocamur Paulo attestante, qui ait,
quae retro sunt oblitus in ea quae sunt priora me extendens, mihi haec
difficilia sunt quia and valde onerosa, and quod men's sponte non recipit
congrue non disponit, Ecce serenissimus Dominus imperator fieri simiam Leonem
jussit and quidem provisione illius vocari Leo potest, fieri autem Leo non
potest. So I end the testimonies of the Ancients with this saying of Cyprian,
which I would we should straightly hold, and accurately defend etc. Cyprianus l.
1. epist. 8. Adulterum est, impium est, sacrilegum est quodcunque humano furore
instituitur ut dispositio Divina violetur. Now we shall subjoine a few of the
most godly learned and approved writers of the most clear and lightsome age of
the Gospel, because there are so many just and full treatises hereanent. Ioh.
Calvinus in epist. 2 ad Timoth. 2. Semper Pistorem meminisse oportet veteris
proverbii, hoc age, quod significat serio incumbendum esse peragendis sacris,
ut studium ejus and intentionem nihil aliud impediat. Pet. Martyr in Loc. com.
class. 4 c. 13. Distingui oportet has functiones civilem and Ecclesiastic^,
quia vtraque earum seorsum totum hominem requirit, immo vix vllus unquam
repertus est, qui alterutram recte obire posset, adeo est difficilis vtraque
provincia. Theod. Bez. Ep. 79. Sed and istud (mi Knoxe) te caeterosque fratres
velim meminisse quod jam oculis pene ipsis obversatur: sic ut Episcopi papatu^
pepererunt, ita Pseudo episcopos (papatus reliquias) epicureismum terris
invecturos; hanc pestem caveant, qui salva^ Ecclesiam cupiunt. Et cum illam in
Scotia in tempora profligaris, ne quaeso illam unquam admittas, quantumvis
vnitatis retinendae specie, quae veteres etiam optimos fefellit, ^landiatur.
And of this opinion clearly and fully are the French and Helvetian Writers and
Kirks. As for the Germans, ye shall hear their judgments shortly out of one of
their most godly and learned writers. David Chytraeus in Mat. 18. Non est autem
regni Christi politia sicut regnum mundanum quod constituitur and sustinetur
gradibus personarum, potentia, authoritate ferendarum legum, armis and
praesidijs distinctis, poenis corperalibus, iudici^s, ordinaria successione,
etc. sed est spirituale regnum, in quo non est visibile caput vni loco
alligatum and ordinaria successione constitutum, ad quod tota Ecclesia alligata
sit, sed v^um Ecclesiae caput est Christus. Deinde etiamsi in Ecclesia sunt
gradus personarum and donorum etc. tamen quod ad potentiam politicam imperandi;
ferendi leges, cogendi, etc. attinet, omnes inter se sunt aequales and quidem
arithmetica aequalitate, nec inter Episcopos quod ad dominum and potestatem
attinet, quisquam alio mayor est jure divino, ut Luc. 22. Reges gentium
dominanturijs, vos autem non sic. Verus igitur and solus gubernator Ecclesiae
est ipse Christus sive verbum Dei: hoc solo verbo regit Christus Ecclesiam non
gradibus and potentia personarum. Ex hoc loco Math. 18. intelligi potest
quomodo regii Pontificum and Episcoporum dominatio cum Evangelio congruat.

CHAP. IIII. That such a Bishoprie is against the doctrine of the Kirk of
Scotland preached these 46 years.
THE doctrine that the Preachers of Scotland have been teaching so many years
since the first reformation, yea since the first light of the Gospel brake
forth in this realm, was dir^cted against all corruptions and abuses of the
Roman Antichrist, and adulterous kirk of Rome. But so it is that the Bishoprie
is one of the greatest errors and corruptions thereof, and have no arguments
of Scripture, Fathers, Counsels nor reason, but the self same that the
Papists use. For probation whereof read Bellarmine the Arch-Iesuit, quaest. de
capite ecclesiae and de membris, and confer his arguments for the Pope and
his Hierarchy, with Doctor Whitgifts against M. Cartwright, and siclike the
rest that write on that head. Secondly, let the auditors yet living of these
notable Preachers of the Kirk of Scotland, glorify God in this matter, and
cease not as they love the honor of Christ, ad weal of his kirk, so long as
they are able to speak, to give an evident and full testimony, what they have
heard of M. Knoxe, M. Cre^g, M. Willockes, M Goodman, M. I^wsen, M Row, M.
Ferg^s^ne, M. Arbuthnet, M Rollock, M. Durie, M. Davios^ne, M ^ont, and others
most godly, sincere, and learned men, who all joined with their continual
powerful doctrine from Pulpit, their travels; yea and sufferings, in dinging
against that Pop^sh corruption of Bishops, till it was all utterly purged and
expelled forth of the kirk, and who now resting from their labors, yea
triumphing in the heavens, have left the true discipline and government of the
kirk and kingdom of Jesus Christ, well and firmly established and settled
within our Kirk; the comfortable effect whereof has been viuely and sincerely
enjoyed unto these late days. And praised be the name of our God and Christ,
there wants not yet successors both to their place and doctrine, able both by
preaching and penning to maintain, yea by his grace not only by imprisonment,
poverty, contempt and trac^^ing of the world, but by their blood to seal up
the truth of the same And last, the very mouths of these now named Bishops,
have been seen and heard preach and profess this verity; (...) pr^a^h or
profess otherwise under pain of Apostasy. H^w (...) ^^w craftily holding both
court and kirk in hand, they are like so to proceed, that the part of Demas
will plai^^, kythe in the Kirk.

CHAP. V. That this Bishoprie is against the confession of faith called the
Kings Majesty's confession, sworn and subscrived at two diverse times, viz. in
anno 1581 when it was first published; and again anno 1590. published with a
general band for the maintenance of true religion and his Majesty's estate and
person; by his Majesty, his Queen and household, and all estates of the Realm.
etc.
THE words of that confession for this purpose are these: We abhor and detest
all contrary religion and doctrine, chiefly all kind of Papistrie in general
and particular, even as they are now damned and confuted by the word of God and
kirk of Scotland; and in special, the Popes worldly monarchy and wicked
Hierarchy, his crossing, anointing, etc. And finally, we detest all his vain
rites, signs and traditions, brought into the kirk without or against the word
of God and doctrine of this true reformed kirk, to the which we join our
selves willingly in doctrine, faith, religion, discipline, and use of the holy
sacraments, as lively members of the same in Christ our head: Promising and
swearing by the great name of the Lord our God, that we shall continue in the
obedience of the doctrine and discipline of this kirk, and shall defend the
same, according to our vocation and power, all the days of our lives, under
the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of body and soul in the day
of Gods fearful judgments. And after a few lines, We therefore willing to
take away all suspicion of hypocrisy and of double dealing with God and his
Kirk, protest, and call the searcher of all hearts to witness, that our minds
and hearts do fully agree with this our confession, promise, oath and
subscription: So that we are not moved for any worldly respect, but are
persuaded only in our consciences, through the knowledge and love of Gods true
Religion, printed in our hearts by the holy Spirit, as we shall answer to him
in the day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Then if so be
that the setting up of Bishops will throw down the discipline of our Kirk, or
if that office has any thing to do with these corruptions of Papistrie and
Antichristian hierarchy: The King our Sovereign, his most excellent and
Christian Majesty, and his Highness most ancient, religious and noble Estates
of Parliament, if there were no other reason but this one, would not for all the
world fall under the danger of so horrible a perjurie against God to set up
Bishops again; yea, and if it were no more but respect of civil honesty, honor
and estimation before the world, they would not be inferior to Herod in
releiving the religion of an oath and great name of God interponed; namely this
Confession of faith being put in print twice within the realm by special
command and privilege, and translated in all vulgar languages throghout
Europe, yea and at his Majesty's coronation in England, put in Latin, and
published a new again by that common post of the world in our age Mercurius
Gallobelgicus. But so it is, as all men know, that the discipline and
government of the kirk exercised by Presbyteries, and by Bishops, are so
opposed one to another, that when the one is set up, the other must down of
force. Therefore the subscrivers and swearers of the former confession, if they
should (as God forbid) be about to set up Bishops and Episcopal government,
they could not eschew the crime of horrible p^rjurie, execrable Apostasy, and
most cursed repairing again of Jericho, from the which the Lord preserve his
most excellent Majesty, and honorable Estates of this present parlaiment. And
if any man doubts what was the discipline of the kirk of Scotland at the
first subscriving and swearing of that confession, let them seek the Register
of the general Assembly holden at Glasgow, to the which it was presented,
together with a platform of the whole Presbyteries to be established
throughout the Realm by the Lord of Caprinton co^missioner for his majesty
to the said assembly in the year of God 1581, they shall find that the
Bishopries were wholly abolished in the assembly holden at Dundie the year
immediately preceding. So that without al question, ^t is meant of the
discipline of the kirk exercised by Presbyteries, Synods, and general
Assemblies directly opponed to the corruption and tyranny of Bishops, as was
clearly defined and ratified in Parliament. After the second subscriving anew
again of the said confession in the year 1592. In end, seeing these same men,
who now would be Bishops, have once or twice sworn and subscrived this
confession, it marvels me with what forehead they can be about a purpose so
quite contrary thereto.

CHAP. VI. That this office of Bishoprie is against the constitutions of the
Kirk of Scotland in her Assemblies.
Master Knox following the light of holy Scripture, and the advice of Theodor
Beza, as he had preached continually, so immediately before his departure, he
wrote to the general Assembly convened at Striveling in the year 1571 in
these words: Unfaithful and traitors to the stocks shall ye be before the
Lord Jesus, if that with your consent directly or indirectly ye suffer
unworthy men to be thrust in within the ministry of the Kirk under what
pretense that ever it be. Remember the Judge before whom ye must make an
account, and resist that tyranny, as ye would avoid hells fire. And this
letter is registrat in the acts of the said Assembly. In the general Assembly
convened at Edinburgh in March 1572, sess. 7. M. John Spottiswood
superintendent of Lawthiane, gave in this article. It is neither agreeable to
the word of God, nor practice of the primitive Kirk, that the spiritual
administration of the word and sacraments, and the ministration of the civil
and criminal justice should be so confounded, that one person may occupy both
the cures. Wherefore the whole Assem. refused the Earl of Morton then Regent his
desire, to make ministers sessioners in the college of Justice. From that
assembly unto the assembly holden at Dundie July 1580, the corruption of the
Bishoprie was more and more espect, unto the time the whole Assem. being
ripely advised, and fully resolved all in one voice yielded as follows:
Forasmuch as the office of a Bishop, as it is now used and commonly taken
within this realm, has no warrant, authority nor ground in the word of God;
but is brought in by the folly and corruption of man's invention, to the great
overthrow of the Kirk of God. The whole assembly of the Kirk in one voice after
liberty given to all men to reason in the matter, none opponing himself in
defending the said pretended office, Finds and declares the same pretended
office, used and termed as is above said, unlawful in it self, as having
neither fundament ground nor warrant in the scriptures of God: and ordaines
that all such persons as bruikes or shall bruike hereafter the said office,
shall be charged simply to dimit, quyt, and leave off the same, as an office
whereunto they are not called by God. And siclike to desist and cease from all
preaching of the word, ministration of the sacraments, or using any way the
office of Pastors, which they receive de novo admission from the general
Assembly, under the pain of excommunication to be used against them, wherein
if they be found disobedient, or contr^vene this act in any point, the sentence
of excommunication after due admonitions to be execute against them. The year
following 1581 a form of establishing Presbyteries throughout all the shires
of the Realm were sent from his Majesty to the general assembly convenced at
Glasgow, and commissioners both from his Majesty and the general assembly
nominate and ordained to plant Presbyteries in all parts convenient. The which
being done, not only ceased all ruling of bishops, but also in the general
assembly at Edinburgh in August 1590 all commissioners from general assemblies
appointed for visitation of Provinces, were ordained to cease, where
presbyteries were planted, ^o root out all danger of tyranny and authority of
sole government within the Kirk: and that because they perceived that sort of
sole government to be against the word of God, and that Jesus Christ had
ordained his kirk to be ruled by the common care and council of his lawfully
called Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons in their meetings and assemblies.
And where some, that knows not, may think that these general assemblies at
which the kings majesty was present, holden since the 7 of December 1596, has
altered these co^stitutions, there is no such thing. Therefore leaving off how
matters proceeded since that time, as known to the whole Realm, I will only
set down out of the Regi^ter of the Kirk what was done.

The general assembly holden at Dundie March 1597, Sess. 11. The general
Assem. votes finds and concludes that it is necessary and expedient for the
weal of the kirk, that the ministers as the third estate of the Realm in name
of the kirk, have vote in Parliament. Sess. 12. Concerning the number of the
Ministers that should have vote in Parliament i^ name of the kirk, it was
likewise concluded and thought expedient, that as many of them as should be
chosen for the vote in Parliament, as were wont of old in time of the
Papisticall kirk to be Bishops, abbots and Pryers, that had the like liberty,
viz. to the number of fifty one or thereby. Item, after reasoning it was voted
and concluded, that the election of such of the ministry, as should have vote
in parliament, ought to be of a mixed quality, and appertains partly to his
majesty, and partly to the kirk. In the general assembly at Montrose 1600 in
March. sess. 6. Concerning the manner of choosing of him that shall have vote
in parliament in name of the Kirk, it is condiscended upon, that he shall be
first recommended by the kirk to his Majesty, and that the Kirk shall
nominate six for every place that has need to be filled, of whom his Ma. shall
choose one whom he best likes, and his Ma. promises oblishes and binds himself
to choose no other but one of that number. And in case his Ma. refuse the whole
upon a just reason of insufficiency, or greater sufficiency of others that
are not recommended; the Assembly shall make a new recommendation of men
according to the first number, of the which one by his Ma. shall be chosen
without any further refusal, or new nomination. And he that shall be chosen by
his Ma. shall be admitted by the Synods. It is concluded that the general
assembly shall have the nomination or recommendation of him, that in name of the
Kirk shall vote in parliament, who shall take the advice of the Synods and
Presbyteries thereanent directed from them in writ. And the Synods shall have
liberty to nominate, as well within the Province as without, providing that if
there be a man within the Province meet for the place caeteris paribus, he
be preferred to any other. Anent his rent, it is advised with one consent,
that the Kirk being planted sufficiently, the colleges and schools already
erected, not prejudged, that the King shall provide him to all the rest that
may be obtained of that benefice, where he is preferred.

The Cautions.
AS to the cautions to keep him that shall have vote in parliament from
corruption, they be these following.

1 That be presume not at any time to propone at Parliament, Council, or
Convention, any thing in name of the kirk, without an express warrant and
direction of the kirk, under the pain of deposition from his office. Neither
shall he consent or keep silence in any of the said conventions, to any thing
that may be prejudicial to the weal and liberty of the kirk under the said
pain.

2 He shall be bound at every general Assembly, to give an account anent the
discharge of his commission, since the assembly going before, and shall submit
himself to their censure, and stand to their determination whatsoever, without
appellation, and shall seek and obtain ratification of his doings at the said
Assembly under the pain of infamy and excommunication.

3 He shall content himself with that part of the benefice, which shall be
given to him by his majesty for his living, not hurting nor preiudging the rest
of the ministers of the kirk within his benefice planted, or to be planted, or
any other minister of the country whatsoever, and this clause to be insert in
his provision.

4 He shall not dilapidate in any way, neither set nor make disposition thereof
without the special advice and consent of his Majesty and general assembly.
And for the greater warrant thereof, he shall interdict himself not to
dilapidate his benefice, nor consent to dilapidation thereof made by others, to
the general assembly, and shall be content that inhibitions be raised on him
to that effect.

5 He shall be bound faithfully to attend upon his own particular congregation,
where he shall be minister in all the points of a Pastor, and hereanent shall
be subject to the trial and censure of his own Presbytery and Provincial
assembly, as any other min^ster that bears not commission.

6 Jn the administration of discipline, collation of benefices, visitation and
al other points of Ecclesiastical government, he shall neither usurp nor
acclaime to himself any power or Jurisdiction, further then any other of the
rest of his brethren, except he be employed by his brother, under the pain of
deprivation. And in case he usurp any part of the Ecclesiastical government,
and the Presbyteries, Synodall or general Assemblies oppone and make any
impediment thereto, whatsoever (...) do after that impediment to be null ipso.
facto without any declaratorie.

7 In Presbyteries, provincial and general Assemblies, he shall behave
himself in all things, and be subject to their censuring, as any of the
brethren of the Presbytery.

8 At his admission to his office of commissionarie those and no other points
necessary, he shall swear to subscribe and fulfill under the penalties
foresaid, and otherwise not to be admitted

9 And in case he be deposed by the general Assembly, Synod or Presbytery from
his office of the ministry, he shall also tyne his vote in Parliament ipso
facto, and his benefice shall vaike.

And further caution to be made, as the kirk pleases and finds occasion anent
his name that for the kirk should vote in parliament, it is advised by uniform
consent of the whole brethren, that he shall be called commissioner of such a
place.

It is also statute and ordained, that none of them that shall have vote in
Parliament, shall come as commissioners to any general Assembly, nor have vote
in the same in any time coming, except he be authorized with a commission from
his own presbytery to that effect.

It is moreover found by the Assembly, that crim^u ambitus shall be a
sufficient cause of deprivation of him, that shall have vote in parliament.

Sess. 8. The general Assembly having reasoned a^ length the question anent
his commission, who shall vote in Parliament, whether he should endure for his
life time, except some crime or offense intervene, or for a shorter time at the
pleasure of the Kirk, Finds and decernes that he shall annuatim give account
of his commission obtained from the Assembly and lay down the same at their
feet to be continued or altered therefrom by his Majesty and the Assembly, as
the Assem. with consent of his Man. shall think expedient to the weal of the
Kirk. Whose whole conclusions being read in audience of the whole assembly,
and they being ripely advised therewith, ratified, allowed and approved the
same, and thought expedient that the said Cautions, together with such others
as shall be concluded upon by the Assembly, be insert in the body of the Act of
Parliament, that is to be made for confirmation of vote in Parliament to the
Kirk as most necessary and substantial parts of the same.

Then briefly to assume and conclude, but so it is that their new L. B. neither
in the entry to their office, nor yet in their behavior therein, hitherto
have kept one jot of these constitutions and cautions, but has broken all;
therefore such rooms and offices should not be confirmed to them in this
present Parliament.

CHAP. VII. That the Office of Bishoprie is against the laws of this Realm.
Our Sovereign, the Kings most excellent Majesty came into the world, and
entered to his Kingdom of this Realm; with the clear light of the Gospel,
and the establishing of a reformed Kirk, and therefore as a most godly and
Christian Prince has in his all Parliaments confirmed, ratified and approved
the freedom and liberty of the true Kirk of God, and religion publicly
professed within his Majesty Realm, as in his first Parliament holden by his
Majesty's good Regent the Earl of Murray, Likewise in his Highness second,
holden by his grandfather the Earl of Lennox; the same is ratified in the first
Act of his first Parliament holden after the taking of the government in his
Highness own person. Also in the first of his sixth Parliament holden at
Edinburgh the 20 of October 1579. Our Sovereign Lord with advice and consent
of his three Estates, and whole body of this present Parliament ratifies and
approues all and whatsoever Acts and Statutes made of before by his Highness,
with advice of his Regents in his own reign, or his Predecessors, anent the
liberty and freedom of the true Kirk of God and religion now presently
professed within this realm, and specially etc.

The second act of the same sixth Parliament is expressly for the jurisdiction of
the Kirk which is there said to consist and stand in the preaching of Jesus
Christ, correction of manners, and adminstration of the holy Sacraments; and
declares that there is no other face of a Kirk, nor other face of Religion,
then is presently by the favor of God established within this realm. And that
there be no other Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical acknowledged within this Realm
other then that which is and shall be within the same kirk, or that which flows
there from concerning the premises. And in his Majesty's seventh Parliament at
Edinburgh, October 1581. In the first Act there is a general ratification of
the liberty of the true Kirk of God, and confirmation of all the Acts and
Laws made to that effect before, by particular rehearsal and catalogue, and
amongst the rest, The ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk of God and
religion, and anent the Jurisdiction of the Kirk of God twice. And after the
Kings perfect age of 21 years in the eleventh Parliament, At Edinburgh July
1587, there is a clear and full ratification of all Laws made anent the
liberty of the Kirk.

Now if any will say, what is all these Acts against the Bishops? I say,
direct: for whatsoever is for the Ministers, Presbyters and Assemblies, is
against the Bishops: But so it is that all these Acts are for the^, because as
we have shown, the doctrine and constitutions of the Ministers and Assemblies,
has been ever since the reformation, against the corruption of Bishops, and
that is the freedom, liberty and discipline of the Kirk which is confirmed,
for verification whereof we allege first the Confession of faith confirmed by
Parliament and registered among the Acts thereof, wherein the 19 Article anent
the notes of the true Kirk, ye have last Ecclesiastical Discipline uprightly
ministered as Gods word prescrived: But so it is, that out of the Word the
doctrine of the Ministers has been against the Bishops, as also the discipline
set down in the General Assemblies. Next that the first Act of his Majesty's
Acts of Parliament. Our sovereign Lord with advice of his three estates and
whole body of this present Parliament, has declared and declares the
Ministers of the blessed Evangell of Jesus Christ, whom God of his mercy has
now raised up to be the true and holy Kirk. Thirdly, that golden Act which
clearly crowns and formally concludes the cause; viz. the first Act of the 12
Parliament of King James the 6. At Edinburgh Iunii 1592 intitulate,
Ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk, of general and synodall
Assemblies of the Presbyteries of Discipline, which speaks this plainly in the
end. Item our Sovereign Lord and Estates in Parliament foresaid abrogates,
casses and annulles the Act of Parliament made in anno 1584 granting commission
to B. and other Judges constitute in Ecclesiastical causes to receive his
Highness presentation to Benefices, and give collation thereupon, and to put
order in all causes Ecclesiastical, which his Majesty and Estates foresaid
declares to be expired in it self, and to be null in time coming, and of none
avail, Force nor effect. And therefore ordaines all presentations of Benefices
to be direct to particular Presbyteries in all time coming, with full power to
give collation thereupon, and to put order to all manners and causes
Ecclesiastical within the bounds according to the discipline of the Kirk. And
finally the act of annexation of the temporalitie of the benefices to the crown
of necessity, demolishes and bears down all the Bishops, Iam. 6 Parl. 1^ cap.
29.

CHAP. VIII. That they are against the honor of God and his Christ.
THe standing for the maintenance of the kingdom of God, and, whom he has
anointed his King upon his holy mountain, the Lord Jesus Christ, is to their
honor; like as to slide from it and leave it, to follow after the world, is
against the honor of God and Christ. To hear the word of God and to do it, is
the special honoring of God, and of that great Pastor of the sheep the Lord
Jesus Christ: As by the contrary the rejecting of his word, and casting it off
behind their back is his dishonor. And finally to build and plant with God is
to honor him, so to cast down and root out that, which by the Ministry of
his notable servants he has builded and planted is to his high dishonor: But
so it is, as I have verified and shown, that Bishoprics makes men to slide
away from the Kingdom of Christ, to leave it, and follow the world, to reject
his word and cast it behind their back: And finally to cast down and root out,
that which Christ's faithful servants has bigged and planted, even that
sincerity of the Gospel and freedom of the Kirk of Christ brought to such
perfection, and so well established, and left unto us by them: and so with the
Scribes and Pharisees to seek the glory of men rather then of God, and to seek
honor one of another, and not to honor Christ nor to seek to be acceptable
unto him.

And is it not, alas, a horrible dishonouring of God, and the preaching of his
blessed verity and word, to flatter men and anoint their filthy flesh with
earthly honor, wealth and sensuality, to make Christ's holy Ministers to be
loathed, sclandered and evil spoken of. And as the Lord rebuked Eli the Priest
and his sons, whose sins were great before the Lord, in making men to
abhor the Lords Ministers and offerings: Therefore the Lord threatened them by
Samuel saying: Wherefore have ye kicked against my sacrifice and my offerings
which I commanded in my tabernacle, and honors thy children above me, to make
your self fit of the first fruits of all the offerings of my people Israel,
wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said thy house and the house of thy
fathers should walk before me for ever: But now the Lord says it shall not be
so: for they that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
despised. And now, O ye Priests, cried Malachie, this commandment is for you,
if ye will not hear it not consider it in your heart to give glory unto my
name, J will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings; yea, I
have cursed them already, because ye do not consider it in your hearts.
Behold I will corrupt your seed, and cast dong upon your faces, even the dong
of your solemn feasts, and ye shall be like unto it: and ye shall know that I
have sent this commandment unto you, that my covenant which I have made with
Levi, might stand, says the Lord of hosts. My covenant was with him of life
and peace and equity, and he did turn many away from iniquity. For the
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. But ye are gone out of the
way, ye have caused many to fall by the Law, ye have broken the covenant of
Levi, says the Lord of hosts Therefore I have also made you to be despised and
vile before all the people, because ye keep not my ways.

CHAP. IX. That this Bishoprie is against the honor and weal of the Kings
Majesty.
IS it not the Kings weal and honor to honor God, to love, fear and obey
him, to be wise and learned, to serve God in fear, and rejoice in trembling, to
kiss the Son lest he be angry; to be a nurs-father to the Kirk, to be an
avenger of all breakers of Gods holy law and misorders against his manifest
word and truth: And in a word to reign in Christ, by Christ, and with Christ,
and against the sin that draws him to the contrary? Is it not the weal and
honor of his Maj. to hold himself in the favor of God, and that reverent
love and good estimation of all that fears God unfeignedly, and loves the Lord
Jesus Christ, by holding fast that profession of the sincerity of the Gospel,
in doctrine and discipline, whereof his H. and Kingdom in this Island namely,
has found comfort and profit, that all the godly this day triumphs in, all
the wicked envy, Europe is astonished with admiration, at that union of these
Kingdoms under one God and Christ, one King, one Faith, one Law, and under his
Majesty advanced and highly lifted up throne, far above all Kings Throns in
Christendom, in this respect and for this cause, namely that his Highness was
borne and entered to reign at the light and sincerity of the Gospel; has
reigned so long, so happily, so peaceable with the same; and he and his
posterity in hope and good appearance holding fast the same to reign most
blessedly even to that appearance of Christ the King of Kings from the heavens.
Is it not his Majesty's weal and honor to stand fast to that confession of
faith sworn and subscrived by his Highness, for good example to his household,
estates and all his subjects, extant in all languages, affixed as it were on
the most high pillar in the great Theater of Europe, testifying and proclaiming
to all, his Majesty's piety, sincerity and zeal to the Gospel of Christ and
his Kingdom, against all corruption and thraldom of the Antichrist of Rome?
And against his weal and honor that leads him to the contrary? Is it not
the weal and honor of his Royal Majesty, to have all the hearts of the most
sincere Protestants and professors of the holy Evangell; not only throughout
great Britain, but also France, Germany, Switzerland and Sweden, to be as it
were the heart of one man, to ware all their blood for his Majesty's safety in
person, increase in honor, and stabilitie in estate; by holding fast unaltered
or mixed the sincere simplicity of the Gospel, and doctrine, sacraments and
discipline, which they have so long professed with his Majesty, and against
the which what cursed force or business was ever able to prevail unto this
hour? And finally, is it not his Majesty's weal and honor to be safe and
free from the falsehood, flattery and cruelty of ambitious avarice, which has
brought so many notable Emperors, Kings and Princes to tragical ends,
corrupted sincere Kirkes, and overthrown flourishing Commonwealths? And
verily this venom and poison of humane Bishops, degenerating into Satanicall,
has filled the Ecclesiastical and civil histories full of such effects, the
smallest hair of root and pickle of seed is therefore to be fanned away and
plucked out of all Kirkes, Kingdoms and Commonwealths This the godly
wisdom, quickness of wit, prudence and sagacitie of the King, who is as an
Angel of God, can well mark, and take up a far, both to beware of it where
he has found it, and can not well amend it, and not to permit to creep into
the field so carefully and clean purged therefrom. Thus passing over the
impairing of the Kings patrimony, and many more things against his Highness
weal and honor, for brevities sake I end this point, not doubting but his
Majesty is always mindful of that declaration, so clearly, godly and
eloquently penned and subscribed by his Highness own hands, at his Majesty's
Parliament holden at Linlithgow in December 1585. The conclusion whereof is
most worthy of remembrance at this time, for that by forgetting that, these
who seek Episcopal dignity seeks the hurt and dishonor of his most renowned
Majesty. Then shortly to end this my declaration, I mind not to cut away any
li^ert^ granted by God to hi^ Kirk, I ac^lame not my self to be judge of
doctrine in Religion, s^^^tion, heresies or true interpretation of Scripture
etc. And in end, My intention is not to (...) with excommunication, neith^^
^^^^me to my self or my (...) power in an^ ^^ng that (...) weer
Ecclesiastical, neither to meddle in any that God w^^^^ the w^y d^v^lv^ in the
^^nds of the Kirk* and to conclude I conf^sse and ^^k^ (...) ^ge Christ Jesus
to (...) He^d and Lawgiver to the same. And wh^t^^^v^r persons (...) themselves
as he^d of the Kirk and not (...) thing that the word of God (...) mi^^^^ to
his Kirk; that m^^ I f^^ ^^mmi^ts manifest (...) against the (...) the words of
his Son; against (...) S^n^^ not ^^y g^^i^, and in t^king his place; against
the (...) Ch^^^t, the (...) how Spirit thing contr^^y (...) to his cons^i^n^e.
Certainly thus h^^^ouri^g G^d and Jesus Christ his Highness shall be w^ll and
honorable, according to that promise, I will know him that honors me.

CHAP. X. That this Bishoprie is against the honor and weal of the Realm.
WH^rein has stood thy honor and weal o Scotland these (...) y^ares and
above. Was it not, in the ^^gement of all th^^^ (...) ^^ghtly, ^^th sincerity
of the Gospel and freedom of Jesus Christ's ^^^^^om est^^^ (...) ^o notably
within thee with so (...) that Gospel of peace came within the (...) foreign
w^^, and all comm^tions within thy (...) been easily settled, God b^^ng in the
m^^st of th^^ (...) bringing (...) judgment upon all that (...) their hea^,
(...) their (...) against his Kirk. And (...) so ^o ^^^h and bewitched, is not
(...) hold fast that vv^^y, having h^d Christ so cl^^rly ^^^^ted forth before
thy eyes as if ^h^m with the same had seen hi^ crucified? Shall thou wi^h
those foolish G^l^tians begin in the spirit and end in the flesh. W^^ th^^^
follovv them, of whom the Apostle weeping (...) write, that they are enemies
to the cross, whose end i^ destruction or damnation, who God i^ their ^^lly,
whose glory i^ shame, earthly minded men who seeks not the glory of Christ,
not safety of the souls of thy people, but to be thy guiders, and misgui^
thee; to be thy conduct^r, and sedu^^ thee, to make thee to sin against God
after the manner of the golden Calves, at Dan and Bethel, that so the Lord may
be in^en^^d and cast thee away from his face? They seek gl^rie amongst men
and one of another, and so neither can believe and trust in Christ themselves,
not make thee do it and be safe. Surely for wealth and honor worldly thou was
never comparable to other nations, but the Evangell so planted in thee was that
crown of thy glory, that decored thy head, and set it up above all Realms and
Kingdoms upon the face of the earth. Hearken, dear mother, what the Lord said
unto his people Israel of old, and take it now to be spoken unto thee. Deuteronomy. 4.
Ask from the times of old that have been before thee, even from that day that
God created man upon the earth f^^th one end of the heaven unto the other, if
there was done such a thing as this is, or if there has been heard he like of
it If any God has essayed to come and take unto him a nation out of the midst
of another nation, with proofs and signs and wonders, with war strong hand
and stretched out arm; finally with most great terrors according to all that
Iehov^h has done for you, even your God to bring you out of the land of Egypt.
2 Samuel 7.23.24.
What nation is like thy people Israel in all the earth, which for to be a
people went to redeem, and has gone to get himself a name, and to work these
great things and mighty, reverently to be admired, expelling from the face of
thy people whom thou redeemed to thee out of Egypt the Nations and their Gods:
for thou have established thy people Israel that it may be a people unto thee
for ever, and thou Jehovah their God. Psalm. 147.
Who tells his word to Jacob, his Statutes and Laws to Israel, he has not
done so to my nation: therefore they know not these Laws, Praise ye the Lord.
Was not Papistrie thy Egypt, o Scotland, and did not the Lord deliver thee out
of it, and safeing thee from that tyranny and thraldom brought thee unto a
pleasant Canaan of his Gospel to serve him in spirit and truth: and that in
such a manner and form, as the like was never heard nor seen? And no less
miraculously has he made thee to dwell therein so long, so safely, so freely:
and shall thou then go and make to thee other Captains by Moses and Aaron,
yea contemning them thy lawful Priests and Levites, to lead thee back again
into Egypt? God forbid, But so it is (dear native country) your Seers see, and
your Watchmen gives you a faithful warning, crying to you, that the Episcopal
Hierarchy is very Papistrie, and spiritual Egypt. Howbeit by the policy of
men, otherways buskit, attired and dressed to take the foolish and simple
withal. It is no other thing in the substance thereof, taken from the last and
grossest dung of Antichrist, making the Kingdom of Christ to be of this world,
turning the spiritual worshipping of God in outward toys and ceremonies,
bringing the pomp of the world into the simple and humble Kirk; yea corrupting
the fountains of the waters of life, and empoysoning the food of the souls to
work dangerous sicknesses and deadly diseases amongst thy sons and daughters.
The whole Pulpits has sounded unto you so many years, and yet continues to
sound where they are not emptied or terrified by their tyranny. Admitting that
Bishoprie again, lost is your honor, wracked is your welfare, and gone is
your grace and garland of heavenly and spiritual glory for ever. Forget not
the first essay of their good service in Parliament to God, the Kirk and
Commonwealth, in giving their votes and suffrages to seventeen erections of the
Prelacies and livings of the Kirk in temporal Lordships to attain thirteen
rounged and dilapidate Bishoprics, as was reported and complained upon to the
Kings Majesty and his Council at Hampton Court, 1606.

CHAP. XI. That Bishoprie is against the constitution and settled estate of the
Kirk and Kingdom, and so most dangerous.
ITt is an Axiom approved in Experience and Policy. Quod omnis mutatio Reipub.
est periculosa etiamsi in melius, how much more in deterius. The reason then
holds thus. All dangerous things for the estate and commonwealth are to be
eschewed: But change is dangerous, namely from such an estate, which is
conform to the word of God, good Laws and Constitutions, the judgment of the
holiest and best learned, ancient and modern, the best estate of the Primitive
Kirk, and best reformed Kirkes from corruption of Papistrie, to an estate
plain contrary, and so most perverse and pernicious. For let Lawyers and
Politiques reason and judge the civil part for the estate of the Kingdom, we
dare boldly conclude, as we have evidently proved, that it is pernicious for
the Kirk of Jesus Christ: And that which is pernicious thereto can never stand
with the good estate of a Christian Kingdom and godly Commonwealth. It is so
clear in the Histories, and miserable experience of these last Ages of the
would that it needs no probation, being acknowledged and affirmed by all
Protestants, that the Popish Hierarchy and usurpation of both the swords, has
brought the Roman Empire, and all Kingdoms and Commonwealths in Europe that
have not resisted the same, to abominable and most filthy servitude and
slaverie, in their goods, bodies and souls. And those who have cast off the
yoke of that bondage, and resisted thereunto have been involved in bloody
battles, and had great fear and ado to keep them safe from the most crafty
and cruel practices of that pestilent throne of kirk ambition and avarice. And
shall the dr^gs, or rather sprowtings thereof be brought in again into Scotland:
Shall these si^lings and sprowrings be taken up and set with guiding again in
the Lords vineyard to grow up to seed, to shake and overgrovv the same? Or
shall these dregs be cast in a Limbique, and such Aquavitie to be drawn
thereof as will make the brains of all giddie that tastes thereof? Shall these
Co^katrice eggs be hatched in our Kingdom of new, whereof all Kings,
Kingdoms and Estates that have ^a^en thereof (...) dead in sin, and spiritual
and temporal slave^^^ And such (...) marked therevvith do cry as if they
were stung wi^h (...)? The Lord safe our kirk, kingdom and K^^^ (...) k^s.

W^ (...) ^fore, the Laws of our Kingdom, the constitutions of our Kirk, the
doctrine and confession thereof, whereunto all the members both of Kirk and
Commonvveal^, and Kingdom have solemnly svvorn and subs^rived, and which has
been professed, established, and stood in our Kirk and Kingdom almost now an
whole Iubile of years. To all the which this Bishoprie, this usurpation of
both Offices Civil and Ecclesiastical the temporal Lordship, the earthly
dominion, the worldly vain pomp and the most dangerous invasion of governing
both court and kirk is most repugnant. And yet notwithstanding the walls of
our Tr^^, which were builded by the finger of our God, must be demolished, and
we with our own hands hail in that devilish Grecian horse within the Lords
City, to set it all on fire. O mad folly! o terrible Judgment for the
contempt of the Gospel and fruitless abuse of the freedom thereof, so long,
so liberally and so gloriously bestowed on Scotland!

CHAP. XII. This Bishoprie is against the honor and weal of the Noble Estates
of Parliament.
THe honor and weal of the Noble Estates of Parliament, namely since the
light of the Gospel shined in our dark nation, was to have the Kirk of God
and liberty of this most ancient Kingdom in special are fall regard, to make
good laws in favor of the same a^^ to s^e them have life and vigor by due
execution. An^ for that st^^ct to have a solemn and free advice and you,
without ^^e vvh^^h (...) thing should pass and be effectual by any o^^oy,
pl^t or pract^se whatsoever. But set ^nce up these B shops once (called l^^g
since the Princes Ledho^^e) thing ^f they were never so unlawful, unjust,
ungodly and pernicious to Kirk and Realm, If they shall be borne forth by the
countenance, authority, care and endeavor of the King (supposing such a one, a
God forbi^, come in the room of our most renoumed Soveragine (for as to the
best has oftentimes succeeded the worst) they shall be carried through by his
Bishops set up and entertained by him for that effect, and the rest of the
estates not only be indeed as ciphers, but also bear the blame thereof to
their great evil and dishonor. And if one will ask how shall these Bishops
be more subject to be carried after the appetite of an evil prince, then the
rest of the estates. The answer and reason is, because they have their Lordship
and living, their honor, estimation, profit and commodity of the King by
others. The King may set them up, and cast them down, give them and take from
them, put them in and out at his pleasure. And therefore they must be at his
direction to do what likes him, and in a word, he may do with them by law,
because they are set up against law: but with other estates he cannot do so,
they having either heritable standing in their rooms by the fundamental
laws, or then but a commission from the estate that send them, as from the
Burgesses or Barons. Again, if one would say, Howbeit the Bishops and all the
spiritualll estate were corrupted, yet there is two or three estates beside?
We answer first, there is a great number of the other estates, whereof it is
easy to make choice of some, that for certain commodity and advancement of
their state and matters, may be easily corrupted. Next, deprave me once the
Ecclesiastical estate, which has the gift of knowledge and learning by
others, and are supposed, because they should be of best conscience, that so
they are, the rest will easily be miscarried. And that so much the more, that
the officia^s of estate, Lords of Session, Judges, Lawyers that have their
offices of the King, are commonly framed after the courts affection. Yea, let
Chancellor, Secretary, Thesaurer, President, Controller, and others that now
are, take heed that th^se new Prelates of the Kirk as convetous and ambitious as
ever they were of old, insinuating themselves by flattery and obsequence in
the Princes favor, attain to the bearing of all these offices of estate and
crown, and to the exercising thereof, as craftily, avaritiously, proudly, and
cruelly, as ever the Papisticall Prelates did. For as the holi^st b^st and
wisest Angels of light, being depraved, became most wi^ked, craf^^^ and cruel
Devils, so the learnedest and best pastor perverted and poisoned by that old
serpent with avarice and ambition, becomes the falsest, worst, and most cruel
man, as experience in all ages has proved. A further consideration of this
point also we leave to the Lawyers, Politiques, and Statesmen.

CHAP. XIII. That this Bishoprie is against the weal of all Scottishmen in
soul body and goods.
HOwbeit that this be clear enough of all that have been spoken in the
chapters preceding, yet particularizing the same, we will make it more clear.
We call them good Scottishmen, that have a true sense of the honor of God,
love of their Christ, care of the sincerity of the Gospel, and liberty of
his Kirk, a feeling of the need of their souls, a hunger and thirst for
righteousness, and that word of life which is the food thereof, and
therewithal a love of their native country, of the freedom and weal of the
same. Now this Bis^oprie shall either take away all true religion and
sincerity of the Gospel, or then the fruitful use thereof for the feeding
and comfort of souls. For if there arise a Popish or profane Prince, they
must alter with him, and please and obey him, or tyne their places, their
honors, their riches and pleasures, the which they will not do, because they
have already given their consciences, honesty, truth and credit before God and
man, as a price for these things of the world. And put case true religion
stand, what care will they have of feeding of souls, who have sold their own
for the world. All their care and travel must be to keep their Court, please
the King, acquire and conserve more plenty of goods, honor and pleasures. And
they being thus set and given, their inferior ministers for the most part will
follow their fashions, so there shall be nothing amongst men but atheism,
licentiousness and profanitie. For as concerning discipline, it being put into
the hands of Bishops, they will make merchandise of it, or let the reins
thereof loose in favor of this or that great man, or of one Courteor or other,
as has ever been the nature and custom of these Bishops to be men pleasers,
and hunters after the favor and friendship of the world, not daring to
displease or adhere unto the execution thereof upon others, least it should
strike upon themselves commonly more guilty and slanderous then any other. And
thus the true worship of God, and care of the salvation of souls, shall
utterly perish, Next, I call them good Scottish men, who have a care and love
of the liberty of their country, and of their bodies to live as free men
therein in safety and good health. But so it is this Bishoprie will bring the
country, the laws, the privileges thereof with the bodies of men in
slaverie, servitude and riotous dissolution, which breeds manifold diseases,
destruction and death of body. For if any succeeding Prince please to play the
tyrant, and govern all not by laws, but by his will and pleasure, signified
by missiues, articles, and directions, these Bishops shall never admonish him
as faithful pastors and messengers of God (for that they are not, having no
lawful calling nor authority from God and his kirk) but as they are made up
by man, they must and will flatter, pleasure and obey men. And as they stand by
affection of the Prince, so will they by no means jeopard their standing, but
be the readiest of all to put the Kings will and pleasure in execution; and it
were to take and apprehend the bodies of the best, and such namely as would
stand for the laws and freedom of the Realm, and cast them in dark and
stinking prisons, put them in exile from their native land, etc. Attour and
besides this, unless that men of whatsoever estate or rank they be, cap and
kneel to them, give them their ambitious styles, places and salutations,
slavishly abusing their bodies against their hearts, they shall not miss their
indignation to be interest, and crossed, and wronged in their ca^ands and
affairs, and to be traduced at Court by them or by their means. Last, their
company and entertainment will be an example of riot and excess, whereto that
Bishoprie is much given. And if thus the Realm, the laws and privileges
thereof, and the persons of good Scotishmen may be used, it is easy to gather
the like of their goods and gear. The Bishop in his own city, and among his
vassals, will think himself a petty Roy, who dare deny to lend, to give, to
serve them, with whatsoever they have? or if they do deny, can they not and
their Lawyers, Domestiques, Dependaries, devise the way how to get him to the
Horn, or into some inconvenience and danger of the law, and then their whole
goods and estate falling into the Bishops hands, they shall be pilled and
polled sickerly, The pitiful experience in times past, makes us bold to give
the warning for the time to come: for it has been seen and felt, and yet daily
is in this Island. And finally, it is already too manifest, that if the Prince
be prodigal, or would enrich his Courtiers by taxations, imposts, subsidies
and exactions laid upon the subject, of the Realm, who have been, or shall be
so ready to conclude and impose that by parliament, as these who are made and
set up for that and the like service. And whatsoever become of the poor
tenants and laborers by land or sea, they shall be ever winners by that block
and butie.

Then to conclude, seeing this Bishoprie, as we have clearly and evidently
shown and verified, is against the written word of God, against the Canons of
the ancient kirk, against the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the kirk, against
the judgment of all the found modern divines and reformed kirkes in Europe,
against the doctrine of the kirk of Scotland preached these 46 years, against
the confession of faith subscrived and sworn by the King and whole body of the
Realm, against the constitutions of the kirk of Scotland in her assemblies,
against the laws of the realm, against the honor of God and his Christ,
against the honor and weal of the king, against the honor and weal of the
realm, against the constitute and settled estate of the Kirk and kingdom,
against the honor and weal of the noble estates in Parliament. And finally
against the weal of all good Scottishmen in soul, body and goods: Our earnest
request and exhortation is, with all humility, submisse and reverend duty to
his most excellent Majesty, and most ancient and noble estates of this present
parliamen^; that as they tender the glory of God, the honor of his Christ, the
peaceable and flourishing estate of Kirk and Commonweal, the welfare and
honor of your selves, and the weal and good of all estates and subjects of
this realm committed by God to their government an protection, that they erect
not of new that unlawful and most pernicious estate of Bishops But on the
contrary, that it would please his Highness with advice of his estates in
this present Parliament, to ratify again of new the established government and
discipline of the Kirk, and confirm the cautions made in general Assemblies,
namely, where his Majesty was present to save the Kirk and Realm from the
most pestilent corruptions of that false Bishoprie that these fearful dangers
and inconveniences being thus prevented, the blessing of grace, peace and glory
may be continued and multiplied upon the kings most excellent Majesty, his
most honorable estates, and whole realm, and the Kirk and kingdom of Jesus
Christ may flourish in all quietness with holiness and truth. Amen.

Archip. Let others glory in their audacious conscience, as there will ever be
a Hiel found to reedifie Jericho, although he know that it will cost him and
his never so dear: for my self, I had rather in the basest estate abide the
bensall of all episcopal authority without, then the forcible contradiction
of these reasons within, set upon the highest top of their ambition; especially
if the rest of the steps be answerable to the first. Weary not to go
through them with me: And now show me which was the second.


Epaph. It is easier for me to tell you now, then it was for them to determine
at that time, when their preferment was so odious to the whole body of the
ministry: yet it was seen at last that Invasio perpetuae dictaturae was vi^
ad imperium, Second step of prelacie, Perpetual moderation
and therefore let them first be constant moderators, which was wrought by this
engine: First, summa papaverum capita demetendi: for in the year 1606, when
this course was in hand, the ministers and rulers of the kirk, who stood in
their watch, were dissipate, many were drawn out of the Country, and after
that they were long detained at Court for the modest carriage of single
ministers in a matter proper for civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as
was the convention at Aberdein; Some of them as Athanasius like Andrew Melvill,
and Hilarious like James Melvill, have died in exile, others were permitted to
return but with restraint. Of the rest remaining at home, albeit some stand to
this day in their own steadfastness, yet a great part wanting their former
encouragement, and loving the world, were moved to leave their long continued
opposition. Linlithgow Assembly.
2 In the time of that absence and dissipation for advancing the Prelates to
this second step of dignity, there is appointed at Linlithgow, December 12 a
convention in profession preparatorie for a general Assembly, but kept like
a general assembly, albeit inspired with another spirit, consisting of Noble
men, Statesmen, and such ministers, as were readiest to take and give. 3. It
was pretended that the cause of the weakness of the kirk against the Papists,
was the appearance of the division in the ministry and alienation of his
majesty's mind from some ministers; And that the cause of this cause was,
partly a fear of the subversion of the discipline and liberty of the Kirk, by
removing of Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial and general Assemblies by some
of their own brethren; usurpation of unlawful Jurisdiction in their own
persons, a grief for the afflicted case of their well affected brethren. And
upon the other side, that the charge of the kirk government was committed to
men who had not wisdom and experience for keeping the kirk in quietness. 4.
For removing this cause upon the one side, there was a declaration made in such
general and ambiguous terms, as might both gull the simple, making them to
conceive that there was no change intended, and yet include their own
particular intention in case they should be examined afterward upon their own
declaration. The words are: There is no purpose to subvert the Discipli^e of
the Kirk of Scotland, but rather to augment and strengthen the same, so far
as it can serve for the weal of the Gospel, and restraint of vice. And (say
the whole Bishops) it is not our intention to usurp and exercise any tyrannous
and unlawful Jurisdiction over our brethren, nor to engyre our selves in any
way unlawfully in the Kirk government, etc. But for removing the cause upon the
other side, there was no declaration accepted, that the wisest and most
experienced men should be chosen thereafter; But the Bishops must be constant
moderators, always restrained by 13 several cautions and bands, not unlike
the caveats at Montrose; But that they play fast and loose in the end by
casting to this provision: If either upon his majesty's advice and proposition
to the assembly, or upon their own supplication, the general assembly be
moved thereafter to grant them any relaxation of any of the cave^ts, which upon
good reason might appear to the said assembly to be over strait; that this
their promis^ should make no derogation to their liberty; Even as a little
before they professed their willingness to dimit their benefices at the pleasure
of the assembly, for taking away all offense from their brethren, but with
proviso that his Man consent and approbation be had thereto. Never a more
pernicious and plausible assembly in this kirk, every one of the Prelates
Vatinius-like preventing accusation by confession and protestation. And yet no
intention but to be perpetuat in their moderation, for atchieving that, which
they all disclaimed in word.


Archip. Was the applause so great that there was no opposition?


Epaph. The opposition could not at the first be so great, as at the first
step, by reason of the dissipation of the opponents, the professed quality of
the convention, the fair pretexts, the great promises, etc. By some the plat
was embraced as a bar of brass to hold out Bishops, by others as a pathway
to their preferment, as the event did prove. And many blinded before, did see
immediately after that convention, that the constant moderators were (as was
said at that time) the little thieves entering at the narrow windows, to make
open the doors to the great thieves. In all the quarters of the country,
great disputation of the power of Ecclesiastical assemblies in choosing their
own mouth and moderator. I might produce the reasons that were penned at that
time against this second step, but that were infinite, and the particulars
were to some of the actors yet living intolerable.


Archip. I have heard of your adversaries, that about these times there were
fair offers made of conference and disputation for final decision of all
controverted matters, but that they failed ever on your side.


Epaph. But the truth is, another general assembly but of the new sort,
consisting of Noble men, Statesmen, and many Ministers, was kept at
Linlithgow, July 26, 1608, where all the causes of the diseases of the kirk,
which were mightily then aggreged, are brought to two heads, one was the
contempt and discredit of the kirk, and of her wonted government; another most
special cause was the distraction of the ministers arising upon diversity of
affection and opinion: diversity of affection was cured, or rather covered by
a slender reconciliation made among so many as were present, and recommended to
go forward among the absents at home in their own presbyteries with many
protestations against the breakers of that new made unity. Diversity of
opinion was put into the hands of a cannie commission composed of Bishops
there professing the title and dignity, and of certain ministers of differing
judgment, upon no better vvarrant then the election of that convention, to
convene with his Majesty then in England, or with such of the counsel as his
highness should appoint, at such time and places as they shall be required by
his Majesty, and to treat reason and to consult upon all matters standing
presently in controversy among the brethren anent the discipline of the kirk,
and whatsoever they agree upon, to report to the next general assembly.


Archip. Why should that offer have been refused?


Epaph. Consider first that the one party of that commission was present, and
in case to do what seemed good in their own eye: the other absent, and for the
most part discouraged by sinistrous reports to deal in controversies of that
kind; no particular ground of the discipline of the kirk was there named to
stand in difference, al was under allowed customs and constitutions of the
kirk. If any particular diversely taken had stood in doubt to be searched and
determined by brotherly reasoning, to what purpose should his Highness or his
Counselors be fashed with such affairs, or by what love and discretion
should modest simple ministers be tempted in such matters to utter their minds
before the splendour of awful authority, all which were rather seen then
latent in pediments of that pretended union: yet the meeting of the
commissioners was appointed and kept at Falkland the 4 of May 1609.


Archip. Who was present then, and what was done?


Epaph. The Earls of Dumbar and Wigtoun, Conference at Falkland.
and the Lords of Scone and Fentunbarnes, did convene as his Ma. commissioners,
with 5 new Bishops, 2 university men, and 3 ministers for the one part; 9
ministers (the tenth being absent) for the other. After reading of the
commission of the general assembly, his Ma. missiue, and M. Patrick Simson his
excuse; his highness commissioners urged a conference of 5 of either side, two
of his Highness commisioners being present, which break of commission was
rather taken by the one party then granted by the other: for making way to
reasoning, the ministers demanded, 1 what were the points of discipline under
different opinions, 2 for the clearing of the quality of difference, that they
would determine what could be said in proper sense to be in controversy, and
what extra controversiam. 3. of those brethren alleged under diversity of
opinions, who were on the one side, and who on the other. 4. by what
authority could that conference make the general commission special, or call
in question one point of discipline established by the kirk, and ratified by
law and practice. Much time and talk being spent about these demands, and some
boastings to dash the ministers being breathed out, but no clear answer
returned, two questions were confusedly cast in. 1 Whether the moderators of
assemblies should be constant or circular (as they termed it.) 2 Whether
should the caveats be kept or not. To the first, the assembly as Linlith how
had already answered, namely that order taken for an Interim shall stand to the
next general assembly. To the second, that the caveats were acts of the
general assembly, such as they must stand unrepealed for a good use, viz. for
restraining the corruptions of voters in parliament in name of the kirk, and in
that respect no more to be called in question then any other act concerning
that vote. But after diverse assayes to draw the ministers in some breach of the
established order, which they declined with all their might, the whole
commissioners considering the generality of their commission, and being moved
with other necessary respects continued their conference to the first tuesday
of August that same 1609 year to be kept at Striveling, willing every one of
the said brethren to advise and consider gravely of the said questions, and to
be ready to propone their minds by word or writ, as they shall think fittest,
etc.


Archip. Ye have put my mind to rest concerning that conference at Falkland: I
pray you show me what was done at Striveling; for I never heard of that meeting.


Epa. The purpose chiefly intended in that assembly and conference to establish
the Bishop in his evil grounded moderation, being in the mean time obtained,
the diversity of opinions still remained, and that diet permitetd to expire
upon hope that the rest of the course in hand would go more easily in a
Linlithgow-like assembly.


Archip. What assembly mean ye; for their sagacitie seems now to be hot upon
the sent.


Epaph. Third step to Prelacie, High Commission.
I mean the assembly of Glasgow. But I must tell you first, that now having
great rents, and being called Lords and Bishops, albeit not in respect of
office but benefice; being Lords of Parliament, Lords of Council, Patrons of
kirks, plotters of Ministers stipends, etc. They were armed at that time in
Febru. 1610 with the transcendent power of high Commission; which being added
unto their former wealth and worldly dignities, makes the third step of their
preferment; Ecce duo gladij; spiritualis ^om^ judicat omnia, ipse vero a nemine
judicatur.

Archip. That is a great and terrible one: for they may now hold intrants at
the door, deprive them who are entered, or plague them with the hungry
persecution, confine, ward, imprisone; So that now I think they may mount as
they please without opposition; especially when the timorous know that never
failing truth; Cui plus licet quam par est plus vult quam licet.


Epaph. Hence was it, Fourth step of Prelacie Their power Ecclesiastical.
that with all diligence the Assembly of Glascow was prepared the same year
1610 to be holden June 8, for lifting them toward the top of the Ladder: that
they might be no longer, tyranni fine titulo. In that more costly then
profitable Assembly moderated by the Bishop, and made up of Cathnes, Orknay and
other wares of that sort; the Assembly at Aberdeen is declared null: the Bishops
made Moderatours in every Diocesan Assembly, and either they or their deputies
moderatour of the weekly meetings of the exercise: Ordination and deprivation
of Ministers, visitation of Kirkes, excommunication and absolution of persons,
presentations, and all pinned to their sleeves. And finally this easy conquest
is made sure with this threefold cord. 1 Every Minister at his entry shall
svvear obedience to his ordinary: 2 No Minister, neither in preaching nor
exercise shall speak against the Acts of this Assembly: 3 That the question of
paritie or imparitie of Pastors be not touched in pulpit, both under the pain
of deprivation.


Archipp. The Acts of this Assembly added unto the former, are like the a^e
added to the decretum; of which the old proverb went, Ex quo decreto alae
supervenerunt, id est, decreta in decretalia ab^erunt, omnia perpetuo in pejus
ruisse. But I see not how in all these proceedings they have received any thing
of that which they call the office of a Bishop, except the Benefice and power
above single Presbyters.


Epaph. Three of the number went to England at their own hand, without
knowledge either of the Kirk, Fifth step, Consecration.
or of their own Glascow Assembly, and there received Consecration, the first
step of their Hierarchy, which after their return they communicate to their
associates. And last of all for setting them upon the top of the mast, where
they are yet fast a sleep: and for conclusion of this Perthian plot of
questions, articles and whole building rising thereupon, Sixth step, their
Confirmation in Parliament.
the Parliament holden at Edinburgh June 28 1617 enacted two several
Statutes, one anent the Election of Archbishops and Bishops: another anent the
restitution of Chapters.


Archipp. I have often heard of the Protestators and protestation at that time.
As ye gave me great satisfaction by that grave and well backed protestation,
which marred the music of their first note at Perth, so I desire to know
what was done against the sixth note, and highest step at Edinburgh.


Epaph. Perhaps ye have seen master Maxwells magisteriall maxims against the
53 Protestant preachers of Scotland. The truth is, the ministers present at
that time to vvatch for the weal of the Kirk, being conveened with the
Ministers of the town of Edinburgh, out of the consideration of present and
imminent evils resolved upon this modest and general form of Protestation.

Most gracious and dread Sovereign; Most Honorable Lords and remanent
Commissioners of this present Parliament: Protestation given in ^o the
Parliament 1617.
We the Ministers of Christ his Evangell, being here conveened from all parts
of this your Majesty's Kingdom, do in all submission and reverence entreat
your Majesty and Honors patient and favorable hearing of this our reasonable
and humble suppli^ation: And first it will please your Highness and Honorable
Estates presently conveened, be informed, that we are here a number of the
Ministers out of all the parts of this Kingdom, and that the Bishops have
protested since our coming to a great many of us, that nothing should be
agreed upon nor consented to by the^ in this present Parliament, in matters
concerning the holy Kirk, the discipline and order thereof without our special
knowledge and advise; affirming also that neither they nor we have power of
consent in any innovation or smallest change of the order of our Kirk
established, without special advice and determination of the general
Assembly, representing the body of the Kirk of the Kingdom had thereunto.
Whereupon we resting in security have received now a sudden report to our
great astonishment, of an Article to pass in conclusion, and to receive the
force of a law in this present Parliament, deceruing and declaring that your
Maj. with advice of the Archbishops, Bishops, and such a competent number of
the Ministry, as your Maj. out of your wisdom shall think expedient, shall
in all time coming have full power to advise and conclude in all matters
decent for the external policy of the Kirk, not repugnant to the word of God,
and that such conclusions shall have the strength and power of Ecclesiastical
laws. Wherein it will please your Maj. and Honorable Estates to hear our just
greeues, and consider our reasonable desire; and not to put us your Maj. humble
and loving subjects to that poor and simple point of protestation; which if
remedy be not provided, we must be forced to use for the freedom of our Kirk,
and discharge of our conscience.

We then first plead reformation and purity in our Kirk, in doctrine, in
ministration of the Sacraments, in discipline and all convenient order with the
best reformed kirks in Europe; which may stand, and have been acknowledged
rather as a pattern to be followed of others, then that we should seek our
reformation from any, that never attained to that perfection, which in the
mercy of God this long time bygone under your High, we have enjoyed, and are
able by reason to maintain the same.

Next we plead the liberty of our kirk, which by the Laws of your Majesty's
Kingdom, and diverse Acts of Parliament given forth in favor of the same, is
established with power of public meetings and general Assemblies, and
allowance to make such Canons and Constitutions, as may serve for the comely
order and decency of the same, all which by this conclusion to be taken, must
be utterly overthrown.

Thirdly, we plead for the peace and tranquillity of our Kirk, that being
nearest the Divine and Apostolic Institution, has lived without schism or
rentings in it self, and by introduction of any noveltie not orderly, nor as
appertains, may be miserably rent and our peace broken.

Fourthly, we have been at diverse times sufficiently secured from all
suspicions of innovation, as by your Maj. letter the list Winter sent down to
this Country to take away all fear of any alteration, which might arise upon
your Maj lovingly intended journey; which letter by your Maj. special will,
and direction of the specials of your Highness council is elsewhere intimated in
our Pulpits. As also by that Proclamation given out the 26 day of September
1605, when rumors of an intended conformity with the kirk of England was
spread abroad. Wherein your Maj. sufficiently avoided all such suspicion: And
the hearts of all honest men settled themselves in a confidence, that no such
thing should be attempted.

These and many other reasons have moved us, in all reverence by this our
humble Supplication to entreat your Highness, and Honorable Estates not to
suffer the forenamed Article, nor any other prejudicall to our liberties
formerly granted, to pass at this time to the grief and prejudice of this
poor Kirk; whereby the universal joy of thousands of this land, who rejoysed
at your Maj happy arriving here shall be turned to mourning: Wherein as we are
earnest supplicants to God to inclyne your Maj. heart this way, as the most
expedient for the honor of God and the weal of the subjects, so if we shall be
frustrated of this our reasonable desire, Then do we in all humility with
that dutiful acknowledgment of our loyalty to your Maj. as becomes, protest
for our selves and al our brethren that shall adhear to our protestation, that
as we are free of the same, so must we be forced rather to incur the censure of
your Maj. law, the^ to admit or obtemper an impositio^ that shall not fall from
the kirk orderly convened, having power of the same.


Archipp. The Ministers could say no less for defense of the liberties of the
Kirk granted in former Parliaments; and for declaration of their present and
purposed constancy.


Epaph. Albeit a protestation be a form of defense, forbidden to no person
neither by the law of God, of nature, or of man, nevertheless a heavy
accusation and hard pursuit is intended against the Ministers of that
protestation: and some of the^ for their steadfast standing to the liberty of
the Kirk put to high extremity: But as sundry of the subscrivers of the first
protestation at Perth, through ambition sought after the Prelacy, against which
they then proteste^: So a number of the first subscrivers of the second
Protestation at Edinburgh, were charged to compei^e at Santandroes a few days
after, and through fear were moved at that time to repent themselves of their
faithful service done to the Kirk: and since have practiced and preached
against their protestation, to their own shame, the offense of their people,
the sorrow of their dearest friends, advantage of the enemy, and no small hurt
to the Kirk and cause of Religion.


Archipp. I perceive that ye have ever been protesting, and they ever
proceeding, till that the unity, authority, and order of the Kirk are quite
destroyed, and the external worship of God left naked without a guard,
ready to be a pray to every enemy.


Epaph. The bitter fruits of the former alteration caries secret seeds of the
following defection; Bitter fruits of the three former degrees of defection.
the one side partly by terrors and allurements, crosses and commodities,
banishment and benefices is in number diminished; and partly by pains, fears
and expenses vvearied and weakened. Nec ultra pars sanior ea tempestate
repugnare ausa, ^am quoquo modo rebus finem imponere cupiens, Nam quillibet
audere atque agere facile era^ maximorum amicitia subnixis. The other, what by
revolters, and what by Intrants daily increased and by svveet success and
frequent favors encouraged and made vvanton. Before that mystery of
Hierarchy was unvailed, distraction among the Ministers was judged to be the
causes of the increase of superstition and Papistrie; the fine pretense of so
many Assemblies, but both the one and the other are as negligently passed as
mightily increased since. What the Kirk of Christ has lossed, as much has
Antichrist gained; he needs not to fear the fead of Discipline and Kirk
Assemblies, nor the ancient unity of vigilant Pastors, for by the Circaean cup
of this mighty mutation the face of matters, and fashions of men are so
metamorphosed, that perhaps you shall find, that he who loved you best and
hated the adversaries and corrupters of Religion most, is changed quite from
himself, and scarsly can ye know your old friend now walking in his new cut:
our old one heart is now either heart and heart, or else no heart at all. We
were wont to close up our great controversies with hearty harmony: now in
common matters we hirsp like harp and harrovv. For liberty is slaverie; for
mutual honor, pride and contempt, the spiritual service of the Gospel is
left for the affairs of this life, for Kirk Assemblies are Episcopal Courts
for friends comfortless and against enemies awlesse. If there ye seek reason,
ye shall have will: and if you say Brother, my Lord smiles, and yet fretts at
you as a Disciple of the old discipline, and a despiser of the new domination:
for reasoning and grave deliberation in weightiest matters you shall have a
dash of artificial voting, like Alexanders sword upon Gordius knot. yea in a
point of Religion if they cannot persuade you, they will surely usurp over
your conscience. Papistrie, blasphemy, brea^h of the Saboath, contempt of the
Gospel, mocking add puritanizing of faithful Ministers, and reformed
professors are rather passed as a merriment, or praised by a smile, then
repressed and punished as crying transgressions: he that refraines makes
himself a prey, and he that will not follow the drove like the beasts of the
field is the proud man's earth whereupon he trampes, and must have ready
shoulders for a load of injuries; and if he be not servile in imitation, like
wax to persuasions, and witty to vvrong himself, he must learn to bear
contentment and extremities in one mind. Thus Christ tries his own Kirk;
Antichrist has escaped with his cruelty and treachery, and has gotten as
many years of peace to prepare his last onset by subtlety, as the Kirk has
of troubles to make her preparations against his battles. He is shameless and
insolent in his strength as he apprehends that he is not affrayed to exsult
with the cries of victory before the battle: And notwithstanding of his
incurable cruelty, some of the Pastors and professors of Reliligion, by
banishments, imprisonements, confinings, fear of pursuit, reproaches,
calumnies, and all sort of contempt are so extenuate, that the pity of their
case is no less pearcing, then their faithful labors in the Ministry have
been profitable: Others so drunken with the deceivable favors of the time,
that their care to be great eats up their pains to do good. And if there
be a third sort free of fear and folly, and zealous in Religion, their hearts
are pulled down to behold the miseries of poor men, who feign would do
well, but are wickedly abused, and the pride of idle men, who pay the debt of
their calling by their nodd of Conformity to be admired, as the Prophets of
Jerusalem and the pillars of the Kirk.


Archipp. Your just complaints of the former alteration, albeit there were no
worse to follow, do cry, that it is more then time that the strong men set
up, and sitting on high, Vt os Iehovae should set themselves to seek the Lord,
and say to their brethren, Come near we pray you to us; Let us seek the God of
our fathers and the ancient way of our peace. We have fallen out, but let there
^ee no more strife between you and us: We are brethren and debtors to God and
his people that we should earnestly contend for the maintenance of the faith
once given to the Saints. Wherefore were we borne to see the destruction of our
people and the destruction of our holy City, and thus to fit still, till it be
delivered into the hands of strangers, to be devored by the sword of sworn
enemies, that as her glory had been great, so might her dishonor and her
excellency be turned into sorrow. Let us be zealous of the Law, and give our
lives for the covenant of our fathers, for by it we shall obtain glory.


Epaph. Yet the very tears of Gods people for the common miseries of the Kirk
will feed the fury of such incendiares, as make their own particulars their
highest projects: The wicked will still do wickedly. As the Bishops of Rome
after their advancement were not satisfied with the two uncouth Tragedies of
Bellum sacrum and Bellum Pontificium, wherewith they filled the would with
blood, and troad all secular powers under their feet: but must also, which is
worse, deprave Gods worship, and in place of the Ordinances of Christ
establish their own Traditions, wherein they proceeded so far, till they
came to the manifest contradiction of Christ's own legacy in the Sacrament, by
that horrible clause of Non obstante expressed in their act, Notwithstanding
that Christ institute etc. So our Prelates after their preferment, not resting
content with the destruction of the unity, authority and order of the Kirk,
nor with their precedencie before the Peers of the Kingdom, and power over
all the subjects, must make an on set upon the worship of God, esteemed the
substantial and fundamental part of our profession; so long as the other
which was called the circumstantiall part was in question: but now being once
controverted, judged as indifferent and alterable as the other was before; and
being inspired with the sprit of Desolation by promises and threatenings working
in their souls, fear of loss, faith, hope, and love of worldly commodity,
in stead of Theological virtues, they resolve to proceed in the course of
defection till they have come in effect to the clause Non obstante in the
Sacrament, Notwithstanding the institution and example of Christ.


Archipp. Ye have brought me to the fourth maine degree of defection
concerning the worship of God, Fourth degree of defection in the worship of
God.
wherein I would see the several steps, and upon what part the first assault
was made.


Epaph. Neither they, nor I can tell where they will ariue, but resolving to
try a stormy sea in despite of shipwreck, for better sport to the Papists, for
further disgrace to the reformation of Religion, for loosing all, and for the
more casi^ fishing in troubled waters, The famous Confession of Faith well
known and commended at home and abroad, the forms of prayer publicly used in
the Congregations and Families of Scotland, must be cast in a new mould;
Aberdeen Assembly.
But by some providence these new faces have been kept close since the general
Assembly holden at Aberdeen, the 13 day of August 1616; where some opposition
being made to that needless and hurtful change, and to the forms there
presented, they were set over to further deliberation, but of such a
commission, whose designs when time requires will find favor to speed well.


Archipp. But I hear no mention of the five Articles in that Assembly.


Epaph. Albeit it was laid to the charge of the Prelates, that it was high time
for them to render the fruits of the pains and charges bestowed upon their
exaltation etc. which the clerk was forbidden to read. And albeit lineaments
were drawn for Confirmation, and for holy days, by enjoining the Communion at
Pash; yet the proceedings of that Assembly gave greater provocation then
contentment: As the recantations of some Subscrivers of the protestation at
Edinburgh, and the dissipation of the rest, like the stragglers of an army put
to the rout, through rigorous censure of others, who proved constant, gave
greater hope then distrust of better speed: And therefore unto a naked handful
sick of fear and suspicions, the five Articles were offered, which were
likely to draw down the Sacraments and the Saboath from their honorable
estimation, as the 13 Articles of Perth were powerful to divide the
Ministry, cassire the Assemblies, and nullify the whole Jurisdiction and
liberty of the Kirk. Assembly at Santandroes.
The peeping answer returned to the first motion of these Articles giving hope
to prevail, draws on with posthast a general Assembly to be kept at
Santandroes the 25 of November 1617: Where the said Articles were in a sort
proponed, but neither considered in themselves as points of divinity, true or
false, erroneous or orthodoxe; nor how they might stand in our reformation
without infamy of our profession, and scandal of our professors. By reason
of the shortness of time, sudden convening of the Assembly, and absence of
six whole Dioces besides the Commissioners and best informed sort of sundry
Presbyteries, matters were remitted to further diligence, rather then any thing
perfectly concluded.


Archipp. Had the diligence been used and pains taken at that time before the
conclusion of Articles which has been abundant since, they might have been
perhaps holden off, and the Kirk yet free of their fasherie.


Epaph. But the masters of that credit gave forth that after that Assembly
the Kirk would never be favored in our days with liberty to meet again in a
general: which as it was a pretty policy, speaking fully of the dischage
of the ancient General Assemblies, but lisping for one of the new edition; so
was it a mean to make the credulous Ministers inclining to peace rather then
contentious disputation, the more secure and less careful to search the good
and evil, and to see the course of that plot dressed up to fined articles. In
the mean time they are surprised with the sudden proclamation of a
Convention to be holden at Perth August 25 1618. Perth Assembly.



Archipp. Albeit I have heard and read much of that Meeting, yet I desire to
hear your observation concerning the principal Actors, the proceeding and
conclusion thereof.


Epaph. The meeting was more then ordinary, made up of Noblemen, Statesmen,
Barons and Burgesses powed out for the purpose, with the splendour of their
greatness to dash and deface such simple and modest Ministers and
Commissioners as were loath to admit any noveltie in the worship of God,
whereof they were not fully persuaded in their own mind. Amongst the deliberate
and mighty in those purposes were to be found, some, it may be, taking that
golden occasion to remember the proceedings of the Kirk of old against
superstition and proud attempts, as injuries done against them or some of their
near and dear friends; some to show their resolution to please, in despite of
whatsoever to be said or done; some began to practice those Articles before
they went to Perth, but with as great grief to their own flocks as they
little regarded to off^nd^th (...): and many so their own friends, and set for
their own particulars, that they were led rather with hopes of gain and
pleasure for themselves then with Religion for Religion. In big words the
common cause was professed of all; but the^e was more heat in the pursuit of
what was liked, then patience to consult with reason anent the bringing again
into the practice of Gods worship of certain ceremonies advisedly cast forth,
and happily holden without, for the space of many by gone years. In the
proceedings, how violently matters were carried, God, the conscience of the
mighty and wise, and such indifferent beholders as were present, are
vvitnesses. The particulars are to be seen in the nullitie and antinullitie of
that Assembly so much tossed betwixt an adversary to Novellists, and the
advocate of Novelties, in the answer to gentle John Mitch^lsones pol^mickes and
other Treatises of that subject In end, although costly wits projected that
course, yet so strait was the way to conclusion, that the pleasing of
superior powers was pretended with promise never to urge obedience: no censure
durst be touched against Contraveners nor Statutes made against the golden
rule, Try all things, and keep that which is good: a sovereign preservatiue
against defection, and a deadly dittae against Ecebolius.


Archipp. Such a conclusion made by such persons upon such proceedings is no
strange thing; But obedience unto a conclusion of that quality against so many
bands of conscience, and so long practice, seems a matter more strange.


Epaph. Ye cannot be ignorant what the obedience and what the opposition, was,
for the space of three years after; notwithstanding of so many assayes to
bring on the practice, till at last in the Parliament holden at Edinburgh in
the m^neth of August 1621, there is a law made for the ratification of the five
Articles; but without the sting of compulsion, and as free of penalty as the
constitution of Perth meeting was void of sanction and censure. What civil
obedience shall be given to that Ecclesiastical constitution for respect to
the law, time will prove, and they know best, who resolve to be Christians
according to the act of Parliament.


THE COURSE OF CONFORMITY, AS IT IS CONCLUDED in the last Parliament, Anno
1621.
Archippus. Second demand concerning the parliament.
YOU are now where I would have you, and where my second demand proponed in
the beginning, desired to bring you. As ye have led me through a long
labyrinth, and many secret vvayes of defection, to the beginning of that
parliament; so I beseech you weary not to lead me to the end thereof, that I
may know what I am bound to do by virtue of that act, in the presence of God:
for according to his acts I desire to be professor and pastor both.


Epaph. Satisfied in ^ particulars.
Remembering for preface my premonition in the beginning, I will first show you
the introduction to the Parliament, concerning certain preparations for
dressing the five articles for the parliament, and the Parliament for them.
Secondly the, parliamentarie proceedings, and pains taken in time of
Parliament for their ratification, until the inacting of the statute it self.
Thirdly, some memorable and rate events falling forth at that time by his
providence, who beholds from heaven the actions of men; 1. Preparation for
the parliament. Qui aduersus multos bellu^ gerunt, eos superare possun^ quamu^s
vi^ibus inferiores su^, si modo sust^in^^^ que^^ (...) m^m impetum.
and at extraordinary times leaves not himself without an extraordinary
witness.


Archip. The delay of time was an introduction of it self according to the
Florentines policy. The first brash of a multitude is ever strongest, and time
works. But what were the particular preparations?


Epaph. After their conception and pressing toward the womb at Aberdein,
Saintandrowes, and before, their birth followed at Perth, and begat some
lovers. Afterward they gat the favorable names of the kings service and
conformity; and were carefully fostered by a rumor that the learned and wise
of the land is for them, that the people would gladly embrace them, and to them
was tied all peace and quietness. Multi percutiunt ut grandines, pot^nt^^ ut
sulmina.



Archip. That had been a strong argument indeed in the school of common-wits,
if it would go on this form. Our fathers did it, our Princes gave us leave,
and our Prophets defended it.


Epaph. But this young conformity vvanting such authority, came little speed
at Presbyteries and Paroches. Her cause then was pleaded first in the court of
Facility. The Bishops did convene their Synodals, and there the blast of
conformity was raised with all inforcements of terror; And of the fearful
sort of Gedeons army, some were moved to promise at least the practice of
conformity contrary to their own vote at Perth, and others mistaken in their
modest silence, as consenting to the course. Next, in the transcendent court of
Extremity, the high commission did convene, and as it pleased them to make
choice, faithful pastors were drawn before them; and contrary to all order
and law of this kirk and kingdom, summarily silenced and confined. By these
preparatorie assayes many were induced to call evil good, by speaking for it,
by not speaking against it, by defending it as they were doers of it; and a
busy sort defending it in others which as yet they had not done themselves. By
such proceedings scandal and confusion were mightily increased, The people
did run from novelties at home to seek the sacrament, where they might have it
according to the old form. And although for covering this deformity, and
drawing the ministers to the course intended, it was openly given out, that it
was never meaned, that the people should be compelled to alt^r that form
received and confirmed by law and long practice: yet so pregnant and piercing
were these new forms, that many more suspected some hard event of these varied
policies, then were throvghly persuaded to change their profession; But some
readier way was found out to make disciples of some Noble men and Borrowes, the
earth was compassed, and sundry were made but upon sensible cost. When it was
perceived to be hard and difficile to get place for these strange novelties in
the worship of God, and in the paroches of this kingdom, without more help of
the secular arm, the leaders of that employment after great storms grew calm
for a Parliament.


Archip. But how was the matter brought to a Parliament?


Epaph. The skill was to catch a fit opportunity, Ad res geren das semper
temporum occasiones expectare intucriq. oportere. Machiavel.
and a strong occasion was offered by the seeking of a voluntary supply for
the afflicted state of Bohemia; when the Nobility and others were assembled
for that business, it was resolved, that the general contribution of the Lieges
would be more honorable for the country, and fitting for that worthy cause,
and for presenting their overture, choice was made of the Bishop of
Saintandrowes, who went to Court in the midst of a winter storm, and persuaded
the refusal of the voluntary contribution, and delay for a time to be good
service. And having obtained liberty for holding a Parliament, came speedily
home again with greater joy to such as sent him, then appearance of timous aid
to the state distressed.


Archip. That was too strike under cover a Bastinado de bombaso.


Epaph. After that the deeps betwixt the two rocks of highest displeasure and
popular indignation were tried; the peoples disposition and opinion sounded
they greedily grip the wished opportunity of that charitable supply so
universally liked: finally, all m^ane, and men being fervently disposed, set on
edge and in readiness and prom^ses passed for hope of good success in this
principal earthly desire. This parliament so long delayed, and as long
desired, with all solemnities of state is proclaimed at the market cross of
Edinburgh.


Archip. You are now drawing toward the second point, which I cannot well take
up, except ye give me the tenor of the proclamation as best expressing the
causes of that honorable meeting.


Epaph. Left you or I either should be mistaken, behold the true copy thereof.

Proclamation of the Parliament.
JAMES by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith.

Forasmuch as we know ^^^ll, that the happiness, strength and glory of a
Monarchy free from tyranny and confusion, is builded upon the mutual love
betwixt the king and his subjects, expressed by the one in a fatherly care to
maintain his countries in a secure peace, flourishing with religion and
justice, and by the others in a loyal and submiss^e obedience to their Princes
will and commandment, accompanied with a hearty and affectioned offering of
all supply and aid to the upholding and increase of his estate and honor with
their goods and bodies. Which reciprocal bonds (as laid in by nature and birth
upon king and people) albeit no new contract can tie or shike off, yet are they
with solemnity in a sort renewed at the Assemblies of Parliaments, wherein the
subjects according to the occurrent necessities of the Princes affairs, offer
to him their best supply and help, and he returns to them satisfaction and
ease of their just grievances, pardons for transgression of the laws,
ratifications and acts in favors of particular persons, estates, and
corporations, with the establishment of such new laws as the time does
require. And we having now appointed a Parliament in our kingdom of Scotland
to be holden and begin upon the first day of June next, wherein as the
importance and necessity of our ado^s giv^th ^s just hope for to look for a
supply to be granted to us by our su^jects in our said kingdom in a greater
measure then has been at any time heretofore, So are we most willing, that
they should have all contentment in having either general laws or particular
acts authorized by our royal consent, which being ripely advised, shall be
found expedient to pass. But because our long experience has taught us, how
that diverse persons partly by ignorance, and partly by fraud, are accustomed,
presuming upon the short time of the sitting of our Parliament, to give in many
^illes and articles to those, who are appointed to sit upon the same,
containing matter prejudicial to our crown, or other our good subjects, which
shortness of time, and multitude of business permits not to be so narrowly
examined, as need were. And for this cause we have appointed a certain number
of our counsel to meet some days before the said parliament, and to consider
of all bills, petitions and articles, which shall be exhibit to them by our
Clerk of Register. Therefore our will and pleasure is, that all such, at intend
to give in any articles to be past in this approaching Parliament, deliver the
same to our Clerk of Register before the twenty day of May next, Otherwise the
same shall not be received, read, nor voted in our said parliament, except the
same be past under our own hand. And that ye make publication hereof at the
market cross of our Burgh of Edinburgh, to the end that none of our subjects
pretend ignorance.

Given at our palace at Westminster the 21 of April 1621.

Archip Was there no further done for convocation?


Epaph. Missiue letters and precepts were directed according to the ordinary
custom from his Majesty's Counsel, to all Noblemen of the land, Marquises,
Earls, Vicounts, Lords, Barons, Commissioners of Shires, Bishops and Burrowes.


Archip. I see not a word in the proclamation of the five Articles, and I see a
fa^re occasion offered to the kirk or any of her members to give in their
petitions according to their fears or desires.


Epaph. The cover of the subsidy will not let you see them, grope rather,
Videndi ficultas omnes attingit, attrectandi vero p^^^^s duntaxat, Machiavel.
What was done in the petition ye shall see. The corporations of the kingdom
in private persons, as they had their public or private affairs to be done in
Parliament, as they were wakened and warned by this occasion, according to
their customable privileges, appointed and kept their ordinary meetings, for
preparing their petitions and articles to be timously presented according to
the will of the proclamation. But a necessary corporation, and diverse ministers
and members thereof under great necessities and need of support from the
compassion at hands of that high and honorable meeting, being deprived not
only of the ancient vigorous general assembly, but of the weak image thereof,
and in that respect of wonted order and Council for preparing their desires,
and authorizing commissioners to present the same, was left unrespected and
desolate.


Archip. Yet his Majesty's proclamation not only permitting, but inviting, and
the concurrence of so many weighty causes enforcing, as the great growth of
corruptions, boldness of Papists, and increase of Pa^^stry rather plaistered
then punished, and the distractions of the Kirk now turned into persecution of
the Ministers, and grievous offen^e of the faithful professors like a fire
devouring and wasting all unity, order, and brotherly kindness, with no small
danger to the state of religion, the ministers of duty ought, and without
wrong or offense to any, might have presented their humble ^etion.


Epaph. Chien o^ chaude ^a^t l^ causroide.
Ye may guess at the difficulty of that duty by your own disposition and
retirednes at that time; yet it pleased the Lord to move the ministers in most
quiet and peaceable manner to join their hearts and hands in this form of
supplication.

Supplication presented to the Parliament in name of the Kirk.
May it please your Honors in this present Parliament assembled under the high
and excellent Majesty of our dear and dread Sovereign, to accept and
consider the humble petition of your wearied and broken hearted Brethren,
Ministers and people, obsieged under higher pains then ^^sse of life,
liberty, goods and fame, for Sions sake not to hold their tongue, but to call
and cry to the God of Heaven, and the gods of the earth, that peace may be
within her walls, and prosperity within her palaces.
ALthough it were more expedient to weep then to say ought, when we see the
Lords army disordered, his company broken, and in the chock betwixt Christian
and Turk, Protestant and Papist, some of his worthies put from their places,
and others turned, if not to the enemies camp, yet laboring for his cause.
Nevertheless having this happy occasion of his Highness fatherly care,
providence, and inclination to distribute justice and mercy among his
Majesty's people, to whom by right pert^ines the worthy comforts and
advantages, which the King of Kings has enclosed in hi^ Royal scepter to be
delivered forth and disposed according to the occasions presented, and the
reciprocal consideration in his Highness let proclamation expressed, as also
of this high Court, and of your Honors compassionate intercession for our
quietness and deliverance from injuries already felt, and further feared, we
are even forced to speak, though not as Tertullus, or they who care not for
the loss of much inward peace of their s^^le^ and consciences, so that they
may gain their supposed victory. Yet holding our selves within the bounds of
that Christian moderation, which follows God without injury done to any man,
^t is not beseeming our ministerial calling to secret the truth whereof we
are persuaded: and by a cowardly kind of silence, and truthlesse modesty to
betray a good cause. As touching our own grievances, and others concerning our
selves, we have locked up our hearts with patience, and our lips with
taciturnitie, rather then we should impeshe your Honors at this time with our
just complaints of wronged innocence, by so many great repro^hes, shameless
calumnies of sedition, disobedience, hypocrites, sectaries, etc. Deprivations
and rigorous practices inflicted upon some, as if we alone had troubled
Israel, by holding for says these principles, and maintaining these opinions,
whereupon Sc^^smatickes and Puritanes build their heresies and despise better
then themselves: and for no other causes known to us, but for our constant
care, as God has dealt to every man his measure of faith to build the house of
God, according to the lively pattern prescribed from his holy mountain: our
conformity with the Kirk of Scotland and the best reformed kirkes of other
Couatries, and our loyal obedience to hi^ Mai^sties laws, declaring and
approving the true Kirk, the true members and Ministers thereof, and the
doctrine, sacrament and dis^ipline to be ministered and professed within the
same. As for the vehement outcries against our cause, and the sundry foul
matters laid to our charge in word and writ, we pass them all as swines flesh
dressed after a diverse f^sh^on; and we look for equal hearing at your
Honors hands, and for Paul's liberty from King Agrippa: Thou art permitted to
speak for thy self. In this confidence of our good cause, and persuasion of
your Honors love to the truth known ^y your selves, we pr^esse not to offend
any, but being provoked to d^pend our selve^, leaving to the Lord. Who shall
judge the qui^k and the dead, to persuade them that have their eyes upon us
unpa^tially to judge our labors in the ministry for the true religion, and
against the enemies and adversaries thereof, our harmless conversation and
blameless a^ it pleases the Lord to assi^t us under our infirmities; The
reasons whereby we are uphol^en in our course and protestations, and just
defense against the oppositions intended, are all made patent to the eyes of
the world, ^to ways to lay open the nakedness of our mother to the scandal
of the enemy, or justly to offend any otherwise minded; but that the
multitude of our professors be not tainted with the venom of malitiousnesse,
contrary to the sincere milk which they have received by a swift running spea^
of humane eloquence, more fitting to deceive the ear, then to work g^^e^ in
the heart. If a c^sing ^^^e sor^orne, we should des^^t from speaking. If the
sword of pursuit were put up, we could be soon discharged of our ba^kler.
But being pursued, if we defend not, we die with shame, and are guilty of
our own overthrow.

The praise of all pains wisely taken, the step of all callings, and crown
of commendi^d s^fferings, is to do and suffer in the causes of Christ's spouse
and for the maintenance of the salvation of our own souls, That one thing we
cannot suppress, our hearts desire to have, and hold religion in liberty and
purity. And for that effect, better like of the single form of policy in the
Kirk of Scotland, and the reformed kirkes in other Countries; then the many
Ceremonies retained by some. Yea love and fear compels us to put your
Honors in mind, that as it has been in all ages the holy disposition, and
happy practice of all Gods people, to set continually before their eyes, his
inestimable goodness toward his Kirk, her case and condition in her
military troubles, and in consideration of the one and the other duty,
required and e^s^^cted at your (...), Where through in the riches of Gods
mercy, they have been safe from that dreadful ruin that has justly
overtaken the careless and the wicked, So now in time of dangerous dist^^ction
it would please your Honors to set before your eyes, how wonderfully the Lords
love and with grace has been powered upon his Kirk in this nation, and by the
means of religion upon our gracious Sovereign, your Honors ancestors of
blessed memory, your selves, your friends, and upon this estate, the present
estate of such a loving mother, crying in her bloody distresses for help at
your hands, And in regard of blessings abundantly received in the days of her
liberty and health, what is due from your son-like affections, places of
credit, and honorable callings in your high conventions, where God stands in
the assembly of Gods, high judges among the Gods to your well deserving mother,
in whose womb we were conceived, and brought up on her knees to the condition
wherein we now stand at ease and peace in the days of her distress. Our
hurable petition to your Honors is, that as ye respect the glory of Christ's
kingdom to be continued in this land, the adorning of his Majesty's crown,
and the quietness of his loving and loyal subjects, the endless praise of
your selves, and the flourishing of your Honorable estates with the particular
comfort of so many ministers and congregations within this Realm. This poor
Kirk in the day of her tears, grief and fear, by your timous intercession at
his Majesty's hands, (and the Lord give you favor in the presence of the King)
and your uttermost endeavors debtfull to Gods honor, and Christ's kirk in this
happy occasion now presented, may obtain in this parliament her most
reasonable desires.

A sufficient and ready execution of former acts of Parliament made against the
fearful blasphemy of Gods name, profaning of the Lords day, and contempt of
his: Sanctuary and service so universally overflowing in this land, not only
in the persons of poor ignorants, in a manner tied to these horrible crimes by
a cursed custom and beggarly necessity, but even in the more honorable sort,
whose damnable example encourages their followers to sin without fear, with
such additions as may repress and restrain these crying abominations in all,
without respect of persons.

A safe liberty to enjoy the profession of our Religion, as it is reformed in
doctrine, Sacraments and discipline, and has been openly professed, sworn and
practiced by Prince, Pastors, and people of all ranks; your predecessors of
worthy memory, your selves, and we all yet living these threes^ore years
bygone and above.

A full deliverance from, and a sufficient defense against all novations and
novelties in doctrine, Sacraments and Discipline, and specially such, as by
constitutions of the Kirk, confessions of faith, liberal Laws of the
Country, Oaths and Subscriptions, and long continued practice, has been
condemned and cast out, as idle rites and Romish formalties, under whatsoever
pretense they plead for re-entrie.

That no Act pass in derogation or prejudice of the Acts already granted in
favor of reformation, liberty of Assemblies, convenient execution of
Discipline etc. or for corroboration of new opinions against the same, whether
Episcopacie, or ceremonies the shadow thereof, which for the peace of the Kirk
by heavenly wisdom should be rejected rather then ratified.

That all Ministers that are removed from their Charges, be restored to their
places, functions, and stipends.

The happiness to live under his Majesty and his Heirs, ordinary Judges, and
Rulers appointed by laws and custom, and established by the Acts of
Parliament, that our cause be lawfully cognosced according to order and
justice, before any sentence pass against our persons, places and estates: and
not to be judged by any judicatorie foreign, and not established by the Laws
of our Country.

We trust that as Abraham composed the variance betwixt his own and Lots
servants, Moses interceded betwixt the Hebrews, and Constantine betwixt the
Ministers of the Kirk: So the Lord shall give you courage to intercede with his
Majesty and his Highness fatherly disposition, to set the pillars of the
earth that were shaken, and to take off the heavy burdens, the burdensome
ceremonies, the burdensome censures, and the hurthenous abuses which many have
groaned under: And with a ready and royal hand to quench the beginning fire
of deprivation of Ministers by Ministers, of hindering Gods substantial worship
by him commanded, and withdrawing from the people the appointed food of their
souls, and necessary means of their faith and salvation: of smiting of many
a true shepherd, and committing the flock to many Wolves and blind guides: of
leaving the Papists cause, and suppressing the best Ministers, whereby they get
rest to mischeife the Kirk, and build up their own Synag gue and that for the
sake of Ceremonies, no more necessary for the s^^ use of Christ, then fai^ding
for a chaste ma^^on more ready to cross the commandment of Christ, whereby we
are charged to pray to the Lord of the Harvest, that he would thrust forth
lab^rer into his Harvest, then for the edification of the body of Christ. Thus
^^mbly commanding the innocence of our selves petitioners, and our just right
and possession of that reformation which we earnestly crave to be continued to
your Honorable charitable judgment; We pray God for Christ's sake to enable
you to do that, which may be acceptable to himself, profitable to his Kirk,
and comfortable to your own souls, at that day when we must all appear before
the ^^dgement seat of Christ, that man may receive the thing, which are done to
his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or ill: and to
bless his Man. and Royal issue with peace and truth for ever: And your
Honors with sound Religion and loyalty in this life, and endless^ glory with
Christ for ever.


Archipp. The supplication seems so reasonable and religious that no man
needed to be ashamed to present it, no man could refuse to accept it.


Epaph. It was indeed presented by a faithful Minister in name of the Kirk,
and of his fellow Ministers, in all humility and after the prescribed order, to
the hand appointed by Authority, and obliged by office to receive petitions of
that kind from any corporation, o^ ^^^e le^ge of this Kingdom. But after some
refusals and sundry significations of unwillingnes, it was received at last,
but subscribed by the Presenter, and with su h misregard of the messengers of
God, and matters of his Kirk, that he pla nly prof^ssed his doubting, whether
he would exhibit it in Parliament or not. Relegentem oportet esse religiosum
nefas.


Archipp. Notwithstanding all this diligence in proclamations, conventions,
devising and presenting of petitions and supplications the Parliament was not
holden then, but in August, what could be in doing in the two month^s
interjected? For the estate of Bohome and the Pala^nate abroad cried to hasten
the subsidy for their present succor and safety: And the Parents of Perth
Articles at home, longed to see the day when that birth of their brains should
be perfected in a Parliament.


Epaph Parliament continu^e.
From the first of June, which was the appointed day, the Parliament was
continued to the twenty three of July, upon what causes in so urgent a
necessity upon the one part, and so earnest desire on the other, it belongs
to the search of stately wits. It is well known that the length of secret
deliberation and shortness of open determination is meetest for some matters.
And as well known amongst us, that there was als great unwillingnesse to the
one cause, as affection to the other. Nihil mag^^ discriminis co^sihis tam
inimicum quam celeritas.

Qu c^uid est incoctum non expromunt, benecoctum duunt.


But the pretext behoved to attend the intended purpose. And therefore, during
this delay, great was the negotiation betwixt the rich Merchants of fair
words and fine promises, and the hungry servants of lingering hope, who thought
it now a fit time to draw up their particulars, and the principal cause in one
bargain, What will y^e give me, etc. All these things etc. Every wit that had
a venal^ vote, thought at this Market to repair his losses, to re-edifie his
estate upon the ruins of the Kirk, and fair words made fools feign. Our
vigilant Bishops set themselves, and send forth their explorators and Brokers
to try the inclinations of Noblemen, Commissioners of Shires, Barons and
Burgesses: And as they were found affected, cold, hot or lukewarm, they were
wrought upon to be present, absent, or to resolve vvisely against the day
appointed, whereby many honest simple souls were put to a hard choice,
either to peril Religion or to want promotion; No^ minus ego te spe, quam tu
me vo^e tua delectasti.
and so made many to vvrong themselves in forsaking the truth, which was in
their heart, for hopes, which are never likely to fill their hand. Where the
fear of the Leaders of the course was greatest, there, albeit with a
dissembled secrecy greatest confidence was professed, by making it come to
men's cares privily, that Perth Articles would certainly be ratified, and
therefore it was needless to oppone, which went through the Country as a
Proclamation of victory to dash some, and as terrors of desperation to make
others to cry, Our opposition will do us evil, and the cause no good. And
servile spirits to determine, where the mighty, and multitude are, there will
we be. By this crooked policy the silly simpli^itie of many professors
rawly resolved to stand in the day of trial was deluded. And Noblemen tempted
to lurk in a diffi^ill time, easily obtained license without great trial of
a just cause, as whose absence then presence was accounted better service.


Archipp. When these two months of Preparation was thus past, and the purpose
matured, whether was the appointed day observed.


Epaph. As there were preparatorie years betwixt Perth Assembly and the
Proclamation, and preparatorie months betwixt the months appointed in the
Proclamation and the keeping of the Parliament; so also that the proportion may
be fall, there were days of preparation betwixt the day appointed and the
riding of the Parliament.


Archipp. Know ye what was done in that last time of preparation immediately
going before the work it self.


Epaph. Albeit it was not the first, it was not the last: After the long
expected coming of his Majesty's Commissioner James Marqueshe of Hammilton,
who upon the 18 of Iulie, five days before the appointed day of the
Parliament, was accompanied with diverse of the Nobility, and some of his own
friends (but not so many as would have vvaited on him willingly in a better
errand) to Halyroodehouse his Majesty's own palace prepared royally for the
Commissioner, according to the affection carried to the commission; a great
part of the Nobility having feasted with him that night, upon the morn the 15
of Iulie, he had his first meeting in private with the Officers of Estate, and
Plot-maisters of Perth Assembly, where according to their love to the
conclusion and fear of impediments, all their heads were set on work for the
fore-casting, preventing, or removing opposition and purchasing the victory:
Upon the 20 day there was an universal Counsel meeting, where all things for
peaceable resorting to the Parliament were concluded, and the day destinate
prorogated from Monday the 23 till Wednesday the 25, that they might yet once
again assay the foord, fill up holes, and remove rolling stones before the
riding.


Archip. Ye tell me of great preparation against the Kirk upon worldly respects
on the one side, but I hear of no diligence for the Kirk upon better
considerations on the other: In that troublesome time of the world so
dangerous for Kirkes, Kingdoms and Commonweals, wherein all wits and
hearts were aloft, and every mind of friend and foe, as he respected the
public estate or his own particular, was bended for his own intention: It
seems ye and others of credit in the Ministry should not have been
negligent, but at least should have backed your own supplication, and waited
upon the occasions of doing good.


Epaph. Not only Noblemen, Comissioners of Shriefdomes, Bishops and Burrowes
were present, but from all the quarters of the Country, according to the
common liberty so many of the free Lieges of the land, as had to do in that
highest Court. And amongst them multitudes of Ministers, some to be idle
beholders of the celebritie, others with greater desire of the ratification of
their own erroneous facility, then of the purity of Gods worship and
reformation of the Kirk, Papists of both sorts Jesuits and Dominicanes, wise
in their own generation: It had been a wonder then if there had not resorted
thither a number of faithful Ministers to do their best Pastoral endeavors
for the liberty of the Kirk, and at least for manifesting to the after ages,
that the truth was not altogether deserted to help to make up Catalogum
Testium veritatis.


Archip. Their interest was not meanest in the eyes of God, neither could that
give just offense to any person: his gracious Maj. never refused that liberty
to any of his free subjects, nor to them at the last Parliament, where he was
present in proper person.


Epiph. Yet my Lord Commissioner, by suggestion of his vvisest counsel,
searching the safest way for success, had learned that the presence of the
Ministers might be very prejudicial to the ratification of Perth Articles; at
least might be a powerful mean to stay many from giving their consent to the
making of such a Law: and therefore, by their advice he finds it very
speedfull, that th^se Messengers of God be straightly charged and commanded by
open pro^lamation at the Market cross to pass out of the town of Edin.


Archip. That seems to have been but a boast for their more peaceable
behavior, or for preventing their dealing and suspected Protestation; they
were not called, let be convinced of any fault, and therefore could not be
punished with deprivation of that liberty, which the very law of nature
yields, and was not denied to the enemies of Religion and meanest of the
subjects.


Epaph. Yet upon tuesday the 24 of July, the letters were execute against them
allanerly, among all the subjects of the Kingdom. Only there was joined at
the same instant a Proclamation for bringing in Allane Machonil Do^ chief of
the Clanca^ron Lord of Lochaber known for a vvitch and sorcerer, and declared
to be an infamous murderer, a rebel and despiser of Authority: vvhereupon it
was ordinary in the mouths of the people, that the Parliament could not end
well, because at the beginning thereof, they were banishing God and bringing
in the devil. But perhaps ye will be as incredulous, as that Papist who
feared his fellow professors in foreign parts should be, upon the report of
that proceeding against the pastors of the Kirk; albeit your incredulity and
theirs arise upon diverse grounds. Ye think it too evil to be true: they will
think it too good to be true: for one of the Papists in the time of the riding
of the Parliament bursted out upon the open street into these words with great
exultation; When I come to Rome and Avinjon to report how I have heard the
Ministers of Scotland discharged out of Edinburgh by open proclamation at the
Market cross in time of Parliament, the news will be so joyful, that scarsly
will they be believed by the Catholics.


Archip. All goes wrong, Que v^^^ t^^r s^nchi^^^ luy met a rage su^.
when they rejoice who should be made to weep, and they do weep who should be
made to rejoice: with what color of pretense could that uncouth proceeeding be
plaistered.


Epaph. He that would have his dog felled will soon find a cudgel: One pretense
was, their a sense from the charge of their flocks, whereof they are bound
before God and man to be diligent Overseers. God and the world knows, whether
they who used this pretense are careful of the fidelity of Ministers: whether
they o^ the other sort who were permitted to stay, wait better upon their
vocation: and whether it was not a principal point of their charge to attend
at such a time, wherein such matters were to be handled, as could not but fall
under their own and their peoples practice in the ordinary worship of God.
Another was a show of mitigation in the and of the Proclamation, excepting so
many of the Ministers as ^ight procure a warrant from a Bishop to stay still:
that is to say (according to the Bishops own interpretation when some craved
leave of t^e^ so many as would promise to make no interpellation, intercession
private or public, nor protestation against their beloved articles, whereof
they were so jealous. The third and sidest cloak was the twofold accusation of
two brethren in the Ministry, who were deceived by the Counsel to be
patterns of extremity and preparatiues of terror to the rest.


Archip. What accusation mean ye, and of which Ministers?


Epaph. One was of Mr. Andrew Duncan minister at Crail (but holden from the
function of his Ministry by the fine craft of a timorous te^porizer his
cunning colleague, wrestling betwixt the wind of the world, (...) the wave of
his conscience) for presenting the Supplication above written; who was sent
for by the B. of S. androes, and detained by him in his lodging, till he
delivered him to the Captain of the guard to be presented that same day
afternoon before the Counsel, where compe^^ing he was accused by the Bishop
upon his subscription of the supplication (albeit the B. had spoken nothing of
that to him in private when he sent for him) and having acknowledged his hand
writ, he declared his readiness, at the command of the L. of Counsel, upon
assignation of a competent time to produce his warrant of great numbers of
Preachers and Prof^ssors, in whose name he had subscribed; subjoyning, for
stopping the mouth of his accuser that Cuivis private ^icet ^gere causam
publicam: whereupon the B gives out this sentence, It is thought good ye be
committed presently. But because the Defender pleaded the poor man's right: An
non lic^^ ^uili et ^^otesta^i ^^mendicare, The Lords not seeing how they ^ould
put^^^h him for such causes, and liking better the innocence of the defender
then the iniquity of the accuser, thought ^eet to call him in again where the B.
Vt quae non prosunt singula mul^^ (...) ^ubent, first laid to his charge that
he had preached in Crail the week before, which he confessed: That he was his
Man rebel lying at the Horn; he denied that he was ever at the Horn: That he
had broken ward in Dundie: he answered that for obedience he had remained at
Dundie the space of half a year upon double charges, ^^ing separate from his
wife and six children, the approaching Winter made him to draw homeward,
thinking that either they had forgot him or would pity him after so long
trouble. Like as he had received a letter from the B to be at Santand. at a
meeting of some Brethren of the Ministers. In end he besought the L. not to
imprisone him upon his own charge; and to consider that it were greater mercy
to kill them with the bloody sword, then to pine them to death with hunger.
But his doom was dight before his co^peirance.


Archip. What was the other accusation?


Epaph. Mr. Alex. Simson minister at Drieburgh, not having any such intention,
was earnestly desired by a brother serving in one of the ordinary places of the
Ministers of Edin. to preach for him upon the Saboath, which was the 22 of
July immediately going before the day appointed for holding the Parliament.
Whereunto he was persuaded upon sufficient reasons alleged by his requester. He
Preached upon Ezech. 3.16 according to his own custom and the present
occassion, in the good old Scottish fashion, Ca^dide m^^^
and not after the new Laodicean form, more plainly to all then pleasantly to
some, and in greater simplicie of heart then wisdom of words. (...).
He spoke against the manner of the entry of many young men into the holy
calling of the Ministry, against the negligence of watchmen, who because of
the fear of men, of love to the wages of iniquity, and their own guiltines of
the same sin, are silent in censuring the sins of others, and especially
against the defection of Bish. All which and much more spoken not in a corner,
but in the public audience of so great variety of hearers, as were in that
town at that time, I need not record. Upon the day next following he was
called before the Counsel, and when he had confessed all that he had preached
in public: At last the former Minister and he were convoyed by the guard to
the Cannongate, where they were forced to stay that night without liberty to
go to their own lodging pla^^: and upon the morn were led by three of the
guard to the Castle of Dunbartane, where they entered upon Thursday July 26.


Archip. I see not how the proclamation could pass with any probability
against the whole Ministry, more upon this pretense then the first: for by
what propagation could their personal actions be derived to the rest.


Epaph. Ye will know that best, and will be put out of all your doubts, when
ye have seen the Copy of the Proclamation itself in these words.

AT Halvroode-house 23 Iulie 1621.
Proclamation charging the Ministers to depart one of Edi^^.
Forasmuch as it is understood by the Lords of secret Counsel that some
re^tlesse and busy persons of the Ministry en^glecting the care and charge of
their own Kirkes and flocks, over the which they are bound in conscience before
God, and in duty before men to be careful and diligent watchmen and Overseers
have lately made their redress to this Burrow of Edinburgh, where the Estates
of the Kingdom in the sovereign and high Court of Parliament are now
assembled: and that some of their Ministers have not only engyred, and in a
manner intruded themselves in the Pulpits thereof, without any lawful warrant
or calling, but in stead of wholesome doctrine for edification of the present
Auditors, have fallen out into most injurious and undutifull speeches against
the sacred person of the Kings Maj laboring thereby, so far as in them lay, to
possess the hearts of the Auditors with some bad opinion and construction of
his Maj. unspotted life and conversation. And not content herewith, th y have
their privy Conventicles and Meetings within this Burrow, have obtruded
themselves upon some of the Estates of Parliament, and in public audience have
prejudged his Maj. most religious, sincere and lawful proceedings, using
solicitations against his Maj. just intentions: And have not only directly
manifestly and avouchedly done, what in them lies, to call the sincerity of
his Maj. disposition toward the true Religion in question, but to incultate
and fasten the same bad opinion into the hearts of his Maj good subjects, and
so cross and hinder all his Maj. proceedings in the Parliament, which has no
other aim but the glory of God, purity of Religion, and weal of this
Kingdom. In which three points, the bypast experience of his Maj. happy
government will clear the sincerity of his Maj. most religious disposition
toward the glory of God, and weal of his people, and will vindicate his
Majesty from the malignant aspersions of his Majesty's undutifull subjects.
And whereas this form of doing in a Kingdom, where the purity of Religion
has such a free and uncontrouled liberty and progress, as it has in this
Kingdom under his Majesty's most godly, wise, just, and happy government, is
not suffered nor allowed and has no warrant of law, custom nor observation
elsewhere, but may draw with it many dangerous consequences, and raise up
emulation, and distastes betwixt his Majesty and his good people to their
danger and harm. Therefore the Lords of secret Counsel ordaining letters to be
direct to command and charge the whole Ministers presently being in this
Burrow, except the ordinary Ministers of the Burrow, and such others, who
upon the notorietie of their lawful adoes here, shall procu^^ warrant from
their Ordinary, and failing of him from one of the Arch^ to remain and abide
still here, by open Proclamation at the Market cross of Edinb. to remove and
depart out of the said Borrow within 29 hours next after the said Charge: and
that they onn^ wise presume to repair again thereunto during the time of this
Parliament under pain of rebellion. And if they or any of them f^ile, the said
space being bypast, to denounce etc. which denunciation to be used at the
Market cross of Edinburgh shall be as sufficient, as if it were used at the
market cross of the head Burro^ of the shire where they dwell: certifying them
also that their denunciation they shall be taken, apprehended, warded and
punished accordingly.


Archip. That is more then ever I looked could have proceeded from Christian
authority professing the same reformed religion with us. It was a strong
prognostic of great rigor against the persons of the Ministers, and of great
prejudice to the cause of religion. What was the resolution of the Ministers?


Epaph. They could not stay against the proclamation; they could not altogether
desert the cause in so desperate a time. And therefore finding, that the
commissioners of Shires were sent for; and earnestly desired to make known
their grievances with fair promises of satisfaction, a strong preparation to
purge the great matter of all opposition: and that after assayes there was no
hope of recalling of the rigor denounced against them; for obedience first to
God, and next to God unto his Majesty: they resolved as follows.

WE the Ministers of Jesus Christ in his Highness kingdom of Scotland, being
convened from the quarters of the Country to concur for the weal of the
Kirk, and according to the ancient custom thereof observed before in
Parliaments, to consult upon weighty affairs, as the present case requires
consideration: and being charged at the market cross of Edinburgh to remove
forth of the said Borrow within 29 hours immediately following the said charge:
as also justly fearing harder sequells to follow upon such beginnings, have
concluded according to the necessity laid upon us, to have our informations
and admonitions to the honorable Lords of Parliament, attesting them in the
name of our Lord Jesus, to remember the labors and sufferings of their
honorable predecessors: and to do in the matters in hand, as they would be
accepted at his glorious appearance: and praying to the Father of lights, to
open their eyes, and to incline their hearts to try things that differ and
approve things expedient.


Archip. Informations and admonitions good for them, cannot be evil for me and
others: and who knows if being represented to them after so many sensible
confirmations from heaven and earth, they consider of them more advisedly and
unpartially: and so many as have lost their first love, remember from whence
they are fallen, and do their first works.


Epaph. Some preposterously judge of all reasons by the conclusion, and not of
the conclusion by the reasons: (...).
others are so obstinatly set against al persuasion, that Ne si persuaseris,
persuadebis. And a third sort close their eyes and ears against all
information: they fear that the light of their mind prejudge their affection:
and they be made to believe that for true, which they wish were false: yet both
for their sakes whose repentance we are seeking, and for your own and others
whom we would confirm, behold some of the many then left behind us.

Reasons left by the ministry to the members of parliament.
YOur Honors assembled in this present Parliament, ought to absta^^ s^^
ratification and all corroboration whatsoever of Per^h Assembly, and Acts
thereof, for the reasons following, and many more alleged, and to be produced,
if your great adoes could permit.

1 It is but an assembly single, and in it self divided. 2. in form of
proceeding not only different from others, but directly against the order
establish^d by the kirk. 3. In effect contrarious to all general and
provin^iall Assembly, P^^sbyter^es, and Sessions, as they are institute, and
have been h^l^^ in Scotland since reformation of religion within the same. 4.
The carried s ntence and acts thereof are repugnant to the form of religion
retrived, beloved, professed, established, and defended by this kirk, and
whole body of this Realm, by your Honorable predecessors of worthy memory,
and your selves: and practiced universally and in the several paroches of this
kingdom these sixty years and above. Non est a consuetudine recedendum
sacise nisi rationi adversetur; much less from a known truth directed and
blessed by God in such abundance of benefits as the lend has enjoyed with
religion No kirk Protestant nor Lutherane, nor of other profession, Papist, or
whosoever will go in a change without some evident (at least apparent) reason of
the word. The change but of the old Calendar for the Popes new one (and that is
but a small thing made a great hurly burly both at Rig^m Livonia, and at
Augusta.

2 Such ratification should cross and directly prejudice the acts of
Parliament 1592 and the provision expressed in the end of the act of
Parliament, 1^97 And all other acts set down in favor of the jurisdiction of
the kirk, liberty thereof, assemblies, and discipline. Item, his Majesty's
proclamation published and printed at command of his Counsel 1605. Item, the
protestation made at Perth, 1606, and all others made before and since. Item,
the covenant made by the ministers and professors of this kingdom, 1596 and
1597, and all other bands, whereby Pastors and flocks have obl^shed themselves
in persons and continual practice to stand to the form of religion received
and practiced, Tales legum mutationes would prove legum vulnera. Quae in suo
statu, eademque manent etsi deteriora sunt, tamen vtiliora sunt. Reipub. quam
quae per renovationem vel meliora inducuntur. And with what credit and
constancy could your Honors confirm separation from your fathers, and the
break of ancient unity and conformity with your own kirk, when it may be
truly said. Melius atque rectius olim provisum, and quae convertuntur, in
deterius murantur.

3 The reformers of this kirk, and such as by a long continuance follow them,
said a sure foundation and builded upon the same without error,
notwith^tanding of diffi^ile times; It were our wisdom to go forward and not
ha^k^^rd, to strengthen and not to weaken. David left not the (...) where Saul
left it, nor Solomon where David. If our fathers were in the way, our change is
error and out of the way: And shall we say now, th^^ our sound and ancient
profession is priscus rigor, cui jam pares non sunt homines. Constantines
course was more commendable, Perfecit Constantinus quod Philippus jam caeperat.
It were our duty, if our forebeears had done wrong to practice the rule, Quae
illicita a Praedecessoribus invenitintur admissa, in melius revocari oportet.

4 Observation of days, kneeling, etc. as they are straightly enjoined, are void
of the necessary properties required by the wisest fathers in a lawful
ceremony, ut fidei congruat, saluti proficiat, disciplinae conducat, So in this
kirk neither are they necessary, expedient, nor sitting the frame of our
reformation; they edify not, they divide and destroy, in so far as ceremonies
being testes religionis, they are signs to the adversaries of the truth, that
we repent our reformation, which is not, and presages to return to their
damned corruptions, which by the grace of God we mean not in substance or
ceremony. To reinduce them, say the divines of Germany, is to disturb the
peace of the kirk, to grieve the godly, to wound the weak, to countenance
Popery, by show of inclination toward it, or commoderation with it In
neighbor kirks, where they most prevail, their removal is most earnestly
sought.

5 In Perth assembly they are concluded not as laws binding either to fault or
pain, but as admonitions or institutions. Magnum est discrimen inter
ecclesiastica decreta and politica, quorum necesse est illa minus obstringere
conscientias. Nam in ecclesiasticis spectanda est (...). In politicis aute^
parendu^ est, quamvis tu eam eutaxiam non videas. Such ceremonies are juris
privari non publici. Ilk man is bound in conscience by the word first to
discern what is indifferent, and then to direct himself in the right use of
every individual thing for his own edification: And if ministers and
professors be restrained from that search, and brought under a compelled
obedience by the law, that were to revive the ancient servitude of the Germany
Adiaphorisme, wherewith the godly would never suffer themselves to be
entangled. Nulla lex sibi solam conscientiam justitiae suae debet, sed ijs a
quibus obsequium exspectat.

6 Our forebears finding the contro^^ted ceremonies to be the monse^ebs of
Popery, and like the mowdiworts in Thessaly, that overthe^ a whole to^ne, Quod
in Papatu dolendum, in reformatione auferendum ^uta^ent, They not only took
away Beal, but the calves of Dan and Be^hel. They thought it no ways meet to
follow Pilats policy to please the Jews with scourging of Christ, that they
might keep him alive. And will the Papist be pleased with scourging the
doctrine by invoctions, etc. And taking again some of these ceremonies, will
that preserve us against their heat breathed out against us as heretics, and
make us lurk under mitigation, as if we were now but schismatikes. Non est ad
hunc modum in religione agendum, (says one) tota enim repurganda est and ad
vivum emendanda And another says: Atqui praestaret s^ pultam esse doctrinam ad
tempus, quam sic slagellari.

It is to be feared, that before it be long, that men disaffected to the
ancient order, shall further presume ere it be long, to give out other doctrine
as well as new ceremonies.

7 Ratification would compass a great many Ministers and professors of this
Kirk between two dangerous straits; either to practice against the truth, as
they understand it, and have walked in it, and against the personal band,
whereby they have oblished themselves to stand constantly to the obedience of
it, or else to fall under the breach of a civil law more hardly perhaps to be
persued, then the laws against heresy, blasphemy, breaking of the sabb^th
day, etc. In such a case as we are always ready in our good^ and ^o^ies to
the increasing and upholding of his majesty's honor, and estate, so according
to our possibility, and the occurrent necessity of his Highness affairs, we
cheerfully offer our best supplies and help. And for ease of our just
grievances, and fears of our Christian liberty from constraint of ceremonies,
we humbly beg to have returned ratification of our ancient liberties of
religion. Ceremonies should be persuaded by reason, and not enforced by
compulsion. Propter externoritus disciplinae homines pios ferire, neque domini
est voluntas neque purioris Ecclesiae mos. In the name of the Lord Jesus we
require your Honors, that at this time ye walk in the matters of the kirk, as
one day ye shall be judged dutiful according to the Scriptures following:
Beware of men, beware of evil workers. Let no man beguile you with entising
words. Stand fast in the faith; quit you like men. Be strong. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again with
the yoke of bondage. Hold fast the form of sound words. That good thing which
is committed unto thee, keep. Contend earnestly for the faith which was once
given to the Saints. Seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye fall
from your own steadfastness. Strengthen the things which remain that are
ready to die. Remember how thou have received and heard. And hold fast and
repent. If thou watch not, I will come upon the suddenly, like a thief in the
night, and thou shall not know what hour. They have no courage for the truth
upon earth, Jerem. 9.3.

Five reasons wherefore the five Articles of Perth ought not to be ratified in
this present Parliament.
Other reasons.
FIrst, because that assembly was not lawfully constitute, wanting a
fundamental privilege of a lawful assembly; in respect that contrary to the
act of the general Assembly holden anno 1600, and anno 1568. Bishops, Barons,
and Burgesses voted, not being authorized with Commissioners from Synods,
Presbyteries nor Sessions of Kirks. His majesty's letter direct to particular
Barons and Burgesses, without commission from their incorporations, could not
give them vote in Parliament, much less in the general Assembly.

Secondly, putting the case that those Articles were indifferent, yet the
Assembly has erred, in respect it has concluded contrary to the Apostolic
rule in things in different, which is, that the practice should not only not
compel him that for conscience refuses to practice, but also, least he
offend him, should forbear to practice himself, Propter conscientiam non tuam
sed ipsius dico, 1. Cor. 10.29. If thy brother be grieved for thy meat, now
walk thou not charitably, destroy him not for thy meat for whom Christ has
died, Romans 14. verse. 15.

Thirdly, because the foresaid Articles being determined in alteram part per
circumstantias impeditivas in themselves are unlawful. The observation of it
drawing with it a revolt and returning back again to Popish rites and
ceremonies; a violation of our profession, su^^^tions, and oaths, whereby we
renounced them; a confirming of Papists in their errors, and putting them in
hope of our coming to them in more substantial points; a grieving of the
hearts of all zealously affected, a preparatiue in the hearts of the commonly
(who m^^s^^e religion more by the external mask of ceremonies, then by
substan^iall points of doctrine to the receiving again of whole Popery; a
terrible renting of this kirk, inducing Atheism in place of Religion, the
people no^ knowing what to believe, and seeing the observation of Yuile
obtained, which before discharged by Act of Parliament in all pulpits of
Scotland was sufficiently declared to be the invention and tradition of man,
to be will worship, superstition, entertaining the people in an error anent
the the birth of Christ, leading them to all sort of excess and profanation,
and Geni^ulation the first of the 15 ceremonies of the Mass, test B^llarmino,
a gesture invented and ordained only by Antichrist more than 1300 years after
Christ, a^ the principal external worship of their ^^^den god now enforced in
the (...) of the Lords supper, under pretense of indifferency, more reverence
and humility. As though we were not forbidden praecepto negativo, to presume
to give or recei^e the communion more reverently then Christ and his Disciples
did, or that we were not commanded praecepto affirmativo, to imitate Christ in
all his religious actions neither miraculous nor admirable, nor having a
particular reason restricting them to that time: (...) though we were not
warranted praecepto comparativo rather to imitate Christ with a table gesture
in that holy banquet, then Antichrist with a gesture of adoration inductiue to
Idolatry: or as though a man were able to give a reason why the surplice, the
cross, and the elevation of the bread may not as well be received (being of
more antiquit^^ and if the Minister having a surplice with crossing elevat the
^read, and the people how their knee, what want we of a Mass, Vo^ semelde
erratum est, in praeceps devenitur.

Fourthly, because if the high commission be imboldened by ratification of
this Parliament to deprive Ministers, that will stand out against these
ceremonies, being the greatest number of the best qualified, most painful and
fruitful of their calling within the land, what a lamentable desolation shall
it draw upon this Church? what a wound shall it be to every godly heart to see
their faithful Pastors deprived, warded, and ^^n s^^^l forgiving the communion
as Christ gave it, and refusing to gi^^^^ f^^r the form of antichrist? Is this
a time to obtrude Antich^^sti^^ ^^remonies in the kirk, when the bloo^y sword
of Antichrist is (...) in the blood of so many thousand protestants in France
and Germany.

Lastly (...) it was never seen, that this Parliament confirmed the acts of ^^y
assembly, which they know was called in question, not only by a great number
of the special of the ministry, but also by the greatest part of the most
zealous prof^^^^our, of the whole bo^y of the kingdom, as is m^nif^st by the
practice of Edinburgh seeking the Lords supper in thous^^^ without the city.

An admonition to the well affected Nobility, Barone and burgesses,
Commissioners in this present Parliament.
Admonitions to the same effect.
DO not your Honors now at last perceive, how mightily the Mystery of
iniquity the spirit of Antichrist, the power of darkness and delusion
prev^iles amongst us in the judgment of God; presuppose not in the intention
of man, which we presume not to search, but leave to the Lord the searcher of
hearts. If Papists go free, who used to be fined, if professors be counted
Puritanes, and religion disgraced, if patrons of Popery be set at liberty,
and the faithful committed, if Seminary Priests go abroad, and true Pastors
be confined and imprisoned, if sea ports be patent to foreign Papists and
banished Ministers lie vnrecalled, if sundry statesmen be small friends to true
profession, and not unfriends to Papistry, if time servers and men pleasers
usurp commission for Christ^ kirk being her greatest enemies, if Papists do
incroach and professors grow ^old. If it be discharged that search be made for
mass-priests, or that these foxes being discovered, should be apprehended as
your honors may try, whose intelligence is better, is not there the sound of
the sound of the f^^t of Popery at the doors, whereunto the Lord has long
threatened to c^^t us. The discipline of Christ's kirk is already welneere
destroyed, and turned Antichristian by the usurpation and tyranny of our
Prelates. The worship of God is next, and now among your hands which if ye
suffer to be polluted by the Romish leaven of their unhallowed rites, as sundry
of the ministry unwisely have done, we may justly fear the corruption of
doctrine, and so all is gone.

Consider then, that the touchstone to try your love to the truth, is at this
time, the act concerning these cursed ceremonies, counted indifferent by many,
but in effect pernicious, the bringing back again whereof by the confession of
all, even of the vrgers, is at least unnecessary and untimous, and so in
religion abominable and impious. But if we will say the truth, it is 1. a
returning with the dog to the vomit, 2. to Papists and professors scandalous,
3. contrary to the word, as is largely proven by sundry, and so presumptuous,
4. in regard of the present use, whersoever they are received, proving
superstitious, 5. by reason of the oath of God, which hereby is despised,
bl^sphemous, 6. in regard of the consequences damnable and divelish, and for
the manner of their establishing by violence and craftines, to all them who
have eyes, odious. Which, as your honors in Gods mercy have marked, so have
you done well that being privily tried, ye have not dissembled your dislike
both of the cause, and the cro^ked convoy of it. For well might ye know, when
supplicants were sent to prison, and truth was misconstrued and counted
treason; when Ministers were discharged off the tow^^ for fear of requesting
your Honors to stand for the Lord, little good was to be looked after so
godless a beginning. It rests now, that ye be constant and settled in the love
of the truth. By threatenings, by allurements, by hopes, by fears touching your
selves and your faithful pastors, and other endless ways of darkness they
study to draw away and divert you either to make you vote against Christ, or
to be Newtrall^ and Nonliqu^ts: or to slide away and deny your presence by one
means or other; to draw you under the curse of Meroz for not helping the Lord
against the mighty. But the busier they are, the less freedom in this
Parliament; the less worth in their causes, the greater is your trial, who
stand to give testimony to Christ, your faith the more precious, and your
reward the more glorious. For God has said, He that overcommeth shall inherit
all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. Rev. 21.8.
But the fearful (that is, such who for fear of man dare not give testimony
to the truth of God) and the unbeleeving, etc shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstome, which is the second death.

Another Admonition.
PLease your Honors take heed what you do at this peremptor time concerning
the establishing of the unlawful act of the pretended assembly of Perth.
Christ has put his cause in your hands; be faithful now or never. Beware of
bringing back and casting in again of this stumbling block. The glory of God,
the standing of the kirk of this land, your own souls, and the souls of many
thousands, for whom Christ Jesus died, is now in hazard, and depends much (if
ye look to outward means) upon your fidelity, whereof ye shall not want witness
neither in heaven nor earth The eyes of men and Angels are upon you, the eyes
of those who mourn for the mis ries of Gods kirk are longing for comfort from
you. And the great judge of the world, the almighty our God, whose eyes are
all a flaming ^^re, ^^e behold every man's part in this present Parliament. Yo^^
vote^, your acts, your name^ shall be registrate to all posterity. Ponder the
^^ore the w^ght of the cause where with ye meddle, and the fearful in^^ (...)
w^^^ do accompany and shall follow the ratification of the act of ^h^^ ^tended
ass^^ly, that will ^efall the king o^n of Christ, his ministry, the ^est part
of sin^ere proof (...) your f^iends and familiars, your children and posterity,
and it may be also your own persons both spiritually and ^^lly. For if,
according to your pl^ce, in prudent and humble manner ye do not resist the
esta^^shing of that act ^y all lawful means, ye cannot cl^^^^ your^s^lves of
^^spi^ing the (...) and covenant of God solemnly s^^ (...) s^^s^rived ^y a^^^
st^tes, an^ of drawing down the undoubted cu^s^^ of God, which h^st (...) n^w
to come upon (...) cannot be guiltles of (...) and (...) living the Papist to
(...) th^n we are w^^e off, ye^ and of the gre^ving of the hearts of the kings
^est su^iects, of bringing th^i^ faith, and casting them in ^^plexitie how to
serve both God and their native king. Ye^ cannot be guilty ^e of the thrusting
out of faithful ministers, and bringing in of young boys, ^i^^l^ngs and time
server^ to the overthrow of the Gospel, (...) slaughter of souls. Ye cannot
miss to draw the wh^le ^and in a snare, and in special the weaker Christi ns,
who by the f r^e of civil law must either suffer their guides to become a prey
to worse subjects th^n themselves, or at least their means and estates to be
so pilled and impaired by ^ines and penalties, as in a short time they shall
neither be able to serve their king, their country, nor their ^^n necessities,
or else to control and enthrall the^r conscien^es to the d^struction of their
souls. Now is the time wis^ly to prevent these things, which if ye do, time
shall approve you, God and good men shall ^cknowledge you in this point, better
Christians, better Statesmen, better servants of God, more (...) and wis^
subjects to the king, better friends t^ kirk and commonweal, then they who upon
whatsoever pretenses shall either urge or yield to the contrary. Resist
the^^ore the establishing of ceremony, as a reen^rie of Papistrie. Our
neighbor country groans under the york which now is presented again to their
n^^k^, and would redeem the liberty which you have had, and y t in some
me^sure enjoy. It cost your predessor^ many a tear with God, and their utterm
st endevo^ with men to purchase and transmit this liberty unto you^ and Christ
has bought it with his blood for you. Count not so lightly of it, as to loose
it for a moment, ^ut stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of ^ond^ge. Good su^iects have
no just cause to fear the offense of a good king in maintaining God right and
their own, so long as their cause is honest, and their d^fen^e lawful. Stand
therefore for the truth, and confess Christ before men, a^ ye would that he
should confess you before the father.


Archip. If they had taken time to ponder your reasons and exhortations, I
cannot think that they could have resisted so great evidence of truth so
powerfully expressed. But what resolution was taken in case all these means
should fail^?


Epaph. The Ministers resolved upon the last remedy: a Protestation which
they left behind them in these words.

MAy it please your Honors in this present Parliament, assembled under the
right high and excellent May of our de^^ and dread Sov. Protestation to the
Parliament.


We have now before our eyes the for^seen and foretold bitter fruits of these
alterations of the Kirk, and ^^^t fear of farther evils to ensue upon such
dangerous beginnings, so much the more, as we are deprived of that ordinary
and general Assembly whereunto properly belongs to propone at Parliament the
Kirk affairs. And although for supplement of this pitiful defect, in ^^umble
^^nner we did offer our reasonable supplication, conform to his High,
proclamation, we (...) have no place to be heard in our lawful and religious
desires. In this hard and heavy case the sensible danger of our untim^^s
silen^e in th^se ^aies of the growth of some decay of grace, contempt of the
Gospel, and troubles abro^d moved for the most part by the patrons of that
bloody Co^cel of Trent, and the cons^ience of our inevitable co^pearance before
the judgment s^at of Christ, to give an account of our stewardship, compels us,
as (...) high extremity, to declare to your H^^our bounden and hearty
affection, to hold fast that an^ient faith and form of Religion, received,
believed and defended by the Kirk ^f S^^tl. the King Maj. and E^tates, the
whole body of this R^^lm, your for^^eers of worthy memory, and your selves; as
God eternal truth and only ground of our salvation, and of our high peace and
prosperity by Gods undeserved mercy so long continued: as also our unfaigned
detestation of all forms and ceremonies, many or few, that enemies of the
truth may cast in our teeth as signs of repentance of our reformation, or any
part thereof, and presages to them of our return to their damned superstition,
either substance or ceremonies thereof. And likewise in the name of Jesus
Christ, wh^ shall render to every one, that which he has done in the flesh, to
require your Hon^^: to stand steadfastly for the said ancient Religion, f^rme of
doctrine, Sacracraments and Dis^ipture, as they have been ministered in this
Kirk ever since the Reformation of Religion, for the jurisdiction and liberty
of the true Kirk, general and provincial Assemblies, Presbyteries and
Sessions, as they are established by the Kirk, and laws of this Kingdom, and
against all usurpation and corruption of spiritual government, and unnecessary
Ceremonies, as the five Articles of ^^th Assembly, and whatsoever is as aples
of strife, and dead^y destroyers of the kirk of Jesus Christ.

Otherwise, if it shall happen (as God forbid) that any matter ^e propounded,
put in article, or concluded in this present Parliament, in prejudice of the
said Religion, and acts of Parliament part in favors of the same, with sorrow,
and sore against our hearts we will be constrained to use the remedy of
Protestation. Like as a^hering to the protestations made to the Parliament
holden at P^rth in the year of God 1606, and to the Protestation used in the
last Parliament holden at Edinburgh, and to all other Protestation^ whatsoever
made in favor of this Kirk, and against all hurts and injuries intended
against the same. By these presents, we solemnly protest all, and whatsoever
Articles, ^^ctes, and others whatsoever shall be propoued, concluded and
publ^shed in or from this present Parliament in prejudice of the iur^sdiction
and liberty of the Kirk, Assemblies thereof, order st^^^^shed, or any part
thereof; or in favors of usurped government and damned Hierarchy, of
Ceremonies and alterations whatsoever, concerning the ministration of the
Sacraments, or any other point, or practice of discipline received in this
Kingdom. And for due execution hereof wills and request our welbeloved Brother
(...) to subscribe, and to present the same, as off^cers in open face of
Parliament, to the Lords of Articles being conveened, and, if need be, to
affixe the same upon the Parliament house door, or Market cross of Edinburgh.
To the effect, that our reasonable diss^ssent from all and whatsoever, may in
any sort pre^udge the form of Religion established in this Kingdom, may be
not only known.

At Edinburgh the 25 day of July 1621.

Archip. Ye have showed me evident testimonies of their fidelity, which
maugre oblivion and malice will bide after them, when they are gone out of
^his world, as they l^ft them behind, when they were put out of that Town I
would now know what was the success.


Epaph. The former reasons and admonitions took impression in many hearts, few
were in any doubt what to do, if they had been left to their own liberty:
for there was not one vvh^ either respected these five Articles for their own
good quality, or for the Kirks authority: neith^r ever to this day were they
honored with the name of an Act of the general Assembly, but bear the note
of baseness in the title of Articles. All the perplexity was, what to do in
so great extremity and urging importunity: for the Masters of work, both for
compassing the purpose, and keeping themselves from censure, set their wits by
all means to work so many, as they might, to be of their mind. And for this
effect there was no small business in the beginning to single out and set
inclinable Lords and Noblemen, and so to make way for their Election, who were
to sit upon the Articles, that thereby might be gained in hope of further
victory thirty and two Votes at least in their judgment, who had made
prosperous trial of such cunning first at Perth: and now knowing with whom
they dealt, had no less hope of success here.


Archipp. That would seem to be like the policy of our late Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, in chosing of the privy conference. But after so full preparation,
whether was the day appointed for holding the Parliament now at last observed
with the wonted solemnity?


Epaph. It was; Riding of the Parli^ment.
for upon Wednesday the 25 of July 1621 at the Palace of Halvroode-house, there
is first a Majesticall appearance of high honor and splendour glancing from
that glorious convention prepared for the sacred and high Court of Parliament,
the most excellent person of the mighty King and Head of this Monarchy, being
resembled by the potent and noble Lord James Marquess of Hammilton his
Highness Commissioner, and the Estates of Parliament ranked according to the
worth of their persons, and the deserved and unspotted dignity of their
places. And then they marched in state from the said palace with honour^ borne
according to the custom of this ancient Kingdom, the Crown by the Earl of
Angus^, the Scepter by the Earl of Mar^, the Sword by the Earl of Rothesse to
the Parliament house, where they entered and set themselves in their honorable
places, neither Papists nor any other sort of persons desirous to hear and
see, being excluded.


Archipp. Why pass ye the Prelacie, who of duty ought to have been first
remembered in this their own Ceremonial Parliament.


Epaph. Neither ye not I can remember them with such acclamation of joy, as a
Papist did, who before many Gentlemen cried aloud in the street with lifted up
hand directing his speech to the By hop of Santandroes. God bless you my Lord,
with all your Brethren and favorers of your course; for you and they are
furthering the way to content his Majesty, and us all that are Catholics,
which God prosper, and none resists, except a number of evil disposed
Ministers. But the clamor of the multitude, and the accustomed noise at such
times suppressed the bablings of the seditious Parasite, and buried them in
their ears who were nearest unto himself.


Archipp. Seeing Papists took the boldness both to speak upon the street, and
to be present in the house, modest Ministers would have been overseen,
notwithstanding of the straitness of the Proclamation against them.


Epaph. Yet there was special care recommended to the double guard without
and within, and as great attendance given that no M^nister vvanting the
Bishops license should be suffered to enter. And after that the members of the
Parliament were placed, a second search made for Ministers, that if any had
been permitted to enter, they might be removed.


Archip. How can ye be able to lead me through to the end, seeing ye were
neither an actor, nor permitted to be witness of the remanent proceeding?


Epaph. The Ly^ian ring is worn away long since. Any of the beholders could
relate all that was done openly: every one of the members of the Court could
not see what was done secretly. Lookers on many times see more then
gamesters; and in the val^ the hill is best seen.


Archip. If ye take upon you to tell me the truth, I will cease to be curious
about the mean of your information: what was done in that first meeting.


Epaph. First the B. of Santandroes after a very short prayer, read a part of
Scripture, Speeches in ^^e house of Parliament
Romans 13.7. and delivered a discourse chiefly intending to persuade the
taxation. After him my Lord Commissioner had a speech, declaring to the Estates
his Maj. great and extraordinary troubles, and continual debursements in
supporting the King of Boheme, his Queen, and their mother, and in continual
sending of Ambassadors to France, Germany and Spain to travel for peace among
the Christian Princes, besides the extraordinary aids given to the Germane
Princes to retain them within the compass of the band of friendship and
alliance, the charges of maintaining a sea Navy under the conduct of Sir
Robert Mansfield; adding also that his Maj. suslained and suffered more for the
persecutions and afflictions of the Protestants, and for the defense of the
Reformed Kirk then all the Princes in the world besides, with diverse other
insinuations to persuade a large supply: And for furtherance thereof his L.
professed to have vvarrant to give way to any good advice, whereby money might
increase and abound among us after the taxation. His L spoke for the ^^ue
Articles under the name of matters of Kirk Discipline, that had been concluded
in former Assemblies, practiced in the Primitive Church, not forbidden by the
word of God, and so able to be defined by the Prince, who has lawful power to
command in matters indifferent. He doubted nothing of their good affection, and
concourse to the good advancement of so necessary a service, is was then in
hand. And for himself he should strive to let his Maj. know every man's part:
and he for his part would contribute his best endeavors to a good success. In
the third place (...) Lord Chancell^^r had his Quanqu^m, wherein he spoke to the
^^^our of the ancient, the quality of the Solium Regale, where the
Commissioner ^a^^, the persons who were members of that Assembly severally,
giving every one his own due, and with repetition of some things touched by the
Co^missioner and the Bish. of S. androes, concerning the necessity imposed upon
our liberality, and experience to give way to the Church ordinances, fetching
some conclusion from old judgment of Re^ and Sacerdos in the person of Numa:
he ended with an exhortation to the Lords, to go cheerfully and with a good
mind to the election of the Lords of Articles.


Archip. Never was Scipio, Hannibal, Maccabeus, never C^drus, Thrasybulus, nor
Themistocles, or any Grecian, Roman, or Jew, so much obliged for their
Country, as these three persons for the defense and maintenance of the true
Religion, and common estate of Scotland; of the privileges, laws and
liberties pertaining to the one and the other: they being debtors to the Kirk
and Commonweal of their life, liberty, honorable places and callings, of
their present condition and future expectation: and lying under the obligation
of birth, education, imitation of their honorable predecessors, of their
offices, personal promises, and whatsoever other obligatorie respects: And
therefore it cannot be but in the midst of so many dangers present and
imminent, they behoved to say something, both for testfying their hearty
affections, and for the weal of the Realm.


Epaph. That was not their errand, and had been a contradiction to the other
part of their speech, and to their following actions: and therefore without
further mention of public matters, or any insinuation of their oblished
affection to their spiritual mother the Kirk crying for their help; or to
their natural mother the Country trembling under the burden of diverse
calamities, and under the terror of foreign fear, the actions of the utter
house were closed for that time.


Archip. Was there no further done that day for advancement of the purpose?


Epaph. Not so much in show, as that which is done, but more in substance. For
the Lord Commissioner, Election of the Lords of Articles, and their proceedings
the Nobility and Prelates, with Chancellor, Treasurer, Secretary, and Clerk
Register, Officers of Estate, the life and leaders of this compend of the
Kingdom, went into the inner house, for election of the LL. of Articles, not
after that most free form beseeming Parliaments and Counsels, where choice is
made of persons most indifferent, of best judgment, and no way partially
affected to any party, or restrained to the love of any cause, but by some
learned oblivion of this most reasonable rule, and by some new law, hid custom
and singular practick, for performing of the most free, harmless and innocent
part of this high action, the election of the Lords of Articles proceeded in
another sort.


Archip. Ye are now upon the primum mobile, the secret wheels, which guide the
hand and hammer without: and therefore remove the cover, that I may see the
beginnning of the motion.


Epaph. The Bishops who from their first fabric have sounded many ill hours
to this Kirk and Country, continually behaving themselves as Peers of the
Kingdom, professed parties against the Ministers and Discipline, and as
partial Judges and led Witnesses, when questions concerning Ministers or Kirk
government did occur: or where opposition was to be made to matters proponed
in prejudice of the one and the other, they went to their rooms, and were not
only silent contrary to the debt of their places: but all singing one song,
the rest following the first, in a reasonlesse harmony rare to be found in
Paris, Venice, or the most famous Counsels in the world: they did choose those
eight of the Nobility, Auguss, Mortoun, Nithesdall, Wigtoun, Roxburgh,
Buck^lugh, Scone, Carnegie and these made eight of the Bishops, Sant^ndroes,
Glasgow, Dunkeld, Aberdeen, Brechin, Dumblane, Argyle, Orknay: and these
altogether did choose eight Barons and eight Burgesses. A fair election of
four eights, receiving their names from the clieff of the song, and inspired
with the concord of the first eight, who would be loath to choose any
different from their own mind, and of the second eight conform to them.


Archip. Was there never a note out of tune?


Epaph. By providence two notes of the third eight, and one of the fourth
jarred a little to make the melody of the whole 32 the more sensible to the
ears of the hearers by their irregularity. Finally, for augmenting the number
of fair drawn voters, the seven Officers of Estate, Chancellor, Treasurer,
Secreter, Privie-seale, Justice Clearke, Advocate, and Clearke Register are
adjoined; all faithful servants, and loath by crossing or coming in the
contrary of present intentions, to peril their liberal pensions, their great
Offices, their present employments, and hopes of higher preferment.


Archip. That election so enlarged and qualified with those last seven, is a
strong first fell, and a great conquest of votes in favors of chief desires.


Epaph. Yet it is not quarrelled here, as in former times, when men's own
particulars were in hand. Then presence was weak, now absence is strong. What
Prince and prelate could nor work when Kirk rent sacrilegiously possessed was
but under fear of quarrel, now in these Halcion days, when men's particulars
are out of fear, Politickes and Prelates can easily bring to pass, and so the
first strength of the Parliament is taken in presage of expected victory.


Archip. No marvel, for the case is altered. Which was the first meeting of
the Lords, I may say, of the five Articles thus elected?


Epaph. Upon Thursday the 26 of July, after the Cabinet Counsel, which daily
met in the Abbay by six in the morning and sat while nine, to dress and
dispose matters to be done in such a course, as might lead most easily to the
destinate end.


Archip. Those Lords of Articles convened did they enter at their first meeting
upon the five Articles?


Epaph The Kirk is prejudged here of her ancient privilege, to her great
loss, and they, that all matters may be rightly tymed, are wisely directed to
treat of the matter of Taxation in the first place: because so many as were
affectioned to liberty from Ceremonies, under that hope would be easily induced
to a large subsidy, wherein they had perhaps been found less willing, or
more hardly disposed, if they had not looked to decline that bondage. When the
taxation was concluded then were brought in into the second place the matters
of the Kirk.


Archip. Yet considering the oppositions justly made against these Articles at
Perth; the violent and crooked ways, vvherby they were rather forced and
imposed, then concluded with consent, as reason and the custom of the Kirkes
craved; the hard practices past against certain honest Ministers, and great
coffeehouse universally in the Country tending to dangerous distractions for
refusal of a sort of obedience, which is no ways directed by the act it
self, nor nor once motioned, but greatly feared, when they were so eagerly
dealt for, and now, when the just fear of more desperate inconveniences, and
the conscience of the calling of God did enforce to try the difference betwixt
an act, or rather an advice of the Kirk simple and free of all sanction or
censure, to be imposed upon the Contraveeners, and a law of authority which may
be made vigorous and forcible by the hand of the Magistrate for arbitrarie
execution against innocent and harmless Pastors, and people incapable of
these practices by reason of personal restraint and persuasion of their own
minds to the contrary, I can hardly be induced to think howsoever nothing was
spoken in the face of the Parliament, yet now in private amongst themselves,
they will peremptorily determine, without due deliberation at least, if not
for purging the humor, yet for snibbing the Canker to prevent utter
consumption, their care will be more bended there then in all other matters.


Epaph. Your commendable judgment of charity tells you, what should be done,
but verity must tell what was done. At the incomming of the Article of the
taxation, the Lord Commissioner spoke as before, to further, upon the ordinary
and extraordinary taxations, proportions thereof, and questions moved anent the
exemption and privileges of the Lords of Session, which being matters touching
men's persons and their worldly particulars, are attended diligently, a large
time b^ the space of whole three days spent in reasoning, voting, preferring
petitions, receiving answers, and settling conditions in favor of men fearing
their own hurt. Nothing concluded but with great advisement and very
circumspectly. But the other being matters of Religion touching men in their
conscience, and the Kirk in her peace, as things indifferent were quickly and
smoothly past in very short space without search of any of your many
difficulties, albeit with seen opposition and dissassent of so many, as in the
providence of God might in such a time and place bear witness to the truth.


Archip. Was the consent of the Lords of the Articles of such force, that there
was no hope of remedy afterward.


Epaph. By ordinary custom of former times, purposes once past in the Articles
have good appearance to go through at Parliament. But the Plot-masters of the
five Articles; partly through fear of hard success, which they had certainly
found by sudden voting in public; and partly to keep their own plantation
free of disgraceful opposition, and themselves with their Associates from the
blame of madness by the multitude of companions, they dare not hazard at the
first; but resolve to hold the Parliament sitting and the Lords of the Articles
doing for some days, Policies making way for conclusions.
till they can see a fair day for conclusion through the storms of common
rumor, and diligent travels of many then set to opposition.


Archip. What was the task of the Lords of Articles during that large time; for
the Parliament was not closed till the 4 of August?


Epaph. After some particulars of private men; they were set to hunting,
hauking, fowling etc. to make some sumptuarie laws against banqueting, and
some vestiary against Pasments silk etc. for prolonging time, when their minds
were upon nothing less then upon that pastime.


Archip. What cunning was used in the mean time for contriving the conclusion?


Epaph. Ye know that it is taught by the Masters of Policy, that they who would
work men to their purpose, must either have some knowledge of their
inclinations, and so persuade them: or their infirmities and fears, and so awe
them, or of those who have the government of them, and so rule them. And at
this time the very profundities of our homely policies were opened up, tanquam
pro aris and fo^is.


Archip. But I know that Commissioners of Parliament should be men of another
metal. He that wills Christians to be innocent as Doves in their dealing
with others, warns them also to be as wise as serpents in the dealing of
others with them.


Epaph. Yet some are so possessed with a prejudicate opinion, that they think
all sincerity and conscience, either to be pretended only, as it is too often,
or to proceed out of fantasy, simplicity of manners, and inexperience of the
affairs of the world: So that in their estimation, confirmed by so many
instances, as may make up more then one experience, no man almost is so nice,
but he may be talked with, if he be taken on the right side. Upon this ground
the solistations, protestations, (...). Maxima pars hominu^ hunc habet morem,
quod sibi volunt, dum id impet^ant boni sunt, sed id ubi penes so habent ex
bonis pessimi and fraudulentissimi fiunt.
and promises of great reward, often used since the beginning of the Parliament
are here again enlarged amply, and engyred finely for soupling such with
suceties, as they take to be Minnies mouths. And for the hopeful generation
of greater spirits, whether thinking by contradiction to ascend, or straited
with their own necessities, there were dressed large promises of great rewards
for service to be done at this time, with great enforcements of nodds and
complements of the most significant sort for bewitching the eyes of the good
Gentlemen to apprehend felicity in their own facility, and their standing or
falling in the verbal insinuations of their said friends.


Archip. That might be a policy for some, but it could not serve for all,
especially for such as were at their hopes end with the world.


Epaph. Benefits already received were presented to that sort in the cup of
exprobation, to dash them with the wrath of their unthankefulnes, and fear of
former favor to be unrecoverably lost, if at this time they did not prove more
then honest men. Some were threatened with utter ruin: and the sillier sort
terrified out of their wits with loud blasts of highest displeasure, ready to
draw on without delay a deluge of desolations upon the Kirk, if the Articles
happened at that time to be refused.


Archip. Both these are like Mathematical Midses to demonstrate Metaphysicall
conclusions; with what face could the world be so used for an argument in
matters of Religion?


Epaph. The matters were couched in the corners of extenuation, and vilified in
the dust of indifferency; howsoever they were eminent and highest in their
desires and intention, and had more lovers and friends to do for them, then
Religion it self I fear should find were it to pass in an act of Parliament.


Archip. Yet I am sure these Ringleaders could not well know the names of many
Commissioners and Voters, far less their several dispositions and
intentions.


Epaph. For gaining be unknown, and trying all, treacherous Intelligencers are
sent forth, in outward appearance men of very good sort, but indeed of the
generation of the Neronian quadruplators to shuffle themselves in all honest
companies, but specially in the meetings of Noblemen commissioners of Shires
and Burrowes, Delator^^, ho ^^num genus public exitio ^ep^tium and po^nis
quid^m nun^nam satis co^citum. Tacit.
where under color of the same affection and inclination to like or dislike,
as those Sinons found the disposition of companies where they happened to be,
they lurked; but still above all things they counterfeited a dislike of Per^h
Articles; and by that vile and base Judas like dissimulation sucked out men's
minds, and became acquaint with all their counsels that vvisely were not
aware of them. The points of their false profession were to learn men's names,
their natures and their purposes, that thereby they might be the more able to
inform their Masters, Who was what, and who was not. And some of the
cutthroats, where they were admitted would seem in presence to give
approbation to such things as they heard, that so they might go less
suspected: and sometime by their pernicious fraud, where they durst adventure,
they would divert honest men most craftily from good motions and resolutions,
and then at night return to their directors, like venomous vvaspes clogged
with filthy lies and flattering suggestions; Albeit there were some like
Aesops Flee, that sat upon the Axetree of the Coach wheel, and said, What a
dust do I raise?


Archip. Particular persons might be known and disappointed by that craft; but
when they conveened with the Estates, whereof they were members, they b^hoved
to bewray themselves, and so be brought by the rest to a right mind again.


Eppah. The Noblemen and Commissioners of Shires and Burrowes, in a mild manner
of Imperious request, were restrained from the necessary use of the ancient
privilege granted to the several Estates of this land, to conveene by
themselves in time of Parliament, for advising, reasoning, and preparing
themselves the more deliberately to vote in public. And although for their
better information it was promised, that they should have inspection of things
past by the Lords of Articles, at least 24 hours before meeting in public, it
was not only refused, but they were enjoined that they should never upon any
condition have meeting at any time or place, without special consent given by
my Lord Commissioner.


Archip. (...).
I can reply nothing in this case; your depths are become so shallow that a
vveake eye may see the ground of them. I would never have looked that the
former deceivers could have reported so much as the common favor of Augustus
or Phillip, Amoprodituro^, non proditores, or that the alternatiue of
Themistocles going with commission to the Andrians, could have been here
allowed, either fairness or force, words or violence.


Epaph. I might open unto you greater depths, (...). Suadam and violentiam
(...).
wherein Ships were seen sailing, and Eagles attending them, and discover
secrets where Serpents were gliding, and the greatest Like a man with a maid
playing, when the most expert in the matter of Articles, and of best credit to
make voters, went in paires: The first man, and his fellow labourer, The
Scholar and his Pedigogue, The Principal and his cautioner, all running under
great hope to come speed, and that both privately and publickely, in the house,
and upon the street, at evening and morning, in all places and occasions, with
as many fine forms as they did meet with fashions of men.


Archip. Your Hieroglyphics are obscure, and ye delight to be Acroamaticall.


Epaph. I shall trouble you no more with them, but shall relate one policy as
pithie as plain to all; whereby absents were made present for voting, and
they who were present were made absent from voting.


Archip. Pithie it may be, but plain it cannot be; for that seems an
impossibility through force of contradiction.


Epaph. Ye are in the schools, and I in the house of Parliament: ye are upon
the Logicks, and I upon the Politics. Ye perhaps never heard of Proxeis.
Proxeit.
But such was the force of our procuration in her prime and first rudiments,
that she brought forth three miraculous effects: 1 She brought English
Noblemen, neither having portion nor inheritance in this Realm, nor knowledge
in our affairs Civil or Ecclesiastical, to vote in a Scottish Parliament: 2
She made some, who had licenses passed to remain from Parliament at that time,
and had their excuses, admitted to vote by procurators: 3 She made some by the
greater wisdoms and care of their faithful Procurators, to vote against their
own minds. And another way to make absents present, was by moving some who
had obstinately refused, when they were elected by their Shires to accept
commission, upon their refusal had taken instruments, and had sworn neither to
ride nor vote in Parliament at that time, both to accept commission, and to be
ready to vote.


Archip. But how was it possible to make them who were present to be absent?


Epaph. This was more easy, and was brought about with singular artifice, by
many ways and diverse degrees. And first before the last day of the Parliament,
diverse Commissioners, who in derision were called Puritanes, because they were
more affected to the ancient liberties of the Kirk against obtruded novelties,
Three policies to make them who were present to absent.
were moved to leave both Town and Parliament; and so were found some of them
straggling through the Country; some visiting their friends, and some posting
homeward, while the Parliament was yet sitting; all flying from apprehended
danger upon the one side, and from enforcing importunity on the other.


Archip. When was the last day, for that behoved to be the great day?


Epaph. There was first a cautelous brute broched and blown abroad with a
snell air of seeming coffeehouse, that the Parliament would sit longer then
was looked for, and it might be till the Articles were concluded: and then the
voters of victory being numbered, and success brought under the eye of good
hope, suddenly without the knowledge, and beside the expectation of many of the
members of the Parliament, Saturday the foutth of August was chosen as the
fittest time for closing the action.


Archip. But it is not time yet for you to close your narration, ye must both
show me the other ways of making them who were present, to be absent; and what
was more done in that day.


Epaph. The second way was as skillful, but not so successful as the first.
Upon some question of place betwixt two Lords of Parliament, both lovers of
Religion, it was apprehended that they would rather loose their votes, then
peril their dignity: And therefore strait commandment was given to Noble men
to keep their own places. But as that worthy Grecian with his
fellow-ambassadour buried their private emulations till their return, when the
public affairs of the commonwealth were exped; so they perceiving the
snare, packed up the controversy for that time, and of their Christian
discretion, and generous affection, preferring a substantial duty to a
circumstantial ceremony kept their liberty, and so disappointed that policy.
And as the first policy of this sort persuaded some to leave the Town, so the
second would have moved others to leave their riding. But on the other side I
will tell you by the way that their policy could not make all to be present
of whose concurrence they assured themselves. Divine providence in one example
might have been a sufficient instruction to let them see, how easily his
Majesty might have turned all their purposes and counsels to folly, if it had
been his pleasure, for that which befell one might have befallen the rest. For
one of the Commissioners whom they had to be a ringleader of the rest of the
Commissioners of the Burgesses fell off his horse and gave place to another.
And who was this but that Commissioner of the chief Burgh Edinburgh, who
fell that day in the street, and was forced to give place to a craftsman chosen
in his room to be peer to that first kneeling Provest of that Town, which was
once as another Jerusalem s^nding the purity, power and love of the Gospel
through all the corners of the kingdom but now (albeit the power of grace
remain in the hearts of many hundreds) is as universally scandalous through
suddenly admitted novations by themselves and their pastors too penitent of
their protestation, practisers, and preachers of contrary conformity, and
paternes of change to the whole country. The Lord give them hearts to remember
from whence they are fallen, that they may repent and do their first works.


Archip Who knows, but they who have done so many things well for their
common estate, common works and privileges of their town, may do somewhat
(and the Lord bless them with an open door) for the liberty and flourishing
estate of their kirk, to the wonted benefit of the whole realm. But proceed
in the rest of your policies.


Epaph. The next degree must be to keep them from voting, who had ridden, and
now entered in the house of Parliament, and this was also brought about by
persuading some Noblemen inwardly warned to vote against the five articles, but
outwardly wrought upon to vote for them; to make a mid course, and to lurk in
the inner house till the kirkes part was acted, and Gods worship through her
sides had received a deadly wound, and then to come forth to the stage, and in
their own places to play their parts in civil matters. It is better to be
altogether Christians with Paul, then to be almost Christians with Agrippa, or
not all with Fe^tus; He that loves father or mother (far more he that loves
the wo^^^) more then me, is not, etc.


Archip. Ye remember Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea: But there had been no
place left for that policy, if the former order kept in the Articles, when the
kirk was postponed, had been now observed in face of Parliament.


Epaph. To the end that this policy might have place, when it was now made
manifest, that other matters would not find great opposition, the kirk had a
pathy pleader for her precedencie in publi^ke. For after the Lord commissioners
speech, the Lord Chancellor spoke for the kirkes right, alleging that both
reason and custom required, that the kirk have the first place, and for that
cause gives direction, that the Act concerning the kirk, meaning the five
articles, and ratification thereof, be first read.


Archip. What speech mean ye of the Lord Commissioner?


Epaph. When all were now entered into the house, and were set in their own
places, after deep silence he had a preface for voting, short, but vehement;
partly exhortatorie for yielding to the five Articles of Per^^^^artly
apologetick for defense of his Ma against surmises of Popish religion, partly
declaratory, attesting that there was nothing under heaven that could be so
acceptable to his Majesty, as that the Kirk of Scotland would receive these
five Articles; and partly promissorie, that he would engage his honor, says
and credit upon that princely word which his Majesty past to him, that if they
would receive these 5 articles at that time, his Highness would never burden
them with any more ceremonies during his life time; according to a promise
utt^^^ed by the Bishop of Aberdein to the same meaning for casing the way to
the articles, but without such reply, as was made to him by a Noble man, that
he was too liberal of his promises, having no assurance: for his Majesty
would not bind himself after that sort.


Archip. That prefa^e was a strong cup of digestion.


Epaph. And was well seconded with the sweet sauce of my Lord Chancellors
oration composed of two ingredients, love and learning. For after he had
pleaded in his Exordium for the Church her dignity; it is, says his L. an
evident declaration of his Ma. love to God and religion, that he has so great
care of the Kirk: and as for matters proponed, they require not much
disputation, being already concluded by learned Bishops, Fathers, Doctors and
Pastors convened at Perth for that effect. After this confirmation, the Lord
Commissioner adds the confutation: for against the apprehension and surmise,
that his Majesty was resolved to make this kirk in all things conform to the
Church of England; he did assume that his Ma. willed him to signify unto them,
that these being once concluded, he would urge no other rite nor ceremony, and
that by their according to these, they would give singular declaration of their
loyalty; and therefore requested to take heed how they voted.


Archip. Was there no mouth opened at this time to make reply, or to offer
reason in the contrary?


Epaph. No place was l^^t for reason, only against that summary form of
proceeding the promise made to the Nobility for having the conclusions of the
Lords of Articles 24 hours at least before they were voted in publi^ke, was
timously remembered and urged by a Noble man, to the effect they might, proceed
with deliberation according to the worth of matters, especially the acts being
long, and of great consequence, and not to give sudden judgment, like as many
ciphers, as in effect (said he) they were made by that form of dealing. I will
not trouble you with the answer made to reasonable a motion, and bitter repulse
of all further deliberation: but I will draw now to the conclusion.


Epaph. That is all, and I long to hear it, that I may see what proportion of
policy is kept, whether the end be answerable to the the beginnings and
proceedings.


Archip. In the conclusion, Threefold confusion in voting.
when the matter is brought to the voters of the house, there was a threefold
well studied confusion: first albeit the five articles were different in
themselus, and the most part had different opinions concerning them; yet they
were all hudled up in one bundell according to the practick and success at
Perth, that all of them might carry the savor of any one that was least
resisted, and then every one the most misliked of them the favor of all. The
same skill was used in joining the ordinary and extraordinary taxation: for
diverse of every estate thought hardly of the extraordinary taxation, all being
most willing to give large supply in the ordinary, answerable to the great
affairs in hand, and honor of the kingdom. And therefore upon assurance,
that it would be refused by no man, the other was straightly tied to it.
Secondly, advantage was taken of the conceived words, Agree and disagree the
prescribed form of voting: for all being straightly discharged here as at Perth,
to give any reason for their votes, that the conclusion might pass ad numerum
non ad vondus; or least the weight should be prejudicial to the number, and all
directed to express themselves simply in these words, it come to pass, that
the second syllable of Disagree through the wide opening of the mouth at A, did
eat up the first, especially in the low pronounciation of some, who being
desired to speak out, threatenings and boastings with mena^ing eyes were
breathed out against them, for the terror of others following: and so the
negative were noted for affirmative. And thirdly, in calling the roll and
marking the votes, the distinction of the three several estates was
suppressed, and all who had power to vote, were called promiscuously as so many
single persons, that the conclusion might be made up by plurality of personal
voters, without respect na^ to their corporations; whereas the Barrowes, one of
the estates disagreed directly; and the other estate rightly considered, as it
consists of greater and lesser Barons without mixture of officials of estate;
and absents made present by their procurators, would have made that estate
doubtsome, if not negative; and so all the preceding diligence from Perth
assembly to this hour notwithstanding, the act of ceremonies had sound no
other father at this time, except the Estate of Bishop, with others of equal
engagement; as it will still prove frowen faced as long as it is fathered upon
others who begat it against their wills; let men rejoice at the birth
thereof, and busk it up as they please.


Archip. Bu^king it has need of, but the joy at the birth could no^ b^ great
it b^ing conceived and formed by such means.


E^^ph. Yet, as upon the one side, the commissioners of Bor^^^ (...) sil^nt, or
negative in the voting of that act of ^h^ f^^^ A^^^^l^^ (...) ^^fused of the
ratification of the privil^^g^^ o^ th^^ B^^^ves, which was granted to others:
So upon th^^^^h r^si^^, (...) things are now (...) might unto the wished end,
an^ w^^ (...) Bishops of the business many fair (...) house presented by the
(...) with a ^ratulatorie sweet^ (...) liberality to his Man (...) matters,
closing all with (...) never be troubled with more c^remo^^^^ (...) was great
for conquest of the conclus^^^^, bu^ the time w^^ not yet of sorrow for the
prem^^^s*


A^^h^p Y^^ ^ll (...) of the ratification of the ^ articles: but I have h^^^d
nothing wheth^r the pr^^^station, penned by the Ministers, and l^ft behind
them, was used ^r not.


Epi^h. The last ^ay, the entry of the house of Parliament, the most proper
pla^e for using thereof, was most straightly kept, least any Minister should
enter without an Episcopal pasport. And for further se^uitie the Bishop of
Saint Androwes man for his egregious eminency, lest any gift should want
employment, was set over the inner bar, lik^ Saul amongst the people, for
debarring all Ministers, in whose faces he could see any prognosticke of a
Protestation. And that Bishop himself required the Chancellor to charge the
Constable and Marshall of the house to challenge all ministers within: of which
number one being named by the Marshall upon that occasion answered, My Lord ye
take me for the wrong man, the Bishop himself brought me in. Where through the
Minister, undertaker to publish the protestation in the name of the Kirk,
albeit he was within the house of Parliament, yet could not fi^^ a^cesse for
that ^ff^ct, and therefore went forth, and fixed one copy of the protestation
above written upon the door of the T^^^^oth, and another upon the cross.
Again upon the 20 of August, when the Acts of Parliament were proclaimed at
the cross of E^^nburgh, he published three copies, one upon the Cross;
another upon the kirk door; and the third upon the pila^e gate of Haly^ood
house, vvhereupon he took instruments with all r^quisi^e sol^mnities, using
the words following: Here in the name of the brethren of the Ministry
professing the religion a^ i^ has been practiced in our kirk since the
reformation of the same: I protest against all these things that have been
concluded in prejudice of our privileges since the first reformation thereof,
and adheres to my former protestation m^^e and fixed on the Tolboo^h ^^lore and
other places; and to all the Protestations made in favors of the Kirk in the
time of preceding Parliaments.


Archip. It seems, that the fear of that Protestation before it was used, the
distressed Estate of Religion through the Christian world, and their own
profession that they stand for the substance of Gods worship and l^bertie of
the Kirk, howsoever they be lib^rall in Ceremonies, should have made them car
full of the ratification of the truth, and of abolishing all contrary error
and superstition.


Epaph. By the contrary, upon deeper considerations, Act of Parliament.
albeit the ratification of the liberty of the Kirk, of the Assemblies and
Disci^line thereof, and anent trial and punishment of the adversaries of true
Religion has ever been as ordinary in Parliament since the reformation of
Religion, as it was now necessary: ye shall not find a word of that purpose
among all the printed acts of this so long lasting Parliament. But ye may see
in the last words of of the first act an act neither read nor voted in
Parliament rescinding acts made in former times against superstition.


Archip. But that nullitie is restrained by the clause, In so far^ as they be
derogatiue to any of the Articles above written.


Epaph. It is apparent then by their own confession, that something is he e
enacted against former acts of Parliament concerning the worship of God since
the reformation, which some do^ altogether deny. But to answer you. I ask, if a
transcendent power, a great man, or a ring leader presuming to do what he
vvil, and through the spirit of slumber excusing himself from the common
warning, Give an account of thy stewardship, command a young man in a place of
service to do what pleases him; whether of the two shall make the commentary
upon that clause? And must not such a tender flexible creature be more ready
to please his Maker, then to stand upon points to the what becomes his place?


Archip. So great alteration against so many strait bonds, the omitting of the
ratification of the reformed Christian Religion at such a time, and the
re-establishing of superstitious Antichristian ceremonies, might have made the
hearts of the agents to quake, the minds of the multitude, who were suffered
to be present to be miscontent; and the heavens and earth to be astonished.


Epaph. Ye bring me now to the third point that I proponed, wherein I may say,
Many witness^^ o^ a^^ sorts against the ^^^^eding and conclu^^on of Parliament.
that beside the Supplication, Informations, Admi^^^tions and Protestation of
the Messengers of God put out of the town, the minds of the Actors, the voices
of the people declaring their fear and grief, and the Heavens above were
witnesses of the truth against that Act.


A^^^ip. How can ye judge of the minds of the Actors? The Lord knows the
hearts and tries the reins.


Epaph. And will also reward every man openly according to his works done in
(...). Yet none of the Actors could say, that in that action heaven (...) to
honor God, or to do good to his worship. The most part of the^ had professed
freely in private many times before their dislike of the cause and crooked
convoy thereof. And the Lord in his wise providence discovered the fear of
their hearts that last day of the Parliament very early. For about four hours
in the morning there went a pitiful cry through the high street of Edinburgh,
Eye f^^^ly, Fire, Fire. The terrible sound of the common bell, which is seldom
heard but upon great motions, fills the cares of men, raises many out of
their beds, and brings them in arms bare footed to the street, thinking that
the people had made some insurrection. Through this confused confluence of
people, and trouble of the whole town, albeit it was hard to discern, whether
Master or servant was readiest to do homage to servile fear; yet it was
manifest, that men in highest places and known to have strongest hand in the
present course, were in greatest perturbation and perplexity, till they were
assured that there was no other intention, but to quench a fire, whereby a
lodging at the New will of the Cowgate was destroyed without recoverie, which
had been interpreted prodigious in any other place at such a time, and at this
time and place, if the hearts of men had not been possessed with a greater
fear at the first.


Archip. How were the people vvitnesses, and by what means did they declare
their judgment.


Epaph. It were a thing impossible, to relate all their Observations. As when
the news were first brought to Scotland, that the Marquess of Hammilton had
undertaken that Commission, it was ^^grated by the best sort of all ranks,
that the son of so vvo^^hie Parent^^ a nobleman of so great expectation and
good affection to Kirk and Commonwealth, should be tempted to give proof of
his fortaine learning, upon employment so directly crossing the will of the on^
and weal of the other. So the commonpeople partly out of their respect to him,
and partly out of their fear of his Commission had frequently in their mouths
^hese old verses of Knight Keggow.

O wretched Scot when Keggow turns thy King,
Then may thou doole and dolor daily sing,
For from the South great sorrow shall be bring,
Therefore o'r Scot right short shall be his ring.
And, The time will come, I trow as Thomas says,
Heardmen shall hunt you up through gartings gill
Casting the padle and letting the plough stand still.


Again the last day of the Parliament, great multitudes, being conveened in the
utter Court of H^ly^oode-house to b^hold the solemnity, order and honors, as
they were borne, did observe at the very instant, when the Lords went to
their horses and were now mounted, a Swan flying over their heads from the
North toward the South, flaffings with her vvings and muttering her ominous
song, whereat shaking their heads in their manner, and whispering amongst
themselves, they declared what opinion they had of the proceeding, and what
fear of a bad conclusion.

Ar hip. These two instances, whatsoever for^e they have in themselves, are
sufficient testimonies of the disposition and fears of the people. But how was
it that the heavens were witnesses at that time? for I can not think that ye
can like superstitious observation more then superstitious adoration.


Epaph. I love not the snares of superstition, which is the very reproach of
the Godhead I know that faith in things divine, and right reason in things
civil is better directer, then the observation of rare and prodigious events
made by man, who are guided by their senses. Signs must follow and not lead
the truth. Lucretius ait Epi^urum magno met^^ liberasse hum^nas mentes, quod
superstitiones ^ustulent, and fortuito ge^^ omnia confirma^t.
But I dare not deny the power of particular providence in all the works under
the Sun; lest with sensual Epicures, or with the secure world I be forced to
distribute her heavenly praises, betwixt her enemy fortune in secret, and her
handmaid nature in seen second causes. The incomprehensible course of that
highest providence in Gods admirable wisdoms to the foot of whose chair the
highest link of the chain of second causes is fast tied) has made the great
changes of states, whether of Kirkes or Commonwealthes to be sensible by
concurring signs, as it has been ordinary in all time, by observation and
record of these works of God, to give warning to the vveak agents of great
actions, touching the great God in his honor and men in their happiness, to
try themselves whether in their proceedings they have vvalked dutifully with
the convoy of truth going before, and with wisdom at the one hand and charity
at the other, that so they may either rejoice or repent, or at least be
co^vinced against that day of the rightous judgment of God. When the
controversi^ was betwixt Cyrillus and N^storius, which by many K^^k men in
the cast favoring Nestorius part, was counted (...) a ^^a^l^ about words,
especially by Acacius, who called Cy^^llus (...) precise in terms. And when
that Controversy was to be decreed by the Council of Ephesus, upon certain
signs and presages of hard success, this verse was ordinary in the mouths
of men.

(...),
(...).
For when mischief hangs over the Kirk,
Then signs like these begin to work.
And Machiavel him self agrees to the general, de Repub l. 1. c. ^6 through
force of experience in the mutations of States, but he neither can find out
the cause, nor make any good use of the particulars.


Archip. Ye know both the truth of the general, and the true cause thereof,
and therefore let me know the particular.


Epaph. Upon that last day of the Parliament before four hours after noone,
when all the Acts were now concluded, and men's hearts were insulting upon
the Defenders, glorying in their own witty counsels, rejoicing in their great
success^, gaping for great thanks and reward, and wishing every one he were
the first reporter, that he might be carver of his own praise, as if he had
recovered the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Palatinat: The Lord Commissioner
rising from his throne, for ratifying all that was done by touch of the
Scepter, was trysted by the God of heaven. For at the very moment of that
ratification, the heavens send in through the whole vvindowes of the house an
extraordinary great lightning: after the first a second more glancing; and
then a third most terrible of all. Immediately after the lightnings, an un^outh
and extraordinary darkness, for the suddenness and greatness thereof
astonishing all, and couching the insolent joys of some. The lightning, were
seconded with three lou^ blasts of thunder, in sound and short continuance of
every blast like the shot of some Cannon extraordinary great: and were taken by
many within the house of Parliament to be shotts from the Castle. It appeared
to all that dwelt within ten or twelve miles, that the clouds stood right
above the town, and that the darkness overshadowed that part only. By one of
the blasts the Beacon standing in the entry of Leith haven was beaten down.
After the lightnings, darkness and thundering, their fell down a shoure of hail
stones extraordinary great, and last of all a strange rain making the streets
to run like rivers, imprisoning the Lords about the space of an hour and a
half, and straightly forbidding to honor these five Articles with ordinary
pomp and solemnity: So that the servants rode home on the footmantles, and the
Masters with drew themselves, some by coach and some on foot through the
nearest privy ways. Next, as if the heavens had resolved never to countenance
these ill-gotten creatures, upon Monday the 20 of August, when the Act^s were
proclaimed, the same m^^g^ation was renewed by thunder, si^, (...), and great
rain, co^^^^ing all the time of the riding at the Cross: And thirdly, what
has followed since, ye can witness your self. The tempests of vvind and
rain b^g^n at that time have so continued through the u^^outh
unseasona^^^nesse of the ^^e harvest in many places. S Luke gat not a st^w^k,
and the ^^^ne, universally are shaken, and rotten in such measure that never
was there in this Country such it equality of ^ri^es in (...) short time; never
greater fear of famine, and want of ^^ed to s^^ the ground for the next crop.
It is pitiful to remember (if it could be forgotten so long as there is a
Kirk in Scotland) the impetuous inundations of water carrying away with their
violen^e not only corns, cattle, and bridges, but houses, plenishing people
and all. Perth has good reason to call to mind the month of May, the year
1591, wherein by certain commissioners they confessed to the General
Assembly, their rash and sudden receiving of the apostat Lords, troublers of
Kirk and Kingdom, and promised never to give such occasion in time coming,
but to assist and maintain the Kirk of God, and the true Religion presently
professed within th^^ Realm, as at more length is contained i^ the^^ own
confes^ion. From the months of March 1^^6, and August 1618, wherein r^s^e^^^
was both begun and c^ncluded that unhappie change, wh^ i^ has been and is a
cursed mother of many miseries to this Kirk and Kingdom: unto which howsoever
they were disposed, it was openly spoken in the publi^k meeting that they were
inclinable. And if it were so, they (...) as far from their first prom^s^ as
they inclined to that alt^^ation. Item, Item the month of October. 1621 wherein
the (...) and rumbling of waters, and fear and danger within their (...)
sends them to seek their safety by the loss of their fa^^ and ^^^ly bridge,
with such affection as the merchant casts his goods in the sea, or the owner
runs his ship on ground for safety of men's l^ues: The Lord had an eye to the
tears of their sorrow, and h^ard their cries; from the depths he releeved and
saved them, and they stand his debtors of thems^lues for their great
redemption, and that wonderful deliverance. And likewise the town of Berwick
did see the unresistable rage of Tweed, by whose violence was hurled away, not
only their ancient vvodden bridge, but that new and strong one sinely builded
of stone, no less destinate to bear that honorable remembrance: Hoc uno
ponte duo regna conjunxi. Deus diu conjuncta cons^rvet, then to be a common
servant to the North and South parts of this Island. It is moreover pitiful to
hear the lamentation of widows, children and friends at home, for the l^sse
of their dear husbands, loving fathers, and trusty and tender friends by sea,
and specially in those towns that are most z^alous to follow novelties in
religion: and also pitiful to remember the great regrat of Borgh and Land for
want of fuel to prepare their meat and drink, and refresh their persons
against the injuries of the vehement cold. And yet few strikes upon the thigh,
and asks why are all these things come upon us? But for further humiliation,
the Lords hands is yet stretched out, to see if any will repent and return.
For before the vvearisome end of this unseasonable harvest, and the wheat
seed, which far by the ordinary custom of this Country, was not begun in
December, there is come on a heavy Winter, with great hunger and cold,
striking all that have fore sight with fear, and care to ease themselves of
such persons as they may spare, and to live as retired as possible they can;
and daily increasing pitiful cries, not only of vagabond beggars, but of
many honest persons, who if they had employment as before were able to succor
themselves by the fruit of their labors. What the spring and summer following
may bring forth of such beginnings it is hard for us to inquire, (...). Read
Eusebius. l. 9. cap. 7. and after him Niceph. l. 7, cap. 28. Rules for reducing
the judgments of God to their own proper causes.
and best for all, To watch and pray, to be zealous and amend, and to resolve
to exercise their patience and charity, as the Lord has measured unto them.


Archip. I know that the providence of God rules, and the fin of man procures
all judgments and afflictions. And (I thank my God) I have learned against the
Atheism of the times some rules to direct me how to reduce particular
judgments to particular causes, and to father them right upon their own
deserving sins. As 1 by denunciation in the word, when I find in Scripture a
particular judgment threatened against a particular sin, I must confess that
I am become so simple, that I ascribe the judgment when it falls out to that
sin as the proper cause: 2 by Retaliation; when the judgment is so like to
the sin that the sin appears in the judgment as in a mirror: 3 by
propagation, when sin in the own nature brings forth such a judgment as
the birth thereof: 4 by accusation when the conscience upon the coming of the
judgment immediately remembers and convinces of the same sin: 5 by
deprehension, when the sinner is taken in the very act, as a thief with the
fang. When many or all of these rules concur in one particular, they leave no
scruple of dubitation in my heart, whether the matter concern my own
personal case, or the common estate of the Kirk, or Weale-publick. And I doubt
nothing, but men separating themselves for that end, might Savanorolalike, by
the grace of God disposing them to join in their observation the course of the
word and works of God, know much more of the procuring and intended causes
of the judgments of God, and learn more of him who is known by executing
judgments then they do. But to prevent all mistaking my desire is not so much
for the present to make particular application of my rules to that which you
have related as to have satisfaction to the third of my Demands according to my
proposition, Third Demand.
and your promise in the beginning.


CONFORMITY SHOULD BE REFVSED.
E^^ph^as. Fa^^^ (...) ^i (...) at q^ (...) ^di q^e ^^cer^nt pudor^ (...)
^a^^^ndi que au^ire ^^ube cunt, l^ li^u^^ (...) v^ren^ ^ur, hic ubi ^ihil o^u^
est (...), ver^ntur^.
Epaphras. TH^^ (...) quality of the purpose, the ini^ (...) ^o some m^ns
persons, (...) my ^^^ing answers, (...) in the following ^iscourse free of
s^^h (...) And th^r^fore be free with me to (...) y^^r (...) and g^^a^^st
diffi^ultie to the full, and you shall see that I shall be as resolute now as
reserved before.


Archipp. All that I would say is this Seeing the controverted cer^monies are
not matters of faith, but in th^^r nature s^eme to be in^^fferent, are now
^on^luded in Kirk and Parliament, upon so religious and reasonable pretenses,
suffi^ient promises given that no further should be urged upon the Kirk
hereafter, and looking upon all second causes, no hope of the restitution of
our former order, but all appearance that this course shall prevail, what
shall be done? Were it not good to make a virtue of necessity? And is it not
better after due testification of our zeal to our ancient liberty, and of our
misliking of the present course, for our short time either willingly to
receive, or patiently to tolerate that which we cannot m^n^, then to strive
with our Superiors, trouble the peace of the Kirk g^ue place to the common
adversary, carry the infamous n^^es of S^hisme and Puritanisme: and, which we
must respect also, hazard Ministry, living, liberty, and all? There it is.

Four p^incipall difficult^es answered.
If you hau^ no more to say (as I see not what can be said more by the Prelate
and Politi^ian both) I perceive that you stand upon the diffi^ult^es of
^ppearance, Pretense, Promise and Success, the four great enchanters of
mankind, and rolling whe^les of def^ction, which I will labor to silence by
the truth, and ^ogge in their impetuous course by the resistance of solid
reason.


Archip. My first and greatest diffi^ultie is Appearance: for they from to me
and to the m^st part, ^o be no matters of faith, but things merely indiff rent.


Ep^^h It is a happy thing that the thoughts and words of men bring no chang^
upon the ver^^^s of G^^. 1 Diff^culty, Appearance of indifferency.
Had we been these seven years ^^st like the s^ven sl^^^ing Martyrs of
Ni^epho^us in the time of De^ius, this ^in of in ^^ff^^^n^ i^ which de^ives us
^ow, had ma^e us to ^hink that we had (...) her been wakned in another world,
or else that we had mistaken our grounds, when we learned, that matters were
the rules of men's min^^; and that the errors of m^n could do no harm to the
truth of God. All the operations of the mind of man, his cognos^ing, fa^^^ing,
apprehending, dedu^^ing, concluding, etc. although fortifi^d by can^ns,
customs, and laws, are no of that force. For when the mind of man goes
astray from the truth, he incountreth the shadow in place of the substance.
Jeroboam in his time, and his followers imagined, that they worshipped not the
cal^es, but Jehovah in a sensible sign: yet their worship was in seed
presented not to Jehovah, who was not so much as conceived by them, but to
Devils. He that conceives a round ca^ to be squared, conceives not in his
mind a circle, but angles; and the cap remains the same that it was before.


Archip. To what purpose insist you in that which all men admit?


Epaph. To answer your seeming and appearance: although ye and all others
should think, and authority both intend and judge the matters in hand to be
indifferent in the exercise of religion; yet they are not for all that
indifferent. Sitting at the communion is the same now in nature that it was,
when it was sworn to be most convenient to the institution: and kneeling is
no better this year then at the time of reformation, when it had not the
boldness to bide behind Idolatry. The Yu^le preaching has no more piety,
albeit the Christmas pie make it more pleasant then before. Albeit these be
the dreggs of times and manners transforming things good into evil, e^ill into
good, and both into indifferent: verity into heresy, and heresy into
verity, and both into fantasy, that few things s^^me as they are, or be as
they seem: yet verity carrying the image of God, is still unchangeable, and
in the midst of the mask^s of whoorish errors, has such majesty in her
presentation, that with the one of her eyes she ravisheth the hearts of her
lovers, and with the other disdaineth all the courters of carnal sense, her
deadly enemies.


Archip. If either natural or supernatural verities had depended upon
opinion, we would neither know nor believe any thing at all. But I would know
of you first, how men are brought to this opinion of indifferency, if the
things themselves be not indifferent.


Epaph. Three ways whereby men are brought to the opinion of indifferency.
Some men come to it at the first; while they stay their minds from judging
that to be a matter of difference, which they heartily wish were indifferent.
Even as many stay their minds, so far as they can, from thinking that to be
true, which they vvish were false. They cannot do a thing unlawful, but they
can judge a thing unlawful to be indifferent, and so do a thing indifferent.
Others there be, who bring on their minds by degrees. As in Atheism men are
first Godless in conversation, having the form of godliness but denying the
power thereof, and living as without God in the world. Next, they become
Atheists in affection, vvishing that there were not an infinite justice to be
revenged upon their wickedness. At last the Lord gives them over to Atheism
in opinion, that they say in their hearts, There is not a God. So may I say of
Adiaphorisme, and judging of indifferency, many at the first are brought to
practice without consideration. Afterward finding themselves wrong, but either
for fear of shame or skaith, refusing to follow the retrait of their
conscience, they wish in affection that they were not matters of faith. In the
end, the mistress being vowed by the handmaid, understanding is set on work
to find out probabilities, colors and appearances, to make them to seem
indifferent. Observe particular practices, and ye shall find it to be so.


Archip. These indeed are the methods of earthly wisdom. Upon the contrary by
heavenly order the truth coming from above, shines first in the mind by her
light, sends down her heat to the heart, and then in knowledge and zeal
rules the outward action. But whatsoever be the vvayes of men's wits, think
ye indeed, that the things in question are matters of faith, and not
indifferent, I would not vvish you to be singular.


Epaph. A peremptory answer I perceive would chase you away: I shall let you
see my reason, before I tell you my opinion: first, of matters of faith, and
then of things indifferent. If yea join with me, I will be no more
singular, at least in your estimation: And I nothing doubt to bring you, and
all such as will give place to the truth, to be of my opinion, be upon what
side they will.


Archip. There is nothing I desire more to hear: what have you then to say of
the first, whether they be matters of faith


Epaph. It is a sound and received distinction, that matters of faith are not
all of one kind, Three degrees of manners of faith.
but stand in three degrees of difference. There be some things of the
foundation of faith, somethings upon the foundation, and some things about the
foundation. The first sort touches the life and soul of Christian religion:
and thus the Articles of the Creed are accounted matters of faith. The second
is of their necessary attendants, by clear and undeniable consequence
following the former at the heels: so that no man persuaded of the former
first principles, can have any hesitation almost concerning these. And the
third is extended to all things revealed in Scripture concerning whatsoever
purpose although most indifferent in it self. There is nothing of so mean
importance written in the word, but it must be ranked among the matters of
faith, how soon it is manifested to be of divine authority. Neither can he
have any faith at all, who has not faith of all that he knows to be
written.


Archip. No man will deny that: for I have learned, Quaedam nec sum necessaria
cre^^tu per se nec per authoritate^ scripturae quaedam necessaria per se and
per authoritatem scripturae, quaedam necessaria creditu non per se sed per
authoritatem scriptura.
that as there be some things neither necessary of themselves to be believed,
nor by the authority of Scripture; some things that are necessary both ways,
so there be many things necessary to be believed not of themselves, but by
authority of scripture. But what is that to the purpose.


Epaph. I have heard great men say, They are no matters of salvation, that is
to say, they are not of the first degree of matters of faith, and therefore not
to be much respected, as neither helping nor hindering our happiness. But
consider I pray you this second ground, and compare it with the former, that
according to the three forenamed degrees of matters of faith without, there be
answerably within the mind of man as many degrees of damnable infidelity,
these are Ignorance, Error, and Obstinacy: Ignorance of matters of faith of
the first degree, condemns: for whether amongst professors, And accordingly
three degrees of infidelity.
or without the limits of the visible Kirk, he that knows not the principles
of Christian religion, cannot be saved. Error in the second, brings
condemnation, because he who denies that which follows by necessary
consequence upon the principles of religion, has not knowledge of the
principles themselves; He that denies the consequent, denies also the
antecedent, albeit he should profess that he cannot see the necessity of
consequence.


Archip. I doubt of that: for may not I know many grounds without knowledge of
the conclusions, which may be even by necessary consequence deduced from them,
because I never had occasion perhaps to think upon them.


Epaph. Therefore I say not that Ignorance, but Error of matters of the second
sort is damnable. And that he who after consideration denies the consequent,
denies the antecedent. The Jew making confession, with the fathers, of his
faith in the Messiah, but denying that the Messiah is come, does indeed deny
the Messiah. The Anabaptist, professing that he believes in Christ, but
denying him to have taken flesh of the virgin, does indeed deny the Mediator.
Al (...) the Papist avouch, that he is sound in the doctrine of Christ's person
and offices, yet by consequent he denies both, and may look for Anathema
(...) preaching another Gospel. He that swears the king to be h^s
Sovereign, and denies him lawful obedience, cannot be excused by pretending,
that he sees not the necessity of consequence. And he that admits the
princely office of Christ, but will give no place to his r^yall scepter,
neither in his own heart, nor in the government of the kirk, but puts a
crown of thorns upon his head, and in his hand a ^eed, will be attained of
treason against the king of glory, and will be judged an usurper of his
incommunicable dignity.


Archip. It is now evident, and I cannot but think worse of such false
friends, then of avowed adversaries. Albeit I would profess that if I were
ministering the Lords supper, yet it is but my imagination, except I keep the
Lords institution, 1 Cor. 11.20. But come to the third degree, of infidelity.


Epaph. ^^^na domi^a non est, ^^si que le^it^me i^ ^xta instiu^onem dominica^
obser^^tur. Pa^^us.
In the third kind of matters of faith, neither Ignorance nor Error, but
obstinacy, brings condemnation. We are all ignorant of many things, but we
must know the articles of faith. We all err in many things, but we must be
free of error about the necessary consequents of these articles, and free of
obstinacy in the meanest matters. S^, that as it is not Ignorance, but Error
in the second sort that condemns, so it is not error simply, but obstinacy
in the third sort, and Ignoranti^ pra^e dispositionis that condemns. No man
believes expressly all matters of says. No Christian but he carries a mind
prepared and ready to yield to all matters of faith, how soon they appear in
Scripture. In this third kind, m^n may sin very ^ang^rously of obstinacy, as
in the second of Error, and in the first of Ignorance. Albeit before men, the
greatness of the injury be esteemed for the most part, by the object; ^a^tia
personae su p^et ^mp^^tatem (...).
before God the quality of the doer, and manner of doing aga^egs the sin, no
less th^n the substance of the deed. Paul his eating of flesh may be a great
guiltiness as well as his persecution. Remember the hoove of Moses, Daniels
meat, and the opening of his window, Mordecai his pre^senesle, Eleazars morsel,
Paul's hour and appearance of evil, Christ Rac^, his rite of washing of hands,
Ismaels laughing, etc. The smallest matters, the least gestures, the shortest
time, the meanest appearance of evil, which are mole-hills in the worlds
estimation, may be mountains in the eyes of God, especially being found in some
persons, and done after a certain manner. The warning, Be ye holy as I am
holy, is most frequent in Leviticus a book of ceremonies; which both gives
comfortable assurance that God will accept of our services in the least duties;
and teaches also, that true holiness, the perfect pattern whereof he points
at in his own holiness, extends it self to the care of the smallest rites.


Archip. I must confess by your discourse and examples, that it is so. But I
see not the reason, wherefore it should be so: how can so mean matters be
capable of so great guiltiness?


Epaph. A natural Naaman would speak so of the whole rites of Christian
religion, of the very substance of both sacraments. But I would wish you to
think that as in matters fundamental; so also in rituall there be three
sorts of sin; one of Ignorance, the cause whereof is in the mind: another of
Infirmity coming of the affections: and the third of obstinate maliciousness
rooted in the will. No man but he sins daily in things indifferent of
Ignorance, not knowing them to be indifferent: No man but he sins frequently
of Infirmity in things indifferent, miscarried with some passion or temptation
but who against engyring light does sin obstinately in the least jot of that
unalterable verity, can you deny but he sins heynously in a matter of
faith. The enforced ceremonies may seem small to our adversaries, because they
bring small reason for them, and may seem to be no matters of faith, because
they bring no word of faith for them; yet the matters wherewith Christ charged
the Scribes and Pharisees, were not so great. I have often observed in my
experience, That a little leav^ sowreth the whole lump; and I know by my own
heart, That a narrow faith makes a room conscience.


Archip. Show me then how a man shall behave himself, that he fail not in
matters of faith?


Epaph. It is a good distinction of faith, How every one shall be kept from
fa^^ing in matters of faith.
that is observed by Lombardus out of Augustine. There is one faith whereby
we believe: another faith which we believe. In respect of the one, all our
actions especially in the worship of God, and more specially such of them as
are controverted and called in question, must be matters of faith. He that
doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith. In respect of
the other, whatsoever is prescribed in the word, is a matter of faith, whether
it be ceremony or substance: whether expressly or by consequent, whether in the
particular or in the general. Fides quae creditur ducat fidem qua^ creditur.
Now right order requires, that the faith which I believe, be the leader of
the faith, whereby I believe; otherwise this will be a faithless faith, and
prove effectlesse in the end. As the order of Nature is; Matters, Res conceptus
voces. Verbu^ fides, en ^us.
Though^s, Words, so the order of the kirk is; Scripture, Faith, Worship. I^
(...) the first Axiom of our profession, and the best rule for our dir^ction,
That the S^^^^ture is the one^y Canon of all things belonging to religion, and
the only judge of all controversies. All which shall be more clear, w^^n we
s^^^ke of indifferency the other branch of your appearance.


Archip. Doctrine of th ngs indifferent ob^cure.
As Archim^des tomb, when Cicero came to visit it, was all overgrow^^ with
th^^ (...), so seems the matter of indifferency to me; no^h^ng more talked
of, nothing less known. We are all in time, ^la^e, motion, etc. yet the
nature of time, place, motion, is so all digested after so manifold assayes,
that it gave occasion to one ^o say, That they hau^ so many bones, that the
Philosoph^rs are like to wi^rie on them, and have need of cranes to pluck them
out of their throats. All our senses and wits are exer^ised about things indiff
rent: and yet so ignorant of the nature and use of things indiff^rent, that the
wittiest that I have h ard or read, are like the Fox in the Fable li^king only
the outside of the glass, but never coming to the meat within: whereof if it
has been your happiness to taste, I beseech you call me to the banquet.


Epaph What wiser will ye be, when I have told you the Scholastik distinction
of Indifferentia Identitati^ in things altogether coincident, Indifferentia
communitatis of things general in respect of their particulars, Receptionis,
of the matter in respect of the diversity of forms; Indifferency taken in a
th^efold sen e. Aliq^^d d^citut Adiaphora^ sive indiffere^s ^ribas modis. 1
Comparat^ve and per ^^ationem. 2 Effective et per cons quentia^ 3 Subiective et
formaliter.
actionis in respect of this or that particular action; and have out of their
smokie subtilties discoursed upon them severally, when I have deaved you with
Puel, Meisnerus, and many more, their rul^s, their restrictions, and
ampliations, ye will esteem them all but shelles, and not kirnels: and so
will depart as hungry as ye came. And therefore to l^aue them to themselves,
and not to be nice with you about the word of Indifferency, brought rather
from Athens or Rome, then from Jerusalem, would you tune your care a little to
our common phrase, ye may observe, that we call a thing Indifferent in a
threefold sense: First by comparison or relation of one thing to another.
Secondly, in respect of the effects and consequents that it has. And thirdly,
a thing is indifferent in the own nature and quality; beside which three
ways we use not to name any thing indifferent. I will clear them unto you
orderly.


Archip. Ye have need: for that popular indifferency of yours seems to me
as obscure as the other Scholasticke indifferency, And first what call ye the
Relative indifferency, or indifferent by comparison.


Epaph. Any thing is called of us indifferent in the first sense, 1 Comparativ^
and pe^ relationem indifferens.
when it is taken with comparison or relation to the maine or superlatiue
extremes, as that which albeit it be good, is not best; or albeit it be
evil, is not worst; albeit it be verily good or verily evil, yet is neither
very good nor very evil, 1 By comparison indifferent.
but so par^^^^pateth of evil, that we know a worse of that kind, or so
part^^^pateth of good, that we know a better of that kind. And you may
perceive, that whosoever speaks this, as the most part do, unwittingly
presupposes two grounds: one is, that comparison be made betwixt two things
accidental of one and the same kind for that which is a mean betwixt best
and worst, must ag^^e with them in all things, wherein they agree betwixt
themselves, and whatsoever is common to both extremes, must be common also to
the m^ane. Thus we use to say, that a pearl is indifferent great, and that a
hill is indifferent small; yet meaning, that it is neither the greatest nor
smallest pearl, neither the highest nor lowest mountain.


Archip That is true; and so it runs in our daily use through all the ca^
g^^^es of a ^^ents, indifferent, great, good, like, unlike, learned, active,
near, early, decent, etc. But what is the other suppos^ (...)?


Epaph The other ground is, that the comparison be made, and the relation b^
understood according to the bounds of our knowledge, and experience For we
speak of the extremes according to our knowledge, and so must we of the mean,
when we call any thing great, ^st we mean greatest in our knowledge, and so
when we say indifferent great.


Archip. What is that indifferency for our purpose?


Epaph. I wish it were less in our practice, it is nothing else in matters of
religion but luke-warmnesse. For in this sense the present constitution of the
kirk of England, has been and is reputed by many of her own most loving
children, laboring zealously for her further reformation, to be indifferent
and lukewarm, her government, her ceremonies indifferent. This indifferency
or medio^ritie is not here as in moral habits, where both extremes swarving
from the golden virtue, in excess and defect, are sinful and vicious: But
here the one extreme is the matter of commendation, as being the only
excellency, which the coldness and luke-warmnesse cannot climb unto. Such a
mediocritie as Solon could not tolerate in Athens, as the king Tullus Hostilius
punished proportionally in Metius Suffetius that Adiaphorist at Rome. Qui quod
ex praescripto soedevis ad bell^ ^our^ale^ vo^^^us eun tibus in hoste^ Ro^^^us
suos praelio ^luxerat iussu Tulli duabus admotus quadrig^s discerptus e^t.
Liv^u^.
Such Adiaphorists were some of the Princes of Gods people, neither of the
best sort still pousing reformation, nor altogether Idolatrous and
Apostaticall, but subverting Baal and reteining the Calves of Dan and Bethel,
abolishing Idols, but not demolishing the high places. It was this
Indifferency that ruled Pilates policy, when he resolved to scourge Jesus
Christ for saving his life. In our times goodness is grown so s^ant, that we
^ut him who is after this sort indifferent in some degree of goodness; and at
least call him no ill man, who does not all the evil he may; there is worse
then he, and that is all. In this comparatiue sense, kneeling in the act of
receiving the communion, is not a gesture in different, nor (as we use to
speak) midway, except we take ^^^way for wallaway himself, Controuerted
ceremonies are not indifferent in the first sense.
or his nearest kinsman. For howbeit generally there be many things worse, as
the opinion it self of real presence; yet making the comparison amongst
things of the same kind, there is amongst gestures of communicants, according
to the one supposition, and speaking so far as we know any gesture to be
used in the Sacrament, as it was secondly persupponed, I conclude, that of all
gestures kneeling (as most Antichristian) is the worst, sitting, as most
convenient to Christ's own institution, is the best; and standing neither best
nor worst, but indifferent, or midway.


Archip. Ye have cleared that sufficiently. At the reformation of a Kirk it
is a sin not to change kneeling into siting; At the first plantation of a
kirk it is a greater sin to make choice of kneeling, and not of sitting; but
the greatest sin, and a degree of defection, is to change sitting into
kneeling, that is to leave the best, and take the worst of all gestures. But
come now to the second sort of Indifferency.


Epaph. 2 Effective et per consequentiam indifferens.
Secondly, a thing is said to be indifferent in respect of the effects and
consequents that follow upon it, as that which does neither good nor evil,
help nor harm, but for any known sequel may be done or left undone. Thus
fools who see not far before them, 2 By consequent indifferent.
think many things indifferent, which wise men know to be evil or good. In
this sense many things may be indifferent to the body, which are pernicious or
profitable to the soul, indifferent externally, and internally material;
indifferent physically and morally, but good or evil civilly; indifferent all
these ways, but evil spiritually: finally, indifferent every way at one
time, in one person and place; but at another time, in another person and place
evil every way. Wherein every man judges according to his own estimation and
apprehension of the particular good or evil that comes nearest unto him. And
the most part are inve^gled with their own self-love sophistication. It is
neither good nor evil for me, A secundum quid ad simpliciter.
therefore not at all. The penny wise worldling thinks the change of Religion
more indifferent then the taxing of usurie. He will not give a penny betwixt
the best and worst of that, which takes nothing out of his purse, which
serves nothing for augmentation nor diminution of the rentall, a book that he
studyeth more then the Bible. The Epicurean loves festival days because they
are far, and counts in his Calendar all fasting days for dismal. He that
would be great, and aims to be the only figure among ciphers, will have
every thing in Kirk and Policy indifferent, that signifies not something to
him. The saucie Cynick sitting Dictator like in his Cloister, where he
studyeth books and not men, gybeth at all, and with his master Diogenes idly
tumbleth his tub, when his town is turmoil. Every man rolling his thoughts
within his own sphere, and making himself the miserable center, disdaineth
^ilk thing in Kirk and Common wealth that is Eccentrick; thinks upon nothing
less then Religion in matters of Religion, and upon any good or evil more,
then upon spiritual good or evil in matters spiritual.


Archip. Whether think ye the controverted Ceremonies may be called
indifferent in the second sense?


Epaph. Some men have found them well profitable. They are not indifferent in
the second sense.
But for my self I think, to remove this indifferency from them would
require at my hands more words then wit; and from you rather sense then
reason. Beside the doolefull complaints of the Ancients, resounded by so many
late Divines, vvishing in one heart and voice that the matter of contention
were removed. Besides the deep and drowned sighs of Hooker himself, both in
his own and Nazianzens words: besides M. Sprint his first tables and
ceremonial bickerings, with his palinod and necessity of recantantion (for so
was it with him) in case of deprivation, and beside the late speech of the Kirk
our Mother, daily experience of evil spiritual to the most, of evil
natural, oeconomicall, civil, and Ecclesiastical to the best, may let you
see a world of evils issuing from them.


Archipp. It will be said, that all these millions of miseries, which no man
can deny have entered with the ceremonies, follow upon them only by accident,
and that it is not their nature to beget so bad effects.


Epaph. He is not worthy of his hire, that can say nothing for them. Whether
the evils be natural and necessary consequents, let the observed universality
in mixing of man's inventions with Gods institution bear witness, that
whatsoever has been either brought in or maintained in the Kirk of God without
warrant from himself, has ever proved like the brazen serpent and Gedeons
Ephod. Specificative and Reduplicative.
The ornaments by the Philistimes added to the Ark, albeit they were gold,
were but mi^e and emerandes. It is tragically felt and more to be feared, that
ceremonies shall prove in our Kirk such woodb^nd to the wo^ship, as Ministers
have found the dignity of Bishops to themselves, no withstanding all their
fair promises, who, as it is seen through the land, do bear them down as he
great barren ashes do the small fruitful trees growing near unto them: and
as the fa^ festival days make the fasting days which are next unto them the
leanest in all he year. But I have to the third and last signification, as the
more principal and the most proper.


Archip. And I long to hear it; for in the former two the question is not
great.


Epaph. 3 Subiective et formaliter indiffer^ns. 3 By nature indifferent in 2
sensu (...) In 3 sensu (...)
In the third sense things are said to be indifferent, which considered in
themselves are neither good nor evil, as not inclining to the one side more
^hen the other of their own nature: but equally in^lnable and alike ready to
be inclined to either by supervenient determination. And therefore a^ in the
second sense they are called things s^rving nothing either f r happiness or
misery; so in this last sense they are called things in our power, the mids
betwixt extremes That ye may the more exactly take up their nature, ye must
learn to distinguish betwixt a naked action, and an action clothed with
circumstances. Inter a^um nudum sive praecisum a circumstantiis and actum
circumstantionatum.


Archip Tea^h me ^ow to distinguish betwixt them?


Epaph For the first: All our thoughts, speeches, and actions, as they lie
before our eyes in their own nature, before they be defined, v^ste^ wi^h
conditions and circumstantiate, are morally indifferent: our apprehension, our
reasoning, our remembering, our believing, our l^ue, hope, joy hatred, fear,
grief, or speaking and uttering, Distinction betwixt naked actions and actions
clothed with circumstances.
all these by word, writ, gesture or laboring, resting, eating, ^^^nking,
standing, sitting, lying, kneeling, and whatsoever else is the operation or
exercise of any power of the soul or body, within or without, nakedly
considered and without all limitation are as yet indifferent, neither good nor
evil, but may be good, and may be evil; and how far they happen to be
determined, as much they loose of their indifferency, inclyne toward the
extremee, and become good or evil. Thus all things are indifferent. For the
second: (...) est dei solius, creaturae omnes etiam dignissimae in rebus
omnibus etiam indignissimis imperi^ and pr^videntiae sub^iciuntur.
As all those natural faculties and functions forenamed, are of God, through
God, and for God, so is it his sovereignty to set down their marches for their
moral or spiritual determination, to make them good or evil. Neither can any
created power make that which is good to be evil, that which is evil to be
good, that which is indifferent to be good or evil; except upon the supposall
of Predetermination from him who is the Maker and Lord of all. Except man had
his being of himself, and a world of his own making, his determinations could
not be absolute or uncontrouleable in the meanest matters. And thus upon the
contrary nothing is indifferent, as shall be more manifest afterward.


Archip. All the matter I see stands in that divine determination. Would ye
make it plain how by virtue thereof things lay aside their indifferency, and
become good or evil, the light would be greater.


Epaph. This divine determination (which is indeed the principal part of our
theme) so far as it concerns your intention is threefold; the first may be
called Moral and Universal; Three sorts of divine determination removing the
indifferency of things.
the second Ceremonial and National; and the third Evangelicall and Christian.


Archip. I beseech you have not, but go through them in order, and stay upon
every one of them, till I be in some measure satisfied. Now first what call
ye that Moral and Universal Determination?


Epaph. It is to be found in the ten Commandments of the Moral Law, 1
Determination moral.
as they are an transumpt or rather an extended copy of the Law of nature
given to man in the beginning from that first pattern of the law eternal: And
afterward framed for man's estate since his fall and restitution, as it is
expressed and exponed by Moses and the Prophets, but without any national
respect to the people of the Jews.


Archipp. I would have you to apply this determination, that I may conceive how
it removes the natural Indifferency of things.


Epaph. This law of the eternal God directs and commands all the foresaid
faculties, functions and actions, inward and outward, to th^^r right objects
and ends, affects them with their inseparable accidents, and clotheth them
with their unchangeable circumstances; in such sort, that the action good, by
this law can never be made evil; that which is evil by this law can never be
made good; that which is good or evil by this Law can never be made
indifferent. For example; by virtue of this determination, the knowledge of
God, faith in God, hope in God, joy in God, Love of God, etc. are unchangeablie
good: Distrust, hatred of God are unchangeable evils. The true worship of God,
good; Idolatry, and whatsoever is idolatrous evil. Both killing and kneeling
(offend not I pray you for it cannot be denied) which nakedly considered were
indifferent by the authority of this law according to the objects, Occidere
hominem quod est idem secu^dum speciem naturae potest ordinari sicut in fin^m,
ad conservationem justititae and ad satisfaciendum irae. Et ne hoc erunt
diversi actus secundum speciem m^ris quia uno modo erit actus v rtutis, al^o
modo erit actus viti^. Thom. 12 41 art. 3.
ends, and conditions, are made unchangeably good or evil.


Archip. The danger is great I perceive in the application: For if I pass that
for indifferent, whereupon the Lord has before passed his determination to be
good or evil, I fall into the transgression of the law of God, and under his
curse: and therefore I would hear more of that Application.


Epaph. Two observations for sound application of the first determination.
Circumstan^ae vel accidentia fixita^ti momenti sunt ut penes illa peccatum
judicetur id quod agitur. Pet. Martyr Lo^. Com. p. 347. Humani actus non solum
ex object^s verum ex circumstantus boni vel mali dicuntur. Thom. 2.2 qu. 18.
art. 3. Quando circumstantia res^^icit ordinem actionis pro vel contra ex tali
circumstantia censt^uitur allqua species mora is actus in bonitate vel ma^itia,
Ibid. art. 10. Ipsae Circumstantiae interdum constituunt rerum earum quae
aguntur speciem, ex qua res sive actiones nostrae di^u^tur bonae aut malae. Nam
quae v^s simpliciter and per^ bonae sunt eae inter^u^ malae fiunt
circumstantus: est tempus quo res bona aut indifferens redditur mala, quia
intempe^tiva est: similiter de lo^o and instrumentis. Iunius de P^^t. M^ssis c.
7. these. 34.
For that end I give you two Observations, without which it can never be
sound. One is, that the Accidents or Circumstances of a moral or spiritual
action are of the same essence, and substance thereof. The squarest
Conformitant shall either prove a praecisian here in standing upon
circumstances, or else quit his conformity with the law of God. The
circumstances of persons will make fornication, adultery, incest; the
circumstance of place, sacrilege; of time the profanation of Sabbath etc.


Archip. I will never think it strange then, that the observation of one day
is good service to God, and the observation of another is will worship and
superstition: that the circumstance of a private person, or a Midwife; the
circumstance of a private place where the Congregation is not assembled; the
removal of a table; the taking away of Sacramental distribution, the hurting
of Sacramental fraction etc. do alter the substance of the ministration of
the Sacrament of Baptism, or of the Lords Supper. That kneeling in one action
be pious, in another action at another time be idolatrous. Circumstance will
make an action otherwise laudable to be laesae majestatis; and he that can
swallow a Camel in the matters of God without an host, will strain a gnat
in the circumstances of his own affairs, as though they were all substance.
What is your second observation?


Epaph. That the ten commandments be not taken literally, as ten words, but
largely as Christian Pandects and commonheads of all moral duties toward God
and Man, to be exponed and extend^d according to the commentary of the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles in the old and new testament, according to
the perfection of the large law of God, which commands every du^y and
forbids every sin: So that, whatsoever is commanded or forbi^^e^ in the
whole word is contained here and contrary to the sinistrous glosses of natural
men, the least degree of every sin is censured under the name of the highest
degree and grossest of that kind: Unadvised anger is murder. All vvh^ch (which
I would have you to observe) may be reduced to three heads. Some are so
naturally evident that none is found who will deny them, as love to God and
our neighbor, worship of God etc. Praeceptorum mora ^^m triplex est gradus,
n^ quae^am ^^t co^mun^ssima, quaedam v^ro sunt m^gis determinata qu^ (...)
^^ique quorum ratio non est ^u^l be^ n^anis^^^a sid so^^^^ S^^i^^tibus Thom. 12
qu 100 art. 11.
The second sort is of such duties and sins as may be easily discerned, and
yet in this blindfolded estate of man may be unknown or denied by some, as the
particular sins and duties expressed in the several commandments, and other
duties are sins like unto them* As perhaps some are ignorant, that they
cannot tell which of the commandments forbids drunk^nnesse, gluttony etc
There is finally a third sort of such as are not known but by the wise,
through a diligent search of Scripture, as Levit. 14. the rising up before the
hoary head is to be reduced to the fifth commandemant. The abomination of the
Nations forbidden in many particulars, D^ut. 18 is to be reduced to the first
and second command. All which expositions and determinations are also moral
precepts by the force of nature obliging no less then the letter of the ten
commandments.


Archip. Every thing that may be reduced to the ten commandments, and that is
a determination of the moral Law is not moral: for all the precepts,
Ceremonial and Judicial, Ist^ autem ^on, un^ determ nativa praec^ptorum
de^a^og^^a vi i^si^iutio^^^, sed e^ vi natu^alis ins^^nctus. Thom. ibid.
may and must be reduced thither; and yet they are alterable, as the ceremonies
of the Kirk seem to be.


Epaph. Ye have touched that string which has deceived many even of the
learnedest ears. Consider then that the exposition and particular
determinations of the moral precepts be of two sorts, some are immediate, and
determine by force of the law of nature. Another sort are positive, and oblige
by mediation of another law and force of institution. Had Mr. Sprint sounded
this ground he might have felt that the comparison of Ceremonial duties and
moral, the one having the force of institution only, the other of the law of
nature, as well as the rising before the hoarie head, the one mediately the
other immediately commanded, was no sure ground to build his necessity upon.
The ignorance of that thi^^ sort of duties and sins extends the bounds of
indifferency beyond her right.


Archip. I perceive that every external thing, which we call a ceremony is
not of the ceremonial Law, but many of them be of the law Moral, Both made
p^ain in the second commandment.
and therefore unchangeable as being sparkles of the light of the law of
nature. Make your second observation plain in some part^cular comman^ement.


Epaph. The first commandment bidding us have Iehova only for our God,
forbids the having of no God at all; the sin of Atheist, Psalm. 14 the having
of strange Gods and not the true, as the Pagans Acts 14 11 12 the having of
strange gods with the true, as the Samaritanes 2 King 17 33: the not having of
the true God aright, Tit. 1 16. But the second commandment is a more pertinent
example, which enjoining to worship the true God according to his will,
discharges all invention and vvil worship. Coloss. 2; all imitation of others
without the true Kirk, Lev. 18; all translation of Gods own ordinances, 1
King. 12: and finally all degrees to the least, all signs, all monuments,
means, causes, incentives, occasions, provocations, beginnings of evil, hat
may tempt o^ induce our hearts, all show and appearance of any of those evils.
And as every precept commands the communion of Saints, to vvin our neighbor,
and to furth^r his salvation: so every precept forbids to have any
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, or to be accessorie to
other men's sins. Whosoever fails in any of them, Quo ceremonial loquendi
g^nere leg^ imperato ^os tinetur mu ta quae in odio esse vr^ bonis no^^t Apost
quarum qua^^um est contagio Insius enim it Ambrosius no^ solum crimen metuit
sed conta ionem peccati. Quintum est maula ex peccato. His add si placet
sentum ^ Thessalonians. 5 22 pecuni peccati quamvis a peccato perse a^^nam. Afferentes
itaque dederum I^c^bo omnes deos al^ni populi qui erant in ^ann ^ua, and in
aure^s quae ^rant in autibus s^^^ ^^s^^ditque ea Jacob sub illa quercu quae
prope Schecc^nam crat I^^. in I^^. 22.
he fails not in a ceremonial (as men would have it) but in a moral duty.
His sin is not a sin by accident, but in it self and most kindly a sin,
directly against the law of God. Peter Martyr proves at length what great
evils there be in the occasions of evils, Lo^. com. p. 348. Iunius upon Jude v.
22 records six things detestable to good men, the sixth vvherof is the
appearance of evils, albeit in it self it be not evil, which he makes plain
by the example of Jacob, and the like we may see in ^sh^^, Elith, Daniel.
Jerome upon Esaias shows, that by Gods stopping of the Israelites way with
thorns, lest they should return to their former lovers, that we have need of
a strong fence against Idolatry. All our Divines use this Argument against the
Lutheran Images.


Archipp. Think ye that there is a divine determination passed upon the urged
Ceremonies, and that they fall in any sort ender the law moral?


Epaph. I put it our of question. Besides the evil of Scandal, The urged
ceremonies transgressions against the first determination of the law Moral.
in respect whereof, they be by accident sins, and forbidden in the sixth
commandment: beside their external superstition and idolatry, which cannot
be denied more then that the glance of the eye, that a gesture or a rash word
of anger, are Adultery and Murder by Christ's own determination. And as to
command such glances of the eye, and words or gestures of that sort, howsoever
they seem nothing in the eye of the world, were in Gods estimation to command
adultery and murder, and to obey such laws were to obey men rather then God:
so must we judge of authority and obedience in the other. I say, besides that,
they are many otherways transgressions of the second commandment i^ in that
they are occasions and shows or appearance of another superstition and
Idolatry more gross and abominable For they are of that kind of evil actions,
wherein there be two evils, one external, that is seen to be done: another
internal imported and signified by that which is done, which also is
sometimes done, and sometimes not done, according to the quality of the mind,
and secret intention of he door. For if the peril be great, and the doer
simple, as when ignorant people kneel at the Sacrament, both the evils
concur. Another not so well informed as Peter Iudaizing with him and by his
example, might have been indeed as superstitious as any of the Jews, which he
seemed only to be. And so it falls out, that there is a double guiltines,
both upon the strong and upon the weak. Because they who are strong, fall under
the outward transgression, and by their example make the vveak who can not
distinguish and discern so punctually fall under the inward transgression;
when with them they are committing the outward: 2 They are transgressions of
the second commandment, as they be inventions of man, and will worship, or
imitations of the enemies of God, and a draught of that wine of Babels
fornication wherewith the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk, Revel.
17 2, vvherof Gods people ought not to taste at all, I am the Lord your God,
after the doing of the land of Egypt wherein ye dwel^ shall ye not do,
Levit. 18. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by following them,
Deuteronomy. 12. 3 As translations (at least some of them) of Gods own institutions;
Ministers like Gods Ministers, days, altars, vestures likewise; the sin of
Jeroboam ordaining a feast like unto the feast in Judah, 1 King 12 32 wherein
the Proverbiall truth holds, that the l^ker the ^se is to man, the more
deformed it is. To leave this first main determination of indifferency, let
the stretching out of the hand, and bowing of the knee in their nature be
equally indifferent, and the one capable of good an^ evil ^s well as the
other: yet after determination of both by circumstances from God, if we
condemn the one and command the other, we may condemn murder and command
idolatry, condemn the transgression of the second and command the
transgression of the first table.


Archipp. The Indiff^rencie of th^se ceremonies being taken away by divine
determination of the moral law as ye have made it sensible, all the world
cannot mak^ them good or indifferent again. As the fault of the first
con^^ction cannot be mended in the second nor third, so the error of the first
delib^ration upon th^se matters can neither be cure^ by ^he ca^^on of the Kirk,
nor by the law of the Country It were good either to recant and vomit them up
again, or else to let them pass^ with the excrements by the dungport. For good
nourishment I f^are shall they never prove, but daily more and more the face of
the Kirk shall become pale, her knees feeble, and arms vveak, till all her
beauty and strength be gone. Your promise and my desire leads you now to the
second determination.


Epaph. Second determ^na^ion ceremonial.
The second I called Ceremonial and National, making things ceremonially good
or evil, clean or unclean, and therefore to be used or not to be used by the
people of the Jews by reason of divine institution, which before in respect of
moral and universal determination were left indifferent, as having nothing
intrinsecally in their own nature, or by virtue of inherent circumstances,
which might make them good or evil.


Archip. Aliis sacramentis preni^ciare Christi^ cum venturus esset, aliis cum
v^nisset, ann^ ^^a^o portuit sicut modo no^id ipsum ^oquentes divosi^is terum
etiam compulit verba mutare, siquiqu them aliud est praenuntiare a^^d (...)
aliud cum venturus esset, aliud um venisset. Augu^l e^^t^^ Immitib^^s
mut^bi^u^n sicut re^tor^ta noder^^o^, done, universi saeculi pulch^^^^o ^^^us
p^^t^n^ae u^t q^^ sus qu bu q^e temo^ri^us apt^ sunt velu^^ magnum ^armen
^^^u^dam ^n^ffabilis moderatoris e^^urrat at^n ^n^e tran cat in aet^r^am
cantem^lationem speciti qui da^^ rit^ co unt etiam cu^ tem^us est file^,
August. ibid.
There was a time when the Jewish ceremonies were not, there is a time now
when they are not and in the time vvherin they were, they were not ever in
the same estate. If ye intend a comparison of our ceremonies with theirs, I
would have the times distinguished, and every thing considered in the own
time.


Epiph. They had their conception not only in Gods purpose, who did foresee
from everlasting, what form^ of worship was most convenient for every time, and
in himself uncha^geable did change accordingly: but also in the practice of the
Patriarchicall Kirk observing the seven precepts of Noah, and Circumcision the
seal of the covenant with Abraham. Next, they had their being in their birth,
when the Lord brought his first born from Egypt, through the womb of the
read sea, and their infancy during the 40 years peregrination, and their
perfection while they were establish^d at the temple in Canaan: they had their
death when Jesus their life lied upon the cross, and ascended unto heaven,
leaving them b^h^^d as a dead corpse to be buried: and their burial when the
Gospel was preached through the world, Distinction of the ceremonial ^aw in
4 periods of time 1 Nun cesse non esse. 2 Necisse esse. 3 Non necesse esse. 4
Necess^ non esse and impossib^le esse.
and the Temple his typical body demolished, under the rubbish whereof they
were to be laid without hope of resurrection And so the estate of ceremonies in
respect of this second determination, may belaid before your eyes in four
periods of time: 1 before the giving of the law. 2. before the death of Christ,
3. before the destruct^^n of the temple, and 4 from that time to the end of the
world. In the first time they were possible, and more then possible, for by
their forerunners they were likely to be In the second, time they had a being
but mortal; and yet during that time they were necessary. In the third time
they were dead, and no such necessity that they should be: and in the last
time they are deadly, they may not be.


Archip. Now let me know somewhat more of their estate in every one of these
periods. And first before the giving of the Law.


Epaph. In that first time, Estate of ceremonies before the giving of the law.
as it was not a thing indifferent to the kirk of God to refus^, or to alter
any ceremony, which the Lord had sanctified for his worship: no more was it
indifferent to institute either by their own invention, or by imitation of the
children of m^n, any rite or ceremony for the worship of God: for by so doing
they had transgress^d the law moral, or the law of nature, commanding all men
who have any sense of a Godhead, to receive and not to give rules of worship.
The holy care of the ol^ Patriarchs was to reverence and obey that which they
had received, and to attend upon furth^r r^direction.


Archip. That was a happy care, and worthy of imitation: but what say you of
the Jewish cer^monies betwixt the giving of the law, and the coming of Christ:
for during that time, the law of ceremonies was in her glory. In the time of
the law 3 sorts of Iew^sh ceremonies. 1 Div^ne divinae. 2 Divina-humana.



Epaph In that second time there were to be found among the Jews three diverse
sorts of observations; The first were altogether livine, delivered in
particular by Moses from the Lord, either to be shadows of things to come, or
to be a singular form of worship in the kirk during that tim^. The second
sort were partly divine, and partly humane, when the general was divine and
necessa^y either by the law of nature, or by some ceremonial institution but
the particular left without determination from God, as being in it self most
indifferent, variable, and therefore difficult, if not impossible to determine
by general and unchangeable rule; Then man behoved to determine in the
particular, not at his pleasure, but according to the tenor of the law moral;
that is, being persuaded that the matter was indifferent; and so having faith
for the first condition, he behoved for the second to rule all by love, that
is, to have respect to Gods honor, and man's salvation.


Archip. I think ye can hardly give examples of this sort; there being nothing
in the whole worship left without particular determination.


Epaph. It is nothing hard; for of this sort were the hours of the morning and
evening sacrifice, their synagogues, oratories and places of worship through
the land, the outward order of their ordinary meetings, their course of
reading, etc. their pulpit and chaires, the times of fasting (except that one
express in the law) according to the calamities and occurrences of the kirk;
whatsoever was Ecclesiastical in their forms of marriage and burial. Some
things behoved to be done in the sacrament of circumcision, albeit not
sacramental, which was not expressed The great multitude of prescribed
ceremonies made also a multitude of particular cases to be determined by
themselves; That we may say, the more ceremonies the more questions; the more
determinations, the more to be determined.


Archip To confess the truth, all these things behoved to be done, and yet
there is no particular direction for them in Moses law. Which is the third sort
of observations?


Epaph. 1 Human 2.
The third kind were neither merely divine, nor mixed, but merely humane of
man's invention, or at least of man's institution, such were the fastings,
oaths, washings, (...), offerings, penance, prayers, Phylacteries, etc. of the
Hasidaeans and Pharisees, taxed by our Savior as the commandments of men.


Archip. What are the differences of good and evil in these three sorts of
observations?


Epaph. Difference of good and evil in three sorts of ceremonies.
Ceremonies of the first sort, albeit by the law of nature indifferent, yet by
force of divine institution, they become positiuely good. Albeit they were by
nature changable, the kirk had no power to change them; all their changes were
from their first author; for some of them were ordained only for an hour to
be used in an individual action, as the 4 observations in the first Passover,
Exodus 12. Some only for the time of the Wilderness, as their altars of earth,
and rough stones without degrees, both which were changed in Canaan. Some
lasted till after the Judges, that the kingdom was established; some to
Salomons time, some to the captivity, some to the preaching of the Gospel,
and some during the whole time of the policy of the Jews. It was not lawful
for the Kirk either to to institute new forms, or to recall the old, but still
they were to wait upon the mouth of the Lord. Ceremonies of the second sort
were properly about things indifferent, and adherent circumstances, and were
then good when they were institute in faith and love. Even as the pillar of
fire and cloud went before Israel in the wilderness, and pointed at their
encampings; yet the wisdom of Iethro in respect of particular commodities and
incommodities, of straits or mountains, was to them in stead of eyes, Number. 10.
The kirk might then as now, give manifold direction in particulars, but still
holding her eye upon her leader. The third sort was always damnable: for
albeit the Pharisees were counted wise, 1. Cor. 1.20. Where is the wise, where
is the Scribe? (...).
There is more in the words of the wise, then in the words of the Law, yet all
their wisdom is but leaven in Gods eye, while they teach for doctrines the
traditions of men.


Archip. I think it very necessary to think upon these 3 kinds of observations,
Estate of ceremonies before the destruct^on of the temple.
while I think upon the estate of the ceremonial law during the vigor
thereof. Now come to the third time, and the estate of ceremonies in it.


Epaph. All the ceremonies, which continued till the third time, during that
time, are by common consent esteemed indifferent, not only being free of the
first moral determination, which they never had nor could have, but also of
the second ceremonial determination, which they had before the death of
Christ.


Archip. Was it then a thing indifferent for all Christians, whether Jews or
Gentiles, to use or not to use the Jewish ceremonies in all places, and after
what sort they pleased?


Epaph God forbid ye should think so. It was not lawful for the Gentiles to
observe them for the space of an hour, Gal. 2.14.18. and 5.1 1. and 6.12. Act
21.25. The Jewish ceremonies were the same to the Gentiles now, which they
were to the Jews before they were institute, and after they were abolished.


Archip What say you then to the decree of the Council of Jerusalem? Act. 15.
Quapropter recte Apostoli consu^uerunt reciesiae Dei, ut p^^ omnes a violanda
priore legis tabula (quod Idola^ria vel pol^uen^ simulacrorum significatur et a
violanda poste^r^re, quod item Synecdochice nomine Scortationis p^aec pium est
and a violanda ra^rum con^cuntia in rebus adiapheris absi event, quod nomi
e^suffecati and sa^grinis su^t declaratum. Iunius de politia Mo^^s. cap. 8.
was not the observation of legal ceremonies imposed upon the Gentiles at
that time?


Epaph. The conclusion of that council, as it is taken up by learned Iunius,
will give you greater satisfaction then all that I can say: Wherefore (says
he) the Apostle gave good advice to the Kirk of God, that all the godly
should abstain from violating the first table of the Law, which is signified
by Idolatry, and the pollution of Idols: from violating the second table of the
Law, which is contained under the name of fornication; And from violating the
conscience of their brethren in things indifferent, which is declared by the
name things strangled, and blood; whereby ye may see that the general was a
moral duty, and that the Gentiles at this time were tied to no practice.
Neither at any time did the Apostles impose any ceremony upon any person or
fellowship, that esteemed them unlawful: neither would they grant liberty to
the Gentiles to use the ceremonies, which among the Jews were indifferent.


Archip. Might the Jews who had the ceremonies at that time for indifferent,
use them at their pleasure?


Epaph. Nec simulate sed religiose non enim deserend^ c^ntinu^ vel ^ninucorum
o^^^ectationibus tanquam canum mo^sibus pro^cienda Augustine.
No creature may use the ^^st thing at his pleasure. The Jews behoved to
retain them for a while, as things both in nature and use indifferent, That
is, (...) with assurance of their indifferency, or without opinion of
necessity, 2. without s^ancall, that the corpse might be buried with honor.
The Apostolic practices which were at Jerusalem, not at Antio^h, amongst the
I^wes, not amongst the Gentiles, were but so many steps to their grave. And the
Apostolic prea^^^ng both at Antioch and Jerusalem, were the dead sound of the
silver trumpet of the word, and open proclamations that they were c^parted,
that their lif^ Jesus was no more in them, but in heaven, and that therefore
they were to be buried.


Archip. The Apostle says at some times, that they are nothing, and sometimes,
that Circumcision abolisheth the virtue of Christ^ death.


Epaph In respect of their indifferency he says, that circumcision is
nothing, and the^fore skin is nothing but the keeping of the commandments of
God; and therefore he circumcised Timothy, and Iudaiz^d among the Jews, that
he might win the Jews. Again, in respect of their necessity and
superstitious observation, as though they (...) the same force now. which they
had before, he says, that if they were circumcised, Christ could profit them
nothing.


Archip. Their estate after their burial. A^ pr^inde qui, quis nunc
ch^^t^anorum quam v^ sit ex Iudais similitur ce^elrare vo^ui^it tanquam
sepultos c^neres eruens non erit pius deductor vel ba^ulus corpo^is sed imp^us
spultura violator. Aug. Ceremonias Iud^orum and per^^^osa sunt e^ mort^f^^^
christianis and quicunque cas observaverit sive ex Iudaeis sive ex Gentibus tum
in ^^^^^rum diaboli devolutum. Idem.
I come now to enquire of their estate after their burial.


Epaph. Their estate in that time is a mere nullitie: Their naked observation,
which before was indifferent, become unlawful: And whosoever he be that
keeps them now, albeit he were a l^w, denies Christ. After their funeral
they have no more being then before their birth. Man's institution of them then,
and his observation of them now, are equally unlawful. And as circumcision had
been unlawful to the Gentiles before in the time of the Interim, Gal. 5 2, so
would it now have been to the Jews.


Archip. Was it not after their burial that the Apostle practiced, Act. 16 and
21?


Epaph. Some grave Divines (whom for Honors sake I will not name) that they
may leave a back door open for festival days observed in the Kirk wherein
they live, will have the ceremonies to be buried at the time of the Council,
Act. 15, and force themselves to interpret their burial in respect of the
opinion of necessity, and not of observation. As though the observation of
them without that opinion were yet lawful, and were not Judicial, which were
rather to bear down the opinion of men, then to bury the body of Moses; to
give him the burial of an Ass, and to mistake the decree or sentence
concerning the burial it self. All which absurdities must follow the
distinction of days, even in the naked necessity of observation without the
conceit of superstition: seeing the Institution of new days, or imitation of
the days of the Gentiles can be no better then the continuation, imitation or
translation of the days of the Jews.


Archip. I have learned of all that ye have said of this second determination;
that the practice of the Jewish ceremonies in the first time, before the
institution had been unlawful; that in the second time after their institution
it was acceptable worship: that the opinion of necessity which was good in
the second time, was in the third time unlawful: and that their observation
which was indifferent, and being well used was good in the third time, is
unlawful in the fourth time. It was a sin first to observe them at all; next
to observe them as indifferent; thirdly, as necessary; and fourthly at all. But
I have not learned to make the comparison right betwixt them and our ceremonies.


Epaph. The controverted and Jewish ceremonies have some things like, and some
things unlike, as may thus appear. The Jewish and controverted ceremonies
parelled.


Ceremonies, Jewish Controverted. Similitude.

In the first time,

A sin to observe the one at all.

A sin to observe the other at all.

In the second time,

Will Worship and Traditions of the Pharisees damnable.

Will Worship and Traditions of men damnable.

In the third time.

Yokes not to be borne, shows of Religion, turning from the truth, impotent
and beggarly rudiments, etc.

Yokes not to be borne, shows of Religion, turning from the truth, impotent
and beggarly rudiments, etc.

In the fourth time.

A sin to observe the one at all. -- A sin to observe the other at all

Dissimilitude.

In the first time.

The one was possible, non necesse non esse.

The other impossible.

Necesse non esse.

In the second time.

The one of divine institution. -- The other of humane invention.

The one from their infancy brought to perfection by the particular directions
of God.

The other from their infancy brought to their perfection by the subtle
operations of Satan.

The one to bring on the mystery of piety, and to be a pedagogue leading to
Christ.

The other to set up the mystery of iniquity, and to be a pedagogue leading to
Antichrist.

The one to live for a time, and after to die.

The other to live for all time, and never to die.

In the third time.

The one never imposed upon any who esteemed them unlawful.

The other most urged upon the who esteem them unlawful.

The one forbidden the converted Gentiles who before were free of them.

The other commanded Reformed Kirkes, before freed from them.

The one tolerated among the Jews who had them before to win the obstinate and
keep the weak.

The other commanded to Christians, who had them not before, to abdure the
obstinate, and tyne the weak.

The one coming from heaven worthy of an honorable burial.

The other coming from hell worthy of the burial of the uncircumcised.

The one going from their death to their grave, never to rise again.

The other growing from their grave to their life, never to rest again.

In the fourth time.

The one being buried are deadly to the converted Jews to whom they were first
necessary and after indifferent.

The other being abolished are obtruded upon Reformed Kirkes, who once bad them
for Idolatrous, never for indifferent.


Archip. If ye would compare the Jewish ceremonies with things indifferent in
the Christian Kirk, I would trouble you no further in this point.

Epaph. As they be unlike to the controverted ceremonies both in nature and
use: so are they unlike to all Ecclesiastical Constitutions concerning things
indifferent in nature albeit not in use. Jewish ceremonies and things
indifferent in the Christian Kirk compared.
The Apostolic rules are perpetual for the use of all things indifferent in
all the following times of the Kirk. But never was there, nor shall there be
hereafter any time of the Kirk wherein there can be found things indifferent
of that nature. For 1 they were once of divine authority, and behoved to be
kept a while; After that they entered into their indifferency, that the
Sinagogue might be solemnly buried: 2 After that observation there was a
necessity of their exautoration, albeit the rules had been followed most
strictly. Neither of the two can be said of things indifferent in the Christian
Kirk. All which if M. Sprint had more unpartially considered, he had written a
book rather of the necessity of Deprivation in case of Conformity. And not
only he but all others, except such as take the Pope for the Apostle his
successor, would change their Apostolic and Apostaticall paralells in
missallels, their cunning composition into hot opposition. One thing is
necessary, but vvorldly necessity breeds manifold necessity, necessity of
heresy, necessity of profanity, necessity of iniquity, necessity of
Episcopacy, necessity of apostasy, necessity of Conformity but only in the
case of Deprivation.


Archip. You have given me greater light in this ceremonial controversy by
that which ye have said of that first and second determination, I thank God
for it, then ever I had before; and have put me in good hope that ye will yet
break up a greater light for my full information when ye enter upon your
third determination.


Epaph. That Sun of righteousness shine upon my dark mind that ye may have
some of my borrowed light, and both may be led to life in him who dwells in
light. What it shall please his exceeding goodness to communicate I shall not
hide under a bushel. Third determination Evangelical
The third and last determination is Evangelicall and Christian.


Archip. What difference make ye betwixt this and the former?


Epaph. It is like the first, and unlike the second in immutability, (...).
for Christ has spoken in the last times, Heb. 1.1. Like the second and unlike
the first in institution: for the last determination under the Gospel is not
natural but positive. As the Lord made a positive Ordinance for Circumcision
so also for Baptism: And as a lamb was ordained for the Passover, so bread and
wine for the Communion. As it was made known by the first law what was
morally good and evil; by the second what was ceremonially good or evil: so
by this third determination it may be known distinctly and particularly what
is good or evil in the Christian Kirk to the end of the world. With this
difference that the law Moral stands constant as a certain and unalterable rule
both in time of the ceremonies, and in time of the Gospel. But as it was
unlawful to use Evangelicall ceremonies in the time of the Law because the
Lord had not as yet institute them so is it unlawful to use Judicial
ceremonies in the time of the Gospel because divine authority has abolished
them. Both stand with the law moral, but are incompatible betwixt themselves:
both also are incompatible with the ceremonies of pagans and idolaters, and
with all humane inventions.


Archip. Seeing the Ceremonies of the Jews are antiquat, is it not lawful for
the Christian Kirk to appoint new ceremonies in their place?


Epaph. D. Downam has been in a great slumber when he wrote page 69 of
Christian liberty: That as it is lawful for Lawgivers to make civil Laws in
stead of the abolished judicial Law, that it is also lawful for the Kirk, in
her Provincionall, National or General Synod to establish laws
Ecclesiastical, in place of the abrogated law of Ceremonies: for what were
that else but to erect a new Ceremonial law in place of the old, and to make
it necessary albeit not by necessity of divine precept, Si non necessitar^
medii aut precepti divini at saltem necessitate praecepti humans in Christiana
subversienem libertatis and divini and humani juris aquipondium.
as the former was during that time, yet to the wreck of Christian liberty by
the necessity of man's commandment. Only he that makes summer to succeed
after winter, the night to day, old age after youth, may set down one form of
worship after another. The saying of Vindicanus the witty Physician: The
medicine works not because I directed it not. Quia ego non jussi, belongs to
the Lord in matters of his worship, August epict. 5.


Archip. He seems to have gone too far, and I think in the Reformed Kirkes
will find few followers. Yet I am sure the Lord who has appointed Kirk
Assemblies has granted them some power, and vvherin can the power be, except
it be in matters of Ceremony?


Epaph. That I deny not: Three sorts of ordinances in the Christian Kirk
compared with the three sorts of Jewish ceremonies. 1 Divino divinae. 2 Divino
humanae. 3 Humanae.
1 Divinae instieutiones. 2 Ecclesiastica constitutiones. 3 Humana inventiones.
yet many are mistaken in taking up that power. And so was I for a long time,
till I began in simplicity of heart to make the right comparison, betwixt the
Christian and Judicial Kirk, the moral law keeping equal force in both.


Archip. I would gladly hear of that comparison, that I may be as ye are, who
am as ye was.


Epaph. As in the Kirk of the Jews there were three sorts of Ordinances, some
merely Divine, some mixed, and some merely humane: so have there been
answerably the same three kinds in the Christian Kirk; Divine Institutions,
Ecclesiastic Constitutions, and humane inventions, (for so may they be named
for distinction sake.) The Christian Kirk has divine institutions as the Kirk
of the Jews had: the Kirk of the Jews behoved to have Ecclesiastic
constitutions as the Christian Kirk has. And both the kirk of the Jews and
the Christian Kirk, through Satan's subtle tentation, and man's presuming
superstition, have been polluted with traditions of men and will worship. Now
when men will have Ecclesiastic constitutions in the Christian Kirk, whether
they be alone or joined with divine to succeed lineally to divine institutions
in the Jewish Kirk, and when men will have their own traditions or inventions
in the Christian Kirk, to answer Ecclesiastic or Divine constitutions in the
Jewish Kirk: they go awry, either not knowing what Christian liberty is, or
else wittingly turning it into licentiousness. They abridge Gods mar^hes,
(...). Iud. 19. Divine institutions in the one and the other Kirk compared.
and enlarge their own.


Archip. What comparison make ye then betwixt Divine Institutions in the one
Kirk and the other?


Epaph. Divine institution of Legal and Evangelicall worship is equally full
and co^pleat in all things necessary, and that could conveniently be determined
according to the commendation of good laws, which leave as little undetermined
and without the compass of the Law as may be Giving of laws is no part of
Christian liberty under the Gospel more then under the Law. The King of the
Kirk is her only Lawgiver at all time.


Archip. Equally full and complete, that cannot be: for divine institutions
under the law were many in respect of the few institutions under the Gospel.


Epaph. Ye will say with me it must be, if ye consider that in the
ceremonial law of Moses there were two things to be distinguished, number and
light, multitude and direction; the one was a burden, the other a benefit;
the one a yoke, the other an ease. Evangelicall liberty makes the Christian
Kirk free of the number and multitude: but the perfection of the Lawgiver
above Moses suffers him not to give less perfect and particular direction.
We have not multitudes of Sacrifices and Sacraments as the Jews had. But our
information concerning our few and easy Sacraments in every thing necessary
and lawful is as plain and perfect, and fewer questions referred to the
Kirkes decision now then at that time. As then negative conclusions from the
Ceremonial law were good, and affirmative bad; so are they now from the
Gospel. They concluded thus, it is not commanded therefore it is not lawful:
and not thus; it is not forbidden, therefore it is lawful; and so must we now.
Affirmative conclusions of that sort are indirect accusations of the word of
God, and direct challenges of the personal ignorance of men, who for the most
part can as little give a sufficient reason from Scripture against Arrian
heresy, Theologia in subjecto non adaequat Theologiam in objecto. Rectum est
sui and obliqui norma. Nihil extra, praeter aut co^tra ^cripturam, nihil nisi
ex scriptura doceri debet aut potest. Nisi quis sort naturam in suo genere
perfectam. Scripturam vero minus perfectam statuat ac proinde magis in natura
Deum quum in Scriptura sap nisse Iun. These. disp. 6 these. 9.
as against kneeling at the Communion. Our knowledge ought to be fundamentally
positive, and occasionally privatiue It is well if we can give a reason for
our own practice from the Word, albeit we cannot bring a place of Scripture
against each error that breaks out of every crazie brain. It is a safer
conclusion in health to say this agreeable to my constitution therefore I will
use it: then, I know no harm this can do, therefore I will use it. The
Author to the Hebrews reasons many times negatiuely in that Epistle: The
Ancients use it frequently against the error of their times: The Papists use
it unwittingly; and all our Writers against the Papists use it purposely: And
yet it is refused in this cause by our Adversaries to us.


Archip. No marvel, for it has place only in matters dogmaticall and of
faith, not in matters Traditionall and of Ceremony.


Epaph. The word also must be the soul that gives life to the ceremonies
without which they are but dead carcasses. Verbum Del tanquam anima est quae
ceremonias vivificat sublato verbo quicquid rituum observant homines etiamsi
externa specie pi^rum observationi conveniat nihil aliud est quam putida and
satua superstitio. Nonne vides ista qu^a in Sacrosancto hoc pharmacopolio non
continentu^ proinde nullius esse pretii. D. Morio.
But lest ye be miscarryed any longer in this point: I ask first if the Roman
Kirk would enjoyne Chrisme, extreme unction, holy Water (which D. Morton
alleges for examples against the Papists) only as Traditionall, or in their
nature indifferent, and not as things necessary to salvation, whether would
his words make against her. See ye not, because these things are not contained
in holy Scripture therefore to be of no vvorth; for the observation of such
ceremonies are not in Scripture more then the superstition of them. I ask
next, whether the Cross in Baptism, Surplice, Holy Days, kneeling at the
Communion etc. may not be ranked with Chrisme, holy water, etc. that opinion
of necessity being removed. Thirdly, I ask whether a simple affirmation that
the ceremonies questioned are indifferent with a subtle and vehement urging
of them more then of matters of greatest necessity without any demonstration
of their indifferency, be either sufficient proofs that they are intended for
things indifferent by the Vrgers, or sufficient information to Pastors and
people to judge of them as of things indifferent. Do not the Lutherans after
this manner remove sacramental fraction, defend their images, Auricular
Confession. And what ceremony is there in all Paganism, Iudaisme; what
amongst the Papists or Lutherans: what of the whole Altar of Damascus that
may not be brought in under the vale of Indifferency. If it be sufficient to
say that it is not urged as necessary to salvation: He that enforces the^ as
necessary, and affirms they are indifferent; and he that practices with
the^ and preaches against them, is like him Prou. 26. As a man who casts
firebrarnds, arrows and death, so is the man that deceives his neighbor and
says, Am not I in sport. Practice, command, compulsion are better copies of
the mind, then profession in men who pretend they do nothing against
conscience. And people who are more moved with what they see then what they
hear, Quid verb^ audiam cum facta videam. Vos nunime fugiunt conc^atus quibus
angebatur conscientiae mea propter illam quam sequebar vitae vationem innumeris
quotidie superstitionibus connivendum erat. Superstitios^ritus non solum mihi
peragendi: virumetiam ab aliis imp^rtu^^ exigendi multa faciebam aliter quam
sentiebam and docebam, p. 1073.
may say what do we hear words while we see deeds. Were there hearts as
free of the world as P. Martyrs was, they would perhaps deplore their case
with him; and confess the vexation of their conscience in practicing and
urging rites of that sort as he did.


Archip. I see now that albeit the multitude of precepts be not so great, yet
the divine direction is as plain and perfect under the Gospel as ever it was
before. Come to the second part of the comparison betwixt Ecclesiastic
constitutions under the Law and under the Gospel, vvherin I foresee the
greatest difficulties.


Epaph. Second sort compared.
Here indeed properly comes in the consideration of things indifferent by
Ecclesiastical authority determinable: a subject in Divinity most like that of
time, place, motion in natural Philosophy. If ye ask not what they are
every man knows: But if ask what they are, no man can tell you. A subject
disputed mightily, but determined weakly; as most nearly touching the outward
face of every Kirk in the eyes of the world, and the crowns and bellies of
Kirkmen in their own feeling. And hence on all sides so full of prejudice and
heat of contention that it has almost ruined the Kingdom of Christ, set up
the kingdom of Antichrist, divided Pastors, offended people, dismembered the
Kirk, and only not put out the very life of true piety. Oh that it would
please the Lord at last to pity the Kirk redeemed with his blood, and that
vine which his right hand has planted. O Lord our God who have in former
times gotten renown to thy name amongst us; and see how this day we are
become a reproach to all that are about us, cause yet thy face to shine upon
thy sanctuary that is desolate for the Lords sake. O Lord hear, O Lord
forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not for thy own sake o our God, for
thy people are called by thy name. Open our eyes o father of Lights, for if we
be so blind in things lying before our feet, what know we in the high mysteries
of the Gospel: if we swim in these shallow foords of practice, how shall we
wade the bottomless seas of thy wisdom. Give us the simplicity of the
Lamb, banish from us procacitie and disdainful sharpness of wit: subdue our
distempered affections that we presume not to frame rules for thy worship; cut
them off who seek to please themselves by displeasing thee, who build up
their worldly estates upon the ruins of thy Kirk. Save us all from
perfidiousnesse against thee, and that dear mother Kirk in whose bowels we
have our first and second birth, and in whose skirts we are nursed to this
day. Behold he comes in the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also who pierced him, and all kinreds of the earth shall wail because of him:
even so, Amen.


Archip. Thrice happy were that man whom the Lord would honor to be an
instrument of Pacification by manifesting the truth to every man's conscience in
this so long-lasting controversy. I see that the most part agree in the
general, both about the nature and about the use of things indifferent: As
enuntiations of things contingent are necessary and not contingent. So the
general A^iomes of things indifferent and variable are not indifferent but
invariable in all ages and nations. Sicut singularium and co^tingentiu^ ita and
indifferentium d^tarenta scientia in actu signato.
The true doctrine of indifferency is the same in Scotland, England, Germany
etc. The same in the times of the old and new Testament. The Apostolic rules
of respect to Gods glory, to order and decency, to scandal and edification,
are no new precepts, but the exposition of the law Moral, requiring love to
God and our neighbor: and transgressed as well by the Pharisees of old, as by
their successors since. Wherein then stands the greatest diversity and
difficulty?


Epaph. Ye will find it to be in the Application of these general rules to
the particulars controverted in diverse Kirkes. The Roman Kirk has an
unwritten Word for all that, they will have embraced beside, that which they
find in Scripture. The Lutherane Kirks hold somethings for indifferent which
the Kirk of England finds to be condemned in the Word; and England defends a
multitude of Ordinances about Discipline and ceremonies for indifferent, which
we take to be unlawful, and besides the warrant of the Word: the matter going
with several Kirks, every one judging according to her own measure of
Reformation, as with several Christians every one judging according to his
own degree of grace and regeneration. And what vvonder if all the reformed
Kirkes creeped not forth of that Roman deluge equally accomplished; what
greater vvonder then that any should be found free of the smell of that wine of
fornication, whereof they all for so many years were drunk.


Archip. For making the right application; of necessity two points must be
insisted upon 1 How and by what notes I shall know such accidental,
circumstantiall and individual ceremonies as are the proper object of man's
determination. And thus what particulars are left to be in nature indifferent.
2 After what sort must the determination of man pass upon them, that the
actions about things indifferent may be good; and so of their use. For the
first Lambertus Danaeus gives some light Distinguendum est de disciplin^
partibus, quaedam esse in ea essen^ alia omnino, quadam accidentalia.
Essentialia sunt omnia quae de Electione and manner personarum Ecclesiasticarum
hic traduntur. Accident^^^ sunt quae ad particularem earum rerum modum
servandum, sormamone aliquam constitu^^dum and cujusque populi commoditatis
ration in habendam pertinent, veluis quotie^ Episcopo s^ la Heodomad^
conclon^ndum, quiebus diebus, qua hor^, quo loco, and catera quae sunt hi^
usmodi Danaus in 1 Timothy 3 15.
while he distinguishes betwixt things essential and things accidental in
the discipline of the Kirk. All things are essential that are set down there
concerning the office and election of Ecclesiastic persons. Things accidental
are such as concern the particular manner and form of doing of things
essential, as may serve best for the commodity of every people: as how often the
Bishop of the place shall preach every week, upon what days, what hour, in
what place, etc. And Iunius to the same sense. Quaecunque in circumstantiis
posita sunt little traditiones in Ecclesia esse aut no^ esse posse, veruntamen
te^porales, particulares and liberas agnoscimus; quaedam non nisi a praesente
monstrantur (ait Seneca) non potest medicus per Epistolas cibi aut ba^nei
tempus eligere, vena, tangenda est, vetus proverbium est gladiatorem in arena
capere consilium, Iun. disp. 6 These. 11 12.
Traditions of things consisting in circumstances may be and may not be in the
Kirk; yet we acknowledge them (says he) to be temporary, particular and free.
He cites Seneca to this effect saying. Some things are not known but by him
that is present. The Physician cannot choose the time of meat or medicine for
his patient by letter, the vein must be touched. And the fencer must advise
when he is now entered within the listes. I think both say well to the
purpose. What think ye?


Epaph. Ye have both taken up the points very right, and have observed good
grounds for the first. It cannot be denied but there is a mutability, and
oftentimes a necessity of mutation in Ecclesiastic Canons as well as in Civil
Laws, and that upon two grounds; one is the condition of the persons that make
the constitutions who may become wiser and profit in knowledge in such
measure that they be brought to the sight of their former errors or
inexpediency of preceding constitutions. In this case Foelix est necessitas
quae in meliora co^pellit.
it is a happy necessity that compels men to do better. The other ground is
the nature of the subject vvhereupon, and the constitution of the persons for
whom the Canons are made, with other circumstances variable. Nam alia lux
infanti sertur, alia viro, alia aratori serenti, alia metenti alia c^dibi, alia
conjugato. Inn. de Posit. Mosis c. 4.
And therefore the Apostle says well of one sort of Laws, says the Lord.
But of this sort, I say, not the Lord. (...), Coloss. 1 9. Quisquis les
immutabiles ratione and modo immutabili adminiserandus and procuiandas putat,
is domi prudentiam parentum in regendis liberis, ruri peritiam ^taterum in
col^ndi^ agris, in alto peritiam nautarium in observandis ventis damnaturus
est: et lum constantem perpetuamque rationem serv^e putat, ves ipsas quibus
ratio consulit contra rationem perditu^^s. Inn. cod. cap.
As there is a general wisdom considering what is lawful, so there is a
particular prudence judging according to the occurrences what is expedient.
Without these two cases, when either the matter is not variable; or the matter
being variable, the change is not to the better, it is both without and against
reason to change: without reason because when the change is made into that
which is as good, the one and the other in reason is equal: against reason
Ipsa mutatio cons^^indius, etiam quae millitare surv^^, (...) per^^^^.
because the very change hinders the common edification, brings the
discredit of innovation, and extenuate the authority of the Law. This poor
Kirk has the doleful proof of the latter. All the question is of the former;
whether the things changed be in their nature variable, Your observation
gives some light: but the light will be greater both in our controverted
particulars, and in the matter of indifferency in general: if out of the
humble consideration of the intention of Gods spirit in committing his will to
writ, and of his perfect wisdom for fulfilling that intention compared with
the course of the Scripture it self, and with the positions of all the
Divines of the Reformed Kirks whose eyes have not been blinded either with
prejudice or love of the world, we could resolve upon two grounds.


Archip. I pray you, which are these?


Epaph. One is, whatsoever was of that condition, First ground for knowing
what is by nature indifferent.
whether under the law or the Gospel that it could not possibly or
conveniently be determined by a general and positive law, as it behoved to be,
so was it left to the determination of the true Kirk following the direction
of the general rules. And hence the cause is evident why the divine
determination under the Gospel in the Oecumenick Kirk could not be so
particular as in the National Kirk of the Jews. But neither in the one not in
the other was there any thing left to the Kirk vvhereupon particular
determination conveniently could pass before. Under the Law the daily
sacrifice, and more particularly the morning and evening sacrifice were
appointed; but the hour was left to the Kirk, because it was hard without
scruple of conscience to be tied to that, and the precise observation thereof
had been almost impossible. Under the Gospel the Lords day is sanctified, but
the particular hour of the day for public worship in diverse Nations and
seasons of the year could not be designed: and therefore permitted to the
discretion of national kirks, and Particular Congregations, observing the
general rules. Under the Law the word behoved to be preached publicly in
their Cities upon the Saboths, when they came not up to Jerusalem, but no
particular determination of the places and Synagogues: even so under the
Gospel a public place for public worship necessary, but no particular
situation nor appointing of Congregations. In Iudaea, a nomination of the tribe
of Levi for the Ministry, the like whereof could not be under the Gospel
throughout the whole world, far less whither John or James. Public preaching
and prayer commanded, but the individual points of doctrine, petitions of
prayer, and some other particular circumstances concerning the order and manner
of worship, impossible to determine, because they must vary according to the
occasion and cases of persons, places, purposes etc.


Archip That seems to me both a sure and plain ground, my soul blesses you
for it, come on with the second.


Epaph. The other is; whatsoever was unprofitable or needed not to be
determined particularly by divine authority, The second ground.
as being most easily discernable by the light of nature, that is not
particularly determined by the word, but left to the determination of the
Kirk, keeping still the direction of the general rules. And hence it is
manifest that the determination of the Scripture could not possible be more
particular without superfluity. This is the perfection of that wisdom* that
it has neither defect nor excess; that it neither wants any thing possible,
nor has any thing unprofitable. It is commanded that the Pastor shall preach
to the people, but whether he shall stand on his head or his feet, with his
face or his back turned toward them, in a high or a low pulpit, it is left to
the light of nature: That Baptism be ministered with water, but as the water
of Iudaea had been impossible, so it was unprofitable to determine with what
water: That the Lords Supper be celebrate in bread and wine, but as the bread
and wine of Iudaea was impossible, so the light of nature directs whence we
shall have them. The determination of the time and hour was not possible, and
may be known by natural reason but the gesture is determined, and albeit it
had not been expressed, it follows upon the table.


Archip. I take it up: And it would seem that your two grounds join together
in this; that what was most hardly determinable in the general by divine
authority, was most easily discernable by natures light: And again, what in
the particular was most cognoscible by natural knowledge, was most difficult
to general determination.


Epaph. A threefold consequent out of the two former grounds.
So it is, and ye shall see that being well considered they furnish us with
this threefold consequent for our direction. First, nothing merely positive,
voluntary, or that flows from free institution without any help of the light
of nature, can be by nature indifferent in the worship of God, or can be the
matter of Ecclesiastic constitution; whether it come by humane invention,
imitation of the enemy, or translation of Gods ordinances, because whatsoever
is necessary of that sort, is not only possible, but easy to divine and
general determination.


Archip. How serves that first consequent for our direction?


Epaph. Because hence it follows, that wine, sale, spittle, cross in
Baptism, surplice, kneeling in the time of receiving, festival days etc. are
to be rejected. For albeit kneeling in some other exercises of Religion may be
natural, yet in communicating, it is merely voluntary. Even as diverse
religious washings under the Law were of divine institution. Heb. 9 10. Yet the
other religious washings remembered Math. 15.1, and Mark. 7 4, were only of
man's invention and institution, because wrong applied, Math. 1^ 3, Mark. 7 7.
That which is necessary by the light of nature, or by divine institution in
one part of divine worship, may be positive and vvil-worship in another.
Observation of days is of the same kind. The determination of an anniversary
day is no less positive, and as easily determinable by a general law as the
observation of the weekly Saboth.


Archip. Which is your second consequent?


Epaph. The second is, whatsoever is left to Ecclesiastic determination after
that it is determined has a reason from the light of nature, wherefore it was
so determined and not otherwise, having in it a certain expediencie or a kind
of necessity sensible to every one endued with natural reason: As wherefore
one hour or place rather then another is chosen for divine exercise; why one
person rather then another is to be a Minister; why fasting at one time and not
at another; why such doctrines and petitions at one season more then another.
Now the light of nature will never teach any to kneel in the time of eating
and drinking at the Lords Table, but rather to use a Table Gesture. Nor can the
light of nature give a reason why the 25 of December should be observed, except
it be pretended to be the birth day, which is evidently false, or because it is
a fit time for feasting, which is both profane and sensual.


Archip. Which is the third consequent?


Epaph. The third is; the variable matter of Ecclesiastical determination can
never be universal, nor concluded upon internal or general reasons, but
local, temporal, personal, circumstantiall; otherways it could not be
changeable, neither could it have been left for men to determine. And therefore
kneeling with the reason vvhereupon it is concluded, cannot be a matter
indifferent, but necessary to be practiced by all communicants in all times
and places. And observation of days is of the same sort: for were it a thing
indifferent, then one kirk would make choice of one time for instructing of
the people in the naitivitie, and another kirk another time. Vniformitat in
majoribus caeremon^s necessaria: in minoribus impossibilis.
Either that observation must be necessary or unlawful. Every indifferent
thing is variable; and upon occasions may and must be changed: and therefore
all conformity in greater ceremonies is necessary, because they are specified
in the word, so conformity in less ceremonies is impossible, because they
depend upon circumstances variable, as conformity in language and natural
disposition.


Archip. O what a happiness were it, if men could keep themselves within
their marches; and not sacrilegiously usurp the Lords property. If they would
make only such matters the matter of their Ecclesiastic Canons, as the Lord
had not passed any determination upon before. And by that which ye have
taught me, if the will of men did not stand in their light, it were easy to
see what things were in nature indifferent.


Epaph. It were indeed the beginning of a happiness; but it might end in a
misery, if the rules concerning the use of things in nature indifferent were
not observed, Rules for the use of things indifferent.
as well as their nature rightly taken up. And it fears me, when ye have
thought upon these rules, ye shall find that we are more mistaken in the use
then in the nature.


Archip. Some men are so licentious, that they think they may make their own
pleasure the rule for their use of a thing indifferent. Others are so
peremptory, that they affirm there is nothing in use indifferent. I know not
what to think.


Epaph. Distinguendum inter fidem et factu^, inter (...) and (...), inter actum
nudum and circumstantion^um, Inter actum in specie and individuo, inter rem
consideratam in actu signato and actu exercite.
That indifferency has place only in the general, or in the nature of the
action, and not in the particular or in the use, it almost universally
confessed, while men distinguish with the Apostle betwixt our faith and our
fact; with others betwixt our profession and our use, betwixt the naked
action, and the action clothed with circumstances; betwixt one action general
and Individual. Indifferency of action can no more be found in the second
sense, then it can be denied in the first. All the actions of man in his
integrity were good; all the actions of man in glory shall be good; all the
actions of man under sin, let the matter be most indifferent in nature, are
evil; and all the actions of man under grace are either good or evil, not one
of them all indifferent. Were all our actions ruled by the word, as they ought
to be, all our actions would be good as they ought to be. For howsoever the
word be not, as it ought not to be, an Encyclopedia or general sum of all
Arts and Sciences, an universal directorie for all our actions, as they are
natural, civil, moral, oeconomiall, yet the particular determination of all
our actions falls under the rules of the word, in so far as they be
Christian and spiritual, according to the nature of all professions and
Sciences coincident for the most part in the matter, but distinct in their
manner of consideration. The lifting up of a straw (the Schoolmens example) may
be an evil action, and must be either good or evil, especially proceeding of
deliberation. Rules of health and good manners forbid it in some cases, and so
do rulers of divinity. There is no truth more unsavourie to the Libertine, a
greater paradox to the ignorant, and of greater mocking to the worldling, and
yet never denied by any Philosopher or divine, except some few who make a
distinction betwixt actions proceeding of mere imagination, and actions
proceeding of deliberation, in the one placing indifferency and not in the
other. The Idleness of which distinction might be easily shown; but that it
were not to our purpose, which runs upon matters controverted, concluded,
resisted, and so proceeding of deliberation, and not from imagination. He that
esteems it a matter indifferent for him to kneel or sit at the communion, to
observe or not to observe a festival day, now after it is called in question,
has neither reason nor authority of any writer for him: and therefore
carries a note of singularie.


Archip. When I have heard you, I cannot deny the truth, yet I am not
persuaded. For first I may say, that it is Theologia in abstructo, and not in
concreto. I know no man, but every day does many things indifferently. 2. That
ground will breed innumerable scruples of conscience, and is the ready way to
beget superstition. 3. I know not what things are requisite for making an
action by nature indifferent, to be good, that all our actions may be good, as
ye say they ought to be.


Epaph. Yet all the Divines lay it for a ground, and I would have wished that
ye had suppressed your first doubt. In many things we sin all; idle words,
idle gestures, looks, etc. are scored up in the accounts of men. For the
second, beware of profanity in declining of superstition. But in the second and
third both, ye shall say, that ye are satisfied if ye consider, that as in
natural and artificial bodies, produced according to the course of nature,
and skill of Art, there is a concurrencie of the worker, ^onum est ex imegra
ca^sa, (...) vero ex singulis desec^^us.
of the matter, of the form and of the end; for their full accomplishment and
perfection before God and man say that they are good. Even so in some
correspondence their must concur the whole four causes for accomplishing of
every action moral or spiritual, that it may be acceptable to God. It is for
the first necessary that the person or persons, efficient be In Christ by
faith, without which it is imposible to please God: Four causes concurring to
make a good action.
that the action be with the renewing spirit of God, and of the working spirit
of God. 2 the matter or substance of the action be indeed either good or
indifferent in respect of the object, and that it be thoroughly known to be
such. If it be not either good or indifferent, the action is done with an
erroneous conscience. If it be not known to be such, it is done either with a
doubting, V^l errante, vel dubitante, vel haesitante, vel repugna^^^e
conscienti^: conscientia (...) non min^^ a licitis quam ab illicitis ^o^ibet
dubil^^t^^, haesti^^tem, repug^^^te^, vel tandeus audente conscientia.
or unresolved or contradicting conscience. If there be a defect of both, the
action is done with a bold conscience; the first is great, the second greater,
the third the greatest sin.


Archip. Nothing of all that can be denied: what say ye of the third and fourth
cause, the manner of doing and the end?


Epaph. The form or manner of doing presupposes the matter, either to be good
in respect of the object, or to be indifferent, and requires a conformity
with the law of God in the circumstances. Circumstantiae interdum constituunt
actionem in specia morit, alias reddunt actionem meliorem, and malam priorem.
For a good action may have a twofold conformity with the law, one is
principal, and more substantial in respect of the object, which is commanded
(we say may have, because sometimes the object is indifferent.) The other
consists in the circumstances, which sometimes make the action good or evil;
sometimes only make the good action better, or the evil worse: but have
greatest sway where the object is indifferent: for then the manner of doing, as
order, decency, sobriety, do in a manner specificate the action.


Archip. Ye seem to confound: for the circumstances contain all the four
causes, as who, what, etc. which ye refer all to the formal cause, or
manner of doing.


Epaph. In the enumeration of circumstances, we must not take Quis who for the
efficient cause, but for his condition or quality, as a private or public
person, a Pastor or a Professor, a king or a subject: Nor quid what for the
matter or object, but the quality thereof: Mediate vel immediate actu vel
virtute, ut reqiusitus reddere queas rationem a fine cur hoc feceris vel
^miseris.
as, whether it be a matter of salvation, or of life, or of gear: Nor Quomodo,
for this form, but whether it be done openly or secretly, simply or craftily,
etc. all which aggrege tho same. The end is first either immediately or
mediatly, either actually or virtually the honor of God of all the ingredients
of a good action, the most common in profession, the rarest in intention, and
yet the worthiest and sweetest. And, next our own and our neighbors good, the
principal is the edification both of our own souls, and of the salvation of
others, contrary to the great evil of offense.


Archip. Ye say then in sum, that a good man does that which is good or
indifferent, in the best manner, to a good end. All four may be brought unto
two, Bonum good, and Been well. Because no man but a good man can do an action
well with due regard of the circumstances, and the end. If it be neither bonum
good, nor been well, it is neither with the Holy Ghost, nor of the Holy Ghost.
If it be bonum good, and not been well, as the good works of natural or
civil men; it is of the Holy ghost, but not with the holy Ghost. If it be Been
well and not Bonum good, it is with the Holy Ghost, but not of the Holy Ghost.
But if it be bonum good and been well, it is both with and of the holy Ghost.


Epaph. That is right, and the common saying, Bona opera non nominibus sed
adverbij^ sunt indicanda, Pie, sobri^, just.
that Good works are to be judged by Adverbs, is true of all good actions: for
all must be done with the Apostles adverbiall conditions, Soberlie,
Righteously, Godly. But it is especially true of good actions, where the
matter is indifferent, because they have no goodness at all, but that which
is from the Adverbe. And therefore we may call actions that have Bonum good,
and want Been well (as the good actions of the Heathen, properly peccata per
accidens, sins by accident: as being bona opera per se, good actions in
themselves. The actions that have for their matter a thing indifferent, and
want Been well, as the actions of Christians about things indifferent (for
they cannot be called bona opera per se, good works in themselves) and
therefore the more improperly Peccata per accidens, sins by accident. Looking
upon an action good in the matter, we may say that it is good simply
Necessitate consequentis, by necessity of consequent; because all actions
commanded of God are good. But looking upon the actions even of Christians in
matters indifferent, we can only say that they are good necessitate
consequentiae, by necessity of consequence, supponing that whatsoever action
has the former conditions, is good: and that the actions we judge of, have
the conditions.

Archip. Qui vise loing jamais ne rend son coup heureux. I would have you to
make some application of these four causes to our own matters.


Epaph. Seeing all our actions even the meanest, Applied to the purpose.
require all the four causes or conditions, much more our actions in the
worship of God. And yet more, the actions which we must not do once all our
life, but as frequently as we are partakers of such a worship. But most of
all the actions and acts of a kirk assembled for direction in the matters of
Gods worship. For if they fail either in the matter taking that for
indifferent, which is evil, or in the manner of their convening and
proceeding without regard to the formalizing circumstances, or in the end
respecting the pleasure of man more then the pleasing of God, and the profit of
the kirk; in so far as they fail, they are sinful. And according to the
quality of the defect, take upon them the kind of sin under which they may be
ranked. Let the consciences of professors try, whether the acts of Perth
Assembly dare undergo this examination: Whether it was a lawful Synod in it
self: Whether they cleared the indifferency of their articles, before they
concluded them, whether the circumstances may give it a dash. Quis? who? the
kirk of Scotland so vvorthily reformed. Quid? what? that which they had
formerly sp^ed out; and had sworn and subscrived never to lick up again. Vbi?
where? not in another Kirk or Nation, but even where they had sworn. Quibus
auxilijs? by what means, God and the world now knows. Cur? wherefore? for
conforming to a glorious kirk, but in that wherein she was never reformed.
Quomodo? how? God and their own hearts know. Quando? at what time? when
Antichrist is prevailing, Papists presuming, and Idolatry re-entring. And
finally, whether they had either the glory of God, or the salvation of the
people in their sight, which indeed none during that Assembly were so
shameless as to pretend. And let every one try himself, whether he be
moved by the spirit of God to practice according to the constitutions thereof;
whether he be thoroughly persuaded that the matter is indifferent: whether he
keeps all the requisite circumstances; and whether his practice be free of
offense. The superstitious conscience will please it self in the show of
humble vvill-worship. The sleeping and senseless conscience will judge all to
be alike till the Lord give a wakening with his terrors. The bold conscience,
after it has carried seven days, will venture the sacrifice with Saul, 2.
Sam. 13.10. And the accusing conscience will take leave with N^aman, and say,
In this thing the Lord be merciful unto me, 2, King. 5.19.


Archip. Civil and ecclesiastic power in things indifferent.
Think ye that our superiors Civil and Ecclesiasticke, may not command in
things indifferent at their pleasure?


Epaph. None of themselves will think it. Albeit I had rather learn my own
lesson of obeying, then teach their lesson of commanding, I shall in humility
tell you my mind of both: As no power under God can make that good which he
forbids; nor make that evil which he commands: not make that good or
evil materially, which he has left indifferent; So is there no power civil
or Ecclesiasticke, that in a matter of it self most indifferent may command
against piety, decency, sobriety, or charity. habet homo libertatem
arbitrij ad su ^^ndum quod licet: libertatem consilij ad jubendum quod expedit:
Deus solus ha^^^ ^^bertatem conp^aciti ad jubendum quod libet.
Man has liberty of will to command that which is lawful: liberty of
counsel to command what is expedient; but the Lord only has liberty of
pleasure to command what he will. Many things also are permitted to the Kirk,
but nothing without limitation. It is a matter indifferent to eat of such a
meat, yet no power can command to eat of it against Piety, that is, except the
grace be said, and it be sanctified by prayer. No power can enjoin the doing
of an action indifferent against decency, whether in place, time, or manner of
doing. Against sobriety to use our liberty as an occasion to the flesh, (...).
or to pass the bounds of temperance, frugalitie, modesty. Against charity;
because when the matter about which we are exercised, is indifferent, as in
the manner of doing impiety, indecencie, intemperancie, so also scandal is a
sin, and for the most part more incurable and perilous then the former:
whether it be (...) a stumbling block making the vveake to fall, or (...) an
offense, grieving them, or making them to halt: the word calls it murder.
And so it is ratione medij, in respect of the mean, because it is apt to
destroy: albeit ratione eventu^, in respect of the event, none shall perish for
whom Christ died. Cursed is be that lays a stumbling block in the way of the
blind, and all the people shall say, Amen: Woe unto him that does offend one
of these little ones. etc.


Archip. I grant ye cannot say ill enough of scandal; but must not I obey my
superiors although all should be offended, the scandal (if there be any) is
but taken: and I have no purpose to give scandal to any, but only to obey.


Epaph. Albeit I speak against the practice of the world, Three grounds
concerning scandal.
yet I shall not willingly decline from the received doctrine of the reformed
Kirkes, and the better sort of the Scholastickes, in answering your objection
by three grounds. In the mean time ye might have left your Parenthesis; He
that denies that there is any scandal, is like him who could not see the wood
for the trees. The bleating of the sheep, Statuta Ecclesiae per se non sunt de
necessitate salutis, sed solu^ ex institutione Ecclesiae: and adeo non obligant
si assue^t rationabile impedimentu^, 2 2 ae. q. 147 art. 4.

Leges autem humana non obligant ex voluntate legislatoris, sed ex ipsa le^um
vtilitate et ratione, D Filled. l. 4. c. 34.

N^cessitate praescientia and indicij divini: necessitate efficientia, Saranica
nempe malitiae and human^ corruptionis and necessitate s^^is: verumetia^
necessitate obiecti. i. infir^^^^ a scandalo sibi satis cavire nequuntinu^


and the lowing of the oxen are loud in Samuels ears. The vvalking of Diogenes
is meetest for a Zeno, who against all reason denies that there is any
motion. The first ground is, that Ecclesiastic and civil constitutions about
things indifferent oblige not Extra casum scandali out of the case of Scandal,
by reason that they are supponed to intend edification. Secondly, as every
scandal is sin, Passive in the patient, Active in the agent, and mixed in
both; so scandal active or given, has place not only in things unlawful,
but indifferent. Blessed is be that condemns not himself in that which he
allows. Romans 14. And that which is mixed scandal comes nearest to the
nature of active; hardly or never can there be a public scandal taken,
except it be also active and given. Seeing there must be offenses, not only
by necessity of Gods decree, of Satan's malice, of man's corruption, of the end,
that the Kirk may be tried, but also by necessity of the object, that is, of
the infirm and weak, who cannot keep themselves from stumbling, when the
rock lies in the way; all occasions of taking of offense ought to be removed
and prevented. Otherwise Ezekias might have suffered the brazen Serpent to
stand, the scandal whereof was only taken But had he suffered, far more
had he ordained it by law to stand after the abuse, the scandal had been mixed,
and more active then passive. Thirdly, scandal is given not only in
intention operantis, in the intention of the doer: but also negligente
operante in condition operis, the doer being negligent in the quality of the
deed. Not only that person gives scandal amongst us, who by the ceremonies
would reduce Popery, or symbolize with the Papists, or knows them to be
dangerous: but he also who not knowing or fearing danger, yields to practice
them, and that propter conditionem operis, by reason of the quality of the
deed. As the Nurse that puts a knife into the hand of her child, of mere
negligence, yea albeit it were of love; and he that suffers a goating Ox to
go abroad, far more if he let him loose. Our own late act of Parliament
(not unlike that ancient law of Millane remembered by Sigonius) for preventing
of fire in the Town of Edinburgh, is a strong confutation of the first act. It
was unlawful among the Jews to bow before an Idol for the knitting of the
shoe latchet. His shift was but silly who would have seemed to fall down
before the Persian King to take up his ring, which he had purposely let fall,
and not to do the king honor, which he would have avoided. Eleazar would
neither eat swines flesh, nor seem to eat it by eating common flesh. And
Secundus would neither deliver the Bible, nor seem to be one of the Traditors
by delivering another thing to be burned. Amos, says Ribera, puts the event
for the cause, when he says, cap. 2. They went in to a maid to defile mine
holy name.


Archip. All that ye have said of Scandal, goes well with the course of the
word, and seems agreeable to the doctrine of Christ denouncing vvoe upon them
not only who give, but also by who^ offenses come. Agreeable to the doctrine
of the Apostle, Romans 14. after he had taught obedience to the Magistrate, chap.
13. His reason is moral, perpetual, peremptory, and universal without
exception of contramanding authority. And therefore the conclusion must be of
the same size. His meaning is not, Destroy not him for whom Christ died,
except Caesar command. But not so agreeable to the doctrine of all our Divines,
Beza himself is alleged to the contrary, epist. 24. And ye know your self
what D. Downame says.


Epaph. No man can be so brazen faced, as to cite that Epistle of Beza to the
contrary without blushing, except it be Mr. Mitchelson our Doctor, who I
remember in the first argument of his Plagiarie and poor pamphlet taken from
the nature of things indifferent, brings the words going before, and
following of that Epistle for his purpose, and perfidiously passes these;
Rerum modiarum vsut nimium promiscuns coercetur, tum in genere, tum in specie:
In genere per legem charitatis, etc. that is, the too common use of things
indifferent is restrained both generally, and in particular, generally by the
law of charity, etc. While Beza gives two rules for their use and restraint,
one first and general of charity, belonging to all men, and all matters of
that sort, that nothing otherwise indifferent and lawful be done whereby our
brother is destroyed; or left undone, whereby he may be edified: he alleges
only the second of civil and Ecclesiastic determination, which is less
principal, and may impose nothing contrary, not prejudicial to the former,
which is the main and principal, grounded upon the original law of nature.


Archip. But what say ye to the other?


Epaph. A wonder it is, what Doct. Douname can mean in good earnest by
marching loyalty in order after piety, and before sobriety and charity. If the
Magistrate have absolute and unbounded authority in things indifferent (which
for fashion sake he denies in the general) What can be the cause why, the
matter being, indifferent he gives not the first place to loyalty preferring
it to piety? or if limited and restrained, why shall not sobriety and charity
be the limits as well as piety? Albeit it be lawful to pledge the King his
health; yet neither sobriety nor piety ought to be banished from the table.
Neither can he say that drinking beyond the bounds of sobriety for once,
carries a greater guiltiness then to practice that many times which may
destroy a soul for whom Christ dyed. May there not be cases of Antinomy, or
opposition of the laws of loyalty and piety, of loyalty and sobriety, as
well as of loyalty and charity. And as he alleges, that there is Scandalum
(...) equal offense in the one; albeit he know that authority judging them to
be indifferent may well be displeased but cannot be scandalized, at least in
ae^uilibrio, in equality with the other scandal. May there not be (...)
peccati, equality of sin in the other, in times or places where there rules
an ungodly or intemperate Magistrate. Bezaes order making charity the first and
general rule; and seconding that with the constitutions of the Kirk and laws
of the Commonwealth is divine. Dounames putting man's authority before
sobriety, and charity, is humane.


Archip. But the scandal cease to be sin, or at least to be our sin,
when our superiors command.


Epaph. Disobedience were unlawful it upon commandment of our superiors the
scandal either ceased to be, or ceased to be sin, or ceased to be our sin.

But first it cease not to be. For the commandment of the Magistrate makes
it the greater, as the boldness of the Papist, the mocking of the profane, the
grief of the godly, the superstition of the simple in these late days have
declared, and still the more that the ceremonies be urged and received, the
greater shall the offense be, and the greatest when there shall be least
contradiction. Next the scandal cease not to be sin, because scandal
being scandal it must be sin, as idolatry is ever idolatry, there is no
dispensation of the law of nature. Thirdly, it cease not to be our sin,
when the sin is in modo imperandi, in the manner of commanding. The superior
may have guiltiness in commanding and the inferior be innocent in obeying:
but when the sin is also in re imperata, in the thing commanded; as the
matter commanded being against piety, decency or charity, the guiltiness is on
both sides.


Archip. For removing of scandal we ought not to disobey, but to render a
reason of our obedience.


Epaph. If rendering a reason of our doing might quit us of sin, as some have
pretended, the question of things indifferent might be soon put to an end, the
Apostle his doctrine abridged, and all the Christian Kirkes brought to
quietness. But that which the Schoolmen utter more obscurely, that the
actions of the understanding depend upon our own will, or upon the will of
others, quoad exercitium, non quoad specificationem, is clear in experience. We
may make our selves or others to think upon the matter, but to assent or
diassent it depends not upon our will. They are little exercised in catechizing
of the ignorant who maintain such grounds.


Archip. But I am sure the commandment of the superior at least extenuates
the sin.


Epaph. Comparing sin with sin, the fault is not so great upon particular
tentation, without purpose and intention to fail against the rule of Charity,
or Sobriety, or Piety: as to obey a Law injoyning the practice of a thing
indifferent against sobriety or charity with purpose of obedience. For in the
one thou simply neglects the commandment of God, but in the other, with a
soul disparagement of Antinomy, thou prefers the commandment of Man.


Archip. Necessary duties must not be left for offense of any.


Epaph. D. Dounam his reason taken from the distinction of necessary and
arbitrary duties can have no place here. For albeit communicating and
preaching be necessary duties, and must be done albeit all the world should
stumble, yet kneeling and comforming, which man has made their adherents, are
no necessary duties; Dimittendum est propter sca^dalum omne quod potest
pratermitt^, salva triplice veritate, scil. vita, do^trina and Instititia
Hieron. gloss. ora. Tom. 9.
but at the most indifferent ever in the opinion of the practisers: and
therefore in the case of offense to be left. Might he not upon the same ground
conclude that seeing drinking is a necessary duty, therefore rather ere I want
drink at a time I will yield to drink above Sobriety. The offense comes not
by communicating, nor drunkenness by drinking: but the offense comes by
kneeling, and drunkenness by excessive drinking.


Archip. The great danger in this purpose is, that declyning the one extremity,
ye fall into the other.


Epaph. To tell you my mind, I acknowledge an essential kirk, the Congregation
of the faithful, a representative Kirk, the Assembly representing the Kirk
essential. But I know no virtuall Kirk on earth: whether the Bishop of Rome,
or any other man, as having in himself eminently and virtually (for so the
Papists profess, and others in part practice) such certainty of truth, and
sovereignty of judgment, that he may command what he will in any controverted
matter Ecclesiastical, whether he command that which is unlawful, or that
which is lawful to be done in an unlawful manner, that is against the
general rules. When Alexander the Great came to Jerusalem he desired his image
to be erected in the Temple. The high Priest was willing to please him in every
thing, wherein God was not displeased: and therefore refusing with all reverence
that idolatry, what he might, and what served more the Kings honor he offered
cheerfully. First, to begin the accounts of their times from his entry into
Jerusalem: and secondly, to name all their first borne sons Alexanders from
him. What is civil, what domestic, what is Casars, what is ours, let them be
forbidden water and fire, and their City sown with salt who refuse it. Let
Christ's royal prerogative who will not give his glory to another be kept for
himself. May we not in so narrow a strait, where we can see no way to turn,
neither to the right hand nor to the left, open our mouths with the obedient
Ass, and say, Have we used to serve so in other matters? In Ministerio
Ecclesia spectandum est and ^p^um ministerium, and persona qua eo fungitur.
Quod ad personam attine^, civili potestati minister subjicitur: nam et civis
est and quemadmodum alii tributum solvit, and morum censuram subit. Sed quod
attinet a^ Ministerium aliqua etiam modo subitcitur Magistratui: quia si contra
verbum D^i aut doceat aut adm^n ^ret sa^ ^^ia, coercibitur a civili Magistrata.
Nec tamen ab eo sed a verbo Dit regulas et rations pe^^ (...) functionis
le^com. p. 902.
Let other men speak for us. Jn the Ministry of the Kirk (says P. Martyr)
both the Ministry it self is to be considered, and the persons that hears
the function. As for the person of the minister he is subject to the Civil
power, for he is a liege: he pays tribute or taxation as others, and
undergoeth the censure of manners: But as for the Ministry it is in some sort
subject to the Magistrate. For if he teach or minister the Sacraments against
the word of God be is to be repressed by the Civil Magistrate: and yet not
from him but from the word of God shall be seek the rules and reasons of his
function. Primum quae autoritate ex^^plove ab ductus sancta^ Dei Ecclesia^ and
simplicitatem my serorum Christi (cujus solius vocem agnoscunt and sequuntur
eves, quia solu^ audiri mandavit Pater, Joan. 10 27) circumvestiundum esse
putet humanis traditionibus quas repudiat Christus. Secundum, quem ad finem res
suas ads^i divinis' judicet oportere. Nam si cacum abis conformetur a^utus
soret alias Ecclesias iis conforman qua verbum Dei accedunt proxime, ex
confilio Cypriam, quam has se illis adiungere. Sit honestiora (...) omnia, quid
simplicitate Christi honestius, quid honesiate simplicius. Si voluntatem, este
s^ne, a^ illud cogitandum, voluntatem Dei esse necessitatem ^ummam nec Dei
Ecclesiam in divinis rebus voluntatibus humanis obligari, tertium, quis tandem
eventus ex humanis traditionibus consequatur, ut diuturna ostendit experientia,
Ecclesiast. l. 3 c. 5.
Worthy Fran. Junius lays before the eyes of authority a threefold
consideration; 1 by what authority or example is the Magistrate moved to
think, that the holy Kirk of God, and the simplicity of the mysteries of
Christ (whose voice alone his sheep know and follow, because the Father
commanded that it should be heard only, Job. 10 27) should be clothed about
with humane traditions which Christ himself rejects. 2 To what end thinks
be, that his things must be sowed unto the Ordinances of God? For if it be that
she may be conform unto others, it were more equitable that other Kirkes
should conform to them who come nearest to the word of God, according to
Cyprians counsel: not that they should join themselves to other Kirkes. If it
be that all things may be more decent, what can be more decent then the
simplicity of Christ? What more simple then his decency? If it be for
fulfilling of his own will let it be so. But it must be remembered that the
will of God is the greatest necessity, and that the Kirk of God in things
divine is not subject to the will of men. 3 What events may follow upon humane
traditions, as daily experience has showed.


Archip. You ever tell me what he should not do. But I would hear somewhat
positive of his power in things Ecclesiastical: what he should and may do in
times of contention especially.


Epaph. That is not my part ye know: yet this I may say, that as in the matter
of heresy; so in time of schism for matters of ceremony, the Magistrate
calls a Synod representing the whole Kirk, having power definitive and the
judgment of jurisdiction according to the word. Right as naturally in the
soul of man, to make it plain by comparison; the Imperial power of the will
may command the understanding, quoad exercitium, that is to pause upon a
certain purpose, and to give her determination, but not quoad specificationem,
that is to assent, or dissassent, or to determine to the one side more then the
other. And as the same Will has actum Elicitum as her essential and most
proper operation, and actum imperatum produced by another power of the soul at
the commandment of the will, as the understanding to ponder and consider, the
appetite to exercise temperance, fortitude etc. and out of her desire and
choice of the sovereign good of soul and body, sets all the powers of
soul and body to work: Even so the Magistrate has actum elicitum in civil
affairs, his essential and most proper object: in the matters of Gods Kirk
whether for order or jurisdiction, albeit he has not actum elicitum, he may
neither preach the word nor minister the Sacraments, not define by himself
regularly: yet he has actum imperatum: he may command ministers to preach the
word, to celebrate the Sacraments, and to convene and determine according to
the Word.


Archip. And say you no more, Is that all?


Epaph. And more then this. He has in all Ecclesiastical canons or
conclusions a threefold judgment: One common as a Christian, another proper as
a Magistrate, the third personal as a man singularly gifted. As a Christian,
the judgment of discretion, that he believe not or practice any thing of all
that which the Kirk concludes, if he find it to be against the word. As a
Magistrate, he must have the judgment of his vocation to discern what
concerns the spiritual weal and salvation of his subjects, and accordingly
to add or suspend the sanction. And as a singular Magistrate having more then
ordinary gifts of knowledge and piety, he ought to have such interest in
determination and jurisdiction with the Kirk, as others who have more then
ordinary gifts.


Archip What take ye to be the part of the Professors? Professors should have
the judgment of discretion.

In verba Dei juramus simpliciter, in Ecclesiae verba (...) nempe quatenus a
deo hanc potestatem accepit per verbu^ ipsius, and in^ra metas a verbo illo
positas religiose se continet, Tilen. 263. Quando vel in forma Synodi vel in
decisione peccatum est, ut alterutra vel neutra sit legitima, tali Synodo
impune omnino contradici potest, neque recipiendum est tale Concilium, ^nno
vero est nullum, irritum, nihilique faciendum Danaeus, 474. Synodi decreta
etiam p^i, magistratus summi edictis sancita and confirmata ad inittenda sunt,
quatenus verbo Dei consentinut. Quod nemo est qui negaverit, nisi qui cum
Cardinalibus and Canonists^ dixerit vocem qua in utroque testamento resonat,
causam litis proponere and adversarum parti^^ jura: vox autem quae in C^n^ni^^
and Synodis resonat, litis decisionem continet.





Epaph. Gods people when the matter comes to their practice, must have the
first (and further they crave not) the judgment of discretion to try the
spirits whether they be of God or not. In case the Kirk whether of ignorance,
or contention, or a man pleasing humor, determine in doctrine against the
word, or in ceremony against the general rules, their duty is to obey God
rather then man. He was a Pope and not a Protestant that concluded. If a beast
touch the mountain he shall die; therefore the Laicke shall not meddle with
Scripture and matters of the Kirk. We know that even poor folk have souls, and
should have knowledge and faith to save them.


Archip. Knowledge in the Professors is most necessary, but the smaller
measure may serve if their Leaders be full of light. Albeit ye and others who
stand against ceremonies have more affection then knowledge, and more zeal
then learning, (as I have often heard you called, ignorant wilful men, and
that there is scarcely a mouth full of learning amongst you all) yet there be
many great Clerk^s, and a fair procession of learned Doctors of Divinity in
the Kirk of Scotland, to whose fatherly care the people may safely commit the
matters of the worship of God, and of their own salvation: let them only obey
their superiors, and attend their secular affairs.


Epaph. I like not jesting in a serious purpose. Jerome was moved to write a
book de vtris illustribus, by the like objection of the Heathen against
Christians. The Papists plead their cause at some times by objecting of
ignorance to the Reformed Kirkes. But I never heard it of any of our
adversaries against us, except of some vain glasterers, who think themselus
learned, because their dwelling has marched a long time with books and
learning: and know not their own ignorance because they pain not themselves to
read and consider difficulties. Some men care not for the loss of the truth,
so they may appear learned. We stand not for our learning, so we may retain
the truth: we have learned Christ, in comparison of whose excellency we think
all things loss, and are ready to defend the least and lowest h^mme of his
garment, against all such Bragadochies. Albeit our Clergy has gotten the
names of the greatest Clerks, yet never had the people more need of knowledge
then now. When great titles began among the Jewish Doctors, as Orgnolam,
Rabboni hakkodesh, the light of the world, the holy Doctor, Vrim and Thummim,
both light and holiness was wearing away. And so was it in the Christian Kirk,
when the titles of Comestor, Magister sententiarum, Doctor irrefragabilis,
Doctor Seraphicus, Doctor Fundatissimus, Doctor Illuminatus, Doctor Solennis,
Doctor Resolutus, Doctor Subtilis, Doctor Angelicus, etc. made men so famous.
Albeit we could point at the men and the gifts amongst our selves, and say,
this is Doctor Resolutus, and that is Doctor Solemnis etc. Albeit our Doctors
for their subtilizing distinctions might with Antonius Pius be called Cumini
sectores; so long as they stand upon their learning they would prove to the
people like the Stars which give but small light, they are so high. The Lord
will confound the wise and learned that he may have the glory to himself.
When vain imaginations, vain altercations, vain affectations, the three
peccant humors of learning do abound in some; and idleness, covetousness,
and ambition, the threefold consumption of the Kirk appears in others, then is
the Clergy sick, and has need of Physic: then have poor people need of
knowledge, and to beware of contagion. To what serve the Priests rods except
they bud? The high Priest in the time of the second Temple was called Vir
multarum vestium, the man with the many clothes, but he wanted the oil. We
have the man with the many clothes (...) with great pomp, but the oil is
dried up. The golden girdle that had wont to be about the pappes soon after the
reformation, is now slacked and sliding down toward the loins, where it was
before, Reu. 15 6: The sea of glass and crystal is beginning to be muddy,
and to be turned into blood, because of this mountain of Episcopacie, and
preferment that is cast into it, Revel. 8 8. And therefore if ever at any time
since the reformation, our people have need at this time of the judgment of
discretion. Institutio. Iussio. Observatio.
And now to close this point of Ecclesiastic co^stitutions I wish you and all
others, by holy judgment to discern of the first institution of these
ceremonies; that thereby ye may judge of the following ratification, and of your
own observation. I have showed you that they are not in nature indifferent, and
giving them to be indifferent, that the Apostolic rules are not kept. And
therefore albeit the conclusion of that Assembly were Ecclesiastical and
public in respect of the persons assembling, seeing it is not Ecclesiastical
and public ratione modi and medii, in respect of the manner and mean used to
bring on the conclusion, but in that respect civil and private, how can it be
counted Ecclesiastical. No man at that time durst so much as pretend piety,
decency, or charity. The Kings pleasure, the averting or preventing of the
kings wrath; what shall become of your Kirk, if the King countenance it not
(such a Theological and inartificiall arguments as his Majesty never did use
in any Assembly, and could not have heard with patience) carried the conclusion.
As the interpretation of Scripture, which is only private ratione personae, in
respect of the person interpreting, and not in respect of the manner and means
of interpretation is not to be judged the interpretation of a private spirit:
so upon the contrary, the conclusion of persons Ecclesiastical, proceeding
from a private or civil cause, cannot be esteemed Ecclesiastical. Lex humana
qu^^^ e^ ^uadi^^^ vi^tu^^ obligandi^n^^ hab^t cu^^a co^muni b^n^ deficit.
The conclusion can have no greater force nor no other quality, but that which
it receives from the reason whereupon it depends. He that striveth to
demonstrate a supernatural conclusion by a natural reason, brings forth
nothing but a natural conclusion. If the first institution be not sound, the
following ratification can give no new right; and therefore the observation
must be unlawful.


Archip. In this third Evangelicall and Christian determination, ye have spoken
of Divine institutions, and of Ecclesiastical constitutions, Humane inventions
in the Christian Kirk.
I would hear now what ye are to say of Humane inventions succeeding in the
Christian Kirk to Pharifaicall conceits in the Jewish Kirk.


Epaph They would all suddenly evanish if the word of Christ were obeyed in his
own house. The lines and cords of men's wit that creep in and rap out may serve
for civil and secular mets and merches. But as the Temple was met with a reed,
so has the Lord ordained a golden reed for the measure of the Sanctuary. In
all Planets conjunction is most amiable except the Sun, which is good by aspect
but evil by conjunction. When man presumes to equal his ceremonies with
divine Institutions, and to set down a positive worship with the worship of
God, that marreth all.


Archip. That is the sacrilegious boldness and presumption of the Roman Kirk;
all the reformed Kirkes abhor wilworship.


Epaph. I wish it were so indeed. The more learned of the Papists make three
sort of ceremonies: some to be the efficient causes of grace, as the
Sacraments: some to remove the impediments of grace, as the sign of the
cross, holy water etc: and some to serve for comeliness and order. They
confess that the Kirk has no power to institute ceremonies of the first sort,
but of the second and third only. Again, the Defenders of our ceremonies
stand only for the third sort in word, but agree indeed with the Papists, as
appears two ways. 1 They take in under the name of rites, for order and
decency, many of the second sort of Popish ceremonies, which the Papists make
forcible to remove impediments. And whatsoever is pretended, it is well enough
known of the Cross, Surplice, Holydaies etc. that they are superstitiously
used, wheresoever they have place; and more ascribed to them then to Christ's
own Ordinances. 2 Under the name of rites serving for decency and order, they
take in all such ceremonies, as they think may add or lend ornament unto the
worship of God, as is manifest out of the doctrine and very definitions of
things indifferent, Traditionum non potest esse certus numerus, ut quae actu
multa sunt potentia infinitae.

Quod fuit serinium pectoris Pontificii hoc nunc est locus de traditionibus non
scriptis. Traditionum humanarum observatio est ^^teruma religionis pestis
vulumsque conscientiarum.


written by Meisnerus and Puel in diverse Kirks. A wide door for the entry of
the whole multitude and theatricall pomp of popish rites, the destroyers of
the simplicity of the Gospel; and like clouds without rain promising that
which they give not, and which should be sought and is to be found in the
Ordinances of Christ. Till this door of Traditions be shut, men's inventions
will be ever intruding themselves, take the place of divine institutions, and
more and more be multiplied.


Archip. I vvil the more confidently lippen to the grounds, which I have
learned from you concerning the nature and use of things indifferent; when I
have known that ye have tried their stabilitie by the opposition of contrary
forces, especially of that man to whom all our reverend Fathers, and learned
Doctors give acclamation of a grand Sophos in the ceremonial cause. Trial of
the foresaid grounds by contrary objections.



Epaph. Who is that? For all our domestic Writers are soon seen.


Archip. I mean by him who first wrote a resolution for the ministry, under
the name of D. Lindesay, and now his (...) and second care of ceremonies with
a parenetick to the Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland, (...).
under the name of David Brechin.


Epaph. Ye may know by the change of his name, the effects of his resolution.
The operation of it has been greater ad intra then ad extra; His exhortation
to the ministers concerns us and our purpose most, because we are of that
number, and it advances the power of the kirk in things indifferent. As he may
well want opinions to defend by arguments, but (which was the cunning of
Chrysippus) he never wanted arguments for defense of his opinions. His
Parenetick had been the more pithie, and his whole proceedings the more plain,
if he had first set down the state of the question in the words of his own
problem, which he subjoyned to his Thesis disputed at Saintandrowes, when he
was to be graced, but could not pass the press with privilege: Whether
things indifferent once abused, and for their abuse abolished, etc. Negat. He
could then give a defiance to all the English Doctors, but the world has made
him vviser since. Secondly, if he had expressed plainly in his exhortation to
the Ministers, what was the only argument of his persuasion to enter and
proceed in that course; nothing but a Bishopric, which he was wont to
profess as ordinarily in private as he spoke openly in public, that he knew
neither Scripture, reason, nor antiquity for kneeling; albeit now his birse
rise when he hears the one, and for cloking the other, his pen has changed
for into enforce, as nighest in sound, and therefore a better excuse then that
which he gave out first, Albeit there were neither scripture. etc. And
thirdly, if for conclusion he had shown his brethren some overture, for
obedience, like that which he once proponed to himself, and talked of to
others, that he could so dress the matter, that his people of Dundie should
hold themselves within the close seats about the wales of the new Kirk, and
never be known whether they sat or kneeled, belike he thought not at that
time that sitting fostered profanitie and superstition in all, as he says,
page 5. Or at least, if in dealing with his brethren, he had remembered what
he was once, and almost even now himself, and pitied his own wonted, Illi
in vos saevient qui nullo tali errore decepti sunt, quali vos deceptos vident.
Ego autem in vos savire omnino non possum, quos ficut incipsum illo tempore ita
nunc debeo sustinere and tanta patientia vobiscum agere quanta mecum egerunt
proximi mei cum in vestro dogmate rabiosus and ^cus errarem.
nay his late case in our persons, as Augustine did the Manicheans, greater
heretics then he thinks us. Let them (says he) be rigorous against you,
who never were deceived with the like error as they see you. As for me, I can
use no bitterness against you, with whom I should bear now, as I did at that
time with my self, and deal in as great patience with you, as my neighbors
used toward me when I was in your error. But what hope was there of
moderation from his heart and hands afterward, who at the first putting off
his wit of ceremonies in print, began with the ominous change of Disce pati,
into Dissipate, of patience into persecution: wherein his thankful Patron
willing to do him one good turn for another, and himself so forward in the
cause, have given good proof how worthy they are of their New Motto.


Archip. I perceive you are acquaint with the purpose; what say you to his
preface concerning the extent of the power of the Kirk? think ye his grounds
sure enough?


Epaph. Compare them with that which ye have heard, and ye shall know there
is nothing left to the kirks power in the circumstances which could
conveniently be determined by the word, more then was left to the kirk of the
Jews, albeit the determination be not so particular, becau^^ the one kirk was
Ecumenical throughout the whole world, the other national in one country.
1. For persons bearing office in the kirk, no nation, nor tribe, nor family
could be designed more then another, Quod est a re non a voluntate
legislatoris. Yet the distinction of the bounds belonging to every synagogue,
was left to the power of the kirk of the Jews, no less then the distinction
of Parishes now to the Christian kirk; and all the distinct office-bearers are
prescribed now as well as then. As unlawful now to bring in a new kind of
ministry into the kirk, as it was at that time; and will prove in the end
to be no better then strange fire. 2. For places, there cannot be a common
place now for solemn worship: for either there behoved to be one for the
whole Christian world, which no man will affirm, except a Roman Catholic;
or else one in every nation, which were the erecting of a proper religion in
every kingdom, and a making of every country a Canaan by it self, and not
a part of the kirk universal, having communion with all the Saints. But as the
Kirk now has a place of meeting for every congregation, so had the Jewish kirk
the like power and liberty in building their synagogues; and no greater
holiness in the one place then in the other 3. For times, in vindicating his
festival days from the blame of Iudaisme; he denies that the kirk has power
to make days like the Jewish days, in appropriating a worship to them,
which is not lawful to perform another day: but seems to slip in two
things. 1. that he gives power to the kirk to make days as holy as that
day, which is more holy then the Jewish days, putting no difference of
holiness betwixt the Sabbath and the days appointed by the kirk; but makes
all the difference to be divine institution. As D. Downame precept. 4. adds
to the weekly Sabboths all other Sabboths lawfully ordained by the kirk, All
which are to be consecrated (says he) as Sabboths to the Lord. And for
example of Sabboths lawfully ordained, he brings the feasts of Christ's
Nativitie, Resurrection, etc. giving power to the kirk to make Sabboths, like
Gods Sabboths. 2. He slippeth in his appropriations; of the two sorts of it he
striveth to remove the one, that is, the appropriation of the worship to the
day, albeit he knows that it would not be counted lawful to solemnize the
feast of the Nativitie, Resurrection, etc. upon other days; the solemn
remembrance of these benefits being the proper worship of the days, and not
the instruction of the people in the grounds of the Catechism. The solemn
worship of the Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, was appropriated to the
own times, yet it was lawful to instruct the people in the knowledge of the
benefits at other times. The other appropriation of the day to the worship,
he passes with silence, as that it made not a Judicial difference of days
When I say, it is not lawful to exercise that worship another day, and to
exercise another worship that day, I make difference of days both ways. As I
do of meats, when I say out of a religious distinction of meats, I will eat
any meat except that; and no other meat but that. Had it been the Lords will
that his people should have kept anniversarie and ordinary feasts, seeing they
were no less positive, and might have been as easily determined as the weekly
Sabboths, he had not passed them without determination. Finally, all that he
has set down concerning order, is no more determined in the kirk of the Jews,
then in the Christian kirk: as vvherat, and how the Priest or Levit should
begin, proceed, close, Psalms, praying, reading, preaching; what petition to
be proponed, circumcision in stead of baptism, the passover in place of the
communion, marriage and all things in doctrine, discipline and divine service.
What has the Doctor meaned when he took upon him the demonstration of
Christian liberty in this point, except he could have brought better
instances. There were many points of service, as sacrifices, vvashings,
anniversarie days, etc. which we have not; but the determination of such as
we have, is as particular as theirs, except wherein the national
circumstances make impediment. They had multitude of observations with
direction; we have the benifit of distinct direction without the burden of
multitude of observations.


Archip. If he had well paralelled the Jewish and Christian kirk in the
particulars, he had not set down that for a privilege, and liberty of the
Christian kirk, which is so manifestly common to the kirk of the old
testament. What think ye of the extent of the power of the kirk as he has
considered it?


Epaph. Some things are essential, some things universal in time and place;
both are determined. The individual circumstances of particular times, places,
and personal conditions pro re nata, are left to the kirk; even as in policy,
oeconomie, etc. some points must be left, because they either cannot or need
not be determined. In his discourse upon this point he proves worthy of his
wages; because in the enumeration of ceremonies, he forgets the Surplice and
Cross, left he should cross his pattern in any thing, and to give proof of
his purpose of more conformity. Albeit he cannot deny, but the cross,
surplice, etc. which he dare not remember* are new rites, sensible and as
dangerous additions, and no less positive in the worship of God, then salt,
oil, spittle, holy warter, lights. God give you and all the ministers of the
Kirk of Scotland, the spirit of discretion, when ye set your selves down at
the feet of your general Preceptor and preceptorie Dictator, to learn rules of
obedience in matters indifferent. If obedience be due to the kirk because
thereby confusion; scandal and schism is eschued: then where all these evils
through obedience do daily increase, obedience to the kirk is disobedience to
God. And whether it be lawful to enquire, and to have respect to scandal,
after that the Canon is concluded, I refer you to that which I said before
of scandal.


Arch. All that you can say against his preface, and the book it self, will seem
as small in his fantasy as the Rhapsodie of Perth assembly, against which he
and his fellow laborers framed this answer.


Epaph. Not the fantasy of man, but the verity of God is to be respected of
us. He calls that treatise a Rhapsodie, for what cause I know not, except
that the author delights not after his fashion to Mercurialize, and borrows
help of the Ancients, of the Scholastickes, and modern Divines. Who loves not
the exquisite Bee-work gathered out of so great diversity of flowers more then
the spiders webb twisted out of her own bowels; which striveth for nothing
but to catch the blind and vveak flies, when she has eviscerate herself all
the year long.


Archip. Will ye speak nothing of the particulars contained in the book it
self.


Epaph. Ye have driven me further already then I intended at the first.
Particular polemicks are to be referred to their own lists, yet I could show
you by a claw or two that ye need not fear the Lion. In the first words of his
answer to the Epistle to the reader (if the answer be his) he denies that the
external worship of God, and government of the kirk shall ever die till the
world be done, how sick soever they be. He is either very simple if he think,
that any man means, that in the kirk universal, the worship external shall
perish; or very senseless if he deny that it may die in particular kirks,
which is the authors meaning, as is evident to the barnliest reader, by the
words immediately following; or most malicious and sycophanticall in abusing his
adversary and the reader against his knowledge through study of
contradiction. Who could look for such a stumble in the threshold Cantherius
in porta.


Archip. I remember of one ground which he beats upon continually, and many
thank him for it, as freeing them from the guiltine e of their oath (albeit
they had done against their former practice before their knowledge of this
evasion) and bringing the perjury upon you and all their opposites. It is
taken out of the first confession of faith, Art. 21. Not that we think that any
policy, and one order in ceremonies can be appointed for all ages, times and
places. But that they may and ought to be changed, etc. Of this sort he takes
to be sitting at the communion, etc. because it is not judged a necessary, but
convenient ceremony.


Epaph. There be two sorts of Ecclesiastic ceremonies, some are determinable
by a general law throughout the Christian world, or universal kirk; al which
are determined in the word, and therefore are necessary; some again are
national, temporal, local, individual, etc. left to the determination of
particular kirks, according to the general rules, and therefore changeable, as
is contained in the article. 2. there is a twofold convenience of ceremonies,
according to the foresaid two kinds of ceremonies, the one essential, the
other accidental; the one is internal or intrinsecall from divine
institution, the other external framed to circumstances. Now let him who has
most hardened his heart in that course, judge betwixt him and God, whether the
one conveniencie or the other be meant, when sitting is judged to be most
convenient: seeing it is not said most convenient without any further, or most
convenient to the times, or to the present constitution of the kirk, as the
Bish. would have it, while he boasts of this so often, saying, that which
at one time is more convenient, at another time may be less convenient. But it
is expressly said, Most convenient to the institution, which in all times and
places is the same, neither can there be any thing most convenient to the
institution at one time in one place, and not most convenient at another time
in another place. The day is coming wherein thanks given for this sort of
evasions, shall turn into bitter complaints.


Archip. I have holden you so long, and ye have said so much beyond my
expectation in my first and greatest difficulty concerning the appearance of
the indifferency of the controverted ceremonies, that I am almost at my wits
end; and I know ye are so wearied, that I cannot put you to further pains in
the remanent difficulties, which are not so material


Epaph. I would to God that ye and all others were both almost and altogether
at their wits end by solid resolution. The second difficulty answered.
If my pains can be profitable to that end, care ye not for my wearying. I
remember your second difficulty was that the ceremonies are concluded in kirk
and parliament upon religious and reasonable pretexts, which I cannot deny; if
ye mean pretexts of religion and reason, ye may remember first, that the
narratiue is only the pretext, but authority is the cause of the conclusion.
In reasoning and voting for the articles, no mention of reverence of religion,
of reason, but frequent mention of authority. In the narratiue of the acts,
never a word of authority, but of reverence, religion, reason. That pastors and
people who either were not present, or shall succeed hereafter, looking upon
the acts as they are conceived; may think that it was not humane, but divine
authority, not violence but reason that carried the conclusion. 2. That
plausible narratiues are but weak reasons in his eyes, who can discern betwixt
colors and causes, substances and shadows. A witty head never wanted a
circumstance to his tale, nor a pretext to his purpose. Men are more troubled
to bring things to pass, then to find out pretenses. When the notary is once
resolved to make a false instrument, he knows it must begin with In Dei
nomine Amen. Augustine says that in his time thieves going out under night to
steal, used first to guard themselves with the sign of the cross. Pirates
have their prayers as well as the honest merchants on whom they prey. Nero in
slaying his mother, and Caracalla in slaying his brother Geta, had their own
special pretexts, according to Machiavels direction; and the tempter could
allege scripture against Christ.


Archip. These are odious comparisons, and answer not to my meaning.


Epaph. I make no comparison, but I answer to your general of pl^usible
pretenses. Ye may be any thing that the world will, if ye suffer your mind to
be casten in that model. The Apostle Col. 2. gives two notes of will worship,
which may easily blind the simple; appearance of wisdom and show of humility.
But true worship is wise and humble indeed, because it is the wisdom and
obedience of God. The vvorldling first lays down the conclusion, and then
finds out the pretext. But the godly first sees the cause, and then the
conclusion. In the one, the will runs before the right wit, and affection
forces reason. In the other, enlightened reason leads the will and
affections. The one is persuaded before he be informed, the other first
informed, and then persuaded. And ever the more knowledge and the less
conscience we find in any age, we may look for the fairer pretenses, and the
fouler conclusions. I might soon close your mouth in this matter by examples
out of Ecclesiastical history. But that the recording of some subtle
pretexts, might perhaps lead unstable souls into great dangers.


Archip. The danger is greater in suppressing them; for I must confess, that
the most part for their direction in a matter of religion, try not the reasons
vvhereupon it is grounded; but content themselves with any pretext or shift,
that they may have for honesties cause when their vvorldly estate or hopes are
in hazard.


Epaph. It may be seen how fair colors have painted foul errors (even of
Paganism it self) by the Apologies of Christians written against the
Gentiles, as of Justinius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Arnobius, Minutius
Foelix, Lactantius, Josephus against Appion, Gregory Nazianzen against Julian,
Eusebius, etc. Symmachus in that one Epistle written to Valentinian,
Theodosius and Arcadius gives proofs what may be said in a bad cause.
Durandi rationale is demonstratiue for Popish practice; and how the Jesuits of
late have shaken a Minerva out of their brains, for maintaining multitudes of
monsters, I refer to your self; and will give but two instances of our
purpose, one of heresy under the Gospel, another of idolatry under the Law.


Archip. That were sufficient, what heresy mean you?


Epaph Never was there an heretic that defended a more pestilent opinion with
more plausible pretexts, Pretexts for Arrianisme.
and subtle evasions then Arrius and his sectaries: for when they were desired
to acknowledge Christ to be the son of God, as he is called in the Creed, they
accepted of that word, because the Apostle says, We are all the sonns of God.
When they were assayed with the word only begotten, they received it,
meaning of that dignity and singular glory in him above all the creatures
beside. And to this end alleged the known place Prove. 8. (...) for (...).
Thirdly, there was added, Before the world was made. This they exponed of the
creation of Christ and all the Angels before the world was made. The fourth
addition, God of God, they escaped by acknowledging all the Angels also to be
Gods of God. And the fifth, light of light, they esteemed to be common to all
the godly. Ye are the light of the world, once darkness, but now light. When
sixthly they excluded adoption by adding, True God of the true God, that they
admitted also, because the true uncreated God cannot be the author nor maker of
false Gods. When seventhly for stopping of this starting hole it was added,
Begotten not made, they escaped by the place of Deuteronomie, Thou have
forsaken the God who begat thee. Never could this monster of heresy be catched
by confession of faith, til at last the kirk was led by the spirit to the word
(...), which in end proved to be the Shibboleth. As the other three words
(...), were used by other three councels against the other three kinds of
heresies, concerning the person of Christ, God-man.


Archip. I perceive that Heretics and Politicians were not shepherds of
Colliers of old, more then the learned seducers in out days: that it is hard
to frame a confession of faith, which they will refuse to subscribe; and yet
for any contrary error or practice, can soon find some evasion: and that no
heresy nor error ever wanted the own probability and pretext. Come now to
the second instance.


Epaph. It is the Idolatry of Jeroboam, which might have been defended or
excused by the kirk and state of that time; as well as the Idolatry of this age
by the authority and Clergy now.


Archip. Idolatry above all other sins is the service of the Devils.
Idolatry is that to the all seeing jealous God, which adultery is to a loving
and jealous husband committed in his own sight. Idols are things of naught,
dung, excrements, sorrows, abominations, vanities, lies. Idolaters of all
sinners have the threatening and execution of the greatest judgments; in this
life diseases of all kinds, Levit. 26. without respect of persons, 2. Chron.
21.18.19. famine for many years, 1. King. 17. the sword, Levit. 26.26. the
desolation of Cities, and scattering of the inhabitants among other nations.
All which came to pass in particular upon Israel. In the world to come they
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And all that are of their fellowship
shall be confounded, Es 44 11. Jeroboam could tell this full well; he heard
himself rebuked by the Prophet, he felt his arm miraculously first dried up
and then cured again: he saw with his eyes the Altar rent, he lost in one
battle five hundredth thousand chosen men, 2 Chronicles. 13 17, and the children of
Judah prevailed because they relied upon the Lord God of their fathers, ver.
18, his son Abijah was taken from him, and Gods hand was still against that
house till it was sweeped out from the ground. I am sure he could have no
excuse for his sin.


Epaph. Idolatry has this evil beside other evils, and above the evil of
other sins, that no man confesses himself to be an idolater, or his
worship to be idolatry: but ostinately defends, disputes, preaches, writes,
persecuteth for it; closes his heart against whatsoever can be said from the
word of the Lord against it, and sets his ^it on edge to devise pretenses, and
find out shifts to excuse it.


Archip. What could Ieroboams Priests or Politicians say for him and his
worship?


Epaph. The truth is, Pretexts (...) Ieroboams idolatry.
that his desire to confirm the Kingdom to himself, fear of the alienation
of the peoples hearts in case they were suffered to resort to Jerusalem, want
of faith to believe the promise of God, and to seek counsel of him prevailed
so far with him, and with the estates of the Kingdom, that they resolved to
set up a worship of their own, not like that of Iudab. And when the Priests
and Levits, according to their duty, resisted the novation, as liking better
of their better warranted old profession: both they, and some of all the Tribes
of Israel following the voice of God in their mouths, were hardly entreated,
vvhereupon there arose a great schism: The men of Judah and some of Israel,
objected that they had forsaken God; but the most part of Israel judged them to
be renters of the unity of the Kirk, rebels against the King, who was advanced
by the Lord beside all expectation: was their lawful Prince peaceably
disposed, contenting himself with his own Kingdom, providing for the good
estate of his own people, and using all means that they follow not other gods;
and esteemed them to be superstitious Precisians in standing out against so
gracious a King, commanding nothing against any article of faith, against any
fundamental point of salvation, detesting the Gods of the Nations, and all
kind of idolatry. The matters he urged were but circumstantiall, rituall and
variable, and such as the best Kings, having the Lords approbation, had changed
before. They could say that the worship was the same in substance, that they
served the same God who brought them out of Egypt, with the sacrifices and
observation of all the statutes kept by all the fathers since the beginning of
the world. That their Bullockes, which Precisians called idols were similitudes
representing the only sacrifice of the Messiah in whom they looked for
salvation. Were there not Cherubines in the Tabernacle and Temple, and twelu
Oxen or Bulls of brass appointed by the wisest King? The Lord forbids such
images only as have divine worship done unto the^; like the Calfe in the
wilderness, turning the glory of God into the similitude of a bullock that
eats grass. But they could say, that they worshipped not these Calves more
then the images of the Cherubines. Are we so gross when we say. Behold our
Gods, as to think that they brought us out of Egypt? We speak figuratively, as
the Arc was called the King of Glory, and the holy Lord God. We will
rather give our lives, lands, liberty and all, then commit Idolatry for the
pleasure of any Prince; and do abhor the abuse of Images, which is to bow
down and serve them; albeit we be not of that mind but we may have them and
worship God by them; because we know no place of Scripture to the contrary. The
place of worship is but a circumstance; and to tie Gods presence to any place,
who is near in all times and places to them that call upon him is
superstition. The Arc was not ever in one place but often removed. In Salomons
own time there was two public places of Gods worship, and Solomon sacrificed
in them both. Is not the whole land holy? The promise made to Solomon of a
special presence at Jerusalem, was tied to the condition of keeping his
Statutes and Judgments, wherein he has failed. And therefore as his Throne is
thrown down, which the Lord at the same time promised to establish, so has the
place lossed the privilege of holiness. We may plead from Antiquity: for
here is Bethel, so famous for that glorious testimony of his presence given to
Jacob, from whom we this day have the name of Israel. Rehoboam is no wiser then
his father, he may fall into his Idolatry, and so Israel by resorting to
Jerusalem may be snared. All danger of Idolatry would be prevented, the poor
people eased of their tedious journies, and both Prince and people saved from
Rhehoboams conspiracy. All this dinne and division proceeds of the humors of
some contentious and avaritious Levits, seducing the simple people, making them
to think that God cannot be served but in Jerusalem after their fashion in
every circumstance and particular ceremony: and of the doting of some persons
of the weakest wit and sex, delighting to go abroad, to be talked of for
zeal, and more pleased with any worship then that which they have at home. The
observation of the Feast of Tabernacles upon the 15 day of the 8 month, is but
the change of a circumstance of time. The day was made for man, and not man for
the day. It was lawful by Gods own warrant to keep the Passover on the 14 day
of the second month; he cares not for the month so the day be kept. It is
presumption to alter things substantial in matters of faith or doctrine: but
superstition to stand upon circumstances and variable ceremonies. What can be
done, the Lords worship cannot be neglected. If the Priests of Levi make it
nice, will still prove contentious, and lead a faction with them for
strengthening the Kingdom of Judah, upon warrant of Antiquity, before the
distinction of Levi was made for orders sake, others of other Tribes, as well
qualified as themselves must be put in their places, and they put away as
Abiathar was by Solomon, because he had his hand with Adoniiah. It may be when
they see their places well filled, and the charity of profuse people, which
cannot last long to decay, that their giddiness go away, and they return to
their right wits. The Prophet that came to the King when his hand dried up,
might have been a Witch coming with lying wonders, for he was slain by a
Lion: and howsoever he threatened destruction he condescended upon no time, left
he should have been convinced of a lie. Abijah dealt not with the King in
meekness and sincerity as became a Prophet; but by his bitterness and passion
declared that that he was partially inclyned to Judah. Abijah dyed not before
his day. All things come alike to the godly and to the wicked, to him that
sacrifices and him that sacrifices not. Or if his death was untimous it was
rather for his secret intentions crossing his fathers courses, then for any
good that was in him toward the God of Israel, as the Prophet would have it.


Archip. You need to go no further. I have often thought upon the Idolatry of
Jeroboam, but never could know what pretexts he could devise to make all Israel
to sin. And upon the contrary we are blinded, and consider never the pretexts
of the idolaters of our times, but are miscarryed with their Idolatry, albeit
it equal, if it exceed not that of Jeroboam. All men are more equal Judges of
other times then of their own. They can admire the virtues, and condemn the
sins of old, or in other places at this time: but can neither discern the
one nor the other in the present time amongst themselves. It is easy to find
out a Since or a Forasmuch, etc. to begin an Article with, when so much may be
said for the greatest abominations. Shall I never by Gods grace suffer my eyes
to be dazeled with the beauty of colors as I have done. For all pretenses vvil
prove but fig tree leaves when the Lord who will not be mocked, cries to the
fugitive conscience where art thou? And I think as little now of my third
difficulty of promise, that no more shall be urged upon the Kirk hereafter.


Epaph. It were good to examine the particular pretenses expressed in the acts
concluding the five Articles, but that is done already: And ye may guess by
the first and greatest what stuff is to be found in the rest: 1 The place of
the 95 Psalm which is alleged commands not when we come to worship God that
we fall etc. for so kneeling were commanded in every exercise of Gods
worship: and it were against Gods commandment to worship him without
falling down and kneeling. 2 Our Kirk used not sitting since the Reformation of
Religion, because kneeling was abused, but because it was most convenient to
the Institution of Christ, as is declared before. 3 Whither the memory of by
past or the sense and multiplication of present superstition may not be a
better pretense for the contrary conclusion. I fear the times shall give reply
to your third Argument: and I vvish that the answer of the third difficulty
were more difficill than (...). The third difficulty answered.
It is the prerogative of the promises of God to be believed above experience,
sense and reason; we ought to judge of their verity by the judgment of
infallibility, of men's persons by the judgment of charity, and of men's speeches
and promises, by the judgment of prudence. Iudicium Veritatis, Cha^^atis and
Prudentiae.
Christian prudence looks back upon this course to the very beginning,
considers how it is still working, and sees the future effects already
present in the causes. As there is great difference bewixt one broken linck,
and the whole golden chain of Gods providence; so one ceremony is but a small
part of the mystery of iniquity. I would know what it is to resist the
beginning of evil; and whether the posterity may justly blame the
predecessors, for giving way to mischievous practices. Prastate ero nos ut ea
que pueri suscepimus, senes posteris reliuquamus ne quid futura aetas inveniat
corrigendum.
It was well said by Symmachus though in a bad cause, Do so I pray you, that
the things we have received when we were children, we may transmit to the
posterity when we become old, that the following age may find nothing to be
amended. Men may promise little for themselves, albeit their intention were
answerable to their profession, less for their superiors whom they dare not
challenge, least of all for Satan, who has the warp of defection rolled up in
secret upon the beam of his hellish project, and employeth one malignant wit
after another to make out the web, by Gods just judgment ever plaguing former
defections with following Apostasy. Never man made count of such promises, but
he who first laid his count to keep the world in all cases of the Kirk, that
he might have something to say for his honesty before the world, rather then
for the peace of his conscience before God, in whose dreadful sight who dare
appear with the vveak promises of sinful men against his infallible
verities? Fourth difficulty of hard success removed. Frater, frater ubi in
Cellam and dic mise^ere meus Deus. Res propter resistentiam, laborem,
inclinatione^, sunt Physice and ethice sed non Theologice ^^possibi^es.



Archip. When all my forces were mustered together in the beginning they made
some show: but now when they are severally provoked to the conflict they
bewray their weakness: my last soldier called hard success, dare not set
out his head.


Epaph. His name should not be heard in a cause of this quality. Care of duty
belongs to us, care of success to God, and not to us. Luther had not been
the right man if he had been ruled by fear of events, when it was said to him
in sad earnest, Brother, brother take you to your Cloister, and pray to God to
help you. Policy has so far prevailed with M. Sprint that he has found a
false key to open a gate for many to enter within the threshold of ceremonies
in case of deprivation, and a back door to escape by in case of reformation,
that his man shall ever fall on his feet. But piety is no temporizer, and in
all times of heresy, profanity, impiety, looks to the will of God to do it
for a good success, and (...) first or last. All difficulties are not
impossible ^t^er, and many natural and moral impossibilities prove
demonstrations of his power, with whom nothing is impossible. All hearts are in
Gods hand, either converting or changing whom he converteth not, or
restraining whom he changes not, or at least ruling and governing to good
ends whom he restrains not. Ecclesiastical history points at six notable
changes of the Christian Kirk, every one of the first five including three
hundred years. In the first three centuries, Piety, simplicity, martyrdomes
abounded under persecution. In the next three, by occasion of heresies,
learning increased. After that, for three hundred years, supremacy and
primacie prevailed in the Kirk. The fourth three years was a time of
sovereignty and domination over saecular Princes and Emperors. The last period
of the same extent was a time of Mammon and heaping up of riches. At last in
the sixteenth hundredth year when Kirkmen had no further to aim at: when the
unkindly daughter had devoured the mother, and every one was saying in his own
bosom, my soul take the ease; then it pleased the Lord from heaven to pity
his own Kirk in working that blessed reformation, never at any time before so
much desired and so little expected. Our National Kirk (so like is she unto
her mother during these sixty years past) has experienced the like
diversity. We had in the beginning a time of martyrdom, with great power and
simplicity of the Gospel: a second time of learning abounding with a greater
number of Doctors indeed, then this time does with titles: soon after
succeeded a time of primacie, when Pastors sought after preferment above their
brethren: When that was obtained they rested not till in the fourth time they
were preferred to the Nobles and Seculars of the land: And now in the fifth
time, sitting in the highest chaires of honor, they leave no mean unassayed by
taxes and taxations, by plots and pluralities, Pauper Episcopus, Pauperio^
Cardinalis. Pauperimus Papa.
by simonie and legacy of the quick and of the dead to multiply wealth,
howbeit some of them find the success of Alexander the fifth. Why then may we
not hope, whatsoever be the present course of second causes, for a reformation,
except the fear of worldly shame and skaith in the particulars remembered in
the end of your third demand, make us all to fall away, and there be few or
none to stand in the gap.


Archip. The danger is great; for the aspersions are very contumelious, and the
incommodities greevous, that I fear few shall be able to bear them with
courage.


Epaph. He that seems to be a ceremonial Confessor has the less evidence
that he shall prove a substantial Martyr. We have not so much to regard what
is said, as how true it is; nor what we shall suffer, as what we have
deserved. Against them (...) we might make reply in the words of the
worthiest instruments that have lived in the Kirk of God after the Apostles,
who have been burdened with the same and other like imputations. And what
is true may be better known then by the slanders of our enemies. 1 By our
doctrine of obedience to all our lawful Superiors. 2 By our practice,
wherein we have altered nothing since the time we were esteemed obedient to
our superiors; Peace-keepers and peacemakers in the Kirk, and enemies to
Papists. 3 By our abhorring the name of Puritanes, which that sect of
Heretics affected, and which the Papists first brought upon us, as the name
of Calvina-papistae upon our Opposites, to make our Religion the more odious.
And 4 by our unwillingnesse to be shut out of our particular residencies, so
long as we are suffered to be faithful in them, by such as are resident in
place, but non-residents in office; leaving their flocks, following after the
world, fostering others like unto themselves, requiring of Intrants
subscription for qualification, and sending the best qualified spirits, because
they have not learned to subscribe, to hang up their harpes on the willow
trees; and their silver trumpets prepared for the Temples, about the unworthy
walls of other professions.


Archip. I know it was given forth of the holy Apostle, that he turned
Christian for a vvorldly respect. That Wickliffe finding himself disappointed
of a Bishopric, became a Schismatic. That John Husse, Jerome of Prage, and
Luther all three fell into apostasy because they wanted preferment: yet so
mighty was the Lords assisting grace, that they through good and evil report
kept the truth, pressed hardly toward the mark: But alas what are we,
whether Pastors or Professors able to bear?


Epaph. If we suffer not greater things for Christ, we are not worthy of him:
If all make defection our desolation shall be exemplarie. As in the privation
natural there is no regresse to the habit, so Courtiers for the most part find
it in the Political: others Kirks have felt it, and we may look for it in the
spiritual privation. The Kirk that the Lord speweth out is under a dreadful
and desperate course. 1 Because he plagueth them with delight, and will so
rejoice to destroy them and cut them off, as he did before rejoice in doing
the^ good: 2 because that vomiting imports that he will make them a reproach:
and 3 because they shall never recover their wonted dignity; for the Lord will
not return to his vomit. Gods goodness toward us has been more then
ordinary, our sins already committed are not common; because we go on in a
course not of ignorance or infirmity, but in obstinate (...) many warnings of
the (...) the works of God. In the land of uprightness will ye deal
unjustly, and will ye not behold the Majesty of the Lord? There be many this
day who maintain the same opinions that the fathers defended of old, yet that
which was only error in the fathers is in them heresy. Origin and
Tertullian were so highly respected in their time, that Vincentius Lyrinenfis
counts the one the chief of the Greeks, and the other of the Latin Fathers:
And yet their followers who with pertinacy persisted in their errors, against
manifested truth, were judged Heretics, and styled Origenists and
Tertullianists; Therefore our judgment must be answerable, it shall not be
common. Adhuc ^isericordum adversatur, nihil est infocticius sodicitaeem
pecc^^um qua poenais nutrium impunitas and ^ala voluntas velut interior hostis
robura^^^. August. op. ^
Men have meddled with ceremonies and the external worship of God. The Lord
has given retribution in things external, if they repent not but go forvvard
against the life and body of Religion: the Lord will not spare their lives and
bodies, but shall proceed from famine to the svvord, and other more grievous
punishments, whereby he shall declare that with the froward he deals
frovvardly. They who will not confess that to be a sin against God that
they have done, shall be left in his justice to fall into that which shall
make them cry, We have sinned and have done wrong to the Kirk of God. And who
are so hardened that they vvil not hear the voice, and feel the finger of
Jehovah in his by past warnings and present judgments, shall be stricken
with a judgment ere it be long that shall make both their ears to tingle.
The Lord has not left himself without a witness this year, wrath is gone
out from him, and the sword of his vengeance is drawn. When the seals were
opened, the voice exponed the meaning; afterward the trumpet was sounded for
him who would not hear that voice: and for the despiser of the trumpet nothing
was prepared but the sti^^^d secret pouring out of the vial of judgment.
There be m^^^ expounding voices (blessed be our God) in all the corners of this
Nation opening up the meaning of the seals; if we be not wise, the next sound
may well be loud, but it shall not be articulate to tell men their particular
transgressions procuring wrath; and then judgment shall come without
advertisement. Long, long, have the white colors of peace hung in our eye: The
Lord is now displaying his bloody banner, what remains if we give not over
but that doolefull ensign of death without mercy. Blessed are they for ever
who endure to the end: Blessed are they who are marked in the forehead,
albeit the mark be not sensible to the world, which sees not the sealed
ones, not can not learn their song: yet it assures them in the secret off
their hearts of the Lords protection, from his devouring Angel. Although when
trangressions are come to the full, the Lord raises up men of a fierce
countenance, and understanding dark sentences, furnished in a time of
defection, with gifts most fitting for destruction: The Lord shall
notwithstanding save his own from their craft and cruelty, so far as serves
for their wished blessedness, shall pour out of his spirit upon his servants
to give testimony to his glorious truth in the midst of persecution: and shall
make them able to discern betwixt appearance and substance, pretexts and
reasons, promises and purposes, success and conscience, that they go not
blindfolded with the world to perdition.


Archip. I thank God I am for my part more able to discern of them then
before, and with the spirit of discretion to others. But all this time ye have
said nothing of our covenants, oaths, subscriptions, professions, and the
particular bonds of this Kirk obliging us beyond all other people and nations:
neither have ye entered into any particular concerning the five Articles.


Epaph. It was my part to answer your demands: When ye shall urge, and God
shall give opportunity, I shall expound more largely, and apply more
particularly the general verities expressed before. For this time I only wish
ye be as good as your word in the beginning: to follow hardly when ye see truth
going before, and to commit the event to the providence of the most high.


Archip. That is my present resolution, and I hope to die in it. The Lords
grace be with you, and with all them that love the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall bring an eternal decision upon all the controversies of men.


FINIS.

