GOD save the KING.
A PROCLAMATION ANENT Tanning and Barking of Hydes.
JAMES by the grace of GOD King of great Britanne, France, and Ireland:
defender of the Faith, to Our Loveds Messingers, Our Shirefs in that part,
conjunctlie and severallie specialie constitute; greeting, Forsamekle, As WE
out of Our Princely and tender regaird toward the honor credit and benefit
of this Our ancient Kingdom, having ever had a special caire and regaird that
the practice of Trades not formarlie known or truly and vprightlie practiced
within the same, might be brought in; and that Our Subjects might be instructed
therein, to the intent that by their industry skill and labors the Cuntrie
might be furnished within the self with many necessar commodities, whereof
now a great part are brought from foraine parts to the discredit of this Our
Kingdom and emptying of the same of a great deal of Treasure yeerlie exported
for that cause: Amongst others Our Royal and Princely projects in this kind,
which have all had one happy and good success. WE were pleased upon one
Petition exhibit unto WS in Our Sovereign and high Court of Parliament,
Concerning the universal abuse in Tanning and Barking of Leather throughout
this Our whole Kingdom, To recommend to the Lords of Our Privy Counsel the
order taking for reforming of the said abuse. Whereupon the said Lords having
taking some pains and travells for trying of the said abuse and the ground and
occasions of the same; And they having at length conferred thereanent as weell
with a number of the principal Tanners of this Our Kingdom of best judgment,
knowledge and experience, in that trade, as with sundry Cordonars of good fame
and credit: And all the particulars which might produce a clear discovery of
the said abuse and occasions thereof, with the means how the same might be
reformed being amply proposed reasoned and discussed, In end IT was found by
the said Lords out of their own reason and judgment, and by the declaration
and confession of the Tanners them selfs, that the abuse and corruptions of
their trade did proceed from their own ignorance and want of skill, in the
true and perfyte form of Tanning: And that therefore there was a necessity of
inbringing of Strangers to instruct them thereintill. Whereupon the said Lords
having entered in deliberation how the strangers might be brought in; In end
the charge thereof was embraced and undertaken by Our traist Cousing and
Counsaller IOHNE Lord ERSKENE who has very cairefullie behaved him self
therein, and has brought in and exhibit before the said Lords the persons
particularly underwritten; They are to say, George Harason in Durham. Nicolas
Richardson there. Cuthbert Hutcheson elder there. Edward Craiges there.
Cuthbert Hutcheson younger there. Ihon Robeson there. Thomas Dobieson there.
Thomas Dobieson younger there. Robert Halfard there. and George Lambert there.
John Heroun in Hexem. Reynold Milbourn there. Harie Twedaill, there. Thomas
VVallace there. George Ogill there. Philip Shilton of Chester of the street.
and George VVilsoun in Morpet. Which whole persons are all of good skill
knowledge and experience in the trade of Tanning. And upon their great Oaths
they have promised to deal faith fully and trewlie with the Tanners of this
Our Kingdom, And to instruct them in the right form of Tanning, and how to
dress their pottes: Like as they have set down some grounds how the Hydes
shall be dressed and handled, from the time they are brought from the Boutcheour,
until they be perfytlie and weell Tanned.

AS namely they have declared that there is a great abuse committed by the
Boutcheours, by slashing of the Hydes and cutting of some of the Rimme away,
whereby a part of the substance of the hydes is taken away and the hydes are
thereby the more apt to receive water.

IT is requisite that every Tanner having a good Stock shall have Two
lyme-pottes at the least, for changing of the hydes from one pot to another,
To wit, One for green leather, and the other for Ripe leather: But if his
Stock will not answer to Two pottes, then he must refresh the Lyme the
oftener; And those pottes are to be of Sax, or Seven foot in length, Four
foot in breadth, and four or fyve foot deep.

The Hydes being brought from the Boutcheour to the Tanner, they are to be
casten in fresh watter there to lie three or four days, till the blood and
filth be sucked out and taken away.

Thereafter they are to be put in a Lyme-potte, there to lie fyve or sax
weeks till they be sufficiently lymed, And three days every week they are
to be handled and sighted and changed from pot to pot for eschuing of
putrifactioun, And being taken out of the lyme-pottes, they are to be casten
in fresh water there to lie one day or one night, till the lyme be washin of,
Thereafter they are to be put in a baitte of fresh watter with pigeon or
Dow-dung, or Hen-pen, there to lie eight days till the lyme be clean wroght
out of them.

The Lyme being cleine wroght out of the hydes, they are then to be brought to
the wouseis of the Barke-pottes, of which pottes every Barker must have at the
least fyve or sax, two for lopping, and the rest for handling, and the pottes
for lopping must be seven foot long five foot deep, and five foot braide,
and the pottes for handling one yaird square every way lyned with timber or
stone, as the commodity affoords, and covered if the owner thinks meet for
eschwing of Thift.

The Hydes being brought to the Bark-pottes and wouseis, they are to be chifted
and handled from one pot to another, to wit, from a worse to a better every
third day or oftener as the occasion presents, till they be sufficiently
Tanned: And the wouseis are made of water and Bark, and of the Bark which the
Tanners of this Our Kingdom cast forth of their Bark-pottes, the English
Tanners make their best wouseis and liquour with some little refreshing and
renewing.

And the Hyde for over-leather must lie twenty four weeks in the Bark-potte,
And the Hyde for sole-leather twenty eight weeks, or less if the leather be
weell followed at the discretion of the Owner.

The hydes being sufficiently Tanned and taken out of the Barck-pottes, they
are then to be dried with the Aer, to wit they must be hung up upon sparres
to be dried in convenient places according as the season and weather falls
out, and they are to be keipt from rain, and never to be dried by fire but
upon plane necessity, and in drying of the hydes all violent and extreme
heates ar to be eschewed.

Many other things have they declared concerning the true and perfyte form of
Tanning, the particulars whereof will be better understood by practice and
sight, then by verbal informations and discourses.

And whereas those Strangers have left their own Cuntrie houses and families,
and are come here to be directed to the several pairtes of this Our Kingdom
for instructing of the cuntrie People in the right form of Tanning, which will
prove very gainefull unto them and profitable to Our whole cuntrie, And will
not only spaire a great deal of Barck which is unnecessary, unprofitably,
and unworthily, spent by them, but besyds will hold a great deal of money
within this Our Kingdom; which is yearly exported for inbringing of foreign
leather.

Therefore it is very necessar and expedient for the honor and credit of
this Our Kingdom, that the said persons shall not only be kyndlie and
freindlie used with all respect favor and duty that apperteineth; but that
they have some Privileges and liberties in the said trade, during the time of
their abode heir for the better inco^^ging them to deal faithfully and
truly ^^ the earand they are co^^ for. And siklyke it is very necessar that
the Tanners and Barckers of this Our Kingdom be cairefull and diligent to
receive tymous instruction from the said Englishmen, to the intent that betwix
and the Term appointed for Sealling of the said Hydes, they may have good
knowledge and experience in the said trade. And for effect, WE with the advice
of the Lords of Our secreet Counsel HAVE taken and by the tennor heirof TAKES
the said persons and every one of them under Our Protection, Defense, and
Saif-gaird, to be unharmed or troubled in their persons or goods for
whatsomeuer deid or occasion otherwise then by co^moun course of Law and
Justice. And sicklyk WE with advise foresaid Have Given and granted and by the
tennor hereof Gives and grantes full liberty privilege license and warrant to
the persons aboue-written and every one of them To use the trade of Tanning
in the several parts and places of this Our Kingdom where they shall happen
to be directed and send in manner following, ^o wit, they shall concur with
the Tanners within these parts and Join with them in the Tanning and dressing
of their Leather, and they shall make use of their Lyme and Barck-pottes, And
shall lay their hydes in the same pottes with the hydes of the Barkers of those
pairts, and shall handle and dress the whole hydes in the pottes
indifferently and and with a commune and aequale respect and consideration: By
the which doing the Tanners of this Our Kingdom, if they be willing or
capable of Instruction may have good occasion to learn and to be instructed
in short time in the true knowledge of the said trade.

OUR WILL IS herefore, and WE charge you straightly and commands that
incontinent those Our Letters seen, Ye pass to the Market Croces of the Head
Burrowes of this Our Kingdom and others places needful; And there by oppen
Proclamation, and in Our Name and Authority make publication of the praemisses
wherethrogh none praetend ignorance of the same: And that ye command charge
and inhibite all and sundry Our Lieges and Subjects that none of them
praesoome nor take upon hand To vex harm molest trouble or inquyet, the
persons particularly above written or any one of them, But to (...) them with
all respects of freindship and kyndnes, in all parts where they shall happen to
repair, As they and every one of them will answer to WS and Our Counsel upon
their obedience at their highest charge and perrell. And sicklyk that ye
command and charge The whole Barckers and Tanners of leather within this Our
Kingdom that they and every one of them betwix and the first day of September
next to come, Provyde them selfs with the number of Lyme and Barck-pottes
aboue-written, And that they dress and handle their Hydes both in the Lyme and
Barck-pots according to the form rewles and ground set down and to be
praescryved unto them: And for this effect that they be cairfull and diligent
to receive instruction from the persons particularly aboue-written, And to
conform them selfs to their directions and informations as well in the
dressing and handling their hydes which are praesentlie in their pottes, as
anent the hydes which shall be put in the same hereafter.

And if any person or persons out of malice and in contempt of this Our
Ordinance and of purpose to hinder the progress of this work, which will prove
so profitable to the whole Cuntrie shall happen to leave of the said trade for
some certain space with resolution to return thereto again at their pleasure
and as they shall find the occasion. That therefore ye intimat and declare to
all Our Lieges that every such person or persons who shall be tried to
offend in this case, shall be called before the Lords of Our Privy Counsel
and punished by them at their discretion. And whereas it is understand to the
said Lords of Our Privy Counsel that the Tanners of this Kingdom may have
sufficient time and leasour to learn the said trade of Tanning and Barcking of
leather in ane upright and perfyte form (if they be willing) betwix and the
first day of November in the year of God Jaj vjc xxj years. Which is the
term appointed by Our said Counsel when the Sealing of the Hydes for
approoving of the sufficiency of the same shall begin. Therefore that ye
intimat and declaire to all the Barkers and Tanners of Hydes within this Our
Kingdom, that all and whatsomever hydes that shall happen to be presented to
Market, sauld or put in work without the Seal after the said first day of
November in the year of God Jaj Sax hundredth and twenty one years. shall be
confiscate and escheat to the use and behoue of him who has the charge and
trust of the Seal. The which to do WE commit to you you conjunctlie and
severallie Our full power By those Our letters, delivering the same by you
duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet, At Haly-rud-house the twenty nine day of Junij and of
Our Reigns the fifty thrie and eighteen years. 1620. Ordained to be
published in print. Per Actum D. Secreti Consilij.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by Thomas Finlas on his M. printer


