AN EXACT DISCOVRSE Of the Subtilties, Fashishions, Policies, Religion, and
Ceremonies of the East Indians, as well Chyneses as Iauans, there abiding and
dweling.

Together with the manner of trading with those people, as well by us English,
as by the Hollanders* as also what has happened to the English Nation at
Bantan in the East Indies, since the 2. of February 1602. until the 6. of
October 1605.

Whereunto is added a brief Description of Iaua Mayor.

Written by Edmund Scott, resident there, and in other places near adioyng,
the space of three years and a half.

AT LONDON, Printed by W.W. for Walter Burre. 1606.

To the right Worshipful Sir William Romney Knight, Alderman of London, and
Governor of the worshipful Company of Merchants trading to the East Indies,
and to the rest of the Committies.
RIght Worshipful, because heretofore it has been a usual custom, that
those which first have been resident in other foreign Countries, as Turkey,
Persia, and Muscouie, have registered such matters as have happened worthy of note
in their times, being in those parts of the maine Continent Land; wherefore I
having been lately Resident for your Worship in the Island of Iaua mayor, toward
the East parts of the world: Albeit I am no Scholar to perform it with an
eloquent discourse; yet fearing, and withal being put in mind by some
friends, that if I neglected it, I should be condemned of sloth: have thought
good to present unto your Worship, these few Lines: the which may certify
you of the great blessings of God, both in preserving the greatest quantity of
your goods, and our lives; which are come home out of that rude and dangerous
Region, into our own native Country. Likewise your Worship shall understand
by this plain Discourse the situation of the place, and the manners and
fashions of the people; with some other strange accidents, which for brevity
sake I did not certify you of by my Letters sent from thence: but in this
small Volume you shall see, from time to time, how every thing has been
ordered, and performed in your business, and other affairs. All which, I
hope, will be to your good liking, considering the place, and extremity we
were in. So desiring GOD to bless and prosper all your proceedings, I rest,

Your Worships, Edmund Scott.

A Description of the EAST INDIES.
AFter our Ships were laden, and all things set in as good order as it could
be: upon the xxi. day of February 1602. our General taking his leave of the
shore, departed, leaving behind him to be resident in Bantan nine persons; over
whom he appointed Master William Starkey to be chief Commander. Likewise he
left thirteen more, which he appointed to go in our Pinnis for Banda: of
which he appointed for chief Commander over the rest, Thomas Tudd Merchaunt:
and for Master of the Pinnis, one Tho. Keych. The General at his departure
left order, that this Pinnis should be sent away with all speed: wherefore
having taken in, to the quantity of 56. Chests and Fardles of goods upon the
6. of March at night, she set Sail: but by reason of contrary winds, after
she had spent near two months beating up and down in the Seas, she was
forced to return again to Bantan. Also; at our Generalles departure, he left
us two houses full of goods* and likewise some goods lying in the Dutch House:
But we weere too few in number to keep one well amongst such a sort of
beggarly slaves, had not God of his great mercy preserved us; neither could
our General spare any more at his departure. It is not unknown to all that
were there, the quarrel betwixt the Iauanes and us before the Ships
departed, who sought all means they could, to be revenged: in so much, that
presently after the departure of our Pinnis, they began to practice the firing
of our principal House with fiery Darts and Arrows in the night: And not
content with that, in the day time if we had brought out any quantity of Goods
to air, we should be sure to have the town fiered to windward not far from
us. And if those fiery Arrows had not by Gods providence been espied by some
of our own house (as they were) it was thought of us all, that that House and
goods had been all consumed; as might plainly appear at the top, when we
came to repair it. But as the malice of the rascal sort of people began now
to appear, and continued for the space of two years against us, so Gods
mercy began to show it self unto us, and continued to the last day: as this
Discourse will plainly show hereafter. His name be blessed for it.

So soon as we had dispatched away our Pinnis, we began to lay the foundation
of our House (which was 72. foot long and 36. foot brood) but by reason there
was at that time a new Protector chosen, we were put to some trouble and cost,
before we could be permitted to go thorrow with it. Also we ayred all our
pryse Goods: And Master Starkey caused the Lethers of most of the Packes to be
stripped off: by whose counsel it was I know not, but those Goods did not keep
their colors nothing so well as the rest, as we found afterward. The 21. of
March, by reason of a Chyna Captain that shot a piece, the Town was set a
fire: in which fire, were many houses full of goods all consumed. Amongst
other, the Dutch-house was burnt to the ground, wherein we had lying 65.
Fardles of goods, besides some Pepper. Also we had some Pepper lying in a
Chyn^ses house, which for the most part was burned and spoiled: so that we
lost 190. sacks clear, besides the damage the rest received. Our loss by this
Fire was great: but we may praise God it was no more, considering how near the
fire came to both our Houses, and how unfit they were at that time, for such a
danger; especially one, where the Fire came within three yards of it, in so
much that the James of the Windows were so hot, that one could hardly suffer
his hand to touch them, and yet the old and dry thatch took not fire; to the
great admiration of all people that were there of many Nations. There was
gathered about this House, all the Villanes in the Country, so that all that
night, we that kept that House durst take no rest for fear they would throw
some fire brands upon it. In the evening some of us standing in the door,
there came Iauans (whom we knew to be notorious Thieves) and asked us how many
we were that lay in that House? We demanded again what they had to do to
ask; and if they would know, they should come at midnight and see. At which
answer, they departed very much discontented: But such is their boldness
there, that in the day time, they would come and look before our faces how our
Doors were hanged, and what fastening they had within: and many times we were
informed by some that wished us well, that if we did not keep good watch, that
there was a crew that meant to enter suddenly upon us, and to cut our throats:
in so much that we being but four at that house, what with our watching, and
what with the disease that reigns much in that Country (which is loosenes of
the body) we were grown to very great weakness, and two of us never recovered
it.

The 19. of April 1603. there came into the Road 9. Sail of Hollanders, over
whom was General Wyborne van Warwycke; who shortly after, sent two of them for
Chyna, two for the Molluckos, two laded at Bantan, one went to Iortan: Also he
dispatched a Pinnis to Acchyn to will certain Ships that went from thence by
Cap. Spylbecks directions to Zelon to win a small Fort from the Portingales, to
come to Bantan: in the mean time he with one Ship, stayed until their
ariuall. We are very much beholding to this General for Wine, Bread, and many
other necessaries and curtisies received of him: He would often tell us how Sir
Richard Luson relieved him when he was likely to perish in the Sea: for the
which (he would say) he was bound to be kind to English men where soever he met
them: and to speak the thruth, there was nothing in his Ships for the
comfort of sick men, but we might command it, as if it had been our own.
Also, he in his own person did very much reverence the Queens Majesty of
England, when he talked of her.

The 25. day of April died Thomas Morgan our second Factor here, who had been
sickly a long time. Also M. Starkey began to grow very weak.

The 28. day came in our Pinnis, which was sent for Banda, having lost one of
her Factors, William Close; and the rest but weak and sickly. About this
time, there came certain of the Kings Officers and forbad us to go forward
with our House: the reason whereof (as I do judge) was because the new
Protector had not as yet received a Bribe: and the Sabyndar and he being at
that time not friends, he could do us little pleasure, wherefore we complained
to Cay Tomongono Gobay the Admiral, who in deed is the Father of all Strangers
in that place: He presently made a great Feast, and invited all the principal
of the Court: At which Feast, he began to discourse of our cause, telling them
what a shame it was that the King and they would not keep their words to the
English General and Merchants; and that rather then he would break his word,
he would go dwell in a small Cottage him self, and we should have his
House: But after much ado, he made them grant that we should go forward
with our House* the which in short time after was finished.

Our principal Merchant fearing Pepper would be dear, by reason of the
Hollanders shipping that was there present, and the rest that were to come,
bought up as much Pepper as he could: and because our House was not as yet
ready, he disbursed his money before the Pepper was waighed; and by reason
the Fleminges are not curious in receiving their Pepper, when we came to weigh
ours, we were forced to receive it as they did, or el^e we should have neither
money nor Pepper: so that we had in that parcel much foul and bad Pepper.

About the fine of April, came in Capt. Spylbeck, who was at the taking of the
Ship of S Thomy with our General, and had an eight part with us, whereby he
somewhat hindered our market. Shortly after him, came in General Hymskerk with
the rich Ship of Machane.

The 10. of May we lost one more of our Company James Haward. Likewise M.
Starkey caused the Pinnis to be new sheathed, thinking she should proceed of
her Voyage again. Also he went and lay at an Island to see if he could
recover his health there, but he grew every day weaker and weaker: wherefore it
was thought best of us all, to make sale of the Pinnis to Captain Spylbeck,
who was desirous of her, and to retain her men at Bantan: for M. Starkey
being not likely to live, it had been no wisdom to leave the whole state of
our business upon the life of one Factor, and so small a crew of men as was
there besides: Likewise finding his time to grow near to an end, he thought
good upon the last of May, to give over his authority, and to spend the rest
of his time with General Warwick, who also lay upon this Island for his
recreation: and albeit he wanted nothing that either his Doctor or Surgeons
could minister, but nothing will prevail when God please to call, so that upon
the last of June he ended his days: whose Burial General Warwick caused to
be honored with a voley of Slot and Pikes, the which with the Colors were
^rayled upon the ground, according to the order of Soldiers burial.

The 4. of Iu^e the great Market on the East side of the River, was by villainy
of certain Iauans (who thought to get some spoil of the Chyneses goods) set
on fire: In which Fire, some Chyneses that were indebted to us, lost all that
they were worth; so that we escaped not without some loss by it.

The 17. of July deceased Thomas Dobson, one of the Factors l^^t for Banda.

The 27 day the Town was burnt again on the East side of the River.

The 5. of August at 10. a clock at night, there came to our House Capt.
Spylbeck, Capt. John Powlson, and some other Dutch Captains, who told us they
had that day bin with the Protector about some business, who asked them if they
would take our parts, if he should do any violence to us? To the which they
answered (as they said) that we and they were near neighbors, wherefore they
might not see us wronged. They said more, that he straightly charged the^* ^^at
whatsoever he should do unto us, that they should not be offended, nor aid
us any way. This sudden news caused us much to marvel, for not past 4. or 5.
days before, he sent many of his Slaves to build the upper work of our House:
for indeed because it was somewhat higher then any other Houses in the town,
many of the chiefest did envy at it, so that we could get no workmen that
durst do it: and we had more trouble about this, then we had when the
foundation was first laid. I was minded the very next day following, to have
gone to the Protector, and to give him a Present, and also to give him thanks
for his men; but hearing this news, I thought it best first to go to Cay
Tomongon Gobay the Admiral, whom I knew to be our friend, to certify him what
we had heard by the Hollanders, desiring him as he had always professed to be
our Father, that he would tell us whether the Protector would do us any
violence or no. He told me, the Protector would do us no harm without his
knowledge: and further he bid us fear nothing, for so long as he lived, we
should receive no violence at any man's hands: Always provided, that we kept
good watch in the night, for fear of Fire and Thieves. From thence I went
presently to the Protector, and gave him a small Present, and also thanks for
his men. The Present he received, but I perceived by his countenance he was
angry. He told me that that day he had much business with the King, but the
next morning he would send for me, for that he had to speak with me. Well
thought I, thou can do no more then God will give thee leave. The same day
the Admiral sent his Son to him, to know what his meaning was to use such
threatening speeches of us? but he denied them. In the morning following he sent
for me. When I came, he asked me what they were that had told me he meant to
harm us? I told him, The Hollanders. He asked me again whether they were
Slaves or Captains? I told him they were Captains. He bad me I should show
his Scryuana those Captains. He said more, that if any Iauan or Chynese had
done it, he would have sent for him, and have cut his throat before us. Then he
began to find fault with us because we did not come to him when we had any
suit, but went always to the Sabyndar, or the Admiral? I answered again,
that he was but new come into his place, and that we had as yet no
acquaintance with him, but hereafter I would come to him. Then he promised
me he would do us all the friendship he could: But it was but dissimulation
to borrow money of us, as hereafter shall be declared.

Now whether the Protector lied to us, in denying it; or that the Hollanders
did discemble with us, we can not certainly tell; but he said plainly, the
Hollanders lied: and to speak thrueth, I think they can desemble, and the
Protector is a villain.

Also, the Hollanders about this time, spread a rumor through their own Fleet,
that the King would force us to lend him 5000. Ryals of 8. otherwyes he would
cause our House to be plucked down again: the which was false, for neither
the King nor the Protector had not at that time, sent to us for any, nor did
not in four months after.

The 17 day of August Captain Spy^beck having vented all his Commodities, and
laden his Ship and his Pinnis with Pepper departed thence, having in his
company two Ships more of General Warwicks Fleet, which were also laden
there with Pepper; with whom we shipped home four men, to ease the company
of some charge: of which four, the Master of our Pinnis (we sold) was one,
who died before he went out of the Road. Master Starkey before he died, caused
me to ship them home: but after they were gone, I wished they had been there
again, for we were brought so low with loosenes of body, by reason of bad
dyat, and drinking of that bad water, that we thought we should all have died.

The 19. of August we brought out certain Packes of Goods to air, wherefore
a Iauan (being Slave to one of the principal of the Country (threw some Fire
work upon a thatched house a little to windwardes off us: we espying it,
pursued him, and took him, and carried him to Cay Tomongon the Admiral, who
put him in Irons: within an hour after, there came more of his fellows, who
would have taken him away perforce, wherefore the Admirals men and they fell by
the ears, and many were hurt on both sides. So soon as the Admirals men had
beaten them away, he sent him to the King; but because his Master was one of
the Kings friends, he was not put to death, although by the Law of the
Country he should have died: neither did we greatly seek it, because his
Master was our very good Frind.

Likewise, if any Iauan offend, he must be punished with death: for if they
afflict any lesser punishment on them, they are so wicked and bloody a people,
that they will be cowardly revenged, not only of Strangers, but of their own
Masters: so that if any Slave do offend his Master, he does quite forgive
him; if not, he dies for it: but they are very obedient, and will seldom
offend their Masters, because they are for the most part as wicked as them
selves.

The 22. day of August at night, there were certain Iauans gotten into a great
yeard hard by our House, (who when we were singing of a Psalm, which we did
use to do when we did set our Watch) these Rogues threw Stones at our
Windows as if they would have beaten down our House: and some of the Stones
came in at the Windows, and missed us very narrowly: Wherefore I set a Musket
and a Pike in our Gate; and my self, with some other of my company, went as
closely as we could toward the Yeard: but we were to pass through a Chynes
House before we could get in. I desired the Chynes to open his door, but by
no means I could get him; wherefore we ran against the door, and brake it
down and entered through his House, swearing by the great GOD of Heaven (which
Oath some of those people do use) that whosoever we found in the Yeard should
die: but they hearing us break down the Door, ran out at an other back
gate all but two, which were dwellers in this Chynes House, who hid them selves
in an out house: but by reason of the grievous crying out of their Women and
Children, and also our fury being somewhat aswaged, we did do no execution
upon them, although we set our Rapiers to their breasts, and made them kneel
down and hold up their hands for pardon, for their speech was gone for fear.
Then we rainged all the Town on that side the River, to see if we could
find any of the rest: for we had authority at that time, to have slain any
Iauans that dwelt on the other side the River, if we took them on our side in
the night.

Not long after, but we were served the like trick by Chyneses, the which if
we could have known them, should have paid dear for it: but we terrified
those that dwelt about us so, that never after we had that abuse offered
again.

About this time, there grew a quarrel between the Hollanders and the
Chyneses, and some wear slain and hurt on both sides.

At the very same time that we took the Iauan throwing of Fire, they had a man
slain, for whom they were great suitors to the Court for justice, affyrming
that he, or one of his fellows had done it, and would needs have had him put
to death: although they could not prove it.

One day they being very importunate, the Protector demanded of them if when
they came to any Country to trade, whether they brought Laws with them, or
whether they were governed by the Laws of the Country they were in? To the
which they answered, That when they were abord their Ships, they were
governed by their own Laws; but when they were a shore, they were under the
Laws of the Country they were in.

Well (said the Protector) then I will tell you the Laws of our Country,
which is this: If one kill a Slave, he must pay 20. Ryales of 8. If a Freeman
50. Ryals, If a Gentleman 100. Ryals. The Hollanders requested to have that
under his own hand: the which they had, and it was all the mendes they had for
killing of their man. If they would have taken 50. Ryals of 8. they might have
had it.

About the fine of September came a Iunke full of men from the Island of Lampon,
which stands in the straights of Sunda, and are enemies to the Iauans, and
all others that are dwellers in Bantan: These are so like the Iauans, that the
one is not known from the other. Also there were many Iauans consorted with
them.

These men having their Iunke riding in a creek hard by the Town, and being
in all points like unto the Iauans, would boldly come into the Town, and not
only in the eueninges and nights come into houses and cut off the peoples
heads, but at noone days; in so much that for the space of a month we could
take little rest for the grievous crying out of the people.

One day while we were sitting at dinner, they came and took a woman being
our next neighbor, and mus^ed her so with a Sack, that she could not cry, and
so carried her into a tuft of Bushes on our backside, and there cut her
throat, and meant to have cut off her head, if they had had time: Her Husband
missing her, and looking out might see them carry her; who so soon as he
cried out, we rose from dinner and pursued them: but it was too late to save
her life. Also they were very swift of foot, so that we could come near
none of them: and for any thing that we knew, they might be amongst us; for
after the Iauans were come, we could not know them. It was thought of some,
that they lay hid in the bushes till the coming of the Iauans, and then stole
out, and put them selves among them.

There were some Iauan women that would cut off their Husbands heads in the
night, and sell them to these people. They did linger much about our House: and
surely if we had not kept good watch, they would have attempted the cutting of
our throats: if not for our heads, yet for our goods. But after a while,
many of them were known, and being taken, executed: the which were men of a
very goodly stature.

The reason why they do make these hard adventures, is, their King gives them
a woman for every Strangers head they bring him: wherefore many times they
would dig up such as were new buried at Bantan, and cut off their heads, and
so coussen their King.

Also at this time, we were given to understand by some credible men that
wished us well, of whom the Admiral was one: who every time he saw any of our
House, would bid us have a special care of our good watch, because there was
certain of the principal of the land in birth, though not in wealth, nor
office, (who had many Slaves, but little to maintain them) had laid a plotte
to have slain us in the night, and to have made spoil of our goods, (which
they took to be ten times more then it was) and after to have given it out
the Lampons had done it: Whereupon we were forced to have lights burning all
night round about our House: otherwise in dark nights they being so black
as they are, might have entered suddenly upon us before we should discrie
them: for all the upper work of our Houses (by reason of the heat) are open,
and they are built with Canes, and likewise the fence round about the Houses;
which is but a weak building, and may quickly be borne down.

These Heathen Devils came forth two or three times, thinking to have executed
their bloody pretense, but God would not suffer them: for so soon as they
came within sight of our lights, and might hear our Drum sound at the end of
every Watch, their hearts failed them, so that they durst not give the attempt,
for they supposed we were ready, not only with our small Shot, but with our
Murderers to give them entertainment: and to speak truth, they should have
found it so in deed.

After they had waighted long, and could never find opportunity, they fell
out amongst them selves, and so were dispersed.

The 14. of October General Hymskerke with his vize Admiral, set Sail from
Bantan, having taken in about 5000. Sacks of Pepper: of which quantity I sold
him 1000. Sacks of the Pepper Master Starkey bought: and being in all five
Ships in company, that is to say, his two Men of War, the Ship of Mackow
which he had taken, and two Ships of General Warwickes Fleet: the
Mauricius which laded Pepper at Bantan, and one small Ship that was laden
with Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs at Gr^essoy.

The 17. of October at night about eight of the clock, there was some of these
damned crew of Iauans, had broken down our Fence on the backside, and came
unto the fore part of the House, where stood a Chest of one of our men's without
doors, for our Warehouse was at that time so pestered, that we could not
spare it room within: this Chest had some pyllage in it, which he had in the
prise, and also bought of other Sailors being his fellows; and in the day time
did use to open it and show his commodities, whereby he made the Iauans teeth
to water: we not looking for such guestes so early, they had carried it into
the backside, and almost been gone withal before we discryed them: but so
soon as we perceived them, we followed so fast, that we made them leave
their prize behind them; which we brought back, and set it in the House above
the stairs: also we plucked in the Bridge they had made to come over a Ditch
which was on our backside.

Some two hours after, one of our men having occasion to go down, went to
the place where the breach was, and saw they had laid the Bridge again: I
hearing this, caused two Shot to stand ready to give them their
entertainment.

Not long after, but one bold impudent Rogue came in, and going upright, came
up along an Entry where there stood a Candle in a Window right before his
face, and also a Shot standing by the Candle: but I think the light so
dazzled his eyes, that he saw him not: in fine he shot and wounded him; but
not so sore but that he scrambled away: the other Shot meant well at him
again, but his Piece being moist, would not off. He fell down in our
backside, but yet he crawled over the Bridge, and so got away into a thicket
of Bushes which was on the other side the Ditch.

The Iauans perceiving they could get nothing at our hands but Lead, the which
they had had many times before, and found it to be a Metal too heavy for
them, they began now to fall to work with the Chyneses, whose houses at this
time were full of our Goods which they had bought: insomuch that every night
for a long time, we had greeuons crying out, and we looking every hour when
we should be assaulted, durst take no rest in the night.

Many Chyneses about us were slain: and surely if we had not defended them
with our Shot, many more would have been slain: for the singing of a Bullet
is as tirrible to a Iauan, as the cry of the Hounds is in the ears of the
Hare: for they will not abide if once they hear it.

But these continual Alarames and grievous outcryes of Men, Women, and
Children, grew so rise in our ears, that our men in their sleep would still
dream that they were pursuing the Iauans: and suddenly would leap out of
their beds and ketch their weapons. Their next fellows hearing the doleful
noise there made, would bustle up, and in their sleep wound one another
before those that had the watch could come to part them: and if they should
have set the weapons further from them, then they would not have been ready,
if we should have had occasion; the which we looked for every minute: and
being but few of us, I took my turn to watch as long as any: in which I have
stood many times more in fear of my own men, then of any other: and when I
have heard them bustle, have catched up a Target for fear they would have
served me, as they did their fellows.

But all this fear was nothing to us, in comparison of that which I will now
speak of: The which was Fire; Oh this word Fire! had it been spoken near me
either in English, Mallayes, Iauans, or Chyna, although I had been sound a
sleep, yet I should have leaped out of my Bed: the which I have done some
times when our men in their Watch have but whispered one to another of Fire, in
so much that I was forced to warn them not to talk of Fire in the night,
except they had great occasion: and not only my self, but my fellows,
Thomas Tudde and Gabriell Towerson, who after our Watches had been out, and we
heavy a sleep, our men many times have sounded a Drum at our Chamber doors,
and we never heard them; yet presently after, they have but whispered to them
selves of Fire, and we all have run out of our Chambers.

This may seem strange, but it is most true, such was the fear we lived in,
and not without cause; for many times when I have watched while twelve a clock
at night, I have been raised up after, three times before morning by Alarames
of Fire.

And I protest before GOD, I would not sleep so many nights in fear again
for the best Ships lading of Pepper that ever came from thence.

I speak not this to that end I tendered my own private life so much, but
for fear of the great loss and damage the adventurers and my Country, should
have sustained if we should have miscarryed: Neither let any that may be sent
thither hereafter, be any whit discouraged by it: for then we were Strangers,
and now we have many friends there, and the Country is grown to much better
civility: and as the young King grows in age, will more and more; because the
government will be better.

In three months space the Town on the East side the River was burnt five
times: but GOD be praised, the Wind always served us: and although the Iauans
many times fiered it on outside, yet it pleased GOD still to preserve us so,
that by reason it blew but little wind, it was quenched before it came to hurt
us.

The 27. of October came in a P^^nis from Pattania, who brought news that the
P^rting^les had besiedged I^^e, but the Ships that were lately at Z^il^n,
were come o^ Iore, and had beaten them away.

About this time also, there was much falling out between the Hollanders and
the Country people, by means of the rude behavior of some of their
Mariners, and many of them were stabbed in the eueninges: and at that time,
the common people knew not us from the Hollanders, for both they and we were
all called by the name of Englishmen, by reason of their usurping our name at
their first coming thither to trade: and as we passed along the Strees we
might hear the people in the Market railing and exclayming on the Englishmen,
although they meant the Hollanders: wherefore fearing some of our men might be
slain in stead of them, we began to think how we might make our selves
known from the Hollanders: and now the 17. day of November drawing near, the
which we held to be our Coronation day, (for at that time, not the year
following, we knew no other but that Queen Elizabeth was living) we all
suited our selves in new Apparel of Silk, and made us all Scarffes of white
and redd Taffata, being our Countries Colors. Also, we made a Flagge with
the red Cross through the middle: and because we that were the Merchants
would be known from our men, we edged our Scarffes with a deep Fringe of
Gold, and that was our difference.

Our day being come, we set up our Banner of Saint Gorge upon the top of our
House, and with our Drum and Shot we marched up and down within our own
ground, being but fourteen in number, wherefore we could march but single
one after another; plying ou^ Shot, and casting our selves in Rings and (...).

The Sabyndar, and diverse of the chiefest of the Land, hearing our Pieces, came
to see us, and to enquire the cause of our triumph. We told them, that that
day six and forty year our Queen was Crowned, wherefore all Englishmen,
in what Country soever they were, did triumph on that day.

He greatly commended us for having our Prince in reverence in so far a
Country.

Many others did ask us, Why the Englishmen at the other House did not so?
We told them they were no Englishmen but Hollanders, and that they had no
King, but their Land was ruled by Governors*

Some would reply again and say, They named them selves to be Englishmen at
the first, and therefore they took them to be Englishmen: but we would tell
them again, they were of an other Country near England, and spoke an other
Language; and that if they did talk with them now, they should hear they were
of an other Nation,

The multitude of people did admire to see so few of us deliver so much Shot:
for the Iauans and Chyneses are no good Shot.

In the after noone I caused our men to walk abroad the Town and the Market,
whereby the people might take notice of them.

Their redd and white Scarffes and Hatbandes, made such a show, that the
Inhabitants of those parts had never seen the like: so that ever after that
day, we were known from the Hollanders; and many times the Children in the
Streets would run after us crying, Oran Enggrees bayck, oran Hollan^a iahad:
which is, The Englishmen are good, the Hollanders are naught.

I stood in doubt many times, whether I should put this in practice or no, for
fear of being counted fantastical, when it should be known in England: but
by the persuasions of Thomas Tudd and Gabriell Towerson, and chiefly the
present danger we stood in, forced me to it.

I was like to ouerpasse one matter concerning the Hollanders worth the
speaking of: and that was this.

A little before General Warwickes departure hence, which was upon the second
day of this month of November, the Hollanders feasted one an other, and also
us, aboard their Ships; and being merry, they spared neither Powder nor
Shot: it happened one night they sent two Shot toward the Court, one fell
in a Prawe hard by, and split it: the other light within the Court, and put the
King, the Protector, and all the rest, in great fear: the next day the
Protector sent for me, because we had dyned there the day before, he thought
we had had interrest in those Ships.

When I came, he asked me what we meant to let sly our Shot into the
Court? I told him, that we were but invited thither to dinner, and that we
had nothing to do neither with the Ships nor with the Shot; neither were
we there at night when those Shot were discharged. He gave me one of the
Shot, being of a whole Culuering, and desired me that I would show it to the
Dutch Captains, and tell them from him, They should drink their Drink and
spare not: but they should keep their Shot. The which I did: but the
Hollanders said, It was good sometimes to let them see what they could do, if
need were: For they were discontented, beause they had had some men slain in
the eueninges, and could have no redress. Also, they had been suitors a long
time to build such a House as we had, but could not as yet have grant.

General Warwick went for Pattania, and from thence to Chyna.

The 6. of December came in two Ships, which some six months before he had
sent thither: who coming under the Island of Mackow, found a Carryck there
riding at an Anchor, being full laden with raw Silks, Musk, and diverse other
costly Wares ready to depart: and at that time, her men were almost all a
shore, so that they took her without any resistaunce, or very little: They
laded there two Ships, and the rest they set a fire; so that there was (by
their own report) twice so much burnt, as they brought away.

Coming back, they met with a great Iunke of Siam, with whom they fought, and
killed them 64. men: they had some slain and hurt also: but when they had taken
her, and knew her to be of Siam, they let her go again, because they had, or
shortly meant to send Factors thither. There the Captain of the Iunke was
slain, who (they say) when they haled him, would not tell them of whence he
was: and when they bad him strike, answered, He would not for never a Sail
that swamme in the Sea.

The Hollanders not knowing Musk, sold great store to certain of Iapan which
they met at Sea, for little or nothing.

After they had spent some forty days in Bantan, and their Mariners vainly
consumed their Pillage, (the which was great) upon the 17. of January they set
Sail from thence, being four Ships in company; their two, one that laded
at Bantan, and one that some two months before came from Chyna, and had spent
four years out of their Country; of which time, they had been 14 months at
Cuchinchyn: where they at their first coming were betrayed, and their
Captains taken prisoners, whom they made kneel on their knees 24 hours,
having their necks bare and one standing with a sharp Sword ready to have
stricken off their heads, when the word should be given: they bore them down
to be men of War, and Spies, and no Merchants.

These Dutchmen were Papists, wherefore in the end, the Portingall Friars
saved their lives: and afterward they were kindly used: but their Ransom
cost them dear first. They were two Ships, but the one was so Worme-eaten,
that they were forced to take out that lading she had into the other, and to
docke her up at Pattanys.

After coming to Bantan, the Admiral, and Vize Admiral, the two Masters,
and principal Merchant, there docked up their bones.

About this time, the Protector sent to me diverse times, to lend him 2000*
pieces of 8, and if not 2000; 1000: but I put him off, telling him, we were
left there with Goods, but no Money: also, that the people of the Country
ought us much, the which we could not get in: Likewise, that as yet we had
bought but little Pepper; wherefor we must buy all we could, to get lading
against we expected our Ships.

The Hollanders that came in so ^itch from Mackow, had so brybed him, that now
he began to harken to them concerning the buylding of a fairer House.

Also, they agreed with an other Chynes (a Rich man) to buyld an other for
them: the which he did, from the foundation to the top, all of Timber and
Brick.

But this Chynes, and they, had exceeding much trouble and cost before they
could enjoy it.

Also, about this time, I caused a Porch to be buylt before our new Pepper
House door: likewise the Windows to be all Bricked up, and the Seeling aloft
to be searched and mended, with the Foundation also: the which was laid upon
Tymbars, by reason the ground there is soft and marish: and when much rain
falls, it washes away the earth, whereby many times the ends of those Timbars
will be bare.

Of late the Sabyndar had received an exceeding great loss by fire, whose
house all men thought to be fire free: but they were deceived; which caused us
much to stand in doubt of our own.

The 6. of February we lost one of our company Robert Wallys, and many more of
our men were sick and lame, which came by the heat of the pepper in milling
and shuting it, so that ever after we were forced to hyre Chyneses to do that
work, and our own men to ouersee them only.

The 16. of February came in a great ship of Zeland from Pattania, but five or
six days before her coming she sent in a small ship or pynnis willing their
factors to buy up all the pepper they could, which made us think that General
Warwick with all his ships was coming to lade there* wherefore we bought up
all that we found to be good and merchantable: for the Chyneses spoiled much
with water and dirt, because the Hollands refused none: and it is of a certain
that the Chyneses bought one of another, and sold it to the Hollanders again
at the same price they bought it, and yet they would gain 10. Ryalls of eight
in 100 sacks, by putting in water and dirt: for were it never so bad, they knew
their chapmen, and blow which way the wind would, they had shipping to come
thither, either from the East, or from the West* insomuch that one would have
thought they went to carry away the pepper growing on the trees, mountains,
and all. The people there hearing our countries are cold, have asked us if we
beat pepper in our mortars, that we plaster our walls with, to make our
houses warm.

This ship had taken much good purchase, but they swore those Englishmen
they had with them, and also charged them upon loss of their wages, they
should tell us nothing, the which we took very unkindly. The Captains name was
Jacob Peterson, and now he was Vice Admiral to Van Warwick, for after his
Vice Admiral was slain at Zelon by the treachery of the king of Candie, he
succeeded him in place: he had taken a Portugal in the straytes of Mallacka,
laden with wine, and he dealt very bountifully with us, requiting the
courtesies we did them. When their factors had their house all consumed with
fire, we gave them both meat, drink, clothes, and howse-roome, and also lent
them money. There was at this time three howses off Hollanders and Zelanders,
and all lay for several accounts, and bought up pepper, every one so much as
they could get.

The fifth of March the Protector sent to me in the kings name to borrow a
thousand Ryalls of eight, wherefore I was forced to lend them five hundred, or
else they would have fallen out with me: About this time there came in a Iunke
from Iore, with certain Hollanders in it, who stole away with their goods,
because Iore had a long time been besieged by the Portugals of Mallacka, so
that they of the Town could hardly look out: they said the Portugals offered
the King of Iore peace, upon condition he would deliver those Hollanders that
were there into their hands, or kill them himself: to the which the king
answered that he would first loose his kingdom.

In the beginning of this month of March, and to make an end of this old and
wonderful year 1603, we had two great fires on the other side the water,
which did much spoil, but GOD be thanked the wind always favored us. 1604.
And now to begin the new year 1604. My pen affoordes to speak of little
else but murder, theft, wars, fire, and treason, and first to begin with a
Tragedy, we had a Mullato of Pegne in our house, which our ships brought
from Athyne: and in the great ship that came lately from Pattanya, there was
one of his countrymen, who one Sunday being the eight of April had gotten a
bottle of wine, and brought it a shore to make merry with our Mullato.

In the after noone they walking abroad, met with the Provost of their ship,
who bid their Mullato to get him aboard, but he answered be would not.
Whereupon the Provost struck him: our Mullato seeing his countryman misused,
and being somewhat tickled in the head with wine, which he did seldom use
to drink, thought he would revenge his countreymans quarrel: Wherefore he
presently came home, the evening being come, he took a Rapyer and a Target,
and also had his Cryse at his back, and so went forth: and because at that time
there was much quarrelling and brabling between the Iauans, and the
Hollanders: I charged our men that if they were sent out in the evening about
any business they should take their weapons with them, for fear some Iauans
that knew them not, might do them a mischief in the dark; we thinking the
Cook had sent him into the market for herbs, or some thing which he wanted,
mistrusted nothing.

Also there went out with him a slave of the Sabindars, which was borne and
brought up amongst the Spayniards at the Manelies, they meeting with the
Provost, and the other Mullato together, our Mullato began to quarrel with
the Provost, and presently out with his Cryse and stabbed him: then fearing his
countreyman would bewray him, stabde him also, and would have slain him that
went out with him, had he not run through a great ditch, and so got from him,
then meeting with a poor Iauan, and being nuzled in blood, stabde him likewise.

The Fleming not able to go to the house, fell down in a lane hard by the
house: presently the Merchaunts had notice by some, that one of their men lay
hard by wounded: so soon as they came to him, he told them an English man
had slain him: Wherefore the Hollanders came to our house, and desired to
speak with me, who told me, that one of our men had slain one of theirs. I
asked them if they knew which it was, they said no, but they thought it was our
Mullato: presently we had him in examination, who denied it stoutly, we looked
on the point of his Rapyer which he had out: Also upon his Cryse, and could
discern nothing, for he had washed his Cryse before the Hollanders came: then
I sent Master Towerson with them, and also our Mullato to hear what the man
could say, if he were not speechless: when they came, they asked him who had
hurt him, he said an English man. Master Towerson asked him whether it was a
white man, or a black, because he named still an English man, we were in
some doubt: the Fleming being also in drink said, a white man, then presently
he said again, is was dark, he knew not well, and so gave up his life.

As they came back, our Mullato told them there was an other man dead, and
brought them to the side of the ditch where he was tumbled in; they asked him
how he knew: he said he saw him by the light of their candell, which they
all said was impossible, except he had known of him before: then coming a
little further, they stumbled on the Iauan, the which when they saw, made them
all amassed, fearing then they should find more. Then one of the Dutch
Merchaunts looked very near upon the handell of his Cryse where he might
perceive a little shadow of blood, but it could hardly be descerned:
wherefore after they came home, I caused the sheath of his Cryse to be cleft,
where we might see fresh blood within. The Hollanders desired to have him to
their house, but I told them no, he should be as safe with us, we put him
fast in Irons, but still he denied it: I asked him how his Cryse came
bloody, he said he knew not: I told him it was too apparent. Then he
confessed he had slain the Iauan, and said that the Fleming and his
countriman were by the ears, when he came, and had slain one another: we
told him the Fleming then would not have laid it to him only, we said no
more to him that night. Wherefore he laid him down and slept soundly, not
taking any thought in the world, as it should seem: but I am sure I could
take no rest that night for thinking what trouble I was like to have, what
between the Hollanders for their men, and the protector for the Iauan. The
next morning I sent for the Sabyndares slave, who when he came, at the first
denied all that he knew, saying he saw nothing of the matter: but being urged
to speak the truth, he kneeled down desiring us to be good to him, and he
would tell the truth: who presently told the manner how our Mullato came to
^he Flemming, and first killed him, and then his countryman and after how he
persued him. Then we demanded of our Mullato whether he had slain them all or
no? who confessed he had don all three murders, the which we were very sorry to
hear: for if he had slain no more but the Iauan, he should not have dyed for
that. All this while he continued in a careless and reprobate sense, setting
his fact and death very light, the Hollanders would have executed him
presently, but I would not suffer them, until I had spoken with the Protector:
for I knew not then how I should agree with him for the Iauan, only this I
knew, that money he must and would have: but if I had found him too
unreasonable, I meant to have delivered the prisoner into his hands, and to
have let the Hollanders and them agree about the matter: the Hollanders
thinking every hour ten till they had his blood, came again at noone to our
house; we presently went all to the court, where the Dutch Merchants sat down
at the left hand of the King, and the protector, and the vice Admiral at the
right hand: but I sat down above him between the protector and him, at which
I think the Hollanders grudged, but that is all one: for an Englishman scorns
to give place to Hollanders in any foreign Country, if they be of equal
calling.

when we had declared to the King and the protector, wherefore our coming
was, the which they were not ignorant of; the protector demanded fifty Ryalls
of eight for the Iauan, we answered again, that by the laws of their country
they could demand nothing near so much; and more I said, there was no reason
we should pay any money, and the party to loose his life: also the Protector
said that he had nothing to do with the Hollanders that were slain, nor with
our laws, wherefore for them we might agree among our selves, but for the
Iauan, the King must, and would have money: and stood a long time upon fyfty
Ryalls: I said that rather then I would give so much, I would deliver the
party to him: so he should have man for man, and he might save his life if he
would, but I meant it not, when I saw his first demand was but fyftie Ryalls:
for he knowing our house so well, might afterward have been drawn to do us a
myschief. The principal Merchants of the Hollanders hearing me talk of saving
his life, began to rage and to swear he should die, if there wear no more men
in the world: to which pere^tory speech, I answered, that it lay not in them to
put him to death, if I list to save him; and were it not that the deed was so
odious before God, and Men, and that I feared the blood of those Christians
that were murdered, would cry to God, from the earth for vengeance against me:
I would save his life, if it were but to cross their humors, only for their
pere^torie speeches. The Protector hearing us at these hot words, feared we
would have gone by the ears: wherefore presently he sent away the King, and
also told us he had much business desiring us to make an end, he said that
twenty Ryalls was the laws of the country, which we must and should pay, and
so he rose and departed; I dare say, he was afraid we would have cut his
throat: for he took us all to be bloody fellows. The Hollanders would have
paid the twenty Ryalls, and would have had the executing of him: I told them
no, rather the^ he should fall into their hands, I would pay the money out of
my own purse. As we came from the court, they were talking of his death,
saying he should have the bones of his legs and arms broken, and so he should
lie and dye, or else have his feet and hands cut off, and so lie and starve to
death: but I said he should dye the ordynary death of the country, and no
other. The Hollanders and we parted at their house which stood in our way
home, when we were come home, I told him he must dye the next morning, and
willed him to call upon God to forgive him his sins, especially this last
bloody deed: for though he was a Pegu^ borne, yet he was a Christian, and
brought up among the Portingalls: I set others to instruct him too, but he
continued still in an obstinate mind: at this time there stood by an Arabian
borne, who hearing us giving him that good counsel, and saw he would take
none, so soon as we left him he went to work with him, he belonged to the
Dutch ships, and spoke the spanish tongue marvelous well, he first laid open
unto him his grievous offense, and afterward the mercy of God, who had sent
his son into the world to redeem us, and to wash away our sins were they
never so bloody, if if we would repent: within one half hour he brought him
to be the penitent's creature that ever I heard in my life.

In the evening I sent one to the executioner of the town, willing him to come
the next morning: but here I must not omytte to tell you, how the very same day
seven night before, this executioner came to me for money, for killing a
Certain Chynes who had coined false Ryalls; and because this concerned much
the Hollanders, they followed the matter hard: for it was well known, that all
the ryalls we brought were good: for they were almost all of the new stamp
that was coined in the tower of purpose: he told me the Hollanders had given
him twoe Ryalls and a half, for killing the false Coyner, and asked me what I
would give him; I answered him I would give him nothing: for I had nothing to
do with the coyner, and, when he killed a man for me, I would give him five
Ryalls: the next morning this off^cious hangman or executioner not forgetting
my ^ate promise demanded five Ryall^ for his fees: and because he should not
think but that an Englishman would be as good as his word, although it were
made but to a hangman, I gave him five Ryalls, and withal gave him a great
charge not to torment him, as he did the Coynar, but to dispatch him at the
first stabb, wherefore I lent him my own Cryse which was very serviceable for
such a purpose; he answered that when he killed the coynar, he did not execute
his own father.

For their manner is; that when a Iauan of any accou^^ is put to death,
although there be a common executioner, yet their nearest of kin does execute
his office, and it is held the greatest favor they can do them.

On tuesday being the tenth of April the Hollanders came with a guard of shot
in the morning, then we leading him into the fields the people of the town
both Iauans and Chyneses hearing that there was an Englishman to be executed,
came flocking amain: but when they came many wear blanke, and we might hear
them tell one another it was a black man: we told them he was just of their
own color and condition and that an Englishman or white man would not do
such a bloody deed: the executioner, as I had given him charge, did his best
to rid him quickly out of his pain, for belike he dreamed I should have more
work for him shortly, the which within two months after I had to my great
trouble, grief and sorrow: when he lay gasping on the ground, I openly told
the Hollanders that, that was the fruit of drunkenness, and bid them ever
after bevvare of it.

So soon as we had seen him buried, we returned all home to our house,
where we dyned, and after dynner the Hollanders and we parted exceeding
great friends: and the same evening the vice Admiral having one ship more in
company, set sail for Holland: the fourteenth day Thomas Tudd, the companies
chief factor, left there for Banda who had been a long time sick, departed
this life: so that of seven factors left there for that place and Banda, we
were now but two living: and we had lost in all, since the departure of our
ships eight men beside the Mullato that was executed, and we were now ten
living and one boy.

The twentieth day dyed Iaspar Gensbury who was Admiral of the two ships that
was betrayed at Cuchinchyna. The two and twentieth of April came in a great
Iunke from Chyna, which was thought to be cast away because she tarryed so
late, for they use to come in February and March, but by reason of her coming
Cashys kept all the year a very cheap rate, which was a great hinderance to
us in the sales of our prise goods, for when Cashys were cheap and Ryalls
dear, we could not vent a piece of stuff at half the value we did at our
first coming. Again the Chyneses this year sent all their Ryalls they could
get for Chyna, wherefore we were forced to give them credit, or else we must
loose the principal time of year for our sales. Pepper the Hollanders had
left none, but what was in our hands, and the Sabindars, who would not sell for
any reasonable pryse: also our goods now began to grow old, and the colors of
many sorts began to fade; for the warehouses in that place, are so hot and
misty, that although men take never so much pains in ayring, and turning the
wares, yet they will spoil any sort of cloth which shall ly long in them.

It is not long since I made an end of a most pitiful Tragedy: now I must
begin a story of theft and fire, the which must also end as the other did:
only the first for the most part were Christians: and these were Heathen
dogs: a long time we lived in fear of fire, but now we felt the brunt and
smart of it, and if God most miraculously had not preserved us, we had all
perished both lives and goods, the which came to pass by the villainy of a
Chynes borne, but now turned Iauan: who was our next neighbor, and kept a
victualling house; and brewed Arack, which is a kind of hott drink that is used
in most of those parts of the world, in steed of wine. This offspring of the
devil, and heir of hell, had two out houses, which joined to our pales one
the south side of our house, where his guests did use to sit, and in the one
he used to brew, but now he began an other trade, and became an Ingyner,
having got eight fyrebrands of hell more to him, only of purpose to set our
house a fire.

These nine deep workers dygged a well in one of these houses, from the
bottom of which well, they brought a mine quite under the foundation of our
house, but when they came up to the planks of our warehouse, they were at a
stand: before they could make this mine, they were forced to dyg a very deep
well in their yard to draw away the water which did abound in this mine, and
because we should mystrust nothing, they planted Tobacko and many other
herbs hard by that well, and would every day be watering of them. Also we
might hear them boiling of water every day, but because they were brewers, and
had many tubs to wash, and to fill, we mistrusted nothing of that insued: when
they came to these plankes aforenamed, they durst not cut them, for we were
always some of us walking over them, both night and day, after they had waited
two months and could never find opportunity to cut the boards, they began to
cast their Cerberous heads together, how they should get in, but the devil
deceived them, and set them wrong to work, for if they had continued still
until they had come but cross the warehouse opposite against the^, they had
found three thousand Ryalls of eight, buried in Iars for fear of fire: and
also that room was not borded at all, so they might have come into the
warehouse, and had what they sought for: well one of these wicked consortship,
being a goldsmith and brought up always to work in fire, told his fellows he
would work out the plankes with fire, so that we should never hear nor see
him: little did he think, that we should ever come to work with fiery hot
Irons upon him: this seemed to be a rare device, whereupon it was put in
practice; and upon the eight and twe^tieth of May about ten a clock at night,
they put too a candle and burnt a round hole thorough the bords: so soon as
the fire came thorough, the mats of our packs took fire, which presently spread
and began to burn. All this time we knew not of it, nor could perceive any
thing by reason of the closeness of the wa^ehouse: for all the windows were
plaistred up for fear of fire over head, which we looked for every mynut, but
for it to come that way we never once dreamed: after the first watch was out;
wherein I was one my self, the second watch felt a strong funke of fire: for
it was by that time much increased, but they knew not where it should be;
wherefore they went down and opened the pepper house door, where came out an
extraordinary heat yet they could perceive no fire: they searched in every
corner about the cooke-roome but could discern nothing: then one of them
remembered a hole which a ratt had made behind a trunk, that went thorough the
seeling down into the cloth warehouse: this hole we had twice or thrice
stopped and sought means to kill the ratt, because so soon as we had stopped
it, she would open it again in the night: In so much that we were forced to
keep mortar ready tempered in a pan to stop it at an instant, if fire should
take us over head: he looked behind his trunk, where he might plainly perceive
the smoke to steme up out of the hole, then presently he came into my chamber
and told me our cloth warehouse was a fire: I hearing this word fire,
although I was fast a sleep yet it was no need to bid me rise: neither was I
long a slipping on my clothes, but presently ran down and opened the doors
whereat came out such a strong funke and smoke that had almost strangled us:
this smoke, by reason it had no vent, was so thick, that we could not perceive
where abouts the ^yre was, and all that time we had twoe great Iars of powder
standing in the warehouse, which caused us greatly to fear blowing up, yet
setting all fear aside we went to it, and plucked all things off, that lay on
them, which ^eeled in our hands very hott: the powder we got out, and carried
into our backside, then we searched boldly for the fire and found it, we
lighted candels, but the thickness of the smoke put them out; then we ty^d
twelve great wax candles together and lighted them all, which continued a
light: we plucked out packes so ^ast as we could, but by reason of the heat
and smoke, which choked us, being so few as we were could do little good
upon it: wherefore we let in the Chyneses, then came in as well those that
had done it, as others, hoping to get some spoil, those that were minded to
help us, which were but few, durst not for fear of our powder: for they knew
well we had some there, until they had been in the backside and showed where
it stood: then they would have had me broken up the seeling over head, and
there to have powered down water, the which I would by no means, but still
desired them to help pluck out packs: for if we should have given the fire
vent, it would have flamed up to the theatch before we should have gotten
half water enough: and when we had been a fire over our head and under
foot, and all the houses round about us, it had not been possible to have
saved the worth of one groate: then they would have had me have broken down
the house where the fire was, but this was but to have many ways in to have
stolen our goods; neither could I get above twoe or three to help our men to
pluck out packs: as for Master Towerson and my self, we had work enough to
stand by with our swords, to keep them from throwing them over the pales,
after they were out.

Also they were not without their consorts on the other side to receive them.
When I saw that these damned Chyneses would do us little good, but rather
harm, I was almost in despair, and having at that time a thousand pounds in
Gold, (which I had received of General Hemskerke for pepper) in my Chest
above stayres I ran up, thinking to fetch it, and to throw it into a ponde on
our back side. But when I come to my chamber door my mind altered, and I
thought I would go see once again what might be done: and coming through our
house, I chanced to cast my eye into our dyning room, which was right over
the place where the fire was, where there was Chyneses that had removed the
table, and were breaking up the brickes of the seeling: Amongst which was one
unkind neighbor which was the principal Actor: I bid them leave and get them
down, the which they would not, until I began to let fly amongst them. When
I had driven them down, I went down after them, and desired some Merchaunts
that stood by, with whom we had dealings, that they would urge the rest of
the Chyneses to help us pluck out packes, promising they should be well paid
for their pains. It pleased God to put so much good in their minds, which I
think never had any before not since: So that they fell to work of all
hands, and presently the room was cleared, out of which came fifty and odd
packes, whereof sixteen were a light fire: and also they emptied the next
room; for we knew not all this while how the fire came, not yet how far it
went: but the Chyneses did know the most part of them. For when the first
room was empty, and the fire on the walls quenched, few of them would set
their hands to one pack in the next room, saying that the fire was quenched,
and the danger all past: when the fire was all out, I stood musing alone by my
self how this fire could come, being very much grieved in mind.

Then came to comfort me two or three Chyneses, who ^olde me, I did not give
sacrifice to God, wherefore this mischaunce was happened unto me. I told them
I did give sacrifice to God every day, but not after their manner, nor never
would: but had we known then that the Chyneses had done it, we should have
sacryfised so many of them, that their blood should have helped to have
quenched the fire: so soon as we were at leisure, I gave to every one of
them a ticke of my hand, who were about forty in number, and willed them to
come in the morning, and I would pay them: for they would not set a hand to
help, until I had promised to pay them. All this while our house and yard
lay like a small Town that had been newly sacked by the enemy, and goods
lay some hafe burnt, and some trodden in the mire and dirt, and what with fire,
and water much was spoiled: so soon as it was day, the Chyneses came for their
money, the which they are ever exceeding greedy of. I proffered them a piece of
eight a man, which they much scorned, I asked them if it were not enough for
half an hours work: they answered again, that if they had not helped us,
we had had our house burnt, and so had lost all. I told them again, that it
was not long since, that if I had not helped them, they had had their throats
cut: when they could get no more, they took that, some of them wishing our
house had been consumed, although they spoke it not before us: for if they
had, we should have banged them, such is their wicked mind. Now we began
to call to mind, who had been in the warehouse the day before, then we
remembered that there were certain Mullaynes there to look upon goods: Also
one of our men had been there with a Candell, for we could never show any
goods, but we were forced to light a Candell: But Master Towerson was there
all the while, who said he never came near that room where the fire was,
neither was the door ever opened, but either he or I was there, who did
evermore look to the Candell our selves: we thought then that some of those
Mullays being hired by some Portugals, had secretly as he passed by that
room, tossed in a Ball of fire, which he might bring closely for the purpose.
There was at this time a certain Chynes, a bricklayer, which wrought at the
Dutch house: who in the morning told a Fleming that had been long in the
country, that certain Chyneses had done it, but he said they were fled:
he said more, if we looked well in the room, we should find the manner how
it was done. The Dutchman told an English surgeon what he had heard, and
willed him to come and tell us, and he himself because he was perfect in the
language, would go and inquire after them: The English surgeon came to me,
and desired me he might see the room, where the fire was: I presently called
for a Candell, and showed him the room: he going to one corner found a little
round hole, which was burned through one planke of the flower, whereat I put
down a long stick which I had in my hand, but could feel no ground. Then I
called for an Axe, and as softly as we could, we wrinched up the planke,
where under was a way, that the greatest chest or pack in our house might have
gone down: Which when I saw, as secretly as I could, I called three of our
men, and went to the house, from whence the mine came, having our weapons. I
set one in the door, and charged him he should let none come out, whatsoever
he were, and my self with the other two went in, where in one room we found
three men, there were two more in an other room, who hearing us, fled out at a
back door, which we knew not off before we saw them: those three after two
or three blows given, we brought away, one was a dweller in the house, but
the other two we could prove nothing against them. I laid them fast in Irons,
and presently I sent Master Towerson to the Protector to certify him how the
case stood, and to desire him they might be sought out, and have Justice done
upon them, which he promised should be done.

But I think, never a good Protector in the world, would have been so slack
in performance, for such a matter as (...). The Dutch merchaunts seeing we had
taken some, and doubting the Chyneses would ^ile against us, came ve^^ k^ndely
with their weapons, and swear they would live and die in our quartell: when we
had laid out those goods that had received some water, to Air, then we
examined this party that dwelt in the house, who told us the names of six
that were fled, but he would not confess that he knew any thing of it. Also
he said the other two knew nothing of the matter, neither could he tell as
he said, whether the rest were sled: Shortly after, the same day came to me
the Kings principal Scrinana, called Cay Callybon, who in the night time had
been at our house with a great crew of men, to see that no Iauans in our
trouble should offer us any violence. This man told me that one of our
prisoners was his kinsman, and knew nothing of the matter, wherefore he
desired to have him released, promising that if we could prove any thing
against him hereafter, he should be forth coming.

Whereupon I delivered him: many then came to me, and told me that the other
was a stranger, and dwelt at Iortan, and that he was guiltless also, but he
that dwelt in the house, every one said he was accessarie to it.
Nevertheless, because that party had used much to the house, and had dealings
with those that were dwellers theere, I would not take their words, but still
detayned him. I have not known a man better beloved in a Town in my life,
then this man was there: Insomuch that there were some came to me lamenting,
and making suit for him every day, but I would always tell both him and them,
that if he were not guilty, he should fear nothing* for I would not shed
his blood wrongfully for all the goods in the world: and if he were guilty,
all the world should not deliver him out of my hands: in the mean time I said
he should lie well, and eat no worse then I did, whereat every man was
contented: he was a Chynes borne, but now turned Iauan, and withal a very
lusty proper man as one should see: the next day the Protector came to our
house to see the mine, which when he saw, he said it was a most villainous
piece of work, he said more, he had heard of Towns and Castles that had
been overthrown by undermining, but he never saw a mine before: We still
cried to him for Justice against those that had done it, he bid us do
Justice on those we had when we would, and so soon as the rest could be
found, we should have them, so that if we had had no more care then he; we
might have executed one that was not in fault.

Although he himself could and did tell me, that he was guiltless, but I
told him again that I greatly suspected him, because we had known him a
long time, very conversant with him that was the principal dweller in the
house, and that he had layen many nights in the house, which was the greatest
suspicion of all. Then he bid me kill him if I would, but I told him, not
for the world, except I could evidently prove that he was one that did it, or
knew of it, before it was done.

Now we were in a jealousy, that the Protector and some other of the
principal of the land had an interest in this act. Wherefore I thought good to
bring this man that dwelt in the house to some torture to see what I could make
him confess. After three or four days that we had trimmed up our house,
which was all soyled with smoke and du^t, by throwing of water: and also
trimmed and ayred our goods, that had received some damage: We went to work
with this fellow, who when he saw the Irons ly* burning in the fire, began
pitifully to bewail his own misery, saying: O Fathers and Mothers, when you
bring your children into the world, you do not know what misery shall come
unto them. Then being demanded whether he was one or no, he began a
frivolous tale, saying that he heard men that went by the gate say, that two
other put to the fire, and that they two were gu^l^lesse. The confession of
Saw^an turn ^ote.
Then fearing him with hot Iron, but not touching him, he confessed the
whole manner of all, and that he did help: he said chose 2 out houses were
built for that purpose at the first, although they put them to other use,
because we should not mistrust them, and more that the mine was made two months
before, in which time many nights before they had been in the mine, striving to
get into our house, but could not. Then we demanded of him, who put to the
fire, and why they did it.

To the which he answered, that because they durst not cut the boards, for
fear we should hear them, they thought to work them out by the fire, and
that one Hinting and Boyhie did it. I asked him what his office was, he said
that himself and one Vniete that was the principal dweller in the house
bayled out the water: we asked him how they put to the fire, he said with a
candell, and that the candell went out three times, and they still lighted it
again: then I asked him whether the other of Iortan did help, or if he knew
of it, to the which he said no: and the Iron being laid down, he denied again
that he knew of the pretense, but that he had heard of all this since by
others, for which denial I caused him to be well burned under the nails of
his fingers.

Then he confessed again he knew of all the pretense: then fearing him
again with an hot Iron, I asked him if this fellow of Iortan did not know of
it, he said no: then we burned him, the which he endured, though with great
impatience: I demanded who was the first that called them together, and set
them a work: he said Vniete. I bid him name over all those that were
accessarie, which he did. I told him that some great men of the country, or
the rich Chynes had set them a work, and that I would make him confess the
truth who they were: then burning him, he roared out and said, he would
accuse no man that was not guilty, how much soever we did torment him: I bid
him name again all that knew of it, the which he did as before. Now while
this was in hand, Master Towerson, and one of the Dutch Merchaunts went down
into our yard, where this fellow of Iortan was in Irons, and having newely
been eating, his manacles were off from his hands: the Dutch Merchaunt
coming by him, and having a Iapan sword in his hand: he wroung it from him,
but Master Towerson being by, they took it from him again, before he could
draw it: He being asked what he meant to do, he answered he would have
slain himself for fear of being tortured, but I doubt he would have killed
one of them first: We much blamed him, and told him we meant not to torture
him, and willed him not to go about such a thing any more.

In the afternoon the Protector sent to me, willing me to deliver him: but I
knowing him to be a Governor or Protector which had but little wit, sent him
word again, that if he were guiltless, he should receive no harm, and
until I knew the certainty, I would not deliver him. This fellow that we
had already tortured, being very unwilling to dye, said that what he
confessed was, because we should not torment him, and denied again that he
was guilty, I seeing his drift, spoke him fair, and promised him his life if
he would tell me the truth, who was the principal that set them a work, and
indeed if I had perswaswaded him, I meant as I said. Then he told the whole
story again, the which was just as it was before, also he confessed he was
one: wherefore the next morning I sent him to execution.

As he went out of our gates, the Iauans who do much rejoice when they see a
Chynes go to execution, as also the Chyneses do when they see a Iauan go to
his death, reviled him: but he would answer again, saying the English men
were rich, and the Chynes poor, therefore why should they not steal from the
English if they could?

The next day the Admiral took an other of them, and sent him to me, who
knew there was but one man with him: and therefore resolved with himself, not
to confess any thing to us: he was found hid in a privy, and this was he
that put the fire to our house, this was a Goldsmith, and confessed to the
Admiral, he had ^lipped many Ryalls, and also coined some counterfeit: some
things he confessed to him concerning our matter, but not much, the which the
other had confessed before: but he would tell us nothing* Wherefore because of
his sullenness, and that it was he that fired ^s, I thought I would burn him
now a little, for we were now in the heat of our anger. First I caused him to
be burned under the nails of his thumbes, fingers, and toes with sharp hot
Iron, and the nails to be torn off, and because he never blemished at that,
we thought that his hands and legs had been nummed with tying. Wherefore
we burned him in the arms, shoulders, and neck, but all was one with him:
then we burned him quite through the hindes, and with ^a^phes of Iron to^e out
the flesh and sinews. After that I caused them to knock the edges of his
shinne bones with hot searing Irons. Then I caused cold sense of Irone to
be served into the bones of his arms, and suddenly to be snatched out: After
that, all the bones of his fingers and toes ^o be broken with pincers. Yet for
all this, he never shed tear, no nor once turned his head aside, nor styrred
hand or foot: but when he demanded any question, he would put his tongue
betvveene his teeth, and strike his chynne upon his knees to byte it off: when
all the extremity we could use was but in v^ine, I caused him to be put fast
in Irons again, where the Emmets which do greatly abound there, got into his
wounds, and tormented him worse then we had done, as we might well see by his
iesture: the Kings officers desired me, he might be shot to death, I told
them that was too good a death for such a villain, and said more that in our
countries if a Gentleman, or a soldiour had committed a fault worthy of death,
then he was shot to death, and yet he was befriended too, but they do hold
it to be the cruellest and basest death that is: wherefore they being very
importunate, in the evening we led him into the fields and made him fast to a
stake; the first shot carried away a piece of his arm bone, and all the next
shot struck him thorough the breast up near to the shoulder: then ^e holding
down his head looked upon the wound; the third shot that was made, one of
our men had cut a bullet in three parts, which struck upon his breast in a
tryangle: whereat he fell down as low as the stake would give him leave: But
between our men and the Hollanders, they shot him almost all to pieces before
they left him: now in this time the Admiral and the Sabindar sent us a guard
of men every night, for fear the Chyneses would rise against us, but we
feared it not: yet we kept four of the men to be witnesses, that whatsoever
we did (if they should rise) was but in our own defense: after I had kept
this fellow of Iortan nine or ten days, and could prove nothing against him,
I gave him a piece of stuff to make him a suite, and set him free. So soon as
he was out of our gates, every one that met him took him by the hand, and
greatly rejoicing would say, that now they saw the Englishmen would do no more
but justice.

The third of July following, the old woman that was chief Gouernes there,
helped us to an other of them, but not without a bribe: for they will do
nothing there without brybes, although we told them every day, the laws of
God and the strict laws of our countries, for such a matter as this; and they
will give you the hearing of all, and say it is good: but nevertheless they
will do as they list themselves, which shall be not to follow any thing that is
good: and truly my opinion is, that their learned men know very little, but
what humane nature teaches them, yet their high priest Cay Cally told the
King and the Protector that he found in his books, that such as should do
such a deed as they had done, should dye by the law. But now to my purpose;
this outcast of all goodness, had stolen our Generals Cryse, when he was hear,
and had received punishment for it, also in these days he had stolen from us
many times, and many times before I had had the beating of him, and could have
found in my heart to have killed him, but now was the time come, that I was to
pay him for all: his name was Boy^ye, and as I heard, he was one of those that
helped Hynting to put to the fire: wherefore for these manifold Injuries, all
the people thought I would have tormented him grievously, but he being as he
seemed penitent, and confessed all that the other did, and twoe malefactors
more, which they would never confess: and because they should see, that
Englishmen knew as well how to be merciful as to tortor, if occasion served,
I let him dye by a Cryse only, without any tortour: he greatly entreated me
that I would not tortour him; I promised him I would not, on condition he
would tell me the truth, who set them a work, and who they were, all that
were the dooers of it, and also who knew of it before it was done: the which if
one may believe a villain, he did, and they were these that follow, Vnie^e
the chief, Sawwan his partner that dwelt in the house with him, Hynting,
Onygpayo, Hewscamcow, v^ee, which was shortly after slain with a Crise for
lying with a woman: him self, Boyhie, Iccow, and Laccow, which were fled to
Iackatea, the which Iccow and Lackow I had never heard off before: I made all I
could to get them, but I could not, except I would the means have been at
exceeding great charges.

There were others that belonged to some Iauans, which were great men: and
getting into their houses, we could not get them, some of which Iauans did
offer them to sell to us, and we did beat the price, as one would do about an
Ox or a Calfe, but they held them so dear, that I durst not deal with them:
I proffered them as much for every one, as they might buy them an other slave
in their rooms, and some benefit: but they were so fit Instruments for their
purpose, being practiced in all villainy, that they would not part with them
without a great su^me: for the Iauans and Chyneses from the highest to the
lowest, are all villains, and have not one spark of grace in them, and if it
were not for the Sabyndar, the Admiral, and one or twoe more, which are Clyn
men borne, there were noe living for a Christian amongst them: without a Forte
or very strong house, all of brick or stone. The principal of the Chyneses
might have helped us to them all, the same morning when the deed was done, if
there had been any honesty in them, and surely the pretense of stealing was
known to them all, before it was acted: but that they would set our house on
fire, I think they were ignorant. Amongst all other of the Devils Instruments
here upon earth, there was one of the Kings blood called Pangean Mandelycko,
who kept one of these nine villains in his house: one day he coming to our
house to buy cloth, we desired him he would deliver this fellow into our
hands, promising him that we would cause our General to give him thanks when
he came, and that he should be no loeser by it; but by no means he would
not: we told him how good it would be for their country to root out such
villains as they were: he answered again that we should tell those so that
had the government of the cou^trye in their hands, or cared for the good of the
country, for he did not: some three or four days after he came again to
our house, and would have had me given him credyt, for six or seven hundred
Ryalls of eight in cloth, but because he was a man not to be trusted, I
excused the matter, saying that I looked every day for our ships, and that I
could deliver no goods, but I must have pepper presently, whereby I might have
loading ready: after he had been very earnest, and saw he could not prevail:
he went out very angry, and being at our gate he looked back upon our
house, and said it was pity but it should be burnt again: also he would have
had a Chynes that we had some dealings with, to have helped him to some
Chyneses that dwelt near us, to undertake the fyring of our house again: he
being a man generally hated of all for cruelty that he had done, the Chyneses
told us what he said: wherefore I would presently have gone to the court to
have complained of him, but many wished me not to do so, for they said he was
a desperate villain, and cared neither for King nor Protector: but if we
brought him to his answer before the King, would do us a mischief whatsoever
came of it.

The King and the Governor had sent oftentimes to him to deliver us that
fellow he had, but he cared not for them: shortly after we had many shrewd
attempts to have fyred our house, for the town was fyred in three places at
one instant, in the night, a little to windeward of our house, and twice an
other night, but Chiefly by the mercy of God, who preserved us, and by the
diligence of the Chyneses who are grown very poor upon it, it was always
quenched, neither had we any body to complain to that could help us, but
only God, and next unto him our trust was in our swords and shot, which kept
the proudest of them in such awe in the night, that they durst not come within
our reach. He kept a crew of villains like unto himself, who no doubt if
they could have fyered the upper work of our house, would have been there, to
have seen what spoil they could have done in the tumult, but God be thanked
we were not without friends, which would have sent us three times so many more
for our guard, then he was able to make, and did when time came, that the
upper work of our houses were burnt: and shortly I must tell a longer tale
then this, of this ungodly Pangean, what trouble he put both the King and us
to, and how in the end he was banished.

Amongst all these sorrowful and troublesome discourses, it happened that
certain Chyneses which dwelt hard under our pales, did steal away an other
Chyneses wife: and being hardly persued by her husband, they had no means to
shift her away, but to put her over the pales into our ground.

At that time we having newly shot much pepper in to our warehouse, which was
so extreme hot, that we were forced to keep the door open night and day,
having always a regard to it in the night; this being a fit place for her to
hide her in, got behind the door, so far as she could stand for heat; and her
husband would have sought all Iauan, and Chyna, before he would or durst come
thither to seek.

In the night, after our watch was set, one of our men went into our backside,
the which place we did all very much frequent night and day; but as he was
coming back, and being a little starr-light he saw the woman stand in the
pepper house door, who came forth to take breath: for she had been better to
have been in a stoue so long: he presently swore a great oath; a Woman, or
the Devil in the likeness of a Woman: for it was very strange to see such
cattle within the English pale at that time of night* I walking in our gallery
and hearing this, remembered that I had read of many man that had been
overthrown by the deceit of women, began to grow in great fear and
suspicion that some Chynes or this envious Pangean, whom I lately entreated of,
had sent her with some secret fyrework, to work the destruction of us all;
wherefore I ran down and caused her to be searched and examined presently:
she told us that her husband would have beat her, wherefore she was forced
to clyme over our pales and to hide her self: then I caused our pepper house
to be searched, first by dark, and afterward with some lights, for fear
still of fire works: when no thing could be found, I threatened down the
Admiralls men that watched there, that they had brought in their whores, the
which they all forswore: then I threatened our own men, who swear likewise to
the contrary: but I not satisfied yet, and purposing to know the truth, locked
her up in a porch all night, and took the key with me: also I g^ue the watch
both Iauans and Englishmen, a charge to walk before the door, the which they
did; and to look well out round about the house, for fear of some villainy.

I was never so vexed in my life with a woman, although I think many a good
man has: I considering of it in the night, thought it might very well be as
the woman said: and knowing again that it was an ordnary thing for the
Chyneses to beat their wives, especially she being a Cuchinchina woman, which
had no friends in towa^: for the Iauans will hardly suffer them to beat their
women: wherefore now I thought it would prove but some such jest: the next
morning her husband came, who falling down one his marow bones, desired me to
be good to him: for having so lately tortoured some Chyneses, he thought I
would tortour him.

But in my conceit he needed no more plague or punishment then such a wife:
wherefore I presently dismissed them both.

Yet this man was not so ill matched, but he had a neighbor was worse: who
being sat at breakfast, with four more of his friends, were all poisoned by
one of his women: but so soon as they perceived them selves to be so spedde,
they drunk every one of them a good quantitye of beazer stone, some thirtye
grains a piece, the which recovered them all: but their necks and faces brake
out in that manner, that it would have pitied a body to have seen them.

The woeman I say executed, and so did diverse other of our house, who will
witness this to be of a truth: and that all the Chyneses within few days
recovered their health again.

The people of those parts are given much to poisoning: which is the cause
they hold their beazar stones in so high Estimation, that there is not any of
account, but they will always have some ready in their house, and the
Noblemen do horde them up for great Jewels.

And surely I do hold that to be the thing, next under GOD, that has
preserved the most of our lives that have been long resident there. Now a
word or twoe concerning the Dutch shipping, and shortly after into fire and
troubles again* the fifteenth of July came in the Moon from Amboyna being
lade^ with cloves* In whom came three young youths which were the sons of
three the cheifest governors of that Land: their coming was to require aid of
the English, or Dutch, which should come first to Bantam against certain
Portingales which had a small forte there, and did sore anoy them: also there
came in a small Flybote which had taken a pynnis or shuppe, which the
Portingales not long before had taken from Captain Barkell and Captain
Bugall, at Mackow: they took her under an Island a little to the eastwardes of
Iaua: she was bound for Mallacka and had in her a chest of letters, which
should have gone for Goa, wherein the Portingales of Mackow had writ for
powder, shot, and all kind of munition for wars. The upper work of our house
being built of canes, and being withal both high and long, every puff of
wind was ready to turn it over: and we were forced every foot to be at
much trouble and charges about mending and setting it to right: wherefore in
this month of July, we senta prawe to an Island hard by, to fetch timber for the
maine posts round about, and new built it again; but we hardly inioyed it
twoe months, before fire consumed it.

Also the Protector a little before had given us all the houses and ground
which joined to our pales, and bebelonged to those Chyneses which undermined
our house: But although it were given, yet I think there was never Englishmen
paid so dear for so little ground in any country in the world, the houses were
rotten, but the ground did us great pleasure.

Also there was a Pangean or gentleman which had a house and ground, the pales
of which ground came so near our Pepper house door, that it was very
troublesome to us, when we should carry in or out, pepper: wherefore I bought
that house with the ground, so that now we had a very spacious yard, this
house I filled full of pepper, but because it was not boarded within, the
weight of the pepper, being shot, bare out the side of the wall. Wherefore we
were forced to take out all our pepper again, being two thousand and forty
sackes, and to boarde it within to our exceeding great trouble, and some cost.
Also I hired an other house right over against us, which held six hundred and
odd sackes of pepper, and some other houseroome was lent us by our friends: for
the pepper that we had, and were now to receive, took up a great deal of
their kind of houseroome, by reason their building is but low.

The nine and twentieth of August, the Noone set sail from thence to Holland
leaving there those young men which came in hither from Amboyna, who would many
times come to our house, and I always gave them kind entertainment: and it
is most certain that if we should have any store of shipping of force to
come, there we should have any thing at their hands, before the Hollanders.

The third of September it happened two of our men to fall together by the
ears: I finding them in this disorder banged them, and also committed them to
the Irons the next day: they being prisoners had somewhat harder fare then
their fellows: wherefore they said they would know whether I had any such
authority or no: and more, that rather then they would be so used, they would
be revenged on me: and also set the house on fire. I hearing these rebellious
speeches, laid as many Irons on them as they could bear; and whereas before
they sat dry in the house, I sent them into our backeside, where no candels
nor fire should come near them, there to abide both hunger and cold: and
because they had offended before, and also had received punishment for it, and
yet would not beware: I thought now to have sent them home in the next ship
that went, as prisoners to the company: But by their great submission, and the
Hollanders and other Merchaunts in the Town entreating for them, but chiefly
the want I had of men, I was contented to release them upon sureties of their
good behavior after.

The ninth of September the Protector sent a proclamation that no Chyneses
should wey any pepper to the strangers, meaning the English and the
Hollanders; the which proclamation was procured by the Hollanders, and we knew
it very well: for the same day they dined with us, and at dinner they told
us, the Protector owed them ten thousand sackes of pepper: but I told them
that was not so, for they would never trust him of so much: The same evening
one of the principal of the Dutch Merchaunts coming by our gate, we asked
him if he heard the news: he knowing well how to dissemble said no: then
we told him of the Proclamation: he making very strange of it, said that
when any of our ships should come, we should talk with the Protector and
others for all these injuries: but I told him we would not give him, nothing
near so long a day; and that I would talk with him before the next day at
night, and tell him more, then he would willingly hear.

The next morning I went to the old woman, who commands the Protector, and
all the rest, and indeed is called Queen of the land by the Sabyndar, and
diverse others: although she be not of the Kings blood, but only for her
wisdom is held in such estimation amongst them of all sorts, that she
rules as if she were solelye Queen of that Country. After we had made our
griefs known to her, she presentlye sent for the Protector, willing us to
talk with him before her: when he came, I demanded of him for what cause he
had forbidden us our trade? he answered, he must buy ten thousand sackes
of pepper for the King.

I told him again, that the Hollanders themselves had confessed to me, that
the pepper he would buy was for them, and that he owed them ten thousand
sackes: the which he denied, saying he owed them ten thousand Ryalls, but
not ten thousand sackes of pepper: I told him it was contrary to promise
made to our General, that we should be forbidden to buy, and sell freely:
he said still he must, and would buy pepper for the King, and when he was
served, then we should buy again.

I replied again, that our General had a letter to our Queen, written in the
Kings name by consent of the Queen which sat there present, of the
Protector, that then was, the Sabindar, the Admiral, and diverse others of the
chiefest of the land: I asked him if he would now cause the Kings word,
the Queens and all theirs to be broken? then he knew not well what to say.
I told him more, that Kings must keep their words, or else they were no
Kings: And more we told him, that such like occasions was the first falling
out between: our Queen, and the King of Spain, the which cost many
thousands of men's lives: And that it was well known to all Nations, that we
did not only burn and spoil at home, but also came into those parts of the
world, and took away his subjects goods, the which himself could witness.

He said the king owed the land, and therefore there was no reason but he should
be served before strangers* we yielded that was but reason, but we knew well,
that it was not for the King, but for the Hollanders; and that if the King
would buy pepper, the Sabyndar and the Admiral knew of it, but now they
knew no such matter.

Then he confessed it was for the Hollanders, he said he owed them a great
deal of money, but not so much as they reported: The which they lent him long
time, wherefore to pleasure them, he would buy pepper for them. I said he
might, and yet not forbid us to buy, nor yet to receive our debtes: to the
which he answered that all the while we wayed pepper, he should get little,
and therefore we should forbear a while: Then I told him again that the
Chyneses were greatly indebted unto us, and now by means of his proclamation,
they would not pay us. Wherefore I would lay all our debtes upon the King and
him, and when it should please GOD to send ou^ ships thither* we would not
loose one Ryall. After that he began to bethink himself, saying it was
never his meaning to forbid us to receive our debts, and that those which
proclaimed it, did more then he willed them: then I desired him to send his
proclamation again and command the Chyneses to make haste, and pay us our
d^bts: The which in the after noone he did. We entreated him that he would
not help the Hollanders: for we told him, that he could not help them, but
he must hinder us, and that if he got by helping them one way, he would
loose by hindering us another: he answered again, he would help us to, if
we would: we desired him he would help neither of us, but let us shift for
our selves.

Telling him also that he should get more by us, when our ships came, by
sitting still, then by helping the Flemings. He desired us to be contented,
and we should have no wrong, and so departed, so soon as he was g^ue, I
asked the old Queen, which all this while sat by, whether the King would buy
pepper or no: she said no, the king was no Merchaunt; but she thought the
Hollanders had given the Protector a bribe to help them; but said she you
shall have no wrong: for in deed she was always our very great friend, and
the Protector durst not displease her: we gave her great thanks, and after a
while departed: the same day being the tenth of September died Edward
Buntingall our Cook.

In the afternoon, the proclamation came that the Chyneses should wey us our
debts, (...) ^none: many of them not willing to pay their debtes till pepper
came to a higher price, would not hear this last proclamation; but when we
came to ask our debtes would say that they durst wey us none, which was a
great hinderance unto us in getting in our debtes, and we were forced to cause
the Protector to send his officers to some particular men, before they would
pay us: but it must be understood, this could not be done without a bribe:
for we were forced both to braule with him, and to bribe him too: for a man
must do both to those kind of people or e^se he shall have nothing as he
would, and they must be kept betwixt fear and love. I must not forget to tell
how the Protector would needs have me promi^e him not to buy any pepper in
fouretenne dai^^, the which I did: Provided alwai^s that the Hollanders should
not buy neither, nor none for them; but so soon as I came home, I heard (...)
they had weyed a very small parcel of ten sackes: wherefore the very lame^
^ight I bought one hundredth sackes.

The Hollanders now were at a nonplus again, for in time past, when they had
seen any parcel of pepper as they passed by, lying in any warehouse, they
would go in and cheapen it, but wheresoever they came, the people would tell
them they owed it to the English men.

Whereat the Hollanders would go out in a great chafe: but when they saw
they could get none, then they delivered the Protector money, and wrought with
him as I have before rehearsed: and if we had had, but ten thousand Ryalls
of eight more then we had the Hollanders should have got little pepper that
year in Bantan. It is most certain they are very much hated there; and what
they do or procure, is for fear of their shipping, wherein they abound in all
these parts.

The twelfth day of September, the Protector sent Ryalls up and down amongst
those that were dealers in pepper, in the kings name, some to serve him one
hundredth sackes, some fifty sackes, some twenty, some ten, some five, as it
were a begging: and indeed he took it up at the kings price, which was 1/2 a
Ryall in a sack less then we paid: the Chyneses with much grutching served
him.

A while after, he set a tax upon them to serve him so much more; then the
Chyneses rayled upon the Protector, and the Hollanders both: and many of them
would not receive their money, but the officers would throw it down in their
howses, and take their names.

If many in Christendom had seen how Rialls were carried up and down upon
men's shoulders, and how they were thrust upon men, they would think they had
had them on some Island hatd by for fetching. On a time when I was talking with
the Sabyndar, I asked him whether the pepper the Protector bought were for the
King or no; although I knew very well to the contrary before: yet I did it
because I would hear what he would say: he answered no.

But the Hollanders had complained to him, that they could get noe pepper, and
because (said he) the Protector is behoulding to them for money, which they
had a long time lent him: Therefore he did it only to pleasure them: I told
him he did us great wrong by it: He said it was very true, and that the
old Protector would not have done so.

The thirteenth day of September, the king and all the principal of the land
went a progress to an Island some six or seven Leagues to the East-wardes of
Bantan, where they hunted Bullockes, and Vnozuras; and every Noble man's Prawe
was trimmed in very warlike manner, having their colors and shieldes hanging
round about them: some had on their shieldes a half Moon, some a Star,
some a Tygars head, some a furious beast which is in that country called a
Matchan, some one thing, some an other: And because the order is that every
one of ability, both strangers and others, at such a time presents the king
as he passes by with some present: Therefore as the kings Prawe came down
the river, I laid him aboarde, and gave him a present.

The noble men that sat with the king, told me I should have been ready
with half a dousen shot to have brought the King onwardes of his way: I
answered them again that I lived in such fear of fire, that neither I, nor
my men durst go out of doors: but they were so importunate that I might not
say them nay, but presently send for some shot; for, said they, six of your
shot is better then all ours: then presently I sent for half a dousen, who
were attyred in their best Robes, and with their scarfes and hatbandes of our
Countries colors, made a very splendant show.

I brought the king to an Island about a league on his way, where all the whole
train went a shore* they would needs see our men march and show them their
order in discharging their shot. I told them it was not worth the seeing,
except I had more men: they answered they could see by a few what more could
do: the king sent us Ryce, Fruits, and C^ckayes. About four a clock in the
afternoon, the king departed on his journey, and I taking my leave of him and
his train, (who thanked me) went directly home.

The fifteenth of September, by means of an old ^ro^t which was making of
Candels, the Town was set a fire: the which consumed all the upper work of
our three ho^ses to our exceeding great danger, cost and trouble: the
Sabyndar, who was lately returned from the king, came to us in the tumult. Also
the Admiral who had charge of the Court in the King and Governors absence,
sent us a great train of his principal men; Likewise one of the kings
vnkels came to us with a great number: and also the rich Chynes with a very
great crewe: All these came to see that no body should offer us any violence:
for they knew well we had enemies of great force, not thot they hated us, but
for our goods.

Now we were laid open to all our enemies, for our fence* for the most part
was burnt to the ground, and we had not a place to dra^^e our victuals in:
yet as good fortune was* we had one little shed in the middle of our yard,
which was our court of guard, that escaped, where we camped a nights: the dutch
house escaped though but narrowly* wherefore we borrowed some of their men:
for it is to be noted, that though we were mortal enemies in our trade, yet
in all other matters we were friends, and would have lived and dyed one for
the other.

Also the Admiral and Sabyndar sent us men every night, so that we (with our
drum, shot and pykes) lived soldier-like, until our fence was made up, and
afterward too: for this was but to show us the way, and our fence was no
sooner up, but we looked every hour when it should be burnt down, or borne
down by those that would have had the cutting of our throats: now we paid a
piece of eight for that which was not worth twelve pe^ce before, yet for fear
the rain and weather would spoil our goods, we were forced to set sheeds
over every house, until we could get tymbers to build them again. All which
makes our charges of building very great, and yet we are but very badly housed
there.

This burning of the town was a great hinderance to us in getting in of
pepper: for the Chyneses were all so busy a building, that they could not go
up to the mountains to fetch it.

About the end of this monthe September began great dissension amongst the
principal of the Land, which grew by means of that troublesome member called
Pangean Mandelicko, who, as I have written before, did seek all the means he
could to set our house on fire, but now seeing he could get nothing at our
hands, fell to robbing of Iunks which came into the ^oad with ryce and other
provision of victual. Amongst other there was one which came from Iore: in
this Iunke was great store of Ryce, Men, and Women: he feigned a matter and
gave it out, that there was twoe men in the Iunke that had taken a Iunke of
his, that was theeuing upon that coast, the which afterward was proved to be
nothing so, Nevertheless this spoyler of a common wealth; with a great crew of
villains, his slaves ^eazed on the Iunke, in the night, and carried away all
theryce withal the men and women, as his prisoners: the which was the next
way to keep away all other Iunks, which used to bring victuals to the town,
whereby to starve them all: for that land is not able to feed one quarter of
the people that are in it.

The King and his Protecter sent to him commanding him to deliver the people
and goods, the which he had taken; but he would not: but presently fortified
himself.

Also the rest of the Pangeanes that were both of the Kings blood and his, but
being all traitors to the King, maintained him, so that the Kings officers
durst not meddle with him. The Protector sent to us, willing us not to aid the
Pangeanes neither with powder, shot, nor me^: also he willed us to make our
selves as strong as we could: because they were minded to banish Mandelick^ and
feared they should have some hurly burly before they should get him out.

I answered the messenger, that the Protector needed not to fear, we would
aid such a rebel, but rather do our uttermost against him: and that I was sorry
I had so few men, that I could not lend the King some aid. Also the Sabyndar
and the Admiral sent almost every day to us, willing us to make ourselves
strong, and to have a special care of our watch in the night: for they all
greatly feared, that the rebels would surprise our house, and the Hollanders in
the night: which if they could they should have been ritcher then the King.

Especially ours: for they should have had more followers for our commodities,
then all the Kings in Iaua besides.

Also they were not ignorant of the hatred, the principal rebel bare us,
because I would not trust him, the rebels grew every day stronger, and
stronger, and all the people of the country, and also strangers began to be in
great fear.

I was forced to borrow some small ordinance of Chyna merchants, which were our
friends: and with chains and bushes to fortify our selves, our men being busy
every day making of chain, Langrell, and Crosbar shot: all trade of
merchandise was laid aside; neither did any in the town look after buying or
selling: and every day we should have the rebels espyalls come into our yeard,
who would be very inquisitiue what, and wherefore those were, which our men
were all so hard at work upon: we would plainly tell them, that we looked
every night for such a man's coming, wherefore we made provision for his
entertainment: they would view the shot very much, and show it one an other,
and many times would go aside and whisper to themselves. One day in the middle
of this broyle there came to our house one of the Pangeanes, which not long
ago, was King of Iackatra: and now being kept out by a kindsman of his, who
held it and does homage to the King of Bantan for it.

This Pangean lived like a mal-content, and was every day conversant with the
principal rebel, who as we do judge sent him to our house: ^ee asked to see
some cloth, the which I showed him; no sooner he had seen it but he asked me
if I would give him credyt for one hundred Ryalls worth, or two hundred Ryalls
worth: he had been once with me before, when I denied him, and he was forced
to bring a Chyna merchant to give his word for him: wherefore I maruailed he
should come again so soon, and as I did before so I gave him the denial
again: then presently he bid us carrye it away, asking me if I had any pieces
or powder to spare? I told him no, I had to serve my own turn, and no more*
he was very importunate with me to let him have some: I answered him again
that I had none, but what was for provision for our house, therefore I could
^ell him none of that; though he would given never so much: after that he fell
a reasoning with us where we lay a nights: whether we lay below, or above upon
the top of our warehouse, which had at that time but a shed upon it: I told
him we lay sometime below, and sometimes above, according as we saw occasion:
but wheresoever we were, I told him our Dogs lay always ready, below the
most part of them, and we had some above too: your dogs said he which are
they? then we pointed him first to one piece, then to an other, and indeed
we had a dosen stood very orderly: said he call you them dogs: we told him
they would bark if occasion served.

After he had viewed our shot and our fortifications, he departed: shortly
after this man had a crew of twoe hundred men came from a town some seven
miles of where he dwelled, who in the night time came down the great river in
Prawes: presently the Alarm was given that the Pangranes were up, and would
seize upon the King and the Court* which after much hurly burly in the end
proved nothing.

These men, and likewise all the Pangeanes men keep as the Lord Stanleys men
did in King Richard the thirds time, no man knowing which side they would take,
but the King and all his part was in exceeding great fear of them, and durst
not trust them: wherefore they sent for the King of Iack^tra to come with all
speed, and ^^ing all the force he could make, for they were almost assured
that when they should begin with this principal Rebel* that all the rest of
the Pangeanes would join with them.

All this while we looked for nothing but for throtecutting every night, and
we counted our selves no better then dead men: only we made account to sell
our lives dear: and because we would be sure to be ready, we walked every
night with our matches light in our hatts, and also had our tuchboxes and
pruning ^rons for ordinance in our hands: for if we should have pruned our
pieces, they would have cloyed and so have failed us when we should have need:
neither had we powder to discharge them once in twoe or three days, for so
we might have wanted: we knew well that if they came, it would be one the
sudden, and with such a cry would have ran against our pales, that we
should have had no time to light a match, nor yet have heard what one another
said, for their noise; neither can I forget what a foolish part the Hollanders
played us, in this dangerous and fearful time.

It happened one night, when we set our watch, one of my men put a shot in his
piece, and discharging it upright, the shot f^ll down in one of the Hollanders
out houses thorough the thatch: where were certain Mallays, which lay at their
house, at Supper: the Mallayes as they said (but I do not believe the^)
brought the shot to them, and asked them if they could not live there, secure
from shot* who when they saw it, their principal merchant caused six of their
men to come up stairs into their house, and out of a window to shoot close
over our yeard.

I was at that present walking alone in our yeard, and very much troubled in
mind; in so much that three of the shot was passed close over my head,
before I minded them: then hearing more still which came very near me, and
being withal moonelight, I thought that some Rogues had gotten into a window,
and had made a mark at me: wherefore I stepped behind the corner of a house,
for many times walking there I have had stones thrown at me, and came with
such violence, that they have splyt out pieces of boords, where they lighted,
missing me very narrowly.

At this time, when the Hollanders were in hand with their shot, their were
certain thieves that were breaking of a Chyneses house; and being moonelight
as I said before, also the shot coming over the thieves heads, they thought
that some body had shot at them, wherefore they to go likewise at the very
instant.

The owner of the house had espied them, and gotten a crew together to pursue
them: no sooner was the last shot over my head, but I heard a most grievous
cry and uproar, coming down the street, toward our house: As the Chyneses,
if a Poulcat in the night chance to come out of the woods amongst their hens,
it is enough to make one hundred of them cry out, as if there were one thousand
men in arms against them.

Every one of us betook us to our weapons; verily thinking that now they were
coming, whom hourly we expected, and were glad that they came at such a time
as we had every thing so ready: the thieves after they were a little past our
pales, cared not for the Chyneses, but turned again and cried Payyon, Payyon,
which is, we are ready if you dare, whereby they brought the Chyneses to a
stand, right against ou^ pales.

We thinking all this while they had been our enemies, I had much adooe, to
keep our men from shooting thorough the pales; which if they had, they had
slain many of the townes-men: Anon after* we heard a Chynes (that we knew)
speak; so that then I thought how the matter went; wherefore I bid one of my
men shoot over the pales: the thieves hearing that, as stout as they were,
took their heels amayne, and the Chyneses after them, like a sort of hounds,
which when the Fox turned again durst not bark. Now we wondered whence this
six shot should come, we knew well that no Iauans could deliver six shot
so orderly together: but after we understood it was the Hollanders, we blamed
them much, for doing so in such a dangerous time, although they meant us noe
hurt.

The twentieth of October, came in the King of Iackatra, with a crew of one
thousand five hundred fighting men, besides straggelers, and had a thousand
more coming after.

He challendged the rebel and likewise all the Pangeanes to fight with him
and his company only: he had indeed a great quarrel against them all.

For but a little before they fought means to put him out of his kingdom, but
now the rebels kept their fortification, and would not come out.

The six and twentieth of October, the King of Iackatra, and the Admiral sent
for us, to know if there were no means to fire them, a reasonable distance of,
out of the reach of their baces, of which they had a great number: we told
them, if there had been a ship in the road, it might easily have been
done, but for us to do it, we thought we should hardly find things
wherwithall.

The Admiral asked me what things we would have? I told him, Camphfyer, fault
peeter, and brimstone.

As for some things we had already: the Admiral said he would help us to
all these, and desired us we would help them: also he had a long bow and
arrows fit for such a purpose: but I think a Musket had been beter.

We were minded to have caused the Kings ordyna^ce to have been planted, and
shot red hot bullyts amongst them; which I think would have made work both
with them, and their thatched houses, and fortifications made of canes: the
principal rebel had sought all the means he could to fire us, now we meant
verily to see if we could fire him: but whether it was for fear of the King of
Iackatra, or hearing we were about such a matter, the Pangranes and the
rebels both came to an agreement: within twoe days after the which agreement,
was this; that the principal rebel should within six days depart out of the
King of Bantams dominion, having with him only thirty of his household: the
which he did. For the space of ten days, we looked every hour both night
and day, when the Kings forces and the Pangranes would join battle, for they
were both ready: but the Iauans, are very loath to fight, if they can choose:
the reason they say is, their wealth lies altogether in slaves: so that if
their slaves be killed they are beggered: wherefore they had always rather come
to a se^ feast, then a pitched battle.

In this time of trouble, what with ouerwatching, and with sudden waking out
of our sleep, we being continually in fear of our lives; Some of our men
were distract of their wits* especially one, who sometimes in the night would
fall into such a fra^tike rage, that two or three of his fellows could hardly
keep him in his bed: neither could he tell in the morning, that he was any
such man. I would not wish a more forwarder man in any time of danger, then
he was, when he was in his perfect senses, but it is a great vexation to the
stoutest man that is, to be much broken of his sleep, and when he does
sleep in such fear of his life, as we did there a long time.

Shortly after his departure, the King of Iackatra also departed, who promised
us that if there should ever come English ship or pinnys thither, they should
be very kindly used: we were very much beholding to him, for in these
troubles we being one day talking with the Admiral and him, we asked them
if they thought the Pangranes would join with the rebels; who answered, they
would: and that they were a sort of beggarly poor men, and would seek the
spoil of all such Merchaunts as we, which came thither to trade: and the
Admiral said, that if we had not had a strong house, and kept especial good
watch, they would have cut our throats long ago. The King bid us keep good
watch still, promising that if they came to molest us in that time, or while
he were in Town, he would come himself, and all his forces to our aid.

The Town being now somewhat at peace without brawling or fear of wars
(as for blows I know not one was given before) we sent Prawes for timber, and
began to build our house again, which should never have been for me, but
that we feared our ships would have some weak men in them: and if we
should not have had lodginges for all sorts, it would have gone worse with
them then it did: and notwithstanding we did our best in that matter, we
found all to be little enough for their preservation.

The third of November, came in the Sun, from Tarnata, being laden with
cloves; which stayed here twenty days, and then departed for Holland.

The seventeenth day of November which we took to be our Coronation day, and
having all our pieces and chambers lying laden since the troubles, we invited
the Hollanders to dinner; in the middle of which we drank a health to our
Queen, and also shot off all our Odinance; so that the like peele was never
shot within the Town, and the people said we had Parrets or Munkies, that
gave fire to some pieces: for they thought it had been impossible for so few
men to keep such a stir as we did, what between our small shot, and our
great: indeed our Queen was dead long before; although we knew it not, yet
God be thanked we lost not our labor, since God had sent us both a King and a
Queen too. And here it is not fit I should omit one thing, and yet to make
relation of it, some may think I do it of a vain glory to my self, and
those that were with me: but if any do so think, in this or in any other
matter which I have written, they shall do me great wrong: for it is well
known to some men of account, that if it had not been by their procurement,
these discourses should never have been written, nor a number of them never
once been spoken off by me.

Now to the matter: there is that resort to this town of Bantan a number of
many nations, of which diverse of them are Liedgers: these people having heard
much fame of the English Nation in times past, before ever they saw any of us,
had an especial eye to our carriage and behavior, and we were grown a common
admiration amongst them all; that we being so few, should carry such a
port as we did, never putting up the least wrong that was offered either by
Iauans or Chyneses, but always did Justice our own selves: And when, the
Protector did wrong us himself, it was known that we did not spare to tell
him of it soundly, and in such sort, that he wanted very much of his will.

It is well known also that at the first coming of our ships, the Iauans
offered us much wrong in purloyning our goods: but so many as we took, were
either slain, wounded, or soundly beaten. The Iauans thought we durst not do
so, when our ships were gone: Wherefore they did practice to steal both day
and night: but they found it all one, the which they did admire at, for it is
most certain (and I have heard many strangers speak it, that have been
present, when we have beaten some Iauans) That they never knew not heard of
any Nation but we, that were Liedgers there, that durst once strike a Iauan,
in Bantan: and it was a common talk among all strangers, and others, how we
stood at defyance with those that hated us for our goods, and how little we
cared for them, never offering any the least wrong to the meanest in the
Town, and receiving from the better sort a commendation before the
Hollanders, or any other Nation: and it will be a thing generallye talked off,
in all parts of the world, what different carriage we have been of, when it
is likely there will be no English there.

Now every day the Hollanders looked for their shipping, having little pepper,
nor knowing where to buy any, for that the Chyneses would rather deal with us
(giving as much as they) then them; and which is more, when our Rialls were
gone, they gave us credit, till the arrival of our ships, which was uncertain
to us; when they might have had ready money, and thanks of the Hollanders.

In the beginning of the last harvest, the Hollanders perceiving they should
get little pepper, were very importunate with us to share all the pepper we
bought between us in equal halfes: so that they would have received the one
half of our debts, which we knew to be all sure, except some small driblets;
giving us Ryalls: and we should have received the one half of their debts,
which were owing for the most part, by Iauans, and great men too, (so that GOD
knows when they will be paid) and to have given them Ryalls, for so much as
we should have received: Also what pepper we had bought for cloth, they
would have had the one half, and what they had bought for money, we should
have had the one half: their reason (which was very good) was to keep down
the price: to which if I had consented we had had little lading against I
expected our shippinge, we having (what by debts, what by sales,) five sackes
for their one; they had owing them as much as we, but we knew it to be in
such men's hands, as would be long a paying.

Shortly after that, they began to work with the Protector, as I have before
rehearsed, at which time they delivered so many Ryall into his hands, aa will
not be paid them again in haste.

About this present time the emperor of Damacke, who not many years before
for tyranny, had been deposed, by the kings thereabouts; going by sea from
Bantam, to an other Town upon that coast, was by one of his own sons,
stabbed in his bed sleeping.

All November, and the beginning of December, we were busied both in building
and getting in, and making clean of pepper.

The fourteenth day of December came in a Dutch pinnys, which told us of the
death of the late Queen Elizabeth, and of the great plague and sickness that
had been over all all Christendom, the which struck more terror into our
minds, then all the troubles we had passed: But they could tell no news of
our shppes, which caused us much to doubt: Only they told us the king of
Scots was crowned, and that our land was in peace, which was exceeding great
comfort unto us. Also they told us of the peace, which was likely to be
betwixt England and Spain, the which we were sorry for: because we saw what
good purchase the Hollanders got in those parts, and we always hoped to have
the like when our ships should come.

The twentieth day of December came in all the Dutch fleet, and because we
heard of no letters for us in the Pianys, I made have and went aboard the Dutch
Admiral to bid him welcome, also to inquire for letters; the which we found
in the vice Admiral.

The two and twentieth day of December by means of some of our friends,
Vn-ietee, that was the principal that undermined our house, was discried and
taken, having been long in the mountains, and for want of food was forced to
repair to certain houses near the Town, from whence he was brought to the
rich Chynas house: so soon as I heard of him, I sent Master Towerson to the
Protector to certify him of it, and withal to tell him, we would shortly
execute him: for since the time that this mischief happened, I never went out
of sight of our house my self, but once, until our ships came in, the which
was when the Protector crossed us so much that the^ I was constrained, and my
fear was so great that I thought all would be burnt before I should come
back again. Likewise three times every week I used to search all the
Chyneses howses round about us, for fear of more undermining. The same day
toward evening we discried our ships coming into the road, to all our
extraordinary great joy: But when we came aboard of our Admiral, and saw
their weakness, also hearing of the weakness of the other three ships, it
grieved us much, knowing that Bantan is not a place to recover men that are
sick, but rather to kill men that come thither in health: at my first coming
aboard, I found out General, Captain Henry Middleton very sickely and weak,
to whom I made relation in brief, what troubles we had passed: also I
certified him, that neuerthesse we had lading ready for two ships, which
was some content unto his mind, which was very much grieved for the
weakness of his men: they had hardly fifty sound men in their four ships;
and of the sick men a number died, also those that came thither in health,
many never went out of the road*

The four and twentieth day, our Vice Admiral Captain Coulthirst came a
shore with some other Merchants; on which day we executed this villain which
we had lately taken: but it was happy for him, we had other business to go
about, otherwise he should have died nothing so easy a death, as he did: After
whose execution we thought our selves reasonable well satisfied for the
trouble, and misery they had put us too: for now we had slain the four
principal, and one more was killed for stealing of a woman, as I have before
written. At my coming away, there remained four alive, of the which two were
at Iackatra, one with Mandelicko the traitor, and one with Caysanapatty Lama,
the which we could not as them come by: but I doubt not but Master Towerson
will do his best to get them hereafter: for he and I both, if we live this
hundred years, shall never forget the extreme horror and trouble they brought
us to. The same day our vice Admiral, being accompanied with us that had been
resident there before, and also some other of the new merchaunts, went to the
Court to certify the king that our General had letters from the King of
England, with a present for him: and more, to tell him our General was weary,
having been long upon the seas, and so soon as he was a little refreshed,
he would come himself to see him, and also to deliver the letters and present.

The five and twentieth day being Christmas day we dined aboard with our
General: but I should have spoken before of a Counsel that was holden on
sunday being the 23 day, wherein it was thought of all, that the Dragon and the
Ascension were fittest to go for the Mulluckoes, for diverse reasons which
needed not here be rehearsed, and the Hector and Susan to lode pepper, and to
be despeeded home, And the same week after we were busied in getting of fresh
victuals, herbs, fruits, and flowers, for the recovery of our men, which
were most pitifully paid with the scuruie.

On sunday following being the thirtieth day of December, our General invited
the Dutch Admiral to a feast, where all the Hollanders took the licker so
well, that they were sick on it most part of the week following, by their
own confession; and whereas they purposed to set sail on the monday for the
Mulluckoes, what by means they were ill at ease, and also that the Dutch
Admiral would bid our General again, they stayed until the monday after: so
that by this means we got a weeks time of them, which fell out greatly to
our Generals advantage at the Mulluckoes, as I have heard by all that I have
talked within our ships. Monday being the 31. day, our General came a shore,
and being accompanied with all the merchants that were in health, and diverse
others, he went to the court and delivered the Kings letters and present, the
which were as follows: one fair Basin and Ewer, two fair standing cups, all
parsell gilt, one gilt spoone, and six muskets with their furniture: The which
were kindly received: a day or two after our General spent in visiting our
chiefest friends, as the Sabyndar, the Admiral, the rich Chynees, and also
gave them presents, who very thankfully received them.

Thursday being the third of January, the Dutch Admiral invited our General
and all his merchants to dinner, where the Hollanders (as it is ever their
order at a feast) took in their drink soundly, or else it were no feast with
them: and truly we wanted none, but it is not our country fashion to pour
it in, after that abundant manner as they will. After this day we fell all to
work, both a shore and aboorde to pack up, and taking goods for the
Mulluckoes: but after our men were a little recovered of the scuruie, the flixe
took them so that we continued still very weak in men, in so much that it
was impossible in man's judgment, that ever we should be able to accomplish
our buisinesse in that manner, as God be thanked it is, who surely heard the
prayers of some both in England, and also amongst us, and looking down in
mercy upon our weakness, did raise us up again.

On monday being the seventh of January, the Dutch fleet being nine tal
ships, besides pinnysses and s^oups, set sail for Amboy^a and the Mulluckoes:
so that we rested very doubtful a long time, whether our ships should get any
lading in those parts that year, by reason of their number of shipping which
was gone before ours: neither could our ships possibly go sooner by means
of our weakness.

The tenth of January the ships that were bound home, began to take in pepper,
but they were so oppressed with sickness that they could make no dispatch.

Our 2 ships set sail for Banda, and the Mulluckoes.
The eighteenth day our ships having, taken in all the goods which we thought
meet for these parts, set sail for the Islands of Banda, having their men for
the most part extreme weak and sickly: but how they spent their time until
their return to Bantan. I must refer to their own reports: presently after
the departure of these ships the Protector sent unto us to agree about
custom, the which we had thought we had known since our first shipping
departed; but he asked many duties which we never heard of before: and
because I would not grant to pay them, he commanded the Porters they should
carry no pepper. Wherefore to prevent this should not be a hinderance to us
in lading our ships (for we had hinderance enough besides) I was forced to
agree with him to pay in hand, according to that ^ate as our ships paid
before, and to let the full agreement rest until the return of our General,
and he thought he did us great kindness herein. It pleased God to take away
the twoe masters of these twoe ships which we were now a lading, Samuel
Spencer, Master of the Hector, and Abakkuk Pery, Master of the Susan: Also
william Smith the principal Master M^te o^ the Hector, and many other of
their principal men, with a number of their ordinary sailors: so that we were
not only constrained to hyre men to do them all the ease we could there, but
likewise to hyre so many as we could get of Goossaratt^, and Chyneses to
help bring home our ships; all which has been to our exceeding great
trouble, costs and charges.

The one and thirtieth of march, dyed Anthony Simkyns, the fourth of February
dyed Master Hogsam Merchant.

With much tormoyle we got them both laden by the sixteenth of February, The
depar^ture of the Hector and the Susan.
but it was the fourth of March before they could make their ships ready to
set sail: some twoe or three days before which time, dyed Captain Roger
Styles, who was not likely to live, when our General departed, wherefore
doubting him, he gave order, that Captain William Keelin^ (whom he left
there) should succeed him in place, if God called him; which otherwise should
have remained there until his return, if not after.

Likewise he appointed Master Edward Hyghlord for commander of the Susan,
Also he left Master Surfly^ the Docter of Physic and preacher, to go home in
the Hector, more he left twenty four of all sorts, for the house, whereof
many were sick and never recovered. The fourth of March, as before I have said,
the Hector, and Susan set sail for England: the Hector having sixty three
persons in her, of all sorts, English and others: but many of her own men
being sick, the Susan so nere as I could learn, had forty seven of all
sorts, also many Englishmen sick, I pray God send us good news of her.

William Crane being Master of the Hector, and Richard Hackins Master of the
Susan, by reason of contrary winds, they were forced to come to an Anchor under
an Island until the sixth at night, when they set sail again to the watring
place; unto the which the Hollanders very kindly lent them a Pylot, and also
seven or eight men more to help them to water. Presently after the departure
of these ships, the Hollanders bought up all the pepper they could: and I
thinking our ships would want most part of their lading which were gone to the
east-wards* also bought so much old pepper as I could, and likewise put forth
money to be paid in new pepper the harvest following: for pepper now is scarce
in Bantam, by reason the Hollanders have men in every place, that yields
pepper: so that the shipping of those parts, which was wont to bring it to
Bantam, now do not come: the tenth day I sent a Praw to the watring place,
with some Ryce, which they wanted for their strangers.

The twentieth of March dyed Thomas Smith Anno. 1605 The five and twentieth day
dyed Thomas Keyling. Now we looked every hour for the Hectors boat which
should be left at Bantam, wherein were many of our own men belonging to our
house, and also of the Hollanders men, which were all gone to help our ships
to water: we looked for this boat within ten days after our ships departed
from Bantam, but we heard no n^wes of the^ in four and twentye days after;
wherefore we thought some mischance had befalne them: the Hollanders that were
with them would needs have them keep upon Sumatra side, in their return from
the ships, where ran such a current against them, that they could get nothing a
head: after they perceived they could do no good, they crossed all the
straights of Sonda to the cost of Iaua, where going a shore to buy victuals,
they were very kindly used of the people upon that cost. The six and twentieth
of March, we sent a Prawe to inquire alonge the cost for such a boat: who
hearing in every place where they came that they were gone past, they returned;
and ( GOD be thanked) our boat and men were come in a day before them.

The eight and twentieth day dyed Raph Far^^l, the Hollanders bound for Cambey.
the sixth of April dyed William Wingfield, the eighteenth day dyed Alexander
Travel, the nine and twentieth day dyed Georg Mountney, the thirtith day dyed
William VVheelar Goldsmith: the sixth of May came in a ship from Holland, who
had come all along by the cost of Goa, and meeting there with twoe ships more
of Holland which were bound out for Cambaya, 4 Portingal ships taken.
they three had taken four Portingal^ ships, wherein they found great riches:
only one of them was laden with great horses, which they set one fire, and
consumed both ship and horses: this ship came out of Holland in June 1604,
but they could certify us of no further news then our ships had done.

Now I must speak som-what of the manner and order of the Kings circumcision,
and of the triumphs that were held there every day for the space of a month,
and more before his going to church; whereby all the better sort of the people
of that country had been buisied from the time of the coming in of the Chyna
funks, which is in February, Triumphs at the circumcision of the young Prince of
Bantam.
and March, until the four and twentieth of June, about making preparation for
the same.

The first of June dyed one of our men Georg Heart: but now to my matter. There
was a great pageant made, the foreparte of which was in likeness of a huge
devil: upon this pageant was set three chayers of estate, the middlemost was
for the King, which was placed higher then the other by some twoe foot: on
either of his hands were placed the sons of Pangran Goban, who is heir
apparent to the crown, if the King should dye without Issue: this Pageant was
placed one a green, before the court gate, and rayled in round about.

The manner of their country is, that when any King comes newly to the crown,
or at the circumcision of their King, all that are of ability must give the
King a present: the which they must present in open manner, with the greatest
show they are able to make: and those that are not able to do it of them
selves, do join a company of them together, and so perform it, both
strangers, and others.

About the five and twentieth of June, those shows began, and continued all
that month, and the next, except certain rainy days: the Protector began
the first day, and every noble man, and others had their days, not as they
were in birth, but in readynesse, and sometimes twoe and three companies in a
day: because the Iauans have no good shot, the Protector borrowed shot both
of us and the Hollanders: but when they came to set forth, there was a great
strife between our men* and the Hollanders who should go before: they would
by no means go behind our men, neither would our men go behind them: they
were proud because they were many more in number: and our men were proud
because they had much gayer apparel: for they were all in their sylk suits,
having scarfes and hat bands of their countries colors which made a very fair
show: and they had on their tardd cotes, greasey thrumbd cappes, and those that
had shirts on, they hung out between their legs: whereby it appears, that
pride consists not in apparel altogether, but in mind.

The Hollanders would go foremost, but our me^ would not go after them, but went
in the reareward after the Iauans: but when I heard of it, I wished they had
had wit to come home. Every morning the Kings Guard, which was both of Shot and
Pikes, was placed without the rayles round about the pageant, being commonly in
number about 300. men, but some principal days of shows there was upwards of
600. the which were placed in Files, according to our Marshall dissipline: but
in marching we do much differ. For whereas we commonly march three, five,
seven or nine: they never go but one, and so follow one another so close as
they can, bearing their Pikes upright. As for shot, they have not been used
unto; their drums are huge pannes, made of a mettell called Tombago, which
make a most hellish sound. They have also their Colors and Companies suitable,
but their Standard and Ensigns are not like ours: their Ensign staff is very
high, bending compass at the top, like the end of a long bow, but the colors
on it are hardly a yeard in breadth, hanging down from the top, with a long
pendant.

The first day* being the greatest day of show, there was certain Forts made
of Canes and other trash, set up before the Kings Pageant, wherein was certain
companies of Iauans, placed to defend them, and other companies were appointed
to assault them: and many times the assaultants would fire them.

Now a word or two, in what manner the King was brought out every day, and what
shows were presented before him. Always a little before the shows came, the
King was brought out upon a man's shoulders, bestriding his neck, and the man
holding his legs before him, and had many rich treasures carried over and round
about him. But I should have spoke before of his prin^ipall Guard, that came
out before him, and was placed in the Rayles round about the Pageant. After the
King came out, a number of the principal of the land which gave their
attendance upon the King: and as it should seem, they had their days and
times appointed them. The shows that were brought, came in this manner First a
crew of shot being led by some Gentleman slave, after followed the Pikes, in
the middle of which was carried their colors, and also the music, which was
ten or twelve pannes of Tombaga carried upon a coulstaffe between two, these
were tunable, and every one a note above another: always two went by them,
which were skillful in their country music, and played on them, having
things in their hands of purpose to strike them. Also they had other kind of
music, which went both before and after, but these pannes are the principal.
After the Pikes followed a crew of Targetters with Darts, then was brought in
many sorts of trees with their fruit growing upon them: then followed many
sorts of be^sts and fowls both alive, and also so artificially made, that
except one had been near, they were not to be discerned from those that were
alive. After this followed a crew attired like Maskers, which before the King
did dance, vault, and show many strange kind of tumbling tricks: of these
there was both men and women. After all these followed sometimes two hundredth,
sometimes three hundredth women, all carrying Presents, only at every tenth
woman there went one old motherly woman soldier to keep them in order which
carried nothing. These presents were of Rice and Cashes, the which was laid in
frames made of split canes, curiously set out for show, with painted and gilded
papers, but the Present it self was not commonly worth above twelve pence, or
thereabouts. After them followed their rich Presents, which was commonly a
fair tucke, and some fair cloth of their own country fashion, being
curiously wrought and g^lded or embrodered with gold for the Kings own
wearing, the which was carried also by women, having two Pikes borne upright
before them. Also every Present which was for the Kings wearing, had a rich
tier also borne over it: Last of all followed the heir to that party which
sent the presents, which is their youngest son, if they have any, being very
richly attired after the country manner: with many jewels about their arms
and middles, of Gold, Diamonds, Rubis, and other stones; having also rich
treasures borne over them. A number of men and women attending on them. After
he has done his obaysance to the King, he sits down upon a mat being laid
upon the ground; which is their order in general* the presents are all borne
by the Kings Pageant into the Court, where there are some officers appointed to
receive them. After all which past, one within the Kings Pageant speaks out of
the Devils mouth, and commands silence in the Kings name. Then begins the
chiefest of the Revels and Music, and now and then the shot discharges a
volley. Also the Pikemen and Targetters with darts, do show all there feats of
arms: the shot is very unskillful, but the Pikes and Targets are very expert,
and always when they come to charge their enemy, they come toward him
dancing, because his adversary should have no steady aim to throw his dart,
or make a thrust at him. Likewise, amongst some of these shows, there came in
Iunkes sailing artificially made, being laden with Cashes and Rice. Also in
these were significations of Historical matters of former times, both of the
old Testament, and of Cronicle matters of the country and Kings of Iaua. All
these inventions the Iauans have been taught in former times by the Chyneses,
or at lest the most part of them: for they themselves are but blockeheads, and
some they have learned by Gossarats, Turks, and other nations which come
thither to trade.

Amongsts all others, we were to make a show the best we could: the which must
be understood, could not be great, by reason of our small number, yet it was
pretty, and such as they had not seen the like before: the manner whereof I
will declare. We bought a very fair Poungarnet tree, being full of fruit
growing on it, both ripe and half ripe, some young, and some budded: this tree
we dug up by the roots, which we set in a frame being made of R^tanes or
Carricke rishes, somewhat like a birds Cage but very wide: at the root of this
tree we placed earth, and upon that green turfes, so that it stood as i^ it
had been still growing: upon these turfes we put three Siluer-heard C^nnyes,
which our vize- Admyrall had given me: And at the top, and round about upon the
bows, we with ^hride made fast a number of small birds, which would ever be
ch^rping, see that the tree was as it had been growing; (pretty strange
beasts*) the like whereof they had never seen (feeding about it*) full of
fair fruit, and birds ^erily singing on the top; likewise we had four very
furiou^ Serpents which the Chin^ses there can make art^^^cially, upon these we
hung the Cloth, which was for the kings one wearing, which were pieces
curiously wrought and g^lded after their fashion* some other pieces of Stuff
their were also, which was for the King to bestow upon some meaner of his
followers. More we gave him, one fair Petronell damasked, a Case of Pistols
damasked, with very fair Cases severally belonging to them, the which had
great silk strings with tassels of Gould. Now we had no women to carry these
things, wherefore we borrowed thirty of the prettiest boys we could get, and
also two proper tall Iauans to bear Pikes before them. Master Towerson had a
very pretty boy, a Chines son, whose Father was a little before slain by
theiues, this youth we attyrd as gallant as the King: whom we sent to present
these things and to make a speech to him, signifying that if our number had
been equal to our good wills, we would have presented his Majesty with a far
better show, than we did; with many other compliments.

Upon the 14. of July we sent these things to the Court in this manner, foremost
went a Trumpeter, then ten Musketeeres, all very well furnished with their
countries colors: after which went four Porters, bearing the Tree, then
followed the two Pikemen: after whom went the boys that bare the Petronell and
Pis^ols, next the boys that bare the Serpents with the Kings cloth, over which
were rich treasures borne according to the order. Last followed the youth which
should present them, who had also a rich Canopy borne over him. Likewise seven
boys of his bigness in suitable liueries attending on him, besides diverse
others of his schole-fellowes which followed him for good will.

The King and diverse others about him, took great delight in the Connies. Also
our men carried some fierworkes with them, which were very delightful to the
young King and his playfellowes, but the women cried out for fear they would
set the Court on her, and some of the chief commanded to fire no more: but
Augustine Spalden our interpreter, being a bold youth, said, that if the King
bad him, he would fire more whatsoever they said: Then the King brought them
into a brick Castle, which was uery dark, where they fired all they had, and
made the King and all his train, very good sport.

Now a word or two of the King of Iackatra, who the 18* of July, came to
present his show before the King of Bantan, also to give his present, and to
do his homage, the which was performed the 23. day.

In this manner, in the mornin^ early, the King of Bantans Guard (which was on
this day an extraordianry number) were placed in files, their Pikes set upright
in the ground, and their shot lying in order, every man sitting by his arms,
being clothed in red coats.

About eight a clock, my self with some other of our Merchants, and men, went
to see this show, and taking up our standing near the Kings Pageant, the Kings
Guard would often bid us sit down: but we would answer them they must first
bring us a form, for indeed there is no Nation suffered to stand in the Kings,
or any great man's presence if they be near them, but us and the Hollanders, we
were commanded by the Officers to sit down as well as the rest: but we were
to stout, knowing they had no such Commission to stoop under thire yoke: but
for other Nations they would bring them, if they refused, although the ground
and place where they should sit, were never so durtie. But the Iauans who
cannot endure to have any stand over them, would remove a good distance from
us, and many of the Kings Guard forsook their weapons, and would go sit a
far off: neither can they endure that one should lay his hand on their head,
the which is not for any point of Religion, as some will affirm, but only of
mere pride. Many times when I have come into a Chynesses house, where Iauans
have sat in the floor. I sitting down on a chest as our order was, they have
all start up and ran out at doors, the Chyneses would tell us if any oothr
Nation should do so, but us or the Hollanders, they would stab them, but they
durst not meddle with us: but now to my former matter.

About nine a clock, the King was brought out in the same manner, as I before
have mentioned some two hours after the King of Iackatra came, having a guard
of some one hundredth persons about him, so soon as ever he came in sight, the
Kings Guard all rose up, and every man proved his weapon: the which we had
never seen before, when any show came in: So that it should seem, that there
was great fear, not that the King of Iackatra would offer any violence. But
there was a number of other pety Kings, who had great troops of men, the which
Kings were his mortal enemies. Wherefore fearing they might rise against him,
we plainly perceived the King of Bantams Guard had their charge to be ready to
defend the King of of Iackatra if such a matter should happen. When he came
near the innermost file of the Kings Guard, he could not pass to the King,
but he must needs go through a rank of these petty kings, whom he knew, did
most deadly hate him: wherefore fearing the cowardly stab which is used amongst
that Nation, he began to look very ghastly and wildly on it, although he is as
stout a man as any is in all those parts: pass them he would not, but sat
down upon a lether that was laid on the ground, the which every Gentleman has
carried after him for the purpose. So soon as he was set, he sent to the
King to know if it were his pleasure he should come unto him. Whereupon the
King sent two of the principal noble men about him, to conduct him to his
presence, who after the King of Iackatra had done his obeisance, the young King
embraced him, and welcomed him according to the Country order.

After this was past, the King of Iackatra sat down in a place appointed for
him: all this while there was some other pretty shows presented.

About twelve a clock came his show in presence, the soldiers about 300. in
number, then followed so many women with Cashes and strange fowls, both alive
and artificial. Likewise there was brought in many strange beasts, both alive,
and also artificial; amongst which was one furious beast called by them a
Matchan. This beast is somewhat bigger then a Lion, and very princely to
behold, if he be at liberty, he is spotted white and red, having many black
strokes, which came down from the raines of his back under his belly, I have
seen one of them iumpe at the least eighteen foot by many men's estimation for
his prey: they do kill many people near the town of Bantan.

And many times, the King and all the Country goes a hunting of them, not
only in the daytime, but in the night; This Matchan, which I now speak of,
was in a great cage of wood, which was placed upon truckes of old carriages,
and being drawn in with Buffels, he lay for all the world like a traitor on a
hurdell. There was drawn in, in like manner a huge Giant, which by our
estimation might be some three hundredth foot in height, also a devil came in,
in like order. More there was drawn in, a Garden, having many sorts of herbs
and flowers in it, in the middle of which garden was a fish pond* wherein was
diverse sorts of small fishes, and all sorts of fishes which they do know in
those parts, were brought in either alive, or artificially made. Amongst these
things came in many Maskers, Vauters, Tumblers, the which was very strangly and
sauage-like attired, which did dance and show many strange feats before the
King. There was drawn in likewise, a very fair bed-stead, whereon was a fair
quilted bed also, twelve boulsters and pillowes of silk, embrodered with
gold at the end: the posts of the bed-stead was very curiously carved and
gilded with a fair Canopie wraught with gold.

A number of other pretty toys was brought in and presented, of the which I
neither did, nor could take view of, but only of the principal.

Last of all came in his youngest son, riding in a chariot, that it was
drawn with Buffeles, which me thought was very unseemly. In deed they have but
few horses, the which are small nags, I never saw any of them put to draw, but
only to ride on, and to run a little after the Barbarey fashion (as I have heard
some Barbarey Merchants say,) the which exercise they use every Saturday
toward evening except in the time of Lent, which is a little before ours.

The second day after this show was presented, being Friday, and the Sabbath:
the King was carried in his Pageant to Church, where he was circumsised. His
Pageant was borne by many men: it was reported to me by the Kings nurse, 400.
but I think she lied: for me thought there could not stand so many under it.

The 24. of July, our General came into the Road from Tarnata, so soon as we
descerned the ship, and saw it was the Dragon, I took a Praw, and went aboard
to bid him welcome, who declared to me the dangers they had passed, and
somewhat of the unkindness of the Hollanders, although he had saved some of
their lives, and that (though with great pains and travel) he had gotten a
good quantity of Cloves toward his lading: wherefore after thanks to God, for
his safe return, with the news of the Moluccas, which I will leave to the
reports of those that were there, certifying ou^ General that I doubted not to
provide him of the rest of his lading.

The 24. day came in the great Enchusen of Holland from Tarnata, and the King
of Iacatra came to see our General.

The 11. of August came in two ships from Cambaia, who had taken great wealth
from the Portingales. The same day came in one ship from Tarnata.

The 16. day came in the Ascension from Banda,

The 8. of September, the Dutch Merchants invited out General and all his
Mercha^ts and Masters to a feast, where there was great cheer, and also great
friendship was made between us.

The 15. day of September, two Dutch ships set sail for Holland, the one
being a small ship, which had laden Pepper at Bantan, the other had taken in
some Cloves at Tarnata, the rest of her lading was of prize goods, which was
taken out of the ships which came from Cambaia.

The 21. day came in the Duch Admiral from Banda.

The 22. day our General sent some of his Merchants to the Dutch house to bid
him welcome.

I must not leave out one matter which happened since the coming in of the
Assention from Banda, the which was this; There was certain Iauans which
belonged unto, two of the principal men of that land next unto the King who
had stolen nine Muskets and Caleeuers out of the Assentions Goner room,
shortly after two of them coming to steal more were taken by our people with
the manner, our General sent me abord to examine them and to bring them
ashore: They first told me they belonged to great men, which were our very good
friends, but I mistrusting they did discemble with me, bad the^ confess the
truth, and they should find some favor, then they confessed truly whose
slaves they were, and said the pieces were forth coming.

After they came ashore, our General sent the King and the Protector word of
it, and desired he might have his pieces again: the Protector sent to the
Masters of these two slaves for them, but they loving the Pieces better the^
their men, said they had no Pieces but what they had bought with their money,
yet they sent to our General to desire him to defer their execution for a
day or two, the which was granted, but because the Masters were no great good
willers to the King, the Protector in the Kings name sent the executioner to
put them to death, with a Guard of Pykes: when they came to the place of
execution, our General taking pity of them, would have given them their
lives, but the hangman said their lives were in the Kings hands, and not in our
Generals, wherefore because the King had sent him he would execute them, and
therewithal was going to do his office. I seeing him so forward, stepped to him
and wunge his Cryse out of his hand, in the mean time Master Towerson asked
the rich Chynes which was there with diverse other, if our General might not
pardon them if he pleased. The rich Chynes with a very frowning countenance
answered, with these words: Bree any ane orybb mackan taye, appacar^iza bree
edup: The english of which words for manners sake I will omit, presently after,
this same fatal officer dispatched what he came for, which the two thieves
very pasiently suffered as the manor of all that Nation is, when they are
bound to it, they do hold it the greatest glory that can be, to die resolutelie
without any show of fear, and surely so they do, in as careless manner as it
is possible for flesh and blood. The experience of which I have seen by diverse
both Men and Women, one would think these men should be good* soldiers, but it
is not so, their valor is but when there is no remedy. Against the people of
those parts of the world they are reasonable tall men, but they dare not meddle
with Christians, except they have some exceeding great advantage of number or
other means.

The 26. day of September by means of a Iauans shuting of a Piece the Town
was set on fire, but by reason we had good help of our Marryuars, who were
many of them ashore at that time our house was preserved, but the Dutch house
being to leewards, although they had never so much help could not be saved:
The vpar work of one of the principal houses which did join to their great
house was burnt, and the out houses, wherein lay Cables, Hallsers pickelled
porke, and diverse other things, whereby they sustained great loss; some that
had served five years lost all that they had gotten in those parts, it should
seem they were abord their ships, when the fire hapened whereby they could not
preserve their one: Not long after this, but the town on our side the way was
twice fiered by Iauans in the night, which put us to great trouble in carrying
and recarr^ng our things, but by labor of our Mariners and the Chyneses it
was quenched.

The third day of October our General made a feast for his farewell, whereunto
he invited the Dutch-Admirall, with also all the rest of hi^ Captains,
Masters, and Merchants, where we were all exceeding merry, and great
f^endshippe was made between us, and I pray God they may still continue it
which are there resident, for they shall be sure to find dangers and troulbe
enough besides, although nothing so much as we have done before. And if we do
continue trade in those parts their must be a house built fire-free whatsoever
it cost: And if we give over our trade there, it will purchase more infamy to
our Nation in all those parts and in Chyna, then ever we have hitherto gained
credit, for it will be thought of them all that either poverty is the cause, or
that we dare not come there for fear of the Hollanders. I could aleage some
other reasons, but those that are best able to do it, will not be taught by
me. The Hollanders have an hope howsoever they came by it, that we mean to
give over our trading, of the which they are not a little proud, thi^king to be
lords of all those parts when we are gone. There happened quarrels between them
and us, whilst our Ships rid in the rhoad, which grue by the pride and
disorder of the baser sort of the^, who when their drink was in, did not spare
to come to our house in great troops, using some peremtory speeches to our men,
and likewise hurt some with their knives, whereby we were forced twice or thrice
to go by the ears with the^, in which frayes the Hollanders were beaten and
persued to their one gates, many were wounded some of the^ leuing their armies,
having cause to remember it, so long as they shall live. The 4. day of October
our General being accompanied with diverse Merchants and others, went to the
Court to take his leave of the King and his nobles.

The 6. day of October being sunday about 10 a clock our General withal that
was bound home went aboard, who going by the Dutch-house went in, and took his
leave of the Dutch-Admirall, and the rest of his Merchants. Also there went
aboard with him Master Gabriell Towerson, who was to stay for Agent there, and
some other Merchants, who after dinner some went a shore, and some stayed
until the next day. About 3. a clock we wayed anchor and with some ordinance
bid the town and the Dutch ships farewell. About 11. or 12. a clock at night
we came to an anchor under an Island, where the next day we took in wood, which
our general had sent men before hand to cut ready. The 7. day toward evening
we waied anchor again, and set sail: Mr. Towerso^ and some other of the
Marcha^ts the^ took their leave to go ashore, who^ we committed to the
protection of the almighty, and ourselves to the curtisy of the Sea, desiring
God to bless both the^ and us and if it be his will to send us a happy meeting
in England.

THE DESCRIPTION of Iaua Mayor, with the manners and fashions of the people,
both Iauans and Chinese, which do there inhabit.
IAua Mayor is an Island which lies in 140 degrees of longitude from the
middle part of it, and in 9 degrees of latitude, being also about 146 leagues
long East and West, and some 90 broad, South and North; the middle part of
which Land is for the most part all Mountains, the which are not so steep,
but that people do travail to the top of them, both on horseback and on
foot: some Inhabitants dwell upon those Hills which stand next to the Sea, but
in the very middle of the Land (^o far as ever I could learn) there is no
Inhabitants, but there are wild beasts of diverse sorts, whereof some do repair
near the Valleys adjoining to the Sea, and devour many people. Toward the
Sea for the most part, is low moorish ground, wherein stand their principal
Towns of Trade, the chiefest whereof lie on the North and North-east side of
the Island, as Chiri^gin, Bantan, Iackatra, and Iortan or Greesey. The which
low ground is very unwholesome, and breeds many diseases, especially unto
strangers which come thither, and yield no merchandise worthy trading for, or
speaking of, but Pepper; the which has been brought in times past from all
places of the Land to Bantan, as the chief Mart town of that Country.

The which ^owne for Trade, does far exceed Achin, or any town or City
thereabouts: and Pepper was wont to be brought thither, from diverse other
Countries, which of late years is not, by reason that the Dutchmen trade to
every place to buy it up. This Town of Bantan is about 3 miles in length, also
very populous: there are three great markets kept in it every day, one in the
fore-noone, and two in the afternoon, that especially which is kept in the
fore-noone, does so abound with people, that they thronge together, as in many
Faires in England. Yet I never saw any kind of Cattle to sell, by reason that
there are ve^ie few tame in the Country. Their food is altogether Rise, with
some Hens, and some fish, but in no great abundance.

The Iauans houses are altogether built of great Canes, and some few small
Timbers, being slight buildings; In many of the principal men's houses is good
workmanship showed, as Caruings, etc. and some of the chiefest have a square
brick rowme, being built in no better form than a Bricke-kill, which is only
to put in all their household stuff when fire comes, but they seldom or
never lodge, nor eat in them. There are many small Rivers running thorough the
Town. Also there is a good Rhode for Ships: whereby if they were people of any
reasonable capacity, it would be made a very goodly City; also it is walled
round with a brick wall, being very warlike built, with Flankers and Turrets
scowring every way. I have been told by some, that it was first built by the
Chinese, and by others, that it was first built by the Portingales; wherefore
I cannot say certainly by which of them it was first built, but it is most
likelye by the Chinese, by reason of the oldnesse of it, for in many places it
is fallen to decay for want of repayring. At the very west end of this Town,
is the China town, (a narrow River parting them) which runs cross the end
of the China town up to the Kings Court, and so thorough the middle of the
great town, and does ebb and flow, so that at a high water, both Galleys,
and Iunckes of great burden may go up to the middle of the great town. This
China town is for the most part built of brick, every house square and flat
ouer-head, having bordes and small timbers, or split Canes laid over cross* on
which is laid bricks and sand, to defend them from fire: Over these brick
Warehouses is set a shed, being built up with great Canes and thatched, and
some are built up with small timbers but the greatest number with Canes only.

Of late years since we came thither, many men of wealth have built their
houses to the top all fire-free, of the which sort of houses, at our first
coming there was no more but the Sabindars house, and the rich China Merchants
house, which nevertheless by means of their windows and sheds round about
them, have been consumed with fire.

In this town stand the English and Dutch houses, which are built in the same
manner, only they are very much bigger and higher than the ordinary houses,
and the Dutchmen of late (though with great cost and trouble) have built one
of their houses (up to the top all of brick) fire-free, as they suppose.

The King of this place is absolute, and since the deposing and death of the
late Emperor of Damacke, is held the principal King of that Island. He uses
always marshall law upon any offender whom he is disposed to punish. More, if
any private man's wife, or wives be taken with dishonestie, so that they have
good proof of it, they have power in their own hands, to cause them presently
to be put to death, both man and woman. And for their slaves, they may execute
them for any small fault. If the King send for any subject or stanger, dwelling
or being in his Dominions, if he send a man, the party may refuse to come, but
if once he send a woman, he may not refuse, nor make no excuse. Moreover, if
any inferior body have a suit to a man of authority, if they come not
themselves, they always send a woman, neither do they ever come or send, but
they present the party they sue too with some present be their suite never so
small. To every wife that a Iauan being a free man marries, he must keep 10
women slaves, which they as ordinary use as their wives, and some of them
keep for every wife 40 slaves, for so they keep 10, they may have as many
more as they will, but they may have but 3 wives only. The Iauans are
generally exceeding proud, although extreme poor, by reason that not one
amongst a hundredth of them will work; the Gentlemen of this Land are brought
to be poor by the number of slaves that they keep, which eat faster than
their Pepper or Rise grows. The Chinese do both plant, dress, and gather
the Pepper, and also sow their Rise, living as slaves under them, but they
suck away all the wealth of the Land, by reason that the Iauans are so idle:
and a Iauan is so proud, that he will not endure one to sit an inch higher in
height above him, if he be but of the like calling, they are a people that do
very much thirst after blood. If any Iauan have committed a fact worthy of
death, and that he be pursued by any, whereby he thinks he shall die, he
will presently draw his weapon, and cry Amucke, which is as much to say, I am
resolved: not sparing to murder either man, woman, or child which they can
possibly come at, and he that kills most, dies with greatest honor and
credit. They will seldom fight face to face one with another, or with any other
Nation, but do altogether seek revenge of their enemy cowardly; albeit they
are (for the most part) men of a goodly stature. Their law for Murder is, to
pay a Fine to the King; and that but a small sum: but evermore the friends of
the party murdered, will be revenged on the Murderer, or his kindred: so
that the more they kill one an other, the more Fines or profit has their King.

Their ordinary Weapon which they wear, is called a Crise; it is about two
foot in length, the Blade being waued and crooked too and fro indenture like,
and withal, exceeding sharp; most of them having the temper of their metal
poisoned, so that not one amongst five hundred that is wounded with them in the
body, escapes with his life. The Handles of these Weapons are either of Horn
or Wood, curiously carved in the likeness of a Devil; the which many of them
do worship.

In their Wars their fight is altogether with Pikes, Darts, and Targets: of
late, some few of them have learned to use their Pieces, but very untowardly.

The Gentilitie (both men and women) never go abroad, but they have a Pike
borne before them. The apparel of the better sort, is a Tucke on their Heads;
and about their Loins a fair Pintado: all the rest of their bodies naked:
Sometimes they will wear a loose Coat, somewhat like a Mandillion, of Velvet,
Chamlet, Cloth, or some other kind of Silk; but it is but seldom, and upon
some extraordinary ocasion. The common sort wear on their heads a flat Cap of
Velvet, Taffata, or Callico Cloth, the which is cut in many pieces, and seamed
with a fair stitch, to make them sit flat and compass. About their Loins
they wear a kind of Callico cloth, which is made at Clyn, in manner of a
Silk Girdle, but at the least two yards broad, being of two colors.

Also, there comes from thence, many sorts of White colors, which they them
selves do both die, paint, and guild, according to the fashions of that
Country.

Likewise they can weaue a kind of Striped stuff, both of Cotton and Rinds of
Trees: but by means of their lay^sinesse, there is very little of that worn.

The men (for the most part) have very thick curled hair on their heads, in
which they take great pride, and often will go bare headed to show it.

The Women go all bare headed, some of them having their hair tucked up like
a Cart-horse tail: but the better sort do tucke it up like our riding
Geldings tails. About their Loins they wear of the same Stuffes which I have
before mentioned, always having a fair Girdle or Pintado of their Country
fashion, thrown over one of their Shoulders, which hangs down loose behind
them.

The principallest of them, are most Religious; but they very seldom go to
Church. They do acknowledge Christ to be a great Prophet, whom they call Naby
Isat; and some of them do keep of Mahomets Priests in their houses: But the
common people have very little knowledge in any Religion, only they say there
is a GOD which made Heaven and Earth, and them also: He is good (they say) and
will not hurt them: but the Devil is naught, and will do them hurt; wherefore
many of them (for want of knowledge) do pray to him only, for fear least he
should hurt them. And surely if there were men of Learning (which were perfect
in their Language) to instruct them, a number of them would be drawn to the
true Faith of Christ, and also would be brought to civility: for many which I
have reasoned with concerning the laws of Christians, have liked all well,
excepting only their plurality o^ Women, for they are all very lasciuiously
given both men and women.

The better sort which are in authority, are great takers of Bribes: and all
the Iauans in general, are badd pay masters, when they are trusted;
notwithstanding their Laws for Debts are so strict, that the Creditour may
take his Debtour, his Wives, Children, and Slaves, and all that he has, and
sell them for his Debt.

Likewise, they are all much given to stealing from the highest to the lowest:
and surely in times past, they have been no better then Man-eaters, before
traffic was had with them by the Chyneses: which (as I have heard some of
them say) is not above one hundred years since.

They delight much in Ease and Music: and for the most part, they spend the
day sitting cross legged like a Tailor whitling of Sticks, whereby many of
them become very good Caruers to carue their Cryse handles; and that is all the
work of most of them endeavor to do. They are very great eaters: but the
Gentlemen allow their Slaves, nothing but Rice sodden in Water with some Roots
and Herbs. And they have a certain Herb called Bettaile, which they
usually have carried with them wheresoever they go, in Boxes, or wrapped up in
Cloth like a Sugerloafe: and also a Nutt called P^^ange, which are both, in
operation very hott, and they eat them continually to warm them within, and
keep them from the Flux. They do likewise take much Tobacco, and also Opium.

The Iauans them selves, are very dull and blockish to manage any affairs of
a Common wealth, whereby all Strangers, go beyond them, that come into their
Land: and many of the Country of Clyn, which come thither to dwell, do grow
very rich, and rise to great Offices and dignity amongst the^, as their
Sabenda^, their Caytomongon, and others: but especially the Chyneses, who like
Jews, live crooching under them, but robb them of their wealth, and send it
for Chyna,

The Chyneses are very crafty people in trading, using all kind of cosoning
and de^eit which may possible be devised.

They have no pride in them, nor will refuse any labor: except they turn
Iauans (as many of them do when they have done a murder or some other
villainy) then they are every whit as proud and as lofty as the Iauans.

For their Religion, they are of diverse sects: but the most of them are
Atheists. And many of them hold opinion, that when they die, if they be good
men, they shall be borne again to great Riches, and be made Governors: and if
they be wicked men, then they should be turned into some ugly Beast, as a
Frogge or a Toad.

They burn Sacrifice every new Moon, mumbling prayers over them with a kind
of singing voice: and as they sing, they ring a little Bell, which at the end of
every prayer they ^ing out as fast as ever they can. This Ceremony they also
use when any amongst them of acount, lies a dying.

The manner of their Sacrifice is this: They furnish their Altars with Goats,
Hens, Duckes, and diverse sorts of Fruits, the which are sometimes dressed
to eat, and sometimes raw, and then are dressed afterward and eaten: all
that they burn, is only Papers painted, and cut out in curious works, and
valued by them at a certain price.

I have many times asked them, to whom they burn their Sacrifice? and they
have answered me, to GOD: But the Goserats and Turks, which are there, say,
they burn it to the Devil. If they do so, they are ashamed to confess it.

They are many of them well seen in Astronomy, and keep a good account of
their Months and Years.

They observe no Sabbath, nor one day better then other, except they lay the
Foundation of a House, or begin some other great work, which day they ever
after observe as a Holiday.

When any of them that are wealthy die in Bantan, their bodies are burnt to
ashes: which ashes they put up close in ^arres, and carry it to China, to
their friends.

I have seen when some of them have lien a dying, they have set up 7. Odowres
burning, 4. of them being great, and burning light: and they were set upon a
Cane, which lay cross upon two Crotches about six foot from the ground, and
three set on the ground right under them, being very small, and burning
dim. I have demanded the meaning of it many times, but I could never have
other answer, but that it was the fashion of China: and surely many such like
things they do, not knowing why or wherefore, but only that it has been a
fashion amongst them.

They delight very much in Plays and Singing: but they have the worst voices,
that one shall hear any people have: The which Plays or Interludes, they
hold as Service to their GOD: In the beginning of which, they often use to
burn a Sacrifice, the Priests many times kneeling down, and kissing the
ground three times one presently after an other. These Plays are made commonly
when they think their Iunckes or Shipping are set forth from China; likewise
when they are arrived at Bantan, and also when they set out from Bantan toward
China: sometimes they begin at noone, and end not till the next day morning,
being most commonly in the open street, having Staiges set up for the purpose.

Moreover, they have amongst them some Southsayers, which sometimes rage and
run up and down the streets like madd men, having Swords drawn in their
hands, tearing their hair, and throwing them selves against the ground: when
they are in this frantic taking, they affirm (and other Chinese believe)
that they can tell what shall come to pass aforehand; Whether they be possessed
with the Devil or no, which reuealeth something to them I know not, but many
Chinese use them when they send a Iuncke of any voyage, to know whether they
shall speed well or no: and by their report, it has fallen out according as
those Souhsayers have told them.

The Iauans use Plays too, but they have no more but some History painted on
a Card or Map, the which one makes relation of with such ^esture as
befitteth the matter. Likewise there be Puppet plays made by certain people
of Clyn, which dwell there: the which Puppets are apparrelled like unto the
Christian manner, and they have Lions and diverse kind of Beasts artificially
made, with which they perform their sport very prettily: but these hold the
Plays no point of Religion, or service to their God^, as the people of China
do.

The Chinese are apparrelled in long Gowns, wearing Kirtles under them
hanging something lower then their Gowns: They are surely the most effeminate
and cowardliest people that live. On their heads they wear a Caull, some of
them being made of Silk, and some of Hair: The Hair of their Heads is
very long, which they bind up on a knot right on the crown of their heads.
The Nobility and Governors wear Hoodes of sundry fashion, some being one
half like a Hatte, and the other like a French Hood: others being of
Net-warke, with a high Crown and no Brimmes.

Those people are tall and strong of body, having all, very small black
Eyes: and very few of them have any Hair on their Faces. They will steal,
and do any kind of villainy, to get wealth.

Their manner at Bantan, is to buy Women slaves (for they bring no Women out of
China) by whom they have many Children: and when they return to their own
Country, not minding to come to Bantan again, they sell their Women, but
their Children they carry with them: as for their Goods, they take an order
to send some at every Shipping: for if they die in Bantan, all the Goods they
have there, is the Kings. And if once they cut their Hair, they may never
return to their Country again: but their Children may, always provided,
that they never cut their hair.

FINIS.

