THE HIGHWAYS OF GOD AND THE KING.

WHEREIN ALL MEN OUGHT to walk in holiness here, to happiness hereafter.

Delivered in two Sermons preached at Thetford in NORFOLK, Anno 1620.

By THOMAS SCOT Bachelor in Divinity.

Qui ambulat in via vnaand Regia, non laborat. Hier. Com. in Esa. cap. 57.
Printed at London. 1623.

TO THE READER.
THat which I preached once with approbation of the godly hearers, I publish
now for the use of all beholders: No other reason persuading me to it, then the
necessity of the Times, which begin to be like those, wherein S. Augustine
would have all men write. Farewell, and the Lord make it, as I intend it, a
blessing to thee for Instruction, Admonition, Reformation. Amen.

Tho. Scot.

THE HIGHWAYS Of God and the King.
Proverb. 14. 12. There is a way which seems right unto a Man: But the end
thereof are the ways of death.
THE Philosopher Pythagoras, (whose Ipse dixit, was warrant and reason enough
to satisfy, or silence at least, his whole School) considering the birth of
all Mankind to be after one manner, and their deaths a like certain, expressed
his conceit by the Greek letter Y; showing thereby, that all have alike common
entrance into the world; the King and the beggar; the fool and the
Philosopher; and that only the difference betwixt Man and Man was, in the
different use of themselves, and the choice of their ways here, where there
was a way of wisdom and virtue, and a way of ignorance and vice propounded to
all; and as Men walked in the one or in the other, so was their lives, and the
issue of their lives (their deaths) either miserable or happy.

Our blessed Savior (the true Pythagoras) the wisdom of his Father (whose
Ipse dixit must silence the most curious, and satisfy the most contentious)
has said, Mat. 7. that there are two ways; A strait gate, and narrow way
which leads to life, and a wide gate, and broad way, which leads to
destruction. And every Man that is borne of a woman walks in one of these
ways, and to one of these ends. Iosuah 23. 14. Now as life is the most sweet
and desirable estate, and Death of all things the most hateful and terrible
to Nature; So the means to attain life and avoid death, should be carefully
sought by every wise Christian. Pro. 19. 19
For he that regards not his way (says Solomon) shall die.

This then concerns every man to look to; and is a Doctrine fitting all
persons, all places, all times. For if the way of life be so hard to find
that few attain it, and that those who suppose themselves to be in it may be
out of the way, we cannot be too wary and sedulous in this inquisition, nor
need we fear the loss of our time in seeking, but rather the loss of our
souls for lack of seeking.

This Text contains one of those wise observations which Solomon assisted by
the Spirit of God made, out of his extraordinary experience in the passages of
this world: and thought so needful to be understood of all, as he repeates it
again verbatim in the 16. Chap 25. verse, and in diverse other places in a
diverse manner of words to the same purpose.

We observe herein two principal parts: Division.


1. An erroneous opinion of Priuacie, in these words; There is a way which
seems right to a Man.

2. An infallible judgment of verity, in these words; But the end thereof are
the Yssues of Death.

In the first part we note.

1. The subject or matter propounded; There is a way.

2. The quality or condition of that way; It seems right.

3. The Judge of that quality: A man's self; The spirit of priuacy.

In the other part, the public Judgment, we observe, 1. The end or purpose
and scope thereof, compared with or opposed to the beginning or pretense.

2. The certain ill quality opposed to the seeming good quality; It did but
seem good or right, but it is, certainly it is the way of death.

3. The Judge of this Quality, Solomon, the Public Magistrate, directed by
the Spirit of God, opposed to the erring partial spirit of a Man's self, of
priuacie, to whom the way seems good.

So the way seems right, but it is wrong; It seems the right way to life,
but it is the ready way to death; It seems good in Man's eyes, but it is not so
in Gods eyes* Multa videntur, quae non sunt.

1. The Subject. There is a way.
A way literally and properly is thus defined by some; viae vna pars est Locus;
Com. in Arist. Metaphys. lib. 8.
and alia est dispositio in loco, per quem initio est possibilis, in ea ad
finem intentum. By others Thus; Est via Locus per quem babere iter imnibus
licet. via est transitus a loco in locum.

The Latins call it via (as Varro thinks) either ab eundo, quasi ia* the
Impartiue to Eo; Or else a vehendo, quast primum veba, and tum deinde via.

The Greeks call a way (...), which some likewise derive from (...), quasi
(...), proficiscor, or iter facio.

But none expresses it so aptly and fully as the Original, which is Derech,
whose radix is Darech, calcauit or conculcauit, from the ordinary trampling and
beating of the way with the feet of many passengers. And thus it is used
properly for a way or place of iournying and travail, but metaphorically
translated pro more, ratione, seu vitae institutione, seu consuetudine.

Now in this place it is used in a borrowed sense, and yet holds proportion or
similitude with the thing that lends it.

And thus it must here be understood of the ways of God, or the ways of Man.
The way of God is considered after a twofold manner.

1. His counsel or secret will which is called a way, Romans 11. 33. O the
depth of the riches, etc.

2. His revealed will in his Word, of which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 18. 3.
The way of the Lord is an undefiled way.

This last is likewise twofold. 1. Either via legis and mandatorum. 2. Or via
gratiae, promissionis and Euangelij. The first of these we walk in when we
perform obediently that which is commanded; the second, when we believe
faithfully that which is promised. So the first respects obedience, life,
action, works; the other, knowledge, faith, hope, and the affection of love,
which performs all the Law by being accepted in Christ.

But of these vvayes as the first of all here spoken of, which is that of
Gods Counsel, is too deep for any of us; yea or for Solomon himself to vvade
in, (though the shallowest fools will be busiest in it) so the other, his
revealed will, is the rule of our vvayes, and neither of them here intended by
Solomon; because they are both good and seem so; Vrim or light of knowledge
Thumim, prefection or holiness Exodus 28. 30
but this seems good, yet it is not so.

Then this is spoken of the vvayes of Man; and they are likewise twofold.

Either the way of knowledge and understanding:

Or, the way of Practice or Action.

The way of knowledge, 1. Vrim.
is that Faith or Religion which a man believes to be the truth so far as he
understands, and by which he hopes to attain l^fe and happiness hereafter.
Act. 24. 14.
And in this sense it is taken, Act. 14. 16. 19. 9. And so it sounds, as if
Solomon had said; There is a Religion which a man supposes to be the truth,
and the right way to Heaven, but it is false and erroneous, and the next way to
Hell.

The way of Practice or Action is our conversation, 2. Thummim
manners, and fashion of living and dealing betwixt man and man, in vice or in
virtue, Justice or injury, equity or iniquity: and so it is taken, Mat. 21.
32. And then the sense is, as if Solomon had said, There is a course of life
which a man thinks very upright and just, and so judges himself a holy Man
whilst he lives here in it, but it is a most deceitful trade of life,
bringing a man to death, dishonor, and destruction.

But for our more clear understanding and discerning of this point, we will
speak first of the way of Religion, being the Speculatiue part, whose object
is truth and falsehood: And then of Practice, being the active part, whose
object is good and bad.

And this the rather, because knowledge or the Theory better suites and
answers the way, then action or the practique: and action more properly
corresponds to our passage, travail, and walking in that way. So for doctrine
we will only speak of the truth or falsehood of Religion, and will reserve
the practique part, our life, our manners, and conversation, for the use and
application of those points of doctrine, which from hence shall naturally and
properly flow. And thus much for subject, that we may know, what it is that
Solomon vailes under this shadow, The way.

2. The Quality.
Which seems right] This is the Quality of the Way, which whilst Solomon thus
describes, he affoords us from hence a fourfold division, according to that
common Proverb, The Italian seems wise, and is wise; the Spaniard seems
wise, and is a fool; the French seems a fool, and is wise; and the English
seems a fool, and is a fool: So here, There is a way which seems right and
is wrong* and to that is opposed, A way which seems wrong and is right: and
there is A way which seems wrong, and is wrong; and to that is opposed, A way
which seems right and is right.

Now these seem four diverse ways, Terminus a quo. Terminus ad quem.
but indeed are but two: as two cross or overthwart ways seem to him that
stands in the midst to be four, yet have but two beginnings and two ends: so
here the difference is not so manifold in the subject, but in the Judges, to
whose sight these vvayes appear after a diverse manner, according to the
truth or error of their apprehensions. For that the right way seems vvrong, or
the vvrong way seems right, proceeds a deceptione visus, from error of
judgment. For we see an evil way may to one man seem right and yet be
wrong; and the same way to another may both seem wrong, and be wrong: and a
good way may to an evil sight seem wrong, 1. Sam. 12. 23.
and yet be right; and the same way to a good sight may both seem right, and
be right. Now whilst I speak of a good way, and a bad way, I intend a true
Religion and a false Religion: for as a way may be fair, (which we call a
good way) and yet be indirect: so a Religion may be glorious to the eye, and
furnished with fair pretenses, and yet be false. And as a way may be foul,
(which we call a bad way) and yet carry us directly to the place whither we
tend, so a Religion may be naked, poor, plain in show, persecuted,
afflicted, scorned, contemned of the greatest part of the world, of the
mighty, noble, learned, politic, and yet be the true Religion, and the true
direct way to happiness hereafter, the less happiness it has here.

Having then Religion for our subject, if we look upon it, we shall find
three Religions in the world, especially justling for the truth of this way:
The Turks, the Jews, the Christians: nor need any man to vvonder at this,
that I should mention Turks and Jews with Christians: for the Jews
Religion, yea the Turks superstition seems in their eyes to them, as true and
as right, as ours does to us; and we have nothing but the Scriptures to
distinguish them and us asunder: I mean, the consent of Scripture, Law and
Prophets, Old and New, Spirit and Letter: for some passages and obscure
places, they pretend (though unjustly) to be for them. But because we know
(whatsoever they boast) that their Religions are ways which both seem
vvrong to all good or indifferent judgments, as they are wrong in Gods
judgment: and because our hope is to have no hearers here but Christians, we
will leave them to themselves, and speak of the diversity of ways amongst
us, which appear principally to be four, every one clayming truth, and
holding their Religion to be Orthodoxe, and so the only right way to heaven.

1. The first of these, are the Grecians, or the East Church.

2. The second, the Abissins, or South Church under Presbiter John.

3. The West Church, or Church of Rome under the Pope*

4. The fourth, is the Reformed Church under diverse Princes: which for
distinction sake, and perhaps situation, (having respect to some of these) we
may call the North Church.

Now if any man expect I should sub-divide the Reformed Religion, because there
are some differences amongst us, and such as in some times, and with some
hotheaded persons, breed great combustions in the Church, I shall not need,
neither truly ought I to do it; because all of us (except the Heretics who
are generally cut off from the body of Christ by us all, or those Schismatickes
who separate and cut themselves off, as persons that have no way, that have no
tract of Antiquity, or any footestep to follow directly in the Scripture) agree
in the way it self, though perhaps some of us may vary either in the manner of
walking in that way, or in some ceremony and circumstance of devotion or
discipline, which is as the hedge, and ditch, and fence of this way, and no
essential part of the way it felfe, but rather for the order, ease, and
conveniencie of the Traveler.

And thus those whom our adversaries miscall Lutherans, Protestants, Puritans,
walk as Jacobs sons did out of Egypt to fetch their good old father thither,
to whom their brother Joseph knowing their stubborn, cross, proud, and
perverse natures, gave them this admonition aforehand, See that you fall not
out by the way. Genes. 45. 24. In via out per viam, non pro via, or propter
viam: such are our hot alterations, not for the way, but in the way.

And thus such as the Papist calls Lutherans and Puritans, walk the one upon
the one hand, and the other upon the other, the Protestant in the midst,
shunning both the Extremes. Via Regia temperata est: nec plus in se habens nec
minus. Hier: in Esai. cap. 57
Wherein whilst the other walk with most violent and obstinate auersenesse,
they think themselves only safe, and become severe and supercillious censurers
of us and all men who in the least circumstance dislike their Criticismes, or
in the least ceremony vary from their rigide rules. But for the way it self,
all of us agree in one, and with us the whole Catholic Church, both Grecians,
and Abissins, as the learned know; and as it were easy to demonstrate to the
understanding of the simplest, if time would permit so long a discourse, in
defect whereof I refer them over to a book called Catholic Traditions,
collected by a Frenchman, written in English, and dedicated to our late Prince
Henry of blessed Memory. The only material difference undecided, hangs betwixt
us and the Church of Rome, they holding themselves to be only in the way as
persons that cannot possibly err from it, and all others to be out of the way,
that in all points walk not step by step, and hand in hand with them. Like a
man, who would persuade all England there were no other way to London, but
through his ground, that so he might exact a general toll of the Passengers
for his private benefit.

Now whilst I say, we with all the Catholic Church agree about the way, and
our only difference is with Rome: I neither intend to affirm, that either our
agreement with all is so intite, nor our variance from those of Rome so
distant, as some of ours and some of theirs would bear the world in hand.

Only whilst some Churches join with us in the Articles of our faith, and in
all the fundamental points of Religion (absolutely necessary to salvation) we
dare not judge them for erring in some matters of lesser moment. For what have
we to do to judge another man's servant? he stands or falls to his own Master.
Yet whilst I say, we will not judge, I show there is cause and fear of
judgment, which they may avoid, who vvisely leaving ambiguous and
unnecessary questions, rest and build upon that which is generally and
undoubtedly agreed upon. These and such like I forbear to judge, because I
hear Christ say, Judge not, lest you be judged. Mat. 7. 1. And I know well it
is the presumptuous pride of Antichrist, and an infallible note of that man of
sin who sits in the seat of God, and exalts himself above all that is
called God, 2. These. 2.
to press with Lucifer into Christ's Office, and to judge the quick and dead
before his coming, condemning all for Heretics who walk not in his way.
I know it is the only desperate error, not to see and acknowledge our error;
but to proceed erring with a presumptuous opinion that we cannot err. These
brands therefore I leave to him, who only by these (if there were no other)
might be known to be out of the right way. And yet in the eyes of these men
(led by flesh and blood, and the outward appearance) how well does their way
seem, how indirect and crooked seems ours? Let us a little behold them
comparatively.

years, and was never heard of before Luther?

Does it not seem right (whilst we fancy God like

Does it not seem right, whilst we keep the pictures Mary, and other
Saints our celestial friends? And does it not seem ill, that we should not
only neglect these, but also cast them out of our Churches and houses, break
and burn them; And the more precious account we have of the persons dignity,
by so much the more to hold the picture perilous?

Does it not seem right to flesh and blood, that man Purgatory before we go
to heaven? And seems it not as ill to deny flesh and blood these sensible
satisfactions, and to teach, that all proceeds out of Gods mercy; that we
must do good, but not trust to it; that man cannot satisfy, much less merit;
that the chastisements we suffer, or the best actions we do, are not worthy
of heaven, either ex condigno, or ex congruo; and that as there is no third way
here, but a right way or a wrong way, so there is after this life no third
place, but men presently pass either into eternal joy, or eternal pain.

This is my body, that we should then believe, the bread in the Sacrament to
be transubstantiated into his body, and the wine into his blood? And does it
not seem ill, that we who grant this power of his, should understand these
words spiritually, sacramentally, figuratively, and mistically?

All these things, and many more like these, appear thus to the natural Man.
But appearance and seeming are no infallible notes of verity, as we shall
manifest, when we come to speak of the Opposition, or the public Judgment
of verity, and now will partly show, coming by order to treat of the Judge of
these controversies, who is here said to be man, guided by his own
imagination, and the giddy spirit of Priuacie.

3. The Judge, A Man's self.
To a Man] Man judges of things either by his Sense, or by his Reason (for I
speak of the natural man, that is, of Nature corrupted, not as God made man
righteous, but as man has corrupted his own ways.) By his Sense if he
judges, he finds himself often deceived; for a straight stick put into the
water, seems crooked in his eyes, an echo beguiles his ears; his feeling,
tasting, smelling, all of them are subject to deception. And for his Reason,
the best it can do, is to discourse probably of the least common accident of a
Plea or a Fly; and then whatsoever he brings, may be controuerted so by
another seeming reason, that the Judge who should from this base, ground his
determinations, had need do it with caution, and leave room to retract and
reuerse his sentence. Much more is man puzzeld and lost, when he climes up to
higher contemplations, to consider the hidden things of Nature, as we may
plainly see by Gods arguments to Job, Job. 38. 39.

If then the spirit of a man cannot infallibly judge of the things of a man, of
his own soul and body, or of such things as are subjected to his government,
how shall he be thought a competent judge to determine the things of God,
though we grant him to be of as upright a heart as David, and as wise as
Solomon himself? All that man can do, is to judge by appearance, and we see
here things may seem otherwise then they be.

Now besides the insufficiency of Man this way, 1. Tim. 5. 21
we shall find other defects in him which accompany impotencie, and are
unworthy of a Judge: for in a Judge two things must be principally avoided;
prejudice, and parciality: now both these we shall discover in our Judge, Man.

First, Prejudice: Man naturally abhors all things propounded by his
adversary, and the hate of the person will not suffer him to intertaine the
truth of his discourse, but rather seek arguments to oppose it, his judgment
is so taken up aforehand. Thus I have seen the sentences of the Fathers
rejected for heretical by Roman Catholics, when they have been found in
Luther or Calvin, Whitaker or Perkins.

Secondly, Partiality; Man naturally affects what either proceeded from
himself immediately, or from his near, dear, honored, and beloved
Predecessors, or some that in his eyes seems learned wise, honest, religious.
In which regard God himself disputes this point with man, Ezechiel 18. 2. and
in the 29. verse, concludes with an interrogation, with an expostulation,
saying, Yet says the house of Israel, The way of the Lord is not equal: O
house of Israel! are not my ways equal? or are not your ways rather
unequal? And this is come into fashion again, that Man dares argue the cause
with his Maker; and if God do not as man will have him, subject his actions to
man's reason, and a^e all his creatures; but that, according to the rule of
Justice, he condemn some Reprobates, he is like to be judged the Author of
sin. And I wonder he scapes censure, for making fishes, fowls, beasts: I
muse they find no fault, because he made not all these to be men and
immortal, and why he made not men Angels, whilst holy David wonders at his
extraordinary care and love shown toward man, saying; O Lord, what is man
that thou so regardest him? or the son of man that thou so visitest him? He
wonders that any man is regarded; these wonder, that all men, and all creatures
are not alike regarded. Thus man that judges by appearance, whose sense and
reason may be deceived and so deceive him, as he deceiues others, who may be
iniquus Iudex, a Judge full of prejudice, full of partiality, especially in his
own case) is unfit to decide a controversy of this nature. And this therefore
caused that resolute Luther to utter that speech for which he has been so
often and so unjustly taxed and challenged, That he preferred one Saint Paul,
before a thousand Ambroses, Augustines, Hieroms or Chrysostoms. Because Saint
Paul by the judgment of all those was, for the first planting of the Church,
guided by the infallible direction of Gods Spirit, after a wonderful and
extraordinary manner and measure: But all these men grant themselves that they
might err; nay, that they did err, and so retracted diverse of their former
opinions; desiring neither to be believed nor followed farther, then their
words and writings should be found consonant to the verity of the written Word
of God.

Now then all the judgment of Man; nay, of all men contradicting the Word of
God, is of a private spirit, such as Adam was directed by when he left the
guidance of Gods Spirit; of which Saint Peter speaks, 2. P^t. 1. 19. 20. 21.
If therefore a multitude of men (how learned, wise, or holy soever they be)
should join against the Scripture, their authority must not carry it, for they
all err, and their interpretation is private, though their persons, their
places, their professions be public.

And one or a few men expounding with the Scripture, does not expound by a
private spirit (though his person perhaps be private) but by the spirit of
Truth which directed the holy Penmen of the Scripture; and his opinion and
interpretation is Catholic and orthodoxe, whatsoever his person be. Cyprian
was a public teacher, yet interpreting some Scriptures to prove
rebaptization, his interpretation therein was private, because against the
general sense and scope of Scripture. And Augustine was a Bishop, and so a
public person at whose mouth we are to seek wisdom, yet when he brought
Scripture interpreted by himself, contrary to the general scope, to prove
Children should receive the Lords Supper, his interpretation was worthliy
rejected as of a private spirit. All the founders of Heresies have been
public persons, such as were Nouatus, Arrius, Eunomius, and with these diverse
Bishops of Rome have joined either as authors of Heresies, or Sectators of
such; and herein they were all led by private spirits. Therefore Bellarmine
confesses, lib. 3. cap. 3. De verbo. That the Spirit of interpretation (which
in S. Peter's sense is public) is often given to private men.

So then the Scripture must be expounded by the Scripture, the darker place by
the place more clear. Man must not seek a fortification in Scripture for his
opinion: but he must be careful to raise his opinion and Judgment, out of the
Scripture, evidently confirmed and explaned by it self, and by conference and
coherence of the same with it self; and this is public interpretation;
whatsoever is contrary, is from the spirit of priuacy. Veritas docendo suadet,
falsitas suadendo docet.

All this that I have spoken then, is not totally to exclude man from
determining questions and doubts in Divinity, but to show by what rule he ought
to judge; that is, by no other rule then by the Scriptures: for I gladly
acknowledge, that whereas there is an authenticke and fundamental Judge,
Christ himself (the best interpreter of the Law being the Lawmakers) so he
has placed a ministerial Judge, which is the Church, which must interpret
Scripture by Scripture, and ever be wary not to contradict the will of the
Lawmakers Christ. Now the Romish Sinagogue considering the Church of Christ in
a threefold manner: 1. First, as it is Essential; 2. Secondly, as it is
representative: 3. And thirdly, as it is virtuall. They make the representative
part to consist in the Ministry; and this Ministry to flow from the Pope as
from the head; and to this part that is to the Pope, they attribute that power
which God has given to the whole Church. Now the Pope being thus invested in
absolute power with an opinion of infallibility, laying aside the Scriptures,
judges without them; nay, against them; nay, judges them, and yet must not be
challenged of error.

This we judge unreasonable, that a Man should make his own will the Churches
law, and judge in his own cause without examination. And therefore we show,
Amor and odium and proprium commodu^ faciunt saepe Iudicem non congnoscere
verum. Aristotle: lib. 1. The.
that man who judges by his sense or reason, is not sufficiently qualified for
such a business; or if he were naturally so adapted, yet is he unfit to judge in
this question which wholly concerns himself, in regard of partiality or
prejudice, to both which he is subject. Therefore in questions betwixt us and
the South-Church, Presbiter Johannes is an unfit Judge; and in questions
betwixt us and the Grecians, the Patriarch of Constantinople is as unmeet: and
in controversies betwixt us and Rome, the Pope is not a competent Judge.
Ecclesiasticus. 8. 14. Go not to Law with a Judge, for they will judge for him
according to his honor.

Let us therefore seek a Judge who judges not by the outward appearance, whose
sense and reason cannot be deceived, who is neither prejudicial not partial;
who searches the reins and the heart; for vain is the judgment of man, to
whom this way seems right, when the ends thereof are the Yssues of death. And
this we shall find in the Opposition, which we come now to handle.

The Opposition, or Public Judgment.
1. The end thereof; or purpose pretended.
We had the way judged before prima facie, by the outward appearance, by the
beginning thereof, and so it seemed right. But here we find fronti nulla
fides, no credit to be given to the countenance, but the end bewrayes the
truth of every thing. The woman beheld the fruit which Satan so far
magnified; She saw the tree was good for food, and pleasant to the eyes.
Genes. 3. 6. so she eat thereof and gave part to the man. Thus they judged by
the outward appearance, by seeming, and were deceived, even then when their
sense and reason were at the perfectest. But after they had eaten it is said,
Their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked, Genes. 3. 7. And
then likewise they knew, that the curse of God, The day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the death (Genes. 2. 17) would surely light upon them.
So this way seemed the right way to them to attain knowledge and happiness, but
they found the end thereof to be the way of ignorance, of darkness, and of
death. And as with them, so with all their posterity since, this has succeeded
as a testimony of their hereditary sin, still to be deceived with the seeming
of things; insomuch as that is true which the Poet long since sung.

Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and vmbra, Iuven. sat. 4.

Cum sit triste habitu, vultuque and vest seuerum.
The face and habit of an Anchorite,
May be the cover of an Hypocrite.
Therefore all wise men judge of things not by their shows, but substances,
and not by their beginnings, but ends. Now the end of a thing is either
propositum, the purpose for which a thing is done; and so the end of preaching
is the salvation of souls, or Terminus, the issue or determination of a thing,
as death is the end of a man's life; and so it is here properly taken. A Judge
oftentimes saues a thief, because he hopes he may prove an honest man, and do
good in the Commonwealth: There is the first end, The Judges purpose: But the
Thief proceeds in his the every till he brings himself to the gallows, and
that's the extreme end, the vltimum vale. Of both these we intend to speak
briefly, though the last only be proper to this Text, and the first borrowed
for illustration.

First, then remembering we have Religion for our subject, let us see what it
is, together with the end thereof, to what purpose it tends.

This is Christian Religion, August. i^ Ioannem. Tract. 23. cap. ^.
that one God, not many, be worshipped: because nothing makes the soul happy,
but only one God. The infirm soul is not made happy in the participation of
another soul that is happy, but is happy in the participation of God; nor is a
holy soul happy in the participation of an Angel; but if an infirm soul
seeks to be happy, let it seek from thence, whence a holy soul is happy. For
thou art not made happy by an Angel; but from whence an Angel has happiness,
thou have it also.

Faith with a serious fear of God, Polan. Syntag.
is the pure and true Religion; as Fear contains in it self a voluntary
reverence, and carries with it a right worship of God, such as is prescribed in
the Law.

Religio dicta est eo, Isidor: lib. 18. Etymilog.
quod per eam vni soli Dco religamus animas nostras, ad cultum diuinum animo
seruiendi. Religion then being the band or tyall whereby we are fastened and
bound to God as to the sovereign good, consists of three twines, vz. of
faith, of hope, of love; and a threefold cord is not easily broken. Now the
proper or principal end of this Religion is the glory of God, the subordinate
end is our salvation.

That Religion therefore which most directly and clearly tends to the
principal end, must needs effect the subordinate end most certainly, and so
must necessarily be the only true and direct way to life; and the other, what
show soever it makes, must needs be the way and Issue of Death.

Again, the glory of God is most advanced here in this our way or Religion,
by two affections of fear and love, and by the true fruits and effects of
them. Now that Religion which trains a man up to fear God, and to love God,
as God ought to be feared and loved, gives God the truest glory, and so must
necessarily be the truth.

Lastly, this fear and this love is then most rightly generated and cherished
in the soul of Man, and so Gods glory most advanced, when man's nature is truly
set forth, and he thereby humbled in himself, and so taught to fear; and
when Gods power and mercy is so expressed, as he has been pleased to reveal it
to man's comfort; That so man seeing his own wants and misery, and Gods
all-sufficient power and mercy, might fear and reverence God as a good Master,
might love and delight in God as in a good Father, and might wholly seek to
him, and cleave to him as to the chief and sovereign good, able to supply and
satisfy all his desires abundantly.

This being thus laid down for a rule, let us by this comparatively proceed to
try some points of Religion, controuerted, which are fundamental, or lie next
to the foundation, and judge them right or wrong from the nature and quality of
their doctrine: that is, whether they aim at the right end, The glory of God,
or at an oblique end, the gain of this world, and the glory of Man that
propounds them, according to that direction which our Savior gives, John. 7.
18. He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his
glory, that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.

1. First, for Faith the foundation; Our Adversaries teach a faith which only
believes the power of God to save man: we teach a faith which believes both
his power and will. Theirs teaches fear; ours both fear and love; Theirs
clouds his mercy; ours gives true glory both to his power and mercy.

2. Secondly for hope; Spes boni incerti.
our Adversaries teach a hope which uncertainly expects a good to come;
whether they shall be saved or no they know not, but they hope well: whether
there be a heaven prepared for them yea or no, they know not, but they hope
well. We teach a hope which the Scripture teaches: that is, an earnest
out-looking, expectation, and longing, for the accomplishment of those gracious
promises which God has made to us in his Word. So our faith believes, that
there is a heaven, and a heaven prepared for us; our hope longs for the time
when this shall be perfected; and taught by patience and experience, stays the
Lords leisure, and yet cries out, Apoc. 6. 10.
How long, Lord, how long? They call this hope Presumption, but we know they
are presumptuous for calling it so.

3. Thirdly, Solent Haeretici semper prospera polliceri, and caelorum regna
peccatoribus pandere: vt dicunt parata sunt tibi regna caelorum, potes imi^ari
maiestatem Dei, vt abs^ peccato sis. Accep.st^ enim liberi arbit^i^ potestatem.
Hieron: Com: in Hier: cap. 23.
for Charity; They teach what Charity is truly, but in this they err, that
they make it (that is, the charity of man) to be the cause which moves God to
save us; nay, which deserves and merits salvation of God. And this Charity they
teach so to depend upon Freewill, as thereby they exalt the nature of man,
conceal his fall, and make the decree of God to be grounded upon the mutable
and unconstant will of man. We on the other side teach, that our salvation
wholly proceeds from the charity and love of God, and that all means
conducing to that end, rise from the same fountain of love; and so our
charity, as an effect of that charity of God to us, serves not as a cause
moving God to save, but follows as a cause declaring whom God will save. And
that our Charity, as it is a fruit and effect of Gods Charity, is true
charity; and the works proceeding from that charity of ours, good, but
imperfect; good, as done by a person accepted, imperfect as done by a sinner,
as done by a babe which grows and labors toward perfection; which perfection
is not wholly to be attained, till this imperfection be wholly put away, and
corruption has put on incorruption. And therefore for merit, we are far
from it, as a doctrine opposite both to our charity, and to the charity of God.
To our charity, because charity is a free worker, not respecting the wages; if
she thinks to merit, she is not Charity. To the Charity of God; because if God
gave for the merit of our works, heaven were not properly a gift, nor grace
were not grace; nor charity, charity: for charity is free. Thus even Adam
himself in his integrity could not merit, because be had nothing but what he
received, he was indebted for his daily bread, and for the grace he had to see
and acknowledge this love of God: so whilst we are giving thanks for benefits
received, we are not paying our debts, but running farther in; for every grace
that we have is a new obligation: To him that has shall be given, and we are
receiving whilst we think our selves giving.

Again, they teach, Though Christ dyed for us, and though Gods grace guide and
direct our actions and affections, yet there are some sins left to be
satisfied and discharged by our selves, either in this life by works of merit
or penance here, or hereafter by punishment in Purgatory. Now this they do
teach, not ever perhaps because they so believe, but because it is a profitable
error, and they know they may easily undertake to pardon all that come into
Purgatory. Besides, it is a great glory for their Hierarchy to be sticklers in
so large and spacious a room as they fancy or feign it to be; not only to
have all earth, but all Purgatory also within the verge of their Inquisition.
Now we teach the contrary, because we see this doctrine derogatory to Gods
infinite mercy and glory, and to the infinite merits of our Savior. As if God
had forgot to be gracious, or as if our Saviors merits and actions were
imperfect as our works are; or rather indeed as if our works were perfect to
merit and supererrogate, and his imperfect, not able to do enough for all,
when our Saviors death did satisfy for all the faithful, and was
sufficient for many worlds more, and his merits were superaboundant for us,
and for all that believe and repent.

Fifthly they say, that after the words of consecration, the bread is changed
into the body of Christ, as he was borne, as he suffered. This they do to
exalt the dignity of their Preisthood: we teach the contrary, that it is his
body and truly eaten, but both by faith, after a spiritual manner, as the
Angels eat Christ in heaven by contemplation. And this we teach, both
because we have good testimony of Scripture, with the whole choherence
thereof, and the Analagie of faith so to expound it, as also because it makes
more for the glory of God, and the humiliation of man, when our Adversaries
doctrine does the contrary. For does it not call in question the truth of Gods
word, the truth of Christ's body, when we are led to imagine such a body as
might be borne of the Virgin, or not born; might be crucified, or not
crucified, being neither to be felt, nor seen, nor tasted, yet to be taken
with the hand, eaten with the teeth, received into the stomach? And does it
not exalt man, when it makes him able to make his Maker? And with his word to
make him so, as it should be in his power according to his intention and will
to have him present or not present? What is this else, but to sit in the seat
of God, and to be exalted above all that is called God? Like in spirituals, to
that of the great Earl of Warwickes in the time of H. 6. in temporals, who
chose rather to be called Primus Comes Angliae, then Rex Angliae; and thought
it more honor to make a King, then to be one.

Lastly, they say they humble man more then we, and exalt God more then we: 1.
They humble man more whilst they tell him his sins are such as he must not
presume to go to God, but by means of Saints or Angels. 2. They exalt God
more, whilst they exalt his servants, and give as much reverence to the Saints
as we to God. To this we answer, they arrogate to man, whilst they will see
me wise above that which is written; they derogate from God whilst they make
his service common to the Saints, and can only color it with a distinction;
nay, whilst they make him and Christ only severe Judges, and the Saints and
Angels merciful, and so their Mediators. They ought not to do evil that good
might come of it; this is evil to lie of God, whilst they feign him to be
what he is not, and deny him to be what he is. And of this kind, and to this
end are all their fictions in the Legend, to prove the Saints merciful, and
God severe; yea the blessed Virgin Mary to be more pitiful then Christ her
Son and Savior, in whom she was blessed more as a child, then a Mother.
That they may do this the more safely, they contend and say, That besides the
written word of God, there are many other decrees and dogmaticall points and
traditions necessary to be believed to salvation, which the Church (that is,
themselves alone) have in custody upon trust and credit. Now we teach the
contrary, as well because we have clear testimony of the Scriptures and
Fathers generally, as of a cloud of witnesses to prove the contrary, as also
because it makes more for the glory of God in things of absolute necessity
toward salvation, to govern by positive laws of his own, rather then by
arbitrary and changeable laws of Man; and that he should reveal to us his
will by his own Son Christ Jesus, who came to save us, rather then to leave
us to the uncertain relation of Man, who for ought we know may be Antichrist,
and so intends to deceive us, though perhaps he comes in sheep clothing, or
may seem an Angel of Light to bleare our eyes with appearance.

We might join in this issue with them upon all the questions controuerted,
but these shall be sufficient to give light to see the rest at more leisure. In
the mean time if we cast our eyes truly upon the end of their de^ignements,
we shall easily see, that gain and glory unto themselves are the only
arguments which draw them to fight for the Popes Supremacy, the Mass,
Purgagatory, Pilgrimages, and all the rest of their opinions, wherein they are
opposite to us and to the Scriptures.

To this end they are called Merchants, Revel: 18. 23. Because for gain and
glory they sophisticate Religion, as Merchants their wares, and thus make
merchandise of heaven and earth, and of God himself. And as the Merchants in
London have foreigne commodities whereby they suck the sweet sap of the
Country to themselves, and they in the Country have means again to recall it;
as Norwich by stuffes, York by Cattle, some places by wool and cloth,
others by come, and others by Metals: Or as England with these commodities
furnishes other Countries, and supplies her own wants from thence; and
France with her vvines buys her children wool, and Spain, with Figs,
Raysons Limons, and Oranges for sauce, buys herself bread and meat: so these
spiritual Merchants chop and change commodities, and toss to and fro by that
means the wealth, the pomp, the glory of the world, the fat of the Earth, the
Crowns of Kings. To this end Walsingham had a lady to bring suitors and sees
Eastward, and Canterbury had a Saint Becket to draw it Southward, The North had
a Winifrid, Scotland a Saint Andrew and his arm, the Low Countries a Lady of
Hales, France a Saint Denis, Spain a Saint James, Italy a Lady of Loretto,
and every Country was full of these Marts, where the Saints did several cures
and services to the Church, and had continual Votaries, and those of the
frankest sort, as superstition is commonly a prodigal. And this was a golden
world, and a glorious Religion to the eye, so that we hear old men and
women talk of these things still; but we know this was not sound at the
heart; the way might seem good to a man but the end thereof were the Yssues of
death.

2. The certain ill Quality; or Determination.
Is the Yssues of Death] having spoken of the first end, which is the purpose
and scope of this way, we come to speak of the Issue of this end; that is,
The Terminus vltimus or determination of this purpose and aim, and that is,
Death; They are the Yssues of Death. Life was promised in their first
appearance, it seemed the right way, but upon trial we find Latet Anguis in
herba, the end is the Yssues or ways of death. A great distance betwixt the
promise and the performance, betwixt the pretense and the Issue, the passage
and the port, the starting place and the end of the race; when life is
proclaimed in the beginning, and death meets us at the concluding. I have
fought a good fight (says the Apostle Paul. 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8) I have finished
my course, from henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of glory which God that
righteous Judge shall give me, and not to me only, but to all that love his
appearing. Now the Apostle has fought, and if he had deserved ex condigno,
might challenge this crown as a debt due to his worth, but he does not so, he
expects it indeed out of grace, of free gift; he does not deserve it by
fighting, but he obtaines it fighting, it is given freely by a righteous Judge
who gave him grace to fight, and promised him both to overcome and to triumph.
2. Cor: 12*
My grace is sufficient for thee, makes Paul fear no buffeting of Satan, no
sting or prick in the flesh, for that grace gave him strength to fight and
conquer, and was manifested the more by his infirmity: for Gods power is made
perfect through our weakness. And after he has fought he expects a crown,
that grace is his assurance, he cannot challenge it by any other right, and in
that right he is assured of it both for himself and all others who love the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. To all that love, not to all that fight;
the affection, not the action, is respected; the person, not the passion is
accepted. But now if Paul had been of the Romish faith, this speech of his
would have been judged presumption; not presumption to challenge by merit, but
presumption to challenge of gift, and so resolutely to rest upon the grace of
the giver, as to assure himself and others of this crown. Presumption is
faith with them, and true saving faith is Presumption. When they heat him say,
Romans 8. 38. I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; they would gladly make this only a
probable persuasion, no certain faith: but others seeing this too gross a
dallying with the manifest scope of the Text, say, Saint Paul was assured of
the certainty of his salvation, of the happy end of his right way by
extraordinary revelation only. But let it be so; was it revealed to him for
others that believe too? he says so; for he says nothing shall be able to
separate us: Now then if it be revealed to him for others, let us believe the
revelation, and apply it with unfeigned faith to our own hearts in particular,
as he did to his. And by the way, observe what it is that Saint Paul builds
his faith upon, so that nothing can prevail against it. Is it upon Peter that
rock? Is it upon Indulgences or Pardons of man? Is it upon personal
righteousness, inherent justice, or his own or other men's merits? No; It is
upon that rock Christ Jesus; it is upon the love and Charity of God, in and
through the merits of Christ Jesus our Lord; which love, not death, nor life,
nor Angel, nor power, nor heaven not hell can alter; for Gods love is
immutable, he is not as man that he should repent: whom he loves, he loves to
the end; his ways seem hard, but the Yssues of them are the ways of life.

Whereas therefore our Adversaries accuse us of nouel presumption, for teaching
a faith that may assure us of our salvation, and (to elude this clear place of
Saint Paul, and diverse other the like) say, This was revealed to him by
extraordinary favor. We know and confess, that he as a worthy instrument of
Gods glory, as a Master builder, had many things revealed unto him for the
edification of the Church, but for this particular it was no otherwise revealed
to him then it is to every faithful Christian, in whom the Spirit of God
dwells, as in a temple, and there teaches them to offer Sacrifice, and to cry
Abba Father with tears and groans that cannot be expressed. Well may there be
a difference in the measure of the revelation, not in the matter revealed: We
know (says Saint John. 1. Ep. 3. 14.) that we are translated from death to
life, etc. and after, verse 23. He that keeps his commandment, dwells in
him, and he in him: and hereby we know, that he abides in us, even by that
Spirit which he has given us. So the persons are we, not I, not Saint John
alone but we, all that believe, and love; for this faith and love are
inseparable: Again, we are translated, not it is probable we shall be, but we
are, which makes it certain by faith, as if it were done and accomplished:
Lastly, we know this, and we know it by the Spirit which God has given us,
the same Spirit that taught Saint Paul and Saint John is our tutor too. For
other revelations Christ himself has silenced all pretenses and shadows, and
given absolute authority to the Scripture opened and interpreted by the Spirit
of God to resolve all scruples in case of conscience. Luk 16. 19
And this we may see clearly in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, where Dives
after he had failed of his personal suite, and could not obtain a drop of
mercy for himself, yet requested Abraham to send one to his friends to
forewarne them of the state he was in, not that they might pray for him, for
that was to no purpose, the tree was fallen, but that they might by repentance
and amendment avoid the danger themselves. To whom Abraham gives this answer,
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; so he turns them to the
Scriptures wherein the will of God is revealed to every man, what they should
shun, what they should do, what they should believe, and how they should live.
And when Dives persisting in his suite says; Nay father Abraham, but if one
went unto them from the dead they will repent. Abraham replies definitiuely and
resolutely, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead. So we see, he that doubts the
Scripture, or believes any thing against it, under pretense of revelations from
heaven, or hell, or Purgatory, or the like fictions of Ghosts and Spirits
appearing, is in a wise case, and may be drawn* into a fools Paradise, but
never into the true Paradise, and so wander in this way which seems right, but
the end thereof are the Yssues of Death.

To shut up this point, observe the certainty of this judgment, as the Apostle
Saint John before in the 1. Ep. 3. Chap: 14. verse, speaks in the present.
Tence, we know that we are translated, to note the certainty of their
translation to glory; so here Solomon says, It is the way of Death, and the
end thereof is so, to note the certainty of the thing. And this is a plain
proof of the Spirits assistance to discern the end and determination of a
thing before the end be come; when otherwise it were too late to do it. For it
is too late for Dives to repent in hell, when the end is come; he should have
attended better to Moses and to the Prophets before, and believed the word of
God, not the foolish traditions of his forefathers against the Word, or the
idle old-wiues tales of his foremothers, besides the Word: he should have
attended the admonition of the faithful Pastor and Prophet, and not to the
fained Legend of his flattering Patasites, trencher-fed Chaplains. The
perfection of all humane judgment, is to judge by the end and issue; and even
here we often err too: but if man goes farther of himself by nature, it is
but conjecture and presumption arising from long experience in observation of
like circumstances, as the effect leads us to the cause; but yet even then we
cannot say it is, or certainly it shall be, but it may be so, it may so fall
out, it may be the end of Death. But the Spirit of God sees the end before it
comes; he sees the thoughts afar off, and judges, and warns men aforehand
inwardly by good and holy motions, outwardly by the Scriptures; and he that
will not believe the holy Spirit of God in the Scriptures, it is but justice,
if God give him over to a reprobate mind, that he should be seduced and
believe lies, who would not receive the truth of God, but was transported with
respect of times, persons, places, and other humane Motives.

And here before we part, I give the intelligent Hearer this one observation
by the way, that of all the controversies betwixt us and our Roman
Adversaries, we are not challenged for doing any thing in the service of God
which we ought not to do: for we believe with them all the Articles of the
Creed: we pray as Christ himself has taught us, we live (at least we
teach, that allmen should live) as God has commanded us in the Decalogue. Only
the exceptions they take at us, are for omissions, because they say, we do not
something we ought to do; and our exceptions are against them. 1. First, for
omitting some things which God commands; 2. Secondly, for doing something
that God commands, not after the pattern prescribed, but after another
manner invented. 3. Thirdly, for doing many things which God has directly and
expressly prohibited, prohibiting in the mean time what God has commanded. Now
I desire you so to observe this passage, that you may take it up rightly, and
understand what I mean.

I say therefore again, the questions and controversies betwixt us, are not
for the things we do, but of the things that they do. As for example, they
dare not find fault with us for praying as Christ taught us, Our father, etc.
But the question is, whether or no they do as they ought, whilst they pray to
Saints and Angels. The question is not, whether we may pray to God without
Images or no, but whether we may pray by, at, in to, or before Images, with
any reference to them, as they do. And so for Latin Service, for the Communion
in both kinds, the questions are about the things that they do, not for the
things we do: so the doubt is upon their side; and such a doubt it is, that
the Pope would gladly have granted Queen Elizabeth (of happy Memory) liberty
for her and her people to do these things as we now do them; (as witnesses
the learned B B. of Ely in his Tortura Torti, and Master Camden in his
An^ales), if the Queen would have taken license from him, or would have
subjected her Crown to his Myter; for that was the mark he shot at; the gain
of his Peter pence, and other spiritual trading, and the glory of a Kingdom
so obsequious, so fruitful, so helpefull as England had been, and might be.
But she was too honorable to kiss his foot for fear or hope, and too honest
to receive any courtesy from him: which I add the rather, to let them see,
who perhaps are not altogether well affected toward us, nor persuaded of our
truths, that there is nothing practiced in our Church, but that which finds
allowance and approbation from the modestest and learnedest of their side. And
therefore they may well be present at our service, and communicate with us in
our Sacraments, The Popes word only hinders them from Communion with us: but
Gods word bars us from Communion with them.
without scruple of conscience (unless the Popes countermand be their
scar-crow) although we may not safely communicate with them for fear of
manifest Idolatry, knowing that howsoever their way seems right in their eyes,
yet the Issues thereof are the ways of death.

3. The Public Judge, Solomon.
The last point comes now to be handled concerning the true Judge of this way,
which is the holy Spirit of God, directing the pen of Solomon the Public
Magistrate, the King and the Preacher.

A man, and a private spirit of a man, was the Judge of the appearance, the
seeming good, the beginning of this way; But God is the true Judge, of the end,
and issue of this way. Man was an impotent Judge, God an all-sufficient Judge;
Man was a Judge prejudicial and partial, Genesis 18. 25
God is an upright Judge: for shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

But the Pope of Rome steps in here, Luke 4. 6.
chalenging to be Judge in this case by Charter (as Satan did in the like
case) and to have a Patent sealed to that end by Christ himself. 1. Reg. 2. 27
And for fear Solomon (who as King durst dispose of the Preisthood) should
bring evidence against him either by word or fact, he has stopped his mouth, and
condemned him aforehand to Hell, and brought out Traian the Emperor in his
room; who though he were a Pagan, yet has found so much favor, as to be
preferred before Solomon; In the life of Gregory the great.
who was a Type of Christ, and the wisest Prince that ever reigned.

And doubtless if any other of the Prophets or Apostles should press him with
arguments, he has power to silence them, and to cry up and down, what
Scripture he pleases; to make Canonical Apocrypha, and Apocrypha Canonical,
ad been placitum. For who would believe the Scripture but for the Church? and
who is the holy Catholic Church but his Holiness? at least who is the head
thereof, who rules the roast there but he? Now if any of them urge him too
far, and make against him, he has power to take order with them, either by
binding or loosing; which jurisdiction in this case he excrciseth after a
fourfold manner.

1. By pronouncing them Apocrypha. 2. By eluding their genuine meaning and
sense, by a foraigne and forced interpretaton or exposition. 3. By warranting
an erroneous Iranslation to be Authentical, and the only true one.

4. Lastly, by purging all humors that offend his humor. In which regard we
see how the Ancient Fathers have been shaued, clipped, scoured, washed, let
blood, purged, gelt, and mutilated: yea and many of the Neotericks of their
own Men and faction, have been dieted, and cast into a sweat, and hardly
recovered with the application of their Catholicon. And all these acts of
theirs justified and defended with as much eagerness and show of zeal and
truth, as the honestest cause. Well may we therefore fear and flee from his
censure, as from a Judge full of prejudice, full of partiality; because it is
in his own cause, where he will not limit his Prerogative royal, but extend
it beyond all degrees of comparison. Yet though he be our Adversary, let us
hear him a little, and see what notes and Land-markes he gives us, to know and
distinguish the true way from the false by, that we may follow them, if they
both seem and be infallible; and that we may beware of them, if they only
seem right, but lead to the way of death, and then seek out others that we
may clearly see to be true.

Neither will the time permit, nor is it needful to bring forth all the marks
of the true way, which the Church of Rome hangs out. The principal only I will
briefly touch and point at. But before we do it, I must lay down this ground
of their own which they give to discern true notes by.

True Notes of the Church must be such as are able to constitute the absolute
definition of the Church; so far, that being found, the Church is found; and
being lost, the Church is lost: So says Stapleton, in his proaem. lib. 4.
Again, they must be so proper to the Church, as they cannot be found in any
other society or company of Men besides; And so notable, as they may be more
eminent and notable then the Church it self; and so inseparable, as the Church
cannot subsist without them. Such as these Bellarmine requires in his 2. Chap:
De Notis Ecclesiae. Again, they must be such as Valentia assigns. Tom: 3. in
22. disp. 1. q. 1. de object: fide^, punct. 7. In notis requiritur vt Ecclesiae
verae conueniant, at pque etiam vt illi soli.

This premised, come we now to bring the notes they give to these rules, that
thereby we may try their truth.

1. The first note is, Antiquity; but this is neither clear, nor proper: for
the malignant Church is near as old; Mat. 13. 30 ^inite vtra^ ^rescere vs^^ ad
mes^^em.
nay perhaps elder, then the true Church militant, of which we now speak,
which consists of Men lapsed by sin, and restored by Grace. For the Church is
called (...), quod est, euocare. Because the elect are by the outward preaching
of the Gospel, and the inward operation of the Spirit called out of the Mass
of corrupted mankind, mixed in a confused lump, where they were first evil,
before the grace of God wrought their wills to desire to be good: therefore
Quae nascentia mala sunt, ea crescentia peiora; And so Antiquit as sine
veritate, est vetus error. Error and Antiquity may dwell together.

2. Secondly, they brag of Multitude, as of a certain note. But the most
passengers travail (as our Savior says) in the broad way which leads to
death: so that here it may be said as Liuy said of old in his first Decad:
Fere fit mayor pars, vincit meliorem. And therefore it is that our Savior
comforts his Church here with those gracious words, Luke 12. 32
Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom:
as if he should say, You are but few, a handful; your enemies many, a
multitude, therefore you have cause to fear; yet fear not, God is stronger
then man or Satan, your Father is stronger then your Adversary and his
Legions. You are but little and weak, you cannot conquer this Kingdom by
force, no more then Abraham could; It shall be given to your faith, as it was to
Abraham's: you cannot merit it; if you could then you need not fear; it shall be
given freely; therefore though in regard of your selves you have cause to
fear, yet fear not in regard of the Donor, God. Lastly, you shall have a
Kingdom, you have it not here, for then you need not fear, no more then
Rome does, but make all Kingdoms fear you rather; but it shall be given
hereafter, IO. 20. 27.
therefore fear not but be faithful. Hope well, and have well.

3. Thirdly, they bring forth Succession. But evil men succeed one an other
in evil places: this note therefore is defective. Succession of Persons
without succession of Doctrine is a decession, a defection. The Priests and
Scribes condemned Christ and his doctrine out of the visible chair of Moses,
as Antichrist may do out of Peter's.

4. Fourthly, Luc. 11. 1^.
they boast of unity. But there is a wicked unity in hell. And the Scribes and
Pharisees, and Sadduces, though they could agree together no better then the
Franciscans and Dominicans, or the Secular Priests and Jesuits, yet they bound
themselves in a common band of obedience under one head the high Priest, and
the then visible Church of the Jews, against our blessed Savior and his
Apostles.

5. Fifthly, they call themselves the Catholic Church, and presume to carry it
by that name. But the Jews before them did boast of the Church, the Church,
the Temple, the Temple, and called Christ's doctrine both new and singular, Ier.
7. 4. Mar. 1. 27.
and their own, old and universal; though Christ told them he was before
Moses, Mat. 19. 8.
and ab initio no^ fuit sic, there was a time when it was otherwise, when their
traditions (now grown fusty with age) were novelties, or stale news. Thus
likewise they called Saint Paul's Doctrine, Act. 24. 14.
Heresy. More they could not say against Luther, or can say against us.

6. Sixthly, they bring visibility for a note. But this is not a note of the
thing, but the thing it self which we secke: for could the true Church be
discerned to be the true Church by all, there were an end of this argument, and
no farther use of these notes. But because though her being be visible, and her
true being be visible, yet her being true, is not visible to all; we inquire
for notes whereby we may not only discern her true being, but the being of
her truth.

Now all these notes (with diverse others of the same kind) are not such as are
required by their own rules, as able to constitute the being of the true
Church: for a false Church may have all these and more too; they are not
proper, for other societies have them; And if these would carry it, then the
South-Church might contend for supremacy, and the East-Church would doubtless
carry it against all pretenders as the Mother Church, For she is before Rome in
time, she has larger bounds, and multitudes of people; Almost all the
Apostolic seas, most of the Patriarchs, An Empire, Seven universal
Counsels, The Syrian language wherein Christ spoke, The Greek, wherein the
Scriptures of the new Testament was written; She has Succession even from the
Apostles themselves lineally without interruption, They are at Unity under one
Chief, and they call themselves Catholics; And yet for all these, the Church
of Rome (and that rightly) makes such exceptions against her, as we do
against the Church of Rome.

Since therefore these notes are not essential, but accidental; not proper,
but common; not permament, but transient, we ought to be wary how we
altogether trust to their probable direction, since all, or the most part of
these are such notes as may accompany this way which seems right and is not
so, and so may be made means to ensnare and entangle our affections with
prejudice and parciality, and so to blind our judgments, that having these
we shall be satisfied with show and appearance, though we walk as Joseph and
Mary did three days journey with the multitude of our friends, Luke 2. 44.
and never miss Christ, as if he were none of our Company.

And I pray observe (to hold us to our Allegory of a way) if there were doubt
of two ways, which were the right or the wrong way, and one that would
undertake to direct you to find out the right, should say; You shall know the
right way by these marks, It is an old way, a beaten way, a way where
Passengers travel one after another, It is a way by it self, or one way, it
is called the old way, and it is visible; what were a man the better for these
directions? would he not think such a guide out of his wits? Especially when
he shall see both ways alike old, alike beaten; both vvayes to have passengers
successively, alike frequent, both ways to be entire and singular, both ways
to be called old, and both ways to be visible? Thus both ways doubtless he
would be wild except he had better directions: And yet this is the case of the
Church, which some would thus mark out to the belief and obedience of all
men. But to conclude, all these are no true marks; but the Scripture is the
true and infallible Evidence to bound the Church out, to him that will be
heedfull to observe, and faithful to believe, and humble to obey, as we hope
to manifest. Here then it were meet, I should give you some infallible and
inseparable note of the true way, having shown, or rather pointed at the
defect of these which the Church of Rome produces. But then I should offer
violence both to your patience, and to the Text; the time not permitting so
large a discourse, and my Text leading me to discover the false way with seems
right, but giving no warrant to proceed farther. Only to conclude all, since
it is within my Commission to manifest the false way, I will give you one note,
a sure one, whereby you may know when you are out of the right way, that so you
may shun error and seek truth, and ensue it till death, that in the end you
may find everlasting life.

Briefly Christ himself says, I am the way, the truth, and the life, Ioh. 4.
no man comes to the Father but by me. He is the way to walk in, the truth
to guide you, the life wherewithal you walk. And if you would find this way,
he himself learnes you a rule, Ioh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and those
are they that bear witness of me. And he there vpbraydes the Jews, because
they gave no credit or heed to the Scriptures, but preferred the traditions and
doctrines of their forefathers before it, John. 5. 46. 47.
saying, Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of
me: But if you believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?
Therefore the Apostle calls all Scripture (...), 2. Tim. 3. 16
as a doctrine inspired by God to make men wise to salvation; and so believing
himself, and teaching others to believe, he praises Timothy for being from a
child brought up in them, 2. Tim. 3. 15
and he exhorts all men to follow him as he keeps in this way, and walks
after Christ Jesus and no otherwise. For so long he is sure he goes right, and
they may follow him with security.

Now then I do not say wheresoever thou see the Scripture set forth for a
sign, there Christ is within: there is the true way, the true Church. But I
say wheresoever thou can not see the Scripture, be assured thou art out of
the way: for the Scripture must be ever in thy eye, being that settled
Land-marke by which thou must try and know, and to which thou must reduce and
bring all thy other coast-marks and sea-marks. So it is that Antiquity which
agrees with the verity of the Scripture; that multitude which worship God
according to the rules of the Scripture; that Sucession which suceeed in the
truth of doctrine delivered in the Scripture; that unity which believes the
Trinity taught in the Scripture; that Catholic Church which is founded upon,
and universally agrees with the truth of the Scripture; that visible
congregation which are seen to God, and which see God as he reueales
himself in the Scripture, that become notes by which thou may safely
travail in this doubtful way of mortality. So that the Scripture must ever
be present to make these infallible, though perhaps it be not of absolute
necessity, that all these be ever present with the Scripture to make the
Church true. The Heathens of old burnt the books of Numa because he bewrayd
therein the profane mysteries of their Idolatries. The Turks at this day keep
their people in ignorance; no man must see into, no man must dispute or argue
of their Sect.

And thus our Adversaries of Rome deal with the Scriptures; and resembling
heerin the Heathens and Turks, would yet make the world believe, that they
are the only Christians. And lest they should seem insanire sine ratione, they
have a seeming reason why they permit not the Scriptures to be in the
mother tongue of every Nation publicly to be read by them; lest forsooth ( as
the Rhemists say in their preface) they should hurt themselves, as with fire,
or water, or knives, or swords, or the like. And why do they not put out the
Sun because it hurts the gazers eyes? or why put they not out their eyes to
prevent hurting, especially since they mis-leade many a man to lust and vanity?
To argue from the abuse of things indifferent, to remove the lawful use of
them, is an abuseof sense and reason; But in things of this kind, of absolute
necessity, it is an intolerable and presumptuous foolery. Nature cannot be so
blind as to suffer any but naturals to believe this their doctrine, and to
walk in this their way: Pro. 4. 18. 19.
for Solomon says, The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what
they stumble: But the path of theiust is as the shining light, that shines
more and more unto the perfect day.

True; but will some say, All Heretics hang out this flagge, and all boast
of the Scriptures: how shall we then know the true way from the false by that
which is common to all vvayes, or which all vvayes at least challenge and make
show of? Observe even from this objection the force and authority of the
Scriptures, under which, falsehood as well as truth seeks to shelter herself,
because falsehood by this glass learnes to trim herself up like truth. And
look as the Heathens by their Idolatries proved as well that there was a God,
Act. 17. 23. Romans 1.
as the Jews by their true worship: because nature taught the most barbarous
Nation to adore some Deity, and rather to make a God of a Calfe, a beast, a
bird, a stone, then to be a godless Atheist: so all Heresies and falsehoods
bear witness for the truth and authority of the Scriptures, whilst they
strive to justify themselves thereby; knowing, without the Scripture all other
their arguments, notes, and pretenses, how plentiful or plausible soever they
be, are nothing to the purpose; and therefore they labor to wrest the
Scripture to their fancy. And could the Church of Rome by this evidence
approve her present practice and doctrine, I assure my self she would look no
farther, but would permit every man to read the same at pleasure; nay, she
would command the reading thereof under the pain of her curse, as now she
forbids it with her Anathema. Ingenuous therefore is this speech of a Friar of
her own; Math. Tilesius. Iusti. cap. 5.
Iudeos Scripturis tanquam quibusdam cancellis circumdedit Deus, ne aliorum
more Paganorum euanescerent, atque in adinuentionibus manuum
suarum-insolescerent. God did impale the Jews with the Scriptures as with
certain bounds or abuttals, lest after the manner of Pagans they should
apostate and perish through the inventions and devises of their own hands.
Cyrill. ad Regin. de fide.
Therefore says Cyrill, Necessarium nobis est Divine sequi Literas, and in
nullo ab earum praescripto discedere. It is necessary for us to follow the
Divine Scriptures, and to depart or vary in nothing from that which they
prescribe. Iren. lib. 2. cap. 59.
And Irenaeus: Scripturis diuinis, quae certa and indubitata veritas est, in
firma and valida petra est demum suam aedificare: hac varo derelicta, alijs
niti quibuscunque doctrinis, incertam effusae arenae, vnde facilis sit euersio,
est ruinam struere. To build upon the divine Scriptures, which is the sure and
indubitable truth, is to build upon a firm and strong rock: but this being
left, to rely upon any other doctrines whatsoever, is to build to certain
ruin, upon fleeting sand from whence the overthrow is easy.

Again, Ambros. lib. de parad. cap. ^. In Scripturis diuinis non facila
reprehendamus aliquid, quod intelligere non possumus.
they pursue this objection farther, saying, If it should be granted, that
with much study the learned might attain the knowledge of the true way from
the false by reading the Scriptures, yet how shall the simple resolve
themselves by that rule, when the principal questions arise from the variable
exposition of Scripture?

I told you before, that I gave not this note as an absolute infallible mark
to know the true way by, (though being rightly taken, it is truly such a note
as is formerly required, Essential, Proper, Permanent, and the principal
things whereby we are distinguished and discerned from Jews, Turks, and
Pagans) but I brought it to discover the false way, as by a light in a dark
place. And though the Idiot (as S. Paul calls him) be not able to judge of the
Scripture, yet he has an abridgement of the Scripture, that is, certain short
rules drawn out by the Apostles or Apostolic Men to guide his faith by, and
to try the spirits and the doctrine propounded; this abridgement is called the
Apostles Creed. Now none can be so simple, at least in these days, (except
they be begged, or go a begging) but they can with labor and study (if they
think the salvation of their souls vvorth the while) find, whether the
doctrine taught, crosses and contradicts either the Lords Prayer, the
Commandments, or the Articles of our Creed; all which they have commonly by
heart. Yea God is often so favorable to these poor souls, who seek him in
true humility with a sight and acknowledgement of their own weakness, and
with a hunger and thirst after righteousness, that he reueales to babes and
sucklings, what he conceales from great Doctors and Rabbis: Insomuch as
though Balaam himself (blinded by covetousness, and the desire of gain and
glory) cannot see when his way is contrary to Gods way, and when the Angel
is ready to smite him, Numb 2 32.
yet Balaams Ass can see this.

And they are worse and more stupide then Balaams Ass, that will not both see
and confess these flat contradictions, opposing directly the written and
revealed will of God. For it is easier to see flat contradictions and
oppositions, then things only diverse or dissentaneous; as weak eyes can
discern what stands in the light, at least what stops the light. To this end,
whereas God to his own glory has suffered Antichrist mightily to prevail,
and to seduce many by glorious shows of unity and Antiquity, and general
apparences and flourishes of truth, it has pleased his goodness in that Sea and
Kingdom of Antichrist to leave such open and notorious marks of falsehood,
Abac. (...)
as they which run by may read the Emnity betwixt the serpent and the seed of
the woman still continuing and opposing the truth of the Scripture, by
doctrines directly contrary both to the outward Letter of the Text, and inward
meaning of the Holy Ghost.

And that I may instance briefly what I have so peremptorily affirmed, If they
hear Christ say, Mar. 6.
When ye pray, pray thus, Our Father, etc. And then hear another say; Nay
rather when ye pray, pray thus, O Saint Mary Queen of heaven, O Saint
Michael, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, etc. they will know this is not as it
should be, and that there is flat contradiction betwixt these two speeches,
Thou shall worship thy Lord thy God, Mat 4.
and him only shall thou serve, which is the word of Christ, and this, Thou
shall not worship God only, but the Saints and Angels also, which is the voice
of Antichrist.

If thou hear God say, Exodus.20.
Thou shall make thee no graven Image, etc. and hear others say, Thou shall
make Images and worship them. The Images of God and Christ thou shall adore
with divine worship; the Image of the Virgin Mary and other Saints with the
worship that is due to the person it self; and to this end shall see them
curtaile this commandment out of their Catechismes, that by this means, and
at this gap they may bring their Whore with all her abominations in triumph
into the Church, as sometimes the Grecians did their horse into Troy; though
thou can not perhaps well understand their distinctions, yet thou can
distinguish this fasehood from truth, and see how this their doctrine and
practice contradicts the word of God: and therefore howsoever it may seem
fair, and to be the right way to life, yet it is foul play, and the end
thereof must needs be the Yssues of death.

Again, when thou repeatest in thy Creed this Article, I believe in Jesus
Christ, etc. He ascended into heaven, and there sits at the right hand of
God the Father almighty, and from thence shall come to judge the quick and
dead, etc. And hear a presumtuous Priest with blasphemous mouth say, This
wafer or piece of bread I will presently make the body of Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, and Savior of the world, by crossing it, and using three or
four words over it. Thou must needs see that this binds thee to believe two
contrary things at once: for sitting at Gods right hand, being spoken to our
capacity after the manner of men, betokens a remaining and local residing in
heaven, touching his bodily presence; and coming from thence to judgment
assures thee, he will not come before he come to judge the quick and the dead.
And thou may as well call his birth, his life, his death, and all the rest of
his actions and passions in question, as this. Therefore learn to understand
the Doctrines that cross and contradict one another, and whilst thou beleeuest
Christ saying, This is my body, believe, so as thou may not cross the
Articles of thy Faith; but know, it is his body after no carnal and fleshly
manner, ( for the flesh profits nothing. Ioh: 6.) but after a spiritual and
divine manner. Not food for thy stomach, thy teeth, thy belly; but food for
thy soul, thy understanding, thy faith. And so he calls the bread his body
here; as himself a door, and a vine, and a rock; and Peter astone in other
places of Scripture. And therefore consider, after Christ ascended, he never
appeared to his Apostles in body again, as he used to do often before: Act.7.
55.
But in heaven he appeared personally to Stephen to confirm his faith. And
when before his ascension he appeared to the twelve with whom Thomas Didimus
was; John. 20.
he did not urge Thomas to believe any thing contrary to his sense of seeing,
hearing, and feeling, but rather willed him to confirm his faith by seeing and
seeing, what before he doubted. And then he adds, Happy are those which see
not, and yet believe; he does not say, Happy are they who believe contrary
things to that they see, (as they must do who believe the bread to be changed
into his natural body, which they see and feel to be true bread still) but
Happy are those who believe when they see nothing to the contrary, having the
word of God (which cannot contradict it self) for their warrant. As we do
believe his Resurrection and Ascension which we saw not, and his coming to
Judgment in glory, which we hope to see.

Thus when thou shall hear Christ command thee to take Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament; 1. Cor. 11.
and a Priest countermand this, and will thee to take bread only. Saint Paul
commanding thee from God to pray with understanding; 1. Cor. 14. 16.
and a Roman Priest willing thee to pray in a strange tongue. God himself
blessing Matrimony, and permitting all men to marry; and the Apostle Paul
saying, Marriage is honorable with all men, and in special terms, a Bishop or
Deacon ought to be the husband of one wife, ^. Tim. 3. 2.
etc. and hear a Roman Priest say the contrary; nay, inioyne thee to do
the contrary, and to bind thee by an oath to do it: Then thou that have ears
to hear, hear what S. John says to thee, 2. Ioh. 10. 11.
If any come unto you and brings not this doctrine, (that is, brings any
contrary doctrine to Christ's) receive him not to house, neither bid him good
speed. And hear what God gave his people in charge of old in the like case,
Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. 3.
If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
sign or a wonder: And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke
unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods (which thou has not known) and
let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or
that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you
love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul.

So thou art not to believe him though he confirms his Doctrine by miracles;
nay, suspect him the more and the rather for that: for miracles are the
principal shelters and pretenses of Antichrist, as thou may see. Math. 24.
24. 2. These. 2. 9. So then believe nothing which contradicts the Scripture; for
the Scripture cannot be contrary to it self; because it proceeds from the
Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of unity, of love, and of truth.

And to shut up all this with a familiar example which the weakest apprehension
may conceive, the sleightest memory retain: Not long since there was a trial
before the Judges of Assize at Thetford betwixt two towns for a Common,
Oxborough. Gooderstone.
in which both claymed interest: The one town challenged by prescription, and
pretended use, and proved the use by them and their forefathers time out of
mind. The other parties produced an ancient Composition in writing under the
hand and seal of the Lords and Tenants on both sides. The Judge then
determined, that against a writing there could be no prescription; though,
without a writing, prescription would be current. Because the writing
controuled their present custom, and showed, Ab initio non fuit sic; there was
a time when their old use was not, and therefore their claim was false. In
proving their use against this composition, they proved themselves intruders,
incrochers, trespassers, evil neighbors: It was so far from doing them good,
as it might have done them hurt, laying them open to every man's action, whom
they had offended. So here, wheere the word is silent, there hear Antiquity,
hear the Church, honor tradition, prefer prescription, custom, use. If thou
do not, then thou show thy self a selfe-wild Schismaticke, or an
obstinate Heretic. But where the Scripture speaks; where thou have that
writing under hand and seal, that old composition betwixt God and Man,
appointing Man his limits; there let not man presume to intercommune with God,
but let the tongues of men and Angels be silent. And whatsoever doctrine
crosses that, cross thou it out of thy Creed, or God will cross thee out of
the book of life. Hear Saint Paul aduising the Collossians, Let no man bear
rule over you under show of a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels,
Col. ^. 18.
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind. So whatsoever humble show or pretense he has, he is puffed up,
who presumes to cross the doctrine of the Scripture: And though he comes in
sheep clothing, Mat. 7. 15.
with show of mortification and contempt of the world, yet inwardly he is a
ravening wolf, and desires to swallow widows houses under the color of long
prayers, Mat. 23.
auricular confession, and alms; And, though he seems a worm and no man, and
creeping humbly upon his belly, lickes the dust of the earth; yet beware, he
may be a subtle serpent, and no silly worm; for under the like fair show
Satan deceived our Ancestors in Paradise.

Therefore attend Saint Paul's admonition carefully, where he says, Gal. 1. 8.
But though we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel to you, then
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. And as if this were
not sufficient, observe how he riuets this commandment or admonition again,
Gal. 1. 9.
and again, saying; As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach
any other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed.
What you have received you know in the Lords Prayer* the Ten Commandments,
and the Creed, for these are Epitomees and abridgements of all. If therefore
Saint Paul, or an Angel; an Angel that you were sure came immediately from
heaven; or Saint Peter, or his successor; any Man that you were assured without
controversy were his successor; or any other Man or woman how holy, chaste,
learned, or religious soever they be, should cross this doctrine, believe
them not; nay, let them be accursed, says Saint Paul. Much less then believe
the dotage of men, their gulleries, impostures, fictions, melancholy
imaginations, dreams, visions, and revelations; with which, being deceived
themselves, they seek and indeauor to deceive others.

You have now seen the way, 1. What it is. 2. How it may seem good and not
be so. 3. How impotent, prejudicial, and partial a Judge man is, in his own
case. 4. You have seen the end of this fair way to be false. 5. The issue of
that pretense to be death, whilst life was promised. 6. Lastly, you have seen
the Judgment of Gods spirit, showing you the true notes to know the false way
by. Submit your selves now, and your senses, and judgments to the direction of
Gods holy Spirit, and think not your selves or your Predecessors wiser then
Saint Paul, then Solomon, then God himself: but having found the right way,
the way to life, walk in it constantly, and turn not back to fables, and
traditions, and falsehoods, in which you have too long wandered astray; for
howsoever that way may seem right, and many of our forefathers have ignorantly
vvalked in it, yet the issues thereof are the vvayes of death: From which the
Lord of his mercy deliver us, and direct us to be zealous according to
knowledge; and from faith to clime up to practice, reforming those corruptions
in our lives and manners; which now by the course propounded in the beginning,
we come to search and lay open, in that which follows.

THE SECOND SERMON, PREPARED FOR the Judges, and preached upon Sunday, the
Assizes following upon Monday after.
We have spoken of the speculatiue part, Thammim
the Theory, as the way was taken for Religion; now we are to speak of the
practical part as the way may be taken for the custom and trade of our lives
and conversations, or rather for our passage, or vvalking in that Religion
which we believe and profess to be the truth. And as the Lord said by the
Prophet Jeremy, so may I say to you all. Ier. 21. 8.
Behold I have set before you the way of life, and the way of death: I have
shown you that way which seems right in the partial eyes of man, who thinks
all his own vvayes clean: Pro. 16. 2.
And I have shown you that way that is both right and seems so; Pro. 15. 24.
even the way of life which leads to heaven.

And now I proceed to exhort you to walk in this way: for it is better not to
know then not to practice what we know. An honest Turk which knows not the
will of his Master, is to be preferred before a profane Christian, who knows
his Masters will and does it not, Luke 12. 47
and therefore shall be beaten with many stripes.

A way then in this sense of Solomon. is the customary course of life which a
man chiefly uses, whether it be in virtue or in vice. The whole race of
mankind naturally walk in the road and way of sin and death: But some are
regenerate and called out of this way by faith and repentance: others will not
obey Gods word, but rather choose to live in the pleasures of sin for a season.
And they are said to be in their way, because sin reigns in them, tramples
upon them, and by custom takes away the sense of conscience; obdurating their
hearts, as a way is hardened by the feet of many passengers, so as a plow
cannot pierce the same. Thus men have their darling and beloved sins which is
their way, out of which you can by no means put them; as a Hare starred
before Greyhounds, will have her accustomed way and muse, or die for it; so
these.

And thus a man is not said to be in his way when he sins of frailty, he
then has slipped out of his way, and leaves not till he return into his way
by repentance: but when he sins by custom then he is in his way. And a
notorious sinner is not said to be in his way if now and then he comes to
Church, prays, receives the Sacraments, and forebeares gross sins, or does
some singular and solitary good: for he is not well, till he be out of this
way again, and like a dog returns to his vomit. Therefore a man is judged
wise or foolish, good or bad, and to be in, or out of his way, by his ordinary
actions, not by a special single fact. For nemo omnibus horis sapit; Semel
insanivimus omnes, and in many things we offend all. It is therefore the
general course, proceeding, and perseverance in virtue or vice that brings
life or death to our ways: for the crown of glory is at the end of this race
of virtue, and here death is at the end of this race of vice: the end there of
is the issues of death.

David committed Adultery and Murder, ^. King. 11.
grievous slips out of Gods way; but being in those sins he was besides
himself, out of his wit, out of his way, and never was at rest till by
repentance he returned and witnessed his sorrow by that penitential Psalm,
Psalm. 51.
in which he expresses cordial repentance, and seems to do corporal penance
in the Church to this day. His delight was in the Law of the Lord, he was a
man according to Gods own heart; A man, and therefore might err, might slip
out of the way; but a man after Gods own heart, therefore he would walk with
God as Enoch did, Genesis 5. 24.
and was never well at his heart till, he was reconciled to God by humble and
hearty repentance.

Jeroboam was in his way all his life, 1. King. 13. 33.
and sold himself to commit sin: so that it is said of diverse other Kings
that succeeded Jeroboam both in his seat and sins, That they did evil in
the sight of the Lord, and vvalked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin
vvherevvithall he made Israel to sin.

Ahab was not in his way when upon the Prophets admonition he put on
sackcloth and humbled himself before God: 1. King. 21 25.
but he was in his way when he followed the counsel of Iezabel, slew the
Prophets of God, and murdered Naboth for his vineyard.

Iehu, 2. King. 10 15. 16.
though he slew all Ahabs children according to the word of the Lord, though he
would needs have Iehonadab see his zeal which he pretended was for God, in
killing all the Priest of Baall, and in taking the Images out of the house of
Baall, though he did many other things tending to reformation of Religion and
the State. Yet all this while he was not in his element, in his way: for
presently he was not well till he was committing the sins of Jeroboam,
worshipping the golden calves in Bethel and Dan. Therefore though the spirit of
God praise him for what he did well, yet it adds in the end, 2. King. 10 3^.
But Iehu took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with
all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam which made Israel
to sin.

And thus much to show what this way of practice is, and when we may be said
to be in our way, or out of it.

Now if those men may be deceived in their ways, who think they walk
uprightly and like honest men, what shall become of such as have no vvayes, no
vocations to walk in, or of such as know the way they walk in, is the way
of death, and yet continue to sin against their own consciences, and the very
light of Nature? If the honest Heathen or Turk, for whose truth the Christian
dares depose, having had trial thereof in many bargains; if the devout Jew,
for whom Saint Paul gives testimony: Romans 9.
I bear them record they have the zeal of God though not according to
knowledge. If the superstitious Anchorite, who locks himself from all
pleasure, and makes this world a hell, that he might avoid Purgatory; if all
these (I say) be condemned, when their ways seem good to themselves, having
probable reasons to persuade them that they are so; what shall become of the
irreligious Atheist, who like a fool says in his heart there is no God, and
yet by natural fear is often taught to give his heart the lie for so saying,
and knows his way is the way of death, yet walks in it? what shall become of
the profane Naturalist and Neuteralist, who is of all religions, or no
religion; who goes to an Alehouse with better devotion then to a Church; and
to a Play with greater delight and love, then to a Sermon? What shall become of
the Mur^herer, Thief, Adulterer, Drunkard, Sodo nite, and of the rest of those
impadent sinners who offend against nature, and yet outface the light of the
Gospel, life of the Law, and laugh Religion and Government to scorn? These
men see their vvayes are naught, yet they sit in the seat of scorners, Psalm.
1.
and walk in the way of the ungodly, without fear either of God or man.
And their estate may be resembled to souldiars in a battle, who seeing their
fellows die before, behind, on the right and left hand, and know their turn
to be next, are yet so transported with the present hurry and fury of the
fight, and their senses so damned up with the noise of drums and trumpets, the
neighing of horses, the clashing of weapons, the thunder and lightning of the
interchanged artillery, as they cannot hear the heavy shrikes and groans of
their dying companions, but desperately go on, and seem senseless of danger,
till indeed their bodies be made senseless, and their souls more sensible by
death. So fares it with these, whilst they are sinning, and their souls
ready to be slain by sin, they hear such a thunder of oaths, lies, and
lascivious jests and songs, such drumming and tossing of pots and cannes, such
music which the Devil makes them, or they rather make the Devil, as they
can neither look up to attend the admonitions of God or man, of their friends
or foes, nor see the desperate condition, misery, and ends of their dying
companions, some slain suddenly, others living miserably beggarly, basely,
full of rottenness and sores, deformed, filthy, loathsome to the eye, to the
ear, to the nose; and the rest of these, and the best of these, going (as they
say) to heaven in a halter, if ever they come there. If the righteous scarce be
saved, where shall the ungodly, and sinners appear? O Lord open their hearts,
that as they see their ways are evil, so they may leave their evil customs,
and turn to thee with sorrow and repentance, that if it be possible, they may
be saved from the pit of destruction.

But leave we these vagrants, who either walk in no way, or like rogues,
and vagabonds travail without pasport, and come to speak of such as seem to
have warrant for their vvayes, though upon trial we shall find them forged
and counterfeite.

Ways are either 1. Vicinales. 2. Or Priuatae. 3. Or Publicae.

1. Vicinales vi.e. Or vvayes of vicinity or neighborhood, are betwixt street
and street, neighbor and neighbor, house and house, in Cities or towns. And
these may be compared first with those opinions in our Religion, or conditions
and manners in our lives, which we take up by imitation of our Parents,
Tutors, Predecessors or the like. Thus by imitation and example of others
whom we reverence for knowledge or devotion, by the custom and consent of
times and places, we are led as it were blindfold, to take up upon trust all
matters of faith without examination of their principles or grounds; when if
we were not kept back from search by ignorant superstition, we should
find, that, As man naturally begets man to sin according to his depraved
Image, and man is apter to follow man in evil then in good; so both in Faith
and manners we are often misled and corrupted by our natural parents and
superstitious predecessors: by which reason, as the tares ouergrow the wheat,
so the foolish ouergrow the wise, the superstitious ouergrow the truly
religious; and the godless, the godly; and so stultorum infinitus numerus, the
whole Earth is replenished with such people.

For instance, we send our children beyond the Seas into France, Italy,
Spain, Germany; they return not Englishmen from thence, but Frenchmen,
Italians, Spaniards, Germans; They do not only bring home the Language, which
was the pretense of their travel, but their religions, manners, customs,
diets, gestures, cringes, vices, diseases: so that nothing here now seems
good to them, but all that they bring home that seems right in their eyes,
they hate to be reformed, prejudice has so taken up their affections and
judgments aforehand.

Thus young men taste according to the company which first enters and seasons
them. By which means some smell of Rome, some of Constantinople, and the
greatest number become like salt without savor.

2. Secondly, some vices by their propinquity and neighborhood to virtues, do
so resemble them,that they can hardly be distinguished from them: and so deceive
many a soul, who takes a spetious vice for a wholesome virtue, and rests
satisfied with the shadow in stead of the substance, as children are pleased
as well with counters and counterfeit coin, as with pure gold and current money.

So prodigality is often taken for liberality, or for charity. Spiritual pride
is taken for Humility: Single incontinencie or impotencie, is taken for
chastity; Temeritie is taken for Fortiude: Security is taken for peace of
conscience: Presumption is taken for faith: vaineglory for Piety and devotion:
choleric folly, for zeal: And deadnes of heart, and dullness of affection,
for Contentment.

3. Thirdly, some natural virtues, for neighborhoods sake, and for some
resemblance betwixt them, are often mistaken, for Theological virtues; And
this point would be well observed; for it deceiues many both in judging of
others, and in judging themselves too, whilst either they consider not the
difference, or mark not the proper concurrants to both, or distinguish not
betwixt Nature and Grace.

Thus moral or civil honesty which a Turk may have, looks like true
sanctity, which the true Christian only has. So historical Faith, which
wicked men may have, and the devils have, looks at first blush, to some that
have eyes to see no farther, like justifying Faith, which the Elect only
have: So natural love, which Ethnickes have, is mistaken for Christian
Charity: for that a work be good, that is, accepted of God, it must proceed
out of Faith, and be done in obedience to his commandment, and to the end to
glorify him. Now this cannot be without knowledge, that is the ground of all:
for how shall they believe on him,of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. 14.
Bona opera dicuntur opera Ethnicorum, aut secundum apparentiam tantum, aut quod
substantia operis in se bona sit, licet subiecto, obiecto, fine, alijsque
circumstantijs sit malum. The works of Ethnickes are called good, either by
reason of their appearance only, or that the substance of the work is in it
self good, although in respect of the subject, object, end, and other
circumstances it be evil. And again, Opera Ethnicorum non idcirco mala
dicuntur, quod fiant simpliciter, sed quod non fiant been. The works of
Ethnickes are not therefore said to be evil, as they are simply done, but for
that they are not done well as they ought to be.

For that a natural virtue be christened, (as I may say) without which it
cannot be acceptable to God, there must concur these circumstances:

1. First, that it be done in a right way, a right faith, a right religion,
which is only in the faith of Christ: other foundation can no man lay, 1. Cor.
3. 11.

2. Secondly, that it be warranted by a special faith; that is, first, a
certain knowledge out of Gods word, that it is a work pleasing to him, and
not contradictorie to his will: secondly, with a full persuasion that his
person, who performs it, is reconciled to God, in and through Christ Jesus;
and so his work, yea all his works accepted, as the person and sacrifice of
Abcl was accepted of God, Genesis 4.

3. Thirdly, that it be done to a good end, that is, to glorify God, to
testify our love and thankfulness to him, for his infinite love to us; and to
make our own election sure. And all works done otherwise, how great soever
they be, how glorious a show soever they make, either in our own eyes, or in
the eyes of the world, are those apparances which often beguile good men, (I
mean, men of good natures, of good natural dispositions and affections) and
which S. Augustine calls splendida peccata, glistering sins; promising life,
but leading to death: Their ways seem right in their own eyes, but the
yssues thereof are the ways of death.

Viae priuatae.
In the second place we have private vvayes, which are vvayes of ease for a
man's person, or the private use of his family, as garden alleys, walks,
back-wayes and bywayes. And these have their resemblances in our general
callings as Christians, and in our particular callings, as we are Ministers,
Magistrates, Lawyers, Merchants, or the like.

1. In our general callings, we have private ways, whereby with Nouatus,
we think to go to heaven alone by our selves: As for instance, amongst our
Romish Adversaries the infinite Orders and vvayes of perfection, (as they call
them) do plainly manifest; and with us, that auersenesse and singularity of
humor which preuailes so far with some, as it causes whatsoever is
commanded by the lawful Magistrate in Church affairs, to be by them and
their followers utterly misliked; if for no other reason, yet for this, that it
is commanded, and in obaying they should commit, as they say, three grievous
faults. 1. Sin against their consciences. 2. Give offense and scandal to
their weak brethren. 3. Infringe their Christian liberty.

2. In our particular calling, we have our private walks also, every one
neglecting the maine end at which they should drive, and aiming obliquely,
either at private gain, at vaineglory, or the satisfaction of some base humor
and passion. And to begin with the Divine, because he should lead others
right: The end of his vocation is, by preaching to acquaint men with the will
of God, by praying to turn the wrath of God from the people, and to obtain a
blessing upon his labors, and by practice to confirm such in the true faith by
works, as he has won by words to believe and embrace it: But does he tend
this errand? alas nothing less, for as soon as he is fligge, and comes fresh
out of the University, if he be crossed in his first preferment, then he grows
refractary to the State and present government of the Church established;
neither makes he conscience to mis-leade others, so he may be head of a
faction, and be thought somebody. But if in his first years he meets no
check, but gets preferment, his study then is to grow with the time; and then
he cannot distinguish the warts, moles, scarres, and corruptions of the Church,
from perfections and graces: his study is not to discharge one Cure well, but
to procure and charge himself with many; to heap steeple upon steeple, as if
he meant to climb up to heaven that way. And after all to retire himself to a
Prebendary out of the way, where like a bird in a cage he may be fed fat, and
provide to purschace some new and higher preferment, but never sing more.

This his way seems good to himself (for I will not uncharitably judge him to
sin against his conscience) and yet he finds the issue thereof to be the vvayes
of death. But we must let him alone, he is in his way, it is in vain to move
him to leave it, for he laughes both at the motion and the man that makes it:
he abounds in his own sense, and will not be taught, but by sense, by feeling
punishment when it is too late to shun it.

The Lawyer is presented next, the end of whose vocation is to do justice, and
determine controversies truly for the procuring and preserving of peace: But
does he hold himself strictly in his course to accomplish this end of his
calling and profession? Alas no. But he demeanes himself for the most part, as
a man placed above the Law; And what he does is either against the Law, or
without a Law, as it were by his princely prerogative, 1. Tim. 1. 9.
non est iusto lex posita, etc. There is no Law for a Lawyer. Thus he may take
what cause he list in hand, though he know it be unjust: for his office (he
says) is not to Judge, but to plead; and he speaks therefore with more
affection and earnestnes against the truth, then for it: Because a good cause
will speak for it self, but he deserves praise that maintains an ill cause
well; and for this he shall be famous, and get Clyants, and so get wealth which
is that he aims at.

Again, he may take what fees he will, though the Law limits his takings, and
calls the excess, extortion. He is the expounder of the Law, he is Lex
loquens, the tongue of the Law, and says, That the intention of the Law was
to limit men that they should take no less, and it limits such as can get no
more.

Again, other Trades must do their work, if they will have wages; and must
acknowledge the benefit they receive, and the Benefactor: but here the Master
is the servant; and whereas in all other vocations there lies an Action in the
Case against such, as having taken a valuable consideration for their pains,
will not perform their work; He, nothwithstanding his fee, may speak or hold
his peace as he pleases: for though he has two hands to take fees on both
sides, yet he cannot be at two Bars at once, and Demosthenes, we know, had as
much for holding his peace, as AEschines for pleading. The Doctrine of
Restitution he likes not, it is a popish point; in all other things he can be
content to be Catholic, to be universal, to be for every man: To be for a
man in one case, against him in another, though the cases resemble: nay,
perhaps to be both for the plaintiff and defendant in one case; and though he
cannot plead for both, because he has but one tongue, yet he may give
counsel to both, for that one toungue is double; and takes fees of both, for
that is the end of all. His ways seem good and right; for can he walk wrong
who has the Law, the rule of Equity in his hand, and whose office it is to
guide others right in the way? Yes doubtless, the end shows, that Male parta,
male dilabuntur, the issues of all are the ways of death and destruction.

Next look upon the Merchant as it were the General, and all Mechanics as
Under-officers of commerce, the end of their Professions is, or should be, by
commutatiue Justice to supply the necessities of each other, and so of the
State. But see how they propound private gain to themselves, as the only maine
end and scope of all their labors. And under this cover what one can cheat or
coosen his neighbor of, either by sophisticated wares, or false waights and
measures, or by any other close devise or conveyance, he thinks it tolerable,
nay laudable, a part of his trade, a mystery (as he calls it) of his profession;
without which he could not be a good husband, or thought fit to deal in the
world, or set up for himself.

Thus perhaps he will be curious in the duties of the first Table, which touch
not the corruptions of his profession; but for works of mercy commanded in the
second Table, he knows not what they mean, or perhaps they are superstitious
and popish works, though he hear God himself say, Hos. 6. 6.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. He will not swear perhaps; for that is
too open a sin for his purpose; in this point perhaps he will be an Anabaptist:
but if lies will sell his euill-conditioned commodities, he will let none lie
by him, nor no man lie beyond him. He will not break the Sabbath, no not to
eat, no not to feed others, not to do good, he is a strict Sabbatarian, a Jew
in opinion; but that day or any other he will not stick to coosen his
credulous brother, and as well may you trust a Jew as trust him. Thus he grows
rich, and treasures up wrath for himself, and in his whole dealing shows
himself a wrong Merchant, but a right Judas, who will gain by the feigned show
of godliness, or by any other course. His way seems right to himself* though
the end thereof be the Yssues of death.

Viae Puplicae, vel Pretoriae.
In the third place we have Public ways, common roads, the Kings highway,
which resembles public judgment, public authority, and the Common Laws of
the Land. For because all men think their own ways good, be they ways of
priuacie, or ways of neighborhood, therefore God has appointed Kings and
Judges to be life-tenants and Deputies in his stead, to defend weak truth
from strong falsehood and oppression, and to decide every controversy accordin
to the right rule of reason and Equity contained and expressed in the Laws
where they govern. Otherwise undoubtedly, if every man might be his own
Judge, the Thief, the Murderer, all would be quit, and the Judge and Iewry
should smart for it; the Plaintiff and Defendant, all would be sauers, and the
Lawyer should pay for all, who now is like to get all. To avoid therefore this
confusion, God has set Caesar to arbitrate indifferently betwixt party and
party, and given him a Law and direct rule how to do it, and that he might do
this freely without partiality, without fear or any other thing that might
mis-leade his judgment, God has set him above all, exempted him from all
other Judge but himself, and the Laws which are his rule and judge. Now to
the end he might be fully and compleately furnished, God puts an other spirit
into him, as we see in Moses, and after in the 70. Assistants, and in Saul,
David, Solomon and others who were extraordinarily endued from above with
Graces fitting their employments; and this Spirit whilst it continues with
them, does never contradict the public voice, that is, the Law of the State,
but ioynes with it and speaks the same language, from whence perhaps that
common speech arose, that the voice of the people is the voice of God, if it
be joined with the voice of the King; and this voice is to be heard and
obayed for conscience sake, being here opposed to the Spirit of priuacie,
which will rule, though without reason; and the more weak it is, is for that
the more vvilfull.

Now this Spirit of priuacie (whose wisdom consists in vvilfulnes) may be in
a public Person, when for his own or peoples sin he has lost the public
spirit wherewith God indues Princes. So the public spirit departed from
Saul, 1. Sam. 16. 14.
and a private mad spirit possessed him, 1. Sam. 18.
which made him hate David, for loving him, and being loved of God; to give
him his daughter upon purpose to ensnare and betray him; to deal falsely with
him in all his fair pretenses; and lastly, to cross and contradict his own
religious Law for the extirpation of witches, by consulting with them.

Solomon was in the like case, whilst by the unclean sin of Adultery he
fell into the snare of Idolatry; he crossed his people, and forgot his own
vvritings, where he says, Pro. 28. 15
As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor
people: Yet he thought himself then also perhaps as wise as before, because
he found himself as vvitty, and forgot what he had written, That into a
malicious soul wisdom shall not enter: nor dwell in the body that is subject
unto sin. Sap. 1. 4. 5. 6. 7.
For the holy Spirit of discipline will fly deceit, and remove from thoughts
that are without understanding: and will not abide when unrighteousness comes
in. For wisdom is a loving Spirit, and will not acquit a blasphemer of his
words: for God is witness of his reins, and a true beholder of his heart, and
a hearer of his tongue. Wherefore, for this, when he recovered his former
public spirit, he cried peccaui and miserere with his father David, and
vvrote that book called Ecclesiastes, to bemone and manifest his own fall,
and forewarne other Princes to beware of the spirit of priuacie, that they may
hedge in their royal ways with these conscionable restrictions, whereby
they may be obayed for conscience sake by their subjects.

1. First, Solomon, or Caesar must not rule without a Law, nor by his
absolute power make any, but see to the execution of those that are made. It
inclines therefore too much toward tyranny for a Magistrate to exercise an
absolute authority without limit, and the Superior who rules without a Law,
or against Law, walks in no way himself, but balks his own highway; for a
way is fenced, but the champian fields are for the wild-goose-chase; and
corners and holes for sinister actions. When as public persons should do
public actions in public, Genesis 23. 10.
in the Gates of the City, in the Kings highway, Deuteronomy. 22. 15
in the eye of all. For chamber-workes are suspicious, and carry a show of
priuacy and parciality. And so it is said by Liuy, that Tarquinius made the
name of a King odious at Rome, because he ruled all Domesticu consilijs by
chamber-Councell, as Rehoboam in Israel, and Jews the 11, in France. Thus
Kings though they be in some sort above the Law, because they are dispeusers
of it, are not yet without a Law, because they must rule themselves and others
by it. And thus much the crown that a King wears testifies, which is a type
of the love, and acknowledgement, and consent of the people in his government;
and lets him see, that there is a verge, a hoope, a compass for the heads of
Kings, as well as of subjects, and that we come to manifest in the second
consideration.

2. Secondly, Gods Law is Caesar's verge, which Caesar must neither
transgress, nor suffer to be transgrest. Where God has set no Law, there
Caesar's Law ( I mean the Law of the Land, which is the hedge to this
highway of the King) must stand. And this must agree with the equity of the
Law of God, from whence it originally takes life and strength. For as where
it agrees with Gods Law, we must obey it for conscience sake; so where it
contradicts or crosses the Law of God, the Apostle Peter gives a general
rule, It is there better to obey God then man. Act. 4. 19.
To clear this:

Thou say thy conscience tells thee, the Religion commanded by the King, or
some ceremony used in the Church according to the Laws established, is not
agreeable, but contrary to the truth; If thou can manifest this by the word
of God, then thy Conscience tells thee right, and thou art not to do what is
commanded by man, though he speaks humane Law, but yet thou art to suffer
what is enjoined by him, so speaking with the Law, or so doing as Executor of
the Law: and both these ways thou obayest God and Caesar too; God actiuely,
doing what he wills; and Caesar passiuely, submitting thy will to Gods holy
ordinance, and obaying the Magistrate for conscience sake. But if thy
conscience tells thee this or that, and cannot prove what it tells thee, but by
shifts and shadows; then it is not truly thy conscience, at least no true but
a lying conscience that so misleads thee; nay rather, it is thy fantasy, thy
imagination, thy peevish, prejudicial, and froward conceit; And thou art bound
to resist, and break thine own crooked and perverse will, and to subject it
to the will of God, who has subjected thee to Caesar. For Conscientia non est
contra scientiam, sed cum scientia, Conscience is joined with knowledge; that's
the ground, otherwise thou setst up an Idol in thy own heart, and worshippest
it, whilst thou obayest an erring and ignorant conscience. For an Idol (says
Saint Paul) is nothing in the world; and such is thy conscience, a bug-beare,
a Scar-crow, a Chimera of thine own melancholy imagination, or maleuolent
invention: And howsoever it may seem right to thy self and thy Sectators, or
Sect masters, the Yssues thereof are the ways of death.

3. Thirdly, as the Laws of God must guide our consciences in our rellgious
duties, so the positive Laws of the Kingdom must be the highway wherein
every one must walk in active obedience. And Kings and Judges are the
dispensers and disposers of these Laws according to reason. Neither shall they
need in the execution to satisfy every private, curious, and contentious head,
which pretending conscience, will disobey, or to satisfy every delinquent
with arguments, for then his work were infinite; but strictly and directly to
open the book, and to execute the Law of the Land, and every liege-man is to
acquiesse therein. For the Judge is, or ought truly to be, Lex loquens, and
does but tell us the Law, and show us the highway in which we must walk;
and if we list not to walk in it, we must be content to suffer for our
wilful folly, or walk out of the way, out of the reach of the Law. And
there is great reason for this, for God has set Kings as his Deputies to
execute Justice and Judgment, he expects it at their hands; and where any
evil falls out for lack of execution, the fault is the Magistrates, if there
be Law to prevent it; of him shall the soul be required which perishes for
lack of government; as the soul shall be required at the Pastors hands, which
perishes for lack of instruction in the truth. Great reason is it therefore
he should have power over such as he must answer so strictly for, that he may
punish them, or compel them to come in, or keep them for drawing others out
of his fold.

So we see, Judge. 17. Micha sets up an Idol contrary to Gods Law, he will
have a parlor-worship, a religion by himself: The reason of this error of
knowledge and conscience is given there; Then there was no King in Israel, but
every man did what seemed good in his own eyes. So the King is to see to
Religion, and if Idolatry increases, or sects, or schisms arise, it is
counted the Kings fault, if there be a King; the fault arising here for lack
of a King: that is, of a fit person to execute the Law against Idolatry.
Likewise in the 19. Chap. of Judges, the Levites wife is defiled after an
insatiable and brutish manner: The reason of this villain, this injustice, this
error in practice, is given as before, Then there was no King, etc. So all
disorders of life are for lack of execution of Justice: for God gave the
People a Law in this case; so they lacked not a law, but a Magistrate to
execute it. Again, in the 21. Chap. of Judge: There are two barbarous facts
mentioned; the first, the bloody destruction of Iabes Gilead; the other, the
rape of certain virgins by fraud and force, who came out, without fear of
treachery, securely trusting to their own innocence, and the peace of the
State. The reason of these disorders is given as before; Then there was no King
in Israel, but every man did what seemed good in his own eyes: There was a
Law, but there was none designed to execute it.

Praised be God, we have both King, Laws, Priests, and Judges; how haps it
then, that there are (I do not say sins, for there will be sins as long as
there are men,) but such common, open, crying sins, such reigning, roaring,
raging sins, such beaten roads, common high-vvayes of sins and sinning, as
if there were no King, no Law, no Priest, no Judge in England? I speak not
of them, which may pretend their excuse from the fraylty of our natures, and
our procliuenes to sin, but of such as are committed with a high hand, standing
like thieves by the high-vvayes side at nooneday, and robbing God of his glory,
the Commonwealth of their honor, and that with violence, with applause,
shaddowing their unlawful actions under the pretense of Law it self, which
should reform them. And some of these for the manifestation of this point, I
intend to bring to the bar to answer for themselves.

But see I shall not need; for impudent Sacrilege appears of himself to
confront the Pulpit and the bench too; It is not a scarlet gown that can
fright Dives; for he went in purple every day. If Justice help not, he will
strangle Devotion: for who will give to God, if the Devil enioyes what is
given? Or who will give to the Clergy, to the poor, to charitable uses, if
the Athiest, the profane person, the uncharitable wretch, the Politician, may
ceize upon it and sell it, or the title to i^, as he does. It lies only in the
hands of Power and Authority to stop his mouth; for he has got such
countenance and supportance as he sits in judgment, and has given sentence
(like the Man of sin) against the Clergy, that tithes are not due to them
Iure Diuino; and therefore he and his may ceize upon them with Prescriptions,
Impropriations, Prohibitions, like an other three-headed Cerberus, Iure
diabolico. The Country People like well, and will soon learn this lesson,
they thought before it was no conscience to pay tithes, but all being due by
almos, it was no theft, no sacrilege, but wisdom and good husbandry to
keep as much back as they might; we expected reformation, and a restoring of
the oil to the lamps, as God had lent these times more light then others: But
now there is cause to doubt rather substraction, then to hope for restitution;
much less to expect addition: Simony, Sacrilege, all are let loose and armed,
and Judas has sufficient color to save like a thief his ointment from
Christ's members and Ministers, under pretense of charity, and releeuing the
poor; though Christ sees the thief in Judas heart; and though Solomon knows
howsoever this way may seem right to themselves, yet the end thereof is
destruction to the Church, and death to many a poor soul. But they are in
their way, rather vvilling to pay tenths to Satan, then to God; It is
therefore ten to one, if one of ten, have grace to return and to restore. God
is just, who, whilst they withdraw their hands and hearts from good, withdrawes
his grace from their hearts; they may hear, but they profit not to obedience
and practice; He will not suffer such to gain grace by the preaching of the
Word, who for their own private gain would starve the Preachers of the Word.

The Usurer comes next as a brother in evil to Sacrilege. This must not now
be called a sin, it is justified out of the Pulpit to be none; and it is
grown to be a profession too, and the Usurer is a freeman of every company,
but not free in any good cause or company. It was a sin so ugly heretofore, as
none durst practice it, scarce durst name it, but with the sign of the
cross, as if they had spoken of a Devil: but it is now so common, as he is
scarce thought an honest man that is not one: for he cannot be honest that is
not rich, and he cannot be rich without this trade. This is the gulf wvith
sinks and swallows our Merchants, Clothyers, Farmers, Owners, all. Men
complain of the Law, (and that vvorthily) but this, this is the rock that
Shipwracks all, and spoils all trading and commerce, whilst the venture and
hazard is the buyers and the sellers; but the certain gain falls betwixt both
to the usurer. This Man pays neither duty to God nor the King, for his trade
has no warrant from either. God forbids it, the King tolerates it, as some
States do the practice of the Stews, or as our Savior said of Divorces,
Moses for the hardness of your hearts; suffered you to put away your wives, but
from the beginning it was not so; the time has not been long, since this
sin came in request for a virtue; nor will it be long ere the practisers
shall see, that howsoever the way seems good in their own eyes, yet the
Yssues thereof are the ways of death.

Next, the usurer and the Sacrilegious person, who are coupled like dogs,
comes three together in a cluster: 1. The Forestaller, 2. The Ingrosser, 3. The
Depopulator; as several species of one Genus; birds of a feather, who hang
together of a string, and it is pity they should not ever so hang.

The Forestaller (I mean not the petty forestaller of a Fair or Market, but
the forestaller of Commodities in a whole Country) bites closer then a Goose;
for the Goose eats all above the earth, but this beast eats up all
commodities before they spring, as soon as they are sown in the Earth, and
therefore is a right earthworme.

2. Neither when I speak of Ingrossers, do I intend petty persons, who
ingrosse up this or that commodity; but the Ingrosser of Farms, who like
another Cain takes possession of all, and will not endure any man to thrive or
live by him. Every Farm, every trade, every Sheepes-course is his. Nothing
fatts him but a dear year, nothing drownes him but a deep and long snow: for
if that melts not the sooner, he melts. He has in his hands perhaps what
would employ and maintain ten households, and he scarce keeps one. Thus he
beggars himself, whilst he is not able to stock all his Farms, nor give them
that compass, Arist. Oecon. lib. Sterquilinium
which Aristotle says is the best; namely, to compass the ground about often
with the owners feet: he beggars his Landlord, whilst once in seven years
he hangs his Lease on the hedge, quod agro est optimum, vestigia Domini.
and trusts to his heels; he beggats the poor, whilst he will afford them no
abiding place in the Earth, nor no employment to preserve them from Idleness;
and he beggars the whole State, whilst he breeds beggars, and makes the ground
vnfertile for lack of tending; which if it were in the hands of more, that
could manure and follow every part; would yield more increase to the Occupier,
to the Master, and to the State of the Commonwealth.

3. The last of these is the Depopulator, who to inhanse his Rents, pulls down
all the petty Tenements and Farms, and will have none dwell near him. As Soon
as this is done, he lackes neighbors; thus the justice of God whips him by his
own hand. Then he hyes to the City, where the Dicing-house upon the right
hand, and the Drinking-house upon the left hand, and the Drabbing-house before
him, spends all that is left; or if any be left, the tyre-woman, and the
tailor, dogs and hawks, and Coach-horses divide it; and amongst these he
wastes all that, wherewith his predecessors feasted themselves, and their poor
neighbors. There are Laws against these, but often it concerns the Jury, the
Justices; nay, the Judges themselves, and therefore the Laws must be silent in
this case; for these ways are good in their own eyes, though the Yssues of
them be the ways of death.

There come next to hand three others, who depend of those that went before,
and whose profession is practiced with a kind of warrantable deceit; namely,
the Malster, the Brewer, the Alehouse-keeper; these drink up the State, as the
other did eat it up; and for their sakes, drunkenness is thought a
tolerable, nay, a necessary evil. Their pretenses are the provision for the
poor, or the raising of the price of corn, that the husbandman may live, and
that the rackt Rent may not undo him; but what he gets of these at the Barn
door, he leaves at the Buttery-hatch. Mothes are no worse in cloth, rust in
iron, nor whules in Malt, then these in the Commonwealth. For since these
were set up, and manly exercises cried down, our bodies are weakened and
corrupted, our spirits dulled, and made effeminate, and we fitted for slavery,
being every day ouer-mastered and made slaves by drunkenness and excess. And
yet there are some who suppose this trading to be as necessary for the State,
as Tobacco or the trade of the East Indies; and for my part I am easily induced
to believe them, whilst I know the equal discommodity of all; and see, that
though their ways seem good to themselves, yet the Yssues thereof are the
ways of death.

Next these, the bribing Officer appears, as in a cloud; for his ways are
dark and past searching out, except to him that can hold a candle before the
Devil. Mammon brought him in, Mammon keeps him in, and the excess of his
wife, child, servants, gives notice to all eyes, that such bravery is not to be
maintained without bribes. And therefore when poor men come to pass any
thing how just soever, they are warned to open their purses vvide; and so
whatsoever the cause be, their reedles eye shall be made big enough for the
Cable or the Camel to enter. ^sai* 1. 23.
Justly may God complain of us as of Israel. Thy Princes are rebellious, and
companions of thieves: every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards:
they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto
them. And Ier. 5. 26. Among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as
he that sets snares; they set a trap; they catch men. As a cage is full of
birds, so are their houses full of deceit; therefore they are become great,
and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine; yea, they ouer-passe the deeds
of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they
prosper, and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this?

God himself must visit for these sins, the Magistrate will not; it is he
that must be visited; it must be an omnipotent power that must therefore
reform this general corruption, that spreads so wide, and climbes so high:
for these ways seem good to the eyes of great men, yea to some of the
greatest, (who should correct it) though the Yssues thereof be the ways of
death.

Now I have proceeded so far I will conclude with him that is the cause of
all this, and that is the Courtly Thief; who begges a Patent, that all these
before spoken of, and more too, may rob, as it were, with vvarrant under his
seal. But I do him wrong perhaps to call him thief, he is rather a Beggar;
not a beggar by the Kings highway, but a Beggar of the Kings highway; so that
no man may pass up and down in course of Law and Justice but he takes
custom. Surely he has begged so long, that he has almost made us all
beggars, and therefore it is pity there is no whipping post for him. But
assure himself, though he be of the number of the sturdy and incorrigible
persons here in this world, yet there is a whipping post for him in another
world, and he shall see, that though his wicked ways seemed good in his own
eyes, and in the eyes of his fellows, of his fools, of his flatterers, yet
the Issue of them are the ways of death and destruction.

But what should I need to dwell longer upon particulars, when not only this
or that member, this or that finger or toe, but the whole body is corrupted?
Look upon Religion, are not our adversaries on all sides increased? Do not all
places swarm with schisms, sects, heresies, and private spirits? Look upon
our lives; was there ever such defect of charity, as if indeed it were true
which some slander us withal, that we teach a solitary faith would save, and
that works were needless; nay sinful? was there ever generally such an itch
of private wealth which ever forerunnes and effects the ruin of the
Commonwealth? Look upon all our Proiects, of draining surrounded grounds, or
whatsoever other profitable pretense they carry, see if they aim not at the
draining of the public purse, at the milking of the state by private
Monopolies; as if England were a hard step-dame, and no indulgent Mother to her
prodigal and ungrateful children. Look upon our affections; was there ever
such a dead lukewarm indifferency, a dow baked zeal, as if we cared not
which way the world went, all ways were alike to us? Look upon man and wife,
the Epitome of the Commonwealth; was there ever such iarres, so little love,
such chopping and changing of wives and husbands, such Nullities, such playing
fast and loose with the sacred conjugal knot, such houses overthrown by
busy, pragmaticall, and disobedient Euahs, and effeminate, slavish, and
passive Adams? Look in the street, if you can distinguish men and women
asunder by their apparel, or behavior; if every Succuba seems not an
Incubus; so that you had need of a Jury to inquire of their Sexes? Consider
well if there be such a thing as modesty and chastity or shamefastness, left
amongst women, or courage, manhood, and honor left amongst men. Look upon the
highest, if they make any other account of the poor then of their tame cattle
(I except their dogs and horses, and perhaps their sheep, dear, hogs; for
these must all be fed before them:) Look upon the Commons, if their teeth
grind not with indignation, as if they had stomach enough both to eat the
beasts and their more beastly masters. Look upon all men, if sins of all
kinds do not abound: See if you can distinguish the man from the Master, but
that perhaps the man goes brauer, sweates louder, and will be drunk sooner. And
if his Master keep from Church for conscience sake, he will keep from thence
because he has no conscience. Look every way if it be not a shame to seem
good, much more to be so: If it be not a glory to regard neither God nor King,
Religion nor Law. If they be not the only brave fellows who dare do the
basest acts most boldly, and in a drunken desperate mood, iustle sober and
silent Justice from the wall into the Channel. Behold if want has not made a
violent ceizure of us all; want of wealth, want of strength, want of courage,
want of wit, want of conscience, want of grace; so that we resemble the people
of Laish spoken of in the 18. Chap. of the Judges, 7. 10. verses, and so are a
careless, secure, irregular Nation, a fit prey for any Conqueror.

This is all true, all men see it and confess it; but where is the cause of
this? Our sins; they are both the cause and the effect; for sin is punished
with sin: And we that are evil Customers to defraud God of his due, must
look to have strict and severe Searchers, and Controllers, and watchers set
over us. But where is that causa proxima of sin? Sin is a cause indeed of
sin, but it is causa remota, so that every eye cannot discern that cause.
Why, the next cause of sin which every eye may see, is the lack of Execution
of good Laws; we have them, but thy lie as Henry the fifts Bows and Arrows
at Pomfret Castle, with which he wan the battle of Agincourt; or Edward the
thirds sword in Westminster, which he used in the Conquest of France, and tells
us now what brave fellows our forefathers have been: Here only is the
difference, that sword is ever drawn* but the sword of Justice is ever in the
Sheath.

Now my honorable Lords, you have the sword in your hands, though not the
scepter; draw it forth, and strike with it the enemies of Truth and Justice,
who wander out of the Kings highway, in their ways of neighborhood, and ways
of priuacy. You hear Nehemiah say, Cap. 6. 11. Should such a man as I fear?
It were a shame. Should such as you either fear, or favor, or respect causes
or persons? I cannot suspect such a cloud, where there appears such a shining
Sun of graces, and gifts of knowledge and profession. I dare not admonish you
of any thing, I am so confident of your integrity. Yet because I know as you
are the eyes of the State, the eyes of his Majesty, so you must see by
othermens eyes, and hear by other men's ears, I turn me therefore to them.

Honorable Gentlemen, the King has made you Justices, to assist these Judges
in presence, to supply by your authority their absence: Show your selves as
your Predecessors have done, worthy of your places; reform what you can,
inform where you cannot, that the higher power may. I know you know, you were
not made Justices of peace, to the end to be silent, but to speak. He is
unworthy of his place, who attaines it only for his own grace, to hurt his
enemies, profit his followers, to uphold his faction and party; and therefore
attends his profit or pleasure rather then his calling, where withal he
thinks his conscience is not charged; but that it is enough for him to sit on
the Bench, to tell the Clock, and keep his Cushion warm. You know, and
therefore do the contrary; the Church, the Commonwealth expects more from
you, and I excite you to this in their names.

And you Gentlemen of the Grand-Enquest, and of other Iuries, with chief
Constables, and pety Constables, I turn me to you: Consider you are the eyes
and ears wherewithal Justice sees and hears; without you she is blind and
deaf: let not prejudice or partiality take up your affections therefore
aforehand. Be not like Band-dogs muzled for fear of biting: remember the
dignity, authority and use of your places, and disgrace them not by your
unworthy carriage. The poorest Constable is an eye to the richest and wisest
Magistrate: but few of them I fear have eyes to see it; and that their
Certificates would witness, if they were strictly examined, which commonly are
nothing but matter of form, and yet without either matter or form.

Consider, I beseech you, how Policy has set one eye over another, and how
many eyes there are ouer-looking all your voluntary, your wilful, your
negligent and partial escapes; the petty Constables, chief Constables,
Grand-Enquest, the Justices, the Judges and the whole County. And you that are
next the lowest, consider the like, and so successively as you are
superordinate; I ascend to you honorable Judges, who know you have a King above
you too, who can distinguish of ways, discern colors (though all scarlet
sins, and crying crimes be kept from his eyes and ears artificially): Eccl.
5. 8.
and there is one above him too, who rules the hearts of Kings as the rivers of
waters; and being above him, he must needs ouersee us all; Psalm. 97. 9. Pro.
21. 1. Act. 15. 8.
for he is (...), the searcher and seer of the heart.

There is a double work at the Assizes, the trial of Nisi prius, and Censure
of manners: This, this last (my Lords) is the needful, the acceptable work;
for we have more need of a Cato to reform our corrupt manners, then of a
Cicero, or Antony, or Salust, to purify and polish our Language. We all
speak like good Angels, but we live like evil. The Country Contention makes
the Lawyer rich, but the neglect of Justice makes us all poor. Here nothing
profits but due execution, which is then done, when your honors do not only
give good and learned Charges, and good examples by present actions, but leave
an impression for the future, and look at your return for full obedience to
your commands and orders; which else are effectual no longer with some, then
this my Sermon, which being taken for a matter of course, is perhaps ^ost by
censure and science for a while, but scarce touched by conscience, or drawn
into practice by any at all, though that should be the end of all hearing, as
it is the end of all preaching. Now to conclude; that both my Sermon, and your
Lordships charge, and all our actions may be to the glory of God, and the good
of this Commonwealth; Let us join together in humble and hearty manner, and
commend the end of this our present way of knowledge and the beginning of your
great work of Execution and practice, which follows, to his holy blessing and
direction in faithful and humble prayer.

Gracious God, thou that have given us a way to walk to heaven in, the way of
thy commandments; and, when we did not keep that way as we ought, did
in thy mercy reveal the way of grace unto us in thy Gospel, sending thy Son
to be a way, life, and truth unto us. A way to walk in, the life and strength
wherewithal we walk, and the truth whereunto we walk: dispose our hearts
to meditate, and to observe those things that thou have taught us, and
obediently to show our thankfulness by laboring to practice the same in our
several vocations with the care of good consciences to thy glory. Lord give us
grace to shun all ways that seem evil and are so; or are evil, though they
seem not so. Let us not be misled by ways of neighborhood, by imitation or
example, either of our predecessors deceased, or otherwise absent or present,
nor wander in our private ways from the public rule of thy word, and the
true end of our callings in Church or Commonwealth. Especially (O Lord) keep
us from abusing the Law for a color of sin, as if we had warrant and
authority to justify our wickedness, and durst sin without fear of
punishment in the sight of the Sun, in the Kings high way like Robbers.

And since we see, lack of execution of good laws is the cause of our evil
lives, give care and courage to thy Judges, and zeal and conscience to every
other Officer of Justice, that all may ioyn together to root up sin, and to
strengthen the man of God in the ways of God, that we may so walk with thee
here in obedience as Enoch did; that as he was, we may be hereafter
translated to walk with thee in eternal glory through Jesus Christ our Lord
and Savior. Amen.

A Postscript to all Christian Readers, especially to my brethren and
fellow-laborers in the Ministry, and to the Freeholders.
YOu have seen the highways of God and the King plainly laid down. Keep
you to the word of God strictly, for that is Gods highway; 2. Tim. 3. 14. 15.
16. 17. Concerning the Kings highway, that also is his revealed will in the
Laws of the Land; which, although his absolute will do not constitute (as
Gods vvil does) yet his consent confirms them as the Parliament propounds
them. In the Parliament then (which is the whole State representative) these
highways are made; and the fundamental customs of our State, makes every
Freeholder a way-maker in this case, not binding any man before he has bound
himself by the Knights and Burgesses who are his Spokesmen.

Be therefore wary, when you hear a Parliament summoned by his Majesty, whom
you choose Knights of the Shire, and Burgesses of Corporations; that is, whom
you constitute in your places to repair or make these highways of the King,
wherein you are bound to walk obediently for conscience sake: and remember
what admonitions his Majesty has given you often by Proclamation to this
end: especially in the first year of his Reign, when he found fault with
such as disabled their Counties and Corporations, using to choose strangers
according as they were directed by letters or superior Command, as if they had
no freedoms, or wanted sufficient men of there own to supply those places. And
remember also how before this last Parliament his Majesty (hearing and
beholding what packing, plotting, and undertaking there had been used in this
important business) did command all men to forbear writing and underhand
soliciting for the place, either on their own behalf, or others; and advised
the people to chose freely, and not to betray their own liberties in the
choice. Better counsel you cannot have.

When therefore you hear of a Parliament toward, let the Ministers prepare
the people, and warn them of the work in hand, and let such as are
Freeholders confer together, and (neglecting both their Landlords, or great
neighbors, or the Lord Liftenants themselves) look upon the wisest, stoutest,
and most religious persons; and be careful to choose such as have no
dependancie upon Greatness, nor seek change of the State, Laws, and Religion,
nor hunt ambitiously for place, honor, and preferment; for there is danger in
these: but he that is religious, will stand for his Countries good; and in
choosing such, you shall please God and the King, and profit your selves, and
your posterity.

Finally, let none amongst you be seen idly to sit at home, whilst these
things are doing in the full County, as if it did not concern you: but ride,
run, and deal seriously herein, as for your lives and liberties which depend
hereupon. And as you see such as are contrary minded bandy themselves together
for their party, to choose one of their opinion for their turn, so see you do
the like, that you may countervvorke them and hold the liberty you have got;
and the Lord prosper you, and make you of one mind as one man, that the
Gospel may still flourish among you, that mercy and truth may meet, Psalm. 85.
righteousness and peace may kiss each other, that the Lord may give that which
is good, and the Land may yield her increase.

Errata.
Fol. 10. lin. vlt. for alterations, read altercations.

Fol. 73. lin. 2. for villain, read villainy.

FINIS.

