A Schort and general Confessioun of the true Christian Faith and Religion,
according to Goddis Word, and Actis of our Parliamentis: Subscryuit be the
Kingis Majesty, his houshald, his Nobility, and haill Estaitis of this
Realm, to the glory of GOD, and good exampill of all men. At Edinburgh the
20. day of January, 1580. And 14. zeir of his reign.
WE all, and every ane of us, underwritten, protest, that after lang and dew
examinatioun of our awin consciencis in matters of true and false Religioun, ar
now throuchlie resolved in the treuth be the Spreit and Word of God: AND
THERFOIR we belief with our heartis, confess with our mouthis, and subscryue
with our handis, and constantly affirmis befoir God, and the haill world, that
this is only the true Christian Faith, and Religioun, pleising God, and
bringing saluatioun to man, quhilk is now be the mercy of God reueiled to the
world be the preiching of the blissit Euangell, and is received, believed, and
defended be money and sundry notabill Kirkis and Realms, bot cheiflie be the
Kirk of Scotland, the Kingis Majesty, and three Estatis of this Realm, as
Goddis eternal treuth and only ground of our saluatioun, as mair
particularly is expressed in the co^^ (...) Faith, stablished and publicly
confirmed be sundry actis of Parliamentis, and now of a lang time hes been
openly professed be the (...) and haill body of this Realm, both in burgh
and land. TO the quhilk confessioun, and form of Religioun we willingly
aggrie (...) ^^cis in all pointis, as unto Goddis undoubted treuth and verity,
grounded only upon his written word. And therfoir we abhor and (...) ^arious
Religioun and Doctrine, bot cheiflie all kind of Papistrie in general, and
particular headis, even as they are now damned (...) the Word of God, and Kirk
of Scotland. Bot in special we detest and refuse the usurped authority of
that Roman Antichrist (...) ^^tures of God, upon the Kirk, the Civil
Magistrates, and consciencis of men, al his tyrannous Lawis made upon
indifferent thingis (...) Christian liberty: his erroneous Doctrine againis
the sufficiency of the written Word, the perfectioun of the Law, the Office
of (...) ^lissit Euangell, his corrupted Doctrine concerning original sin,
our natural inabilitie, and rebellioun to Goddis Law: his blas(...) our
Iustificatioun be Faith only, our imperfect sanctificatioun, and obedience to
the Law, the nature, number, and use of the haly (...) We detest his five
bastard Sacramentis, with all his Rites, Ceremonies, and false Doctrine, added
to the ministratioun of the true (...) without the Word of God, his cruel
judgment aganis Infantis departing without the Sacrament, his absolute
necessity of Baptism (...) opinioun of transsubstantiatioun or real presence
of Christis body in the Elementis, and receiving of the same be the wicked, or
(...) his dispensatiounis with solemned aithis, periuries, and degreis of
Marriage forbidden in the Word, his cruelty aganis the innocent (...) abhor
his Diuelishe Mes, his blasphemous Preistheid, his profane Sacrifice for the
sinnis of the deid and the quick, his Ca^ (...)men, Purgatory, prayer for the
deid, praying or speiking in a strange language, his Processiounis, and
blasphemous Letanie, his multi^^^ ^tis or Mediatouris, with his manifald
ordouris, and auricular confessioun, his desperate and uncertain Repentance,
his general and (...) his satisfactioun of men for their sinnis, his
justification be warkis, his Opus operatum, warkis of Supererogatioun, meritis,
pardons, (...), and stationis. We detest his profane halie water, Baptizing of
Bellis, coniuring of Spritis, crossing, sayning, annoynting, co^iuring, (...)
Goddis good creaturis, with the superstitious opinioun joined thairwith, his
warldlie Monarchy and wicked Hierarchy, his three (...) is, with all his
shauelings of sundry sortis, his erroneous and bludie Decreis made at Trent,
with all the subscryuers and approuers of (...) bludie band, coniured aganis the
Kirk of God. And finally we detest all his vain Allegories, Rites, signis and
traditiounis brocht (...) without, or aganis the Word of God, and Doctrine of
this reformed Kirk. To the quhilk we join our selfis willingly, in Doctrine,
(...), Discipline, and use of the halie Sacramentis, as lyuelie members of the
same in Christ our head: Promising, and sweiring Be the (...) OF THE LORD OUR
GOD, that we sall continue in the obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline of
this Kirk, and sal defend the (...) to our Vocatioun and power, all the dayis
of our lyfis, under the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of body
and saul in ye (...) feirfull Judgment. And seeing that money ar stcirit up be
Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to promeis, sweir, subscryue, and (...)
the halie Sacramentis in the Kirk deceitfullie aganis their awin conscience,
mynding heirby first under the external cloak of Reli^^^^ ^^pt and subvert
secreitlie Goddis true Religioun within the Kirk: and efterward, quhen time may
serve, to becum open enemies and (...) the same, under vain hope of Popish
dispensatioun, devised against the Word of God, to his greiter confusion, and
their dowbill (...) the day of the Lord Jesus. We thairfo ir willing to tak
away all suspicion of Hypocrisy, and of sic double dealing with God and his
Kirk, (...) the sercher of all heartis for witness, that our myndis and hear is
do fully agree with this our Confession, promeis, aith, and subscription (...)
moved for any warldlie respect, bot ar perswadit only in our consciencis
throuch the knawledge and love of Goddis true Religi^^ (...)in our heartis be
thy halie Spreit, as we sall answer to him in the day quhen the secreitis of
all heartis sall be disclosed. And for^^ (...)outward professioun of Religioun
and subscription thairof, is nocht sufficient, except that our conuersatioun
and behavior be ag^^^ unto: Thairsoir we and euerilk ane of us prom sis
faithfully to behave our selfis as true professouris of this Gospel in euerilk
respect (...) in public, nor in private, directly nor indirectlie, we sall
impugn the verity thairof be word or write: Bot sall be all meinis man^ and
the same, both in reasoning and vtherwayis, sa far as God will give us grace.
And alswa we promeis that we and ouris quhome (...) and, sall diligently
observe and keip all the godly exercyses of the samin Religioun, as namely
the heiring of the Word, and par^^^ (...)the halie Sacramentis. And because we
perceive, that the quyetnes, and stabilitie of our Religioun and Kirk dois
depend upon the (...) behavior of the Kingis Majesty, as upon a comfortable
Instrument of Goddis mercy, granted to this Country, for the main^ (...)
Kirk, and ministratioun of Justice amangis us. We protest, and promeis with our
heartis, under the same aith, handwryte, and pains (...) defend his person and
Authority, with our geir, bodies, and lyfis, in the defense of Christis
Euangell, liberty of our Country, mini^^ ^^stice and punishment of all
iniquity against al enemies within this Realm, or without: as we desire our
God to be a strange and mer^^ ^^er to us in the day of our death, and cumming of
our Lord Jesus Christ: To quhome with the Father and the halie Spreit, be all
prais, (...) glory, eternally.

Imprented at Edinburgh be Henry Charteris. M.D.XCVI. Cum Priuilegio Regali.


