CANONS AND CONSTITVTIONS ECCLESIASTICAL Gathered and put in form, for the
Governament of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND.

Ratified and approved by His Majesty's Royal Warrant, and ordained to be
observed by the Clergy, and all others whom they concern.

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.

ABERDENE, Imprinted by EDWARD RABAN, dwelling upon the Marketplace, at the
Arms of the CITY, 1636.

WITH ROYAL PRIVILEGE.



The just Copy of His Majesty's Letters Patents, for authorizing the CANONS
after following.
CHARLES R.

WE, out of Our Royal Care, for the Mayntenance of the present Estate and
Government of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND, having diligently, and with great
content, considered all the Canons and Constitutions after-following; and
finding the same such, as We are persuaded, will be profitable not only to
Our Clergy, but to the whole Church of that Our Kingdom, if so they be well
observed; Have for Us, Our Heirs, and lawful Successors, of Our especial
Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, given, and by these presents do
give Our Royal Assent, unto all the sayds Canons, Orders, and Constitutions,
and to all and every thing in them contained, as they are afterward set down.

And further: We do not only by Our Prerogative Royal, and Supreme
Authority, in Causes Ecclesiastical, ratify, and confirm, by these Our
Letters Patents, the saydes Canons, Orders, and Constitutions, and all and
every thing in them contained; But lyke-wyse, We command, by Our Authority
Royal, and by these Our Letters Patents, the same to be diligently observed,
and executed, by all Our loving Subjectes of that Our Kingdom, both within the
Provinces of Saint-Andrews and Glasgow, in all points where-in they do or may
concern every, or any, of them, according to this Our Will and Pleasure,
heere-by expressed, and declared. And for the better observation of them, We
straytlie charge, and command, all Archbishops, Bishops, and all others that
exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within that our Realm, to see and
procure, (so much as in them lies) all and every of the same Canons, Orders,
and Constitutions, to be in all points duly observed; not sparing to execute
the Penalties in them severallie mentioned, upon any that shall willingly and
wilfully break, or neglect to observe the same, as they tender the Honor of
GOD, the Peace of the Church, the Tranquillity of the Kingdom, and their
Service and Duty to Us their King and Soveraygne.

Given at Our Manor of Greenwich, the 23 of May, 1635.
CHAPTER I. Of the CHVRCH of SCOTLAND.
THE Religion of CHRIST teaches us, to honor* Secular Princes, as the
Vicegerent of GOD upon earth: And therefore, as our duty to the King's most
excellent Majesty obliedgeth, It is decreed, and ordained, That all
Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical persons; all Readers of
Divinity Lectures, all Masters, Principalls, Primars, Regents, Fellows, and
all who-so-ever have Charge of Schools, Colleges, and Universities, shall
faythfullie keep and observe, and (as much as in them lies) cause to be
observed, and kept of others, all singular Laws and Statutes made for the
restoring to the CROWN of this Kingdom, the ancient Jurisdiction over the
Estate Ecclesiastical, and abolishing all Forraygne Power, repugnant to the
same. And farther-more, shall purelie, and sincerely, to the uttermost of
their wit and Learning, teach, make open, and declare in their Doctrine,
Exhortations, Lectures, Instructions, and Conferences, at all fit tyms and
occasions, That all usurped and forraygne power (for-as-much as the same has
no establishment, nor ground by the Law of GOD) is, for most just causes, taken
away; and abolished; and that therefore, no manner of obedience or subjection
within His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, is due unto any such forraygne
power: But that the King's power within His Realms of SCOTLAND, ENGLAND,
IRELAND, and all other His Dominions and Countries, is the highest power under
GOD; to whom all men, as well inhabitants, as borne within the same, do by
GOD'S Law owe most loyalty and obedience; before and above al powers, and
Potentates on earth.

2. Whosoever shall herafter affirm, That the King's Mtie has not the same
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly kings had amongst the
Jews, and Christian Emperors, in the Primitive Church; or impeach* in any
part, his Royal Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical; let him be
excommunicated, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop of the Province,
after his Repentance, and public Revocation of these his wicked Errors.

3. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Doctrine of the Church of
Scotland; the form of worship contained in the book of Common Prayer, and
administration of the Sacraments; The Rites and Ceremonies of the Church; The
government of the Church under His Mtie by Archbishops, Bishops, and others
which bear office in the same; The form of making and consecrating
Archbishops, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as they are now established
under His Mties Authority, do contain in them any thing repugnant to the
Scriptures, or are corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful in the service and
worship of GOD; let him be excommunicated, and not restored, but by the Bishop
of the place, or Archb. of the Province, after his Repentance, and public
Revocation of such his wicked Errors.

CHAP. II. Of Presbyters and Deacons, their nomination, ordination, function
and charge.
FOrasmuch as the weight of the Ministerial Calling, does require such a
measure of sufficiency, as humane weakness can attain unto, and is often
discredited by the ignorance, insufficiency, and scandalous conversation of
many who undertake the same; it is ordained, That no person hereafter shallbe
admitted to that holy Function, who has not been bred in some Universitie or
College, and has taken some degree there; and who shall verify the same by
the Subscriptions and Seals of the Universitie, or College, where he received
the degrees of Learning.

2. Neither shall he be admitted to trial, unless he bring a Certificat,
either from the College where he was bred, or (if he have discontinued
there) from the Presbyters or Ministers of that part of the Country, where he
has for the most part resided since his leaving of the Universitie; That he
has been exercised in some honest calling, or study; and that he is a man
blameless in his life, and conversation. Which Certificat shall be given under
the hands and oaths of two or three Presbyters at least.

3. No person shall be hereafter received into holy Orders, without due
examination of his literature, by the Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese, or
by their Chaplaynes, appointed to that work, who shall examine every several
party, as they find cause.

4. The age and prudencie of him that is to be received, must likewise be
considered, as, That he be at least five and twenty years complete, who is
ordained Presbyter; and when he is ordained Deacon, one and twenty years
complete, at least; and be of a modest and settled carriage: so that his
lightness, or indiscrete simplicity, bring not his Calling, or Gifts, in
contempt.

5. No Bishop shall hereafter admit any person into holy Orders, who is not
of his own Diocese, except he bring Letters dimissorie from the Bishop of
the Diocese where he lived, and a Certificat of his honest conversation.

6. Nor shall any man be admitted unto holy Orders, unless he have a
particular place, and charge, where he may use and exerce his Function. And if
any Archbishop or Bishop doc otherwise, he shall keep and maintain the
person so admitted in all things necessary, till he be provided to some
Ecclesiastical Living. And if he offend in this a second time, he shall be
suspended from his Office.

7. That the greater reverence may be carried to that holy Calling, all
Ordinations shall be made by imposition of hands, and with solemn prayers,
openly in the Church, after the morning Service ended, and before the
Communion, in the form and very words praescrybed in the Book of
Ordination, and in presence of two or three Presbyters of the Diocese, who
shall lay on hands together with the Archbishop, or Bishop.

8. All Ordinations shall be made at four times in the year; to wit, the
first weeks of March, June, September, and December.

9. Every Ecclesiastical person, at his admission, shall take the oath of
Supremacy, according to the form praescrybed in Parliament.

10. No person shall hereafter be received into holy Orders, nor suffered to
preach, catechize, read Divinity, minister the Sacraments, or execute any
other Ecclesiastical Function, unless he first subscrybe, to be obedient to
the Canons of the Church. And if any Bishop shall ordain, admit, or license
any person otherwise, He shall be suspended from giving of Orders and
Licenses to preach, for twelve months. And if any Presbyter or Deacon, after
he has subscrybed, to live obedient and conform, shall revolt, he shall be
suspended. And, in case he do not repent, conform, and submit himself,
within the space of three months, he shall be deposed from the Ministry.

11. To avoyde the detestable sin of Simonie, the Archbishop or Bishop, at
his instituting into, or collating of any Benefice, or Ecclesiastical Living,
shall minister to the intrant the Oath praescrybed in the Book of Ordination
against Simonie. And if the Bishop minister not the Oath, He shall be thought
guilty of Simonie himself, and punished accordingly.

CHAP. III. Of Residence and Preaching.
THE many inconveniences which result upon the Non-residence of Ministers,
require that some provision be made there-anent: It is therefore ordained,
That every Minister reside at the Church where he serves, or nigh thereunto.
And if he be found absent, without license of his Ordinary, six Sundays in
the whole year, or do not use and exercise his Office, being present, (the
case of infirmity being excepted) let him be admonished. And if after two
admonitions he amend not, let him be depryved of his Benefice.

2. No Stranger shall be admitted to preach in any Church, unless he be
licenced by the Bishop of the Diocese.

3. Every Presbyter shall either by himself, or by another person lawfully
called, read, or cause DIVINE SERVICE to be done, according to the form of
the Book of COMMON PRAYER, before all Sermons.

4. Albeit the whole time of our life be but short, to be bestowed in the
service of God; yet seeing HE tempereth that work to our weakness, It is
ordained, That Preachers in their Sermons and Prayers, eschew tediousness; and
by a succinct doing, leave in the people an appetite for farther instruction,
and a new desire to devotion.

5. No person of the Laicie, whatsoever gifts he has of Learning, Knowledge,
or Holiness, shall praesume to exercise the Office of a Presbyter or Deacon,
either in part, or whole, unless he have received Ordination, and be
licenced by his Ordinary; under the pain of Excommunication.

6. It is the duty of Presbyters, not only to stir up the affections of
people by exhortation; but likewise to inform their judgment, by solid
instruction, that they may be acquaynted with the grounds of their
Profession: THEREFORE It is ordained, That there be catechizing every Sunday
in the afternoon, except the Bishop dispense with it, as he finds cause.
And because in the country people can not convenientlie meet but in the
forenoone, the Presbyter shall every other year expound the Catechism to his
people, under the pain of suspending him that shall be found negligent herein.

7. If any Preacher shall in the Pulpit particularly, or of purpose, impugn,
or confute the doctrine delivered by any other Preacher in the same Church, or
in any Church nigh adjoining, before he has acquaynted the Bishop of the
Diocese therewith, and received order from Him, what to do in that case,
because upon public dissenting and contradicting, there may grow much
offense, and disquietnesse, to the people; The same being notified to the
Bishop He shall not suffer the Preacher any more to serve in that place which
he has once abused except he faythfullie promise, to forbear all such
matter of contention in the Church, until order be taken therein by the
Bishop; who with all convenient speed shall so proceed, as public
satisfaction may be given to the Congregation where the offense was committed:
Provided, that if either of the parties offending do appeal, he shall not
be suffered to preach Lite pendente: Neither shall any Preacher use bitter
invectiues against his fellow-Presbyter or Preacher; or go about indirectlie
to work his disgrace with the people* under the pain of being censured, as a
prophaner of the Word.

8. No Presbyter or Preacher shall presume in Sermons, to speak against His
MAJESTY'S Laws, Statutes, Acts, or Ordinances: But if he conceive any
scruple or doubt, let him go to his Ordinary, and receive instruction.

9. No man's name shall be expressed in Pulpit, to his reproach, except the
fault be notorious; which notoriorie is defined, if the person be fugitive,
convict by an Assise, excommunicate, or contumacious after citation. Nor yet
shall any man be descrybed by any other circumstances, than public vices,
always damnable.

10. It is manifest, that the superstition of former ages, is turned unto great
profaneness; and, that people, for the most part, are grown cold in doing
any good; esteeming, that good works are not necessary: Therefore shall all
Presbyters, as their Text gives occasion, urge the necessity of good works to
their hearers.

11. When any person is dangerously sick, the Presbyter (having knowledge
thereof) shall resort unto him, or her, (if the disease be not known, or
probably suspected to be infectious) to instruct and comfort them in their
disease, according to the Book of Common Prayer; and farther too, as he shall
think most needful, and convenient. And when any is passing out of this
life, a Bell shall be tolled; that the people hearing, may earnestly pray for
the dying person, as a fellow-member of CHRIST'S Body: and the Presbyter shall
not then neglect to do his last duty.

12. That every Presbyter may be the better enabled to perform his duty,
and be furnished thoroughly with knowledge, he shall be careful to get
himself good Books; especially, and above the rest, the Books of holy
Scriptures, and the Wrytinges of the Ancient Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church: and he shall study diligently; not taking delight in wandering
through the Country, nor meddling in matters not pertinent to his Calling. Or,
if any do otherwise, and after admonition amend not, he shall be suspended
from the Ministry. And if he continue in that evil course, he shall be
deposed.

13. All Presbyters and Preachers shall move the people to join with them in
prayer, using some few and convenient words; and shall always conclude with
the LORD'S PRAYER.

CHAP. IV. Of the conversation of Presbyters.
NO Ecclesiastical person shall at any time, other than for their honest
necessities, resort to any Tavernes, or Alehouses: Neither shall they give
themselves to any servile labor; to drinking, and riot; spending their time
ydlie, by day, or by night, playing at Dyce, Cards, or Tables, or any
unlawful Game: but at all times convenient, hear or read somewhat of the
holy Scriptures; or then exercise themselves in some other study, or
employmentes; always doing the things which appertain to Honesty, and
endeavoring to profit the Church of GOD: having always in mind, that they
ought to excel all others in purity of life, and be ensamples to the people,
to live well, and Christianlie; under pain of the Censures of the Church, to
be severallie inflicted, according to the quality of their offense.

2. The ancient Canons of the Church, did strictly inhibite any man to be
admitted to the Office of a BISHOP, Presbyter, or Deacon, that had not brought
their Families to be Christian. Whereby all Ecclesiastical persons are
taught, to look unto their Families; and govern them in such sort, that they
may be (as it were) little Churches, in regard of the daily Exercyses of
Religion, which are kept in them. Neither shall they conform themselves to the
vanity and superfluity of the time; but in gravitie and frugalitie, keep
that comeliness, which their Calling and Place does require: taking good heed
that their Wives be modest, and sober, their Children trained up in piety and
virtue, and their servauntes of a good and honest conversation.

3. To restrain the vaging humor of some Churchmen, so often censured in
ancient Councels; It is ordained, That no Presbyter shall leave his Charge, to
go to Court, or other places forth of the Country, without the license of
his Ordinary, and that the business be known to be urgent, and necessary.
Wherein if they shall transgress, the Bishop of the Diocese, after trial,
shall inflict such censure, as his fault shall be found to merit.

4. If any Ecclesiastical person shall go out of his Diocese, to suit
Plantation in another, or accept of any place, he shall be recalled by his
Ordinary, and returned to his Charge. And if he disobey, be deposed.

5. It is observed, that sundry Presbyters resort oftener, and stay longer in
EDINBVRGH, than their Charge can well permit; For which cause it is ordained,
That special notice be taken of such, and their names sent to their
Ordinary, that due censure may be inflicted.

6. Because many in holy Orders, undo themselves by Suretiship, It is
ordained, That no Presbyter shall heerefter become Surety, or Cautioner, for
any person whatsoever, in civil Bonds and Contractes, under the pain of
suspension, ever till he be relieved from his cautionrie.

7. All Ecclesiastical persons shall be careful to avoyde the company
wherein filthy songs, and unclean gestures, are used; lest they incur the
suspicion of profaneness; under the pain of such censures, as the Ordinary
shall inflict.

8. Nor shall they give themselves to the study of unlawful Arts, and
Sciences; nor consult with those who are infamous for Magic Sorcerie, or
Divination; under the pain of deprivation for the first, and degradation for
the second offense.

9. If any person shall enter into holy Orders, and afterward leaving the
Exercyses of his Function, shall betake himself to idleness, or any common
trade of life, he shall be counted an Apostate, depryved of his Benefice, if
he have any; and if he have none, shall be incapable of any, for ever.

10. No Presbyter or Deacon, shall haunt the company of Heretics,
Schismatickes, and Excommunicate persons; under the pain of suspension:
unless the Church has appointed them to confer with such persons, for
reducing them unto the right way.

CHAP. V. Of Translation.
FOR restrayning the levitie and inconstancy of some, who upon every light
occasion seek to be translated, It is ordained, That no translation be
granted to any Ecclesiastical person, unless the same be allowed by the
Ordinary. And if he has delapidated the Rents, by setting a Leasse of the
Tithes for a small Duty, or by any other Translation, to the praejudice of
the Church, in that case, he shall not have liberty of Translation unto a
better Benefice; but be compelled to vnderlye the poverty himself has
caused.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sacraments.
FOrasmuch as none have ordinary power, to administer the Sacraments, but such
as are in holy Orders; It is ordained, That no Lay person, who has not
received Imposition of hands, presume to take upon him the ministration of the
same; under the pain of Excommunication.

2. No Presbyter shall refuse, or delay, to Christen any Child presented by
the Parents, or any one of them, assisted by two or three witnesses; although
the same be no ordinary hour of Sermon. And, though all the people be
admonished, to observe THE LORD'S DAY, for celebration of the Sacrament of
Baptism, so far as they may, and to bring their Infantes, for that effect,
unto the Church; yet consideration must be had of the Childrens infirmity;
and in that case the Presbyter shall not refuse to go where the Infant
remains, and baptize the same.

3. Seeing the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUPPER is instituted for confirmation of
our Faith, and increase of Grace, and to be a Testimony of our holy
Profession; It is ordained, That the same shall be administrated four times
every year; whereof the Feast of PASH shall always be one: Provided, That
every man or woman do communicate with their own Presbyter, once a year, at
least.

4. And, for the better preparation of the people, the Presbyter shall be
diligent in examining of them; especially those of the younger sort; to see,
that they hold the foundation of CHRISTIAN RELIGION, and be not guilty of
any grievous sin unrepented of. For which cause, he shall inquire
carefully unto their manners; lest any that are scandalous, or notoriously
wicked, be admitted thereunto. And because strangers, not being of his
Parochin, can not be so well known to him, he shall not receive any person
of another Congregation, without a Certificate from the Presbyter thereof;
bearing, That he does communicate with him, and the rest of the Congregation,
at other ordinary times.

5. In the Ministration he shall have care, that the Elements be
circumspectly handled; and what is reserved thereof, be distributed to the
poorer sort, which receive that day; to be eaten and drunken of them before
they go out of the Church.

6. Superstition and Profaneness are both of them, Extremities to be
avoided: As therefore the adoration of the Bread is condemned; so the
vnreverend communicating, and not discerning of those holy Mysteriee, must be
eschewed. THEREFORE it is ordained* That the holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper be received with the bowing of the knee; to testify the devotion and
thankfulness of the Receavers, for that most excellent Gift.

CHAP. VII. Of Marriage.
NO Presbyter, or Deacon, upon pain of Suspension, shall celebrate Marriage
betwixt any persons, whose Bannes are not proclaimed three several LORD'S
DAYS in the Parochins where they remain. Nor shall he celebrate the same in
any private place, but publicly in the Church, and that betwixt eight and
twelve hours in the fore-noone, without License of the Archbishop of the
Province, or the Ordinary.

2. Neither shall it be lawful to join persons in marriage, being under the
age of twenty one years, without the consent of Parents, if they be living,
or their Governoures, if their Parents be dead.

3. No persons shall marry within the degrees prohibited by the Law of GOD.
And all Marriages so contracted, and made, shall be judged incestuous, and
unlawful; and consequently dissolved as void from the beginning; and the
parties so married, separated by law. And for the better information of all
sorts, touching the degrees prohibited, it is expedient that a TABLE be
affixed publicly in every Parish Church.

4. Because some necessary causes occur, wherein License can not be
refused to marry without asking of Bannes; It is ordained, That no such
License be granted, but to persons of good sort and quality, and upon good
surety, and caution taken, that there is no impediment, and the persons not
under the censure of the Church. Neither shall the License be granted by any,
but the Archbishop of the Province, or Bishop of the Diocese.

5. For-as-much as Causes Matrimonial have been always reputed amongst the
weyghtiest, and therefore require great Caution, when they come to be debated;
IT IS straytlie enjoined, That in all actions of Divorce, and Nullities, good
circumspection be used, and the truth sifted out, so far as is possible, by
deposition of vvitnesses, and other lawful proofs; and, that credit be not
given to the sole confession of parties, howbeit taken upon oath.

6. In all Sentences of Separation, a Thoro and Mensa, there shall be a
Caution inserted, that the persons so separated, shall live continentlie, and
chastely, and not contract marriage with any person, during each others life.
And for the better observing thereof, the Sentence shall not be pronounced,
until the parties requyring the same have given good and sufficient Caution,
That they shall not transgress the said Prohibition, under pain of deposing
the Judge who shall be found to do otherwise.

CHAP. VIII. Of SYNODES.
FOR the better trial of all disorders which may fall out amongst the Clergy,
and the retayning of Unity in Doctrine and Discipline; It is ordained, That in
every Diocese, Assemblies shall be kept twyse a year, in such places, and
at such times, as the Bishop shall appoint. And if any Presbyter absent
himself, without a lawful excuse signified at the time, he shall be
suspended to the next Synod.

2. Because all Conventicles, and secret meetinges of Churchmen, have ever
been justly accounted hurtful to the peace of the Church wherein they live;
It is ordained, That no such Meetinges be kept by Presbyters, or any other
persons whatsoever, for consulting upon matters Ecclesiastical: And, That all
matters of that kind be only handled in the lawful Synodes held by the
Bishops, and established by authority. And if any shall presume to keep any
such Conventicles, or secret meetinges, for the expounding of Scripture,
administering of Sacraments, or consulting upon causes Ecclesiastical, the
Ecclesiastical person shall for the first fault, be suspended; for the
second, excommunicated; and, for the third, deprived. And a Lay-person so
offending, shall, for the first fault, be admonished; for the next,
excommunicated; and then proceeded against, by the Laws of the Kingdom.

3. NATIONAL SYNODES, called by His Majesty's Authority, for matters
concerning the state of the Church in general, shall bind all persons, as well
absent, as present, to the obedience of the Decrees thereof in matters
Ecclesiastical. And if any shall affirm or maintain, that a NATIONAL SYNOD
so assembled, ought not to be obeyed, he shall be excommunicated, till he
publicly repent, and revoke his error.

4. Who-so-ever shall heere-after affirm, that it is lawful for any
Presbyter, or Layman, joyntlie, or severallie, to make Rules, Orders, or
Constitutions, in causes Ecclesiastical; or to add or detract from any
Rubrickes, Articles, or other things now established, without the King's
Authority, or His Successoures, shall be excommunicated, ipso facto; and not
restored, till he repent, and revoke such his bold and schismatic
attemptes. But for-as-much as no reformation in Doctrine or Discipline, can be
made perfect at once in any Church; THEREFORE it shall and may be lawful, for
the Church of SCOTLAND, at any time, to make Remonstrance to His Majesty, or
His Successoures, what they conceive fit to be taken in farther consideration,
in, and concerning the Premises. And if the King shall thereupon declare his
lyking, and approbation, then both Clergy and Lay shall yield their obedience,
without incurring the Censure afore-sayde, or any other. But it shall not be
lawful for the Bishops themselves, in a NATIONAL SYNOD, or otherwise, to
alter any Rubricke, Article, Canon Doctrinall, or Disciplinarie, what-so-ever;
under the pain above mentioned, and HIS MAJESTY'S farther displeasure.

CHAP. IX. Of Meetinges, to Divine Service.
THE public Meetinges on the LORD'S DAY, and other times appointed by the
Church, being a special external Mean to entertayne the COMMUNION OF
SAYNCTS; It is ordained, That the same shall be carefully observed by all
persons, of what condition soever. And that they shall use all due reverence in
time of DIVINE SERVICE, and of every part thereof: For it is the Apostle's
Rule, That all things be done decently, and according to order: answerable
to which Decency and Order we give these directions following.

2. No man shall cover his head in the Church or Chapel, in time of DIVINE
SERVICE, except he have some infirmity: In which case he may wear a
Nightcap, or Coyfe.

3. All persons present shall reverentlie kneel upon their knees, when the
CONFESSION, and other Prayers are read; and shall stand up at the saying of the
CREED.

4. None, either Man, Woman, or Child, of what calling so-ever, shall be
otherwise busied in the Church, than in quiet attendance, to hear, mark* and
understand, what is read, preached, or ministered. Neither shall they disturb
the SERVICE, or SERMON, by walking, or talking, or any other-wyse: nor depart
out of the Church, during the time of DIVINE SERVICE, and SERMON, nor before
the BLESSING pronounced.

5. Neither shall any idle persons be suffered to abide, either in the
Church, or Church-portch, or in the Church-yarde, during the time of DIVINE
SERVICE, or SERMON: but shall be caused, either to come in, or to depart.

6. For the manifesting of our Unity in FAITH, It is ordained, That one form
of the worship of GOD in the Blessed TRINITY, be used in all Churches of the
Kingdom: And that in all Meetinges for Divine Worship before SERMON, the whole
PRAYERS according to the LITVRGIE, be deliberatelie and distinctlie read.

7. Neither shall any Presbyter, or Reader, be permitted, to conceive Prayers
Ex tempore, or use any other form in the public LITVRGIE, or SERVICE, than
is prescrybed; under the pain of Deprivation from his Benefice, or Cure.

CHAP. X. Of Schoolmasters.
NO man shall teach either in public School, or private House, but such as
shall be allowed by the Archbishop of the Province, or Bishop of the
Diocese, under their Hand and Seal; and who shall be found meet, as well
for his dexterity in teaching, as for his learning, and sober and honest
conversation, to have care of Children, and bringing up of the Youth. But
especially it is to be regarded, That they be of good Religion, and obedient
to the Orders of the CHVRCH.

2. All Schoolmasters shall teach in Scottish or Latin, (as Children are able
to learn) the CATECHISM: And when any SERMON is, they shall bring their
Scholars to the Church; and there see they behave themselves quyetlie, and
soberlie: and, at times convenient, examine them what they have learned.

3. None shall be permitted to teach in any College or School, either as
PRIMAR, REGENT, or FELLOW, except he take first the Oath of Alleadgeance, and
Supremacy. And having taken the Charge upon them, they shall acquaynt their
Scholars, and train them up, according to their capacity, in the Grounds
contained in the Book entitled, DEUS ET REX.

CHAP. XI. Of Curates, and Readers.
Every Bishop within his Diocese, shall take trial of the quality of the
Curates and Readers, and permit none to read, or conceive public Prayers in
the Church, unless he be in holy Orders, and lawfully authorized by the
Bishop.

CHAP. XII. OF PRINTERS.
FOR restrayning the Liberty of PRINTING, which is greatly abused, in
setting forth Books, Ballads, Satyricall Lybels, and other Pamphlets,
repugnant to the Truth, or not agreeing with Honesty, and good Manners; IT IS
ORDAINED, That nothing heere-after be imprinted, except the same be seen,
and allowed, by the Visiters appointed to that purpose.

CHAP. XIII. Of Christninges, Weddinges, and Burialls, to be registrated.
IN every Paroch-Church within the Kingdom, a Parchment Book shall be
provided, at the Charge of the Parochin; vvhere-in shall be written the day
and year of every Christning, Wedding, and Burial: which shall be kept,
and laid up in a sure Coffer, to be provided also by the Parochin, and not
taken forth by the Presbyter, or any other, except when the Christninges,
Weddinges, and Burialls are to be recorded. And to the effect those be not
neglected, the Presbyter shall every Lord's Day, after Prayers, or Sermon,
take forth the said Book, and write there-in the names of all persons
Christened, with the names and Syrnames of their Parents; The names also of all
persons married, and buried in that Parioch in the week preceding; with the
day and year of every such Christning, Wedding, and Burial. And every year
once, within one month after the first day of January, transmit unto the
Bishop of the Diocese, a true Copy of the names of all persons Christened,
married, and buried, the year before within his Parochin; with the days and
months of every such Christning, Marriage, and Burial, subscribed with his
hand: to the end the same may be preserved in the Bishops Register. Wherein
if he shall be found negligent, he shall be called, and censured, for the
contempt of this necessary Constitution.

CHAP. XIV. Of public Fastes.
NOne in holy Orders shall without the License and direction of his Ordinary,
appovnt or keep any solemn Fastes, or be present thereat of purpose; under
the pain of Suspension, or other punishment, which the Bishop shall think fit
to inflict.

2. Neither shall it be lawful to keep, or indict, any FAST upon SUNDAYS;
but only upon Weeke-dayes; and such as shall be appointed by HIS MAJESTY.

CHAP. XV. Of decency in Apparel, enjoined to persons Ecclesiastical.
THE CHVRCH of CHRIST being ever desirous that Her Clergy should be had in
outward reverence, and regard, for the worthiness of their Calling, did think
it fit, to have them known to the people, by a prescribed and decent form of
Apparel: whose judgment we following, do ordain, That all Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Masters of Colleges, Doctors in Divinity, Presbyters,
Deacons, Masters of Arts, and Bachelours of what Faculty soever, shall use
Apparel beseeming their Degrees, and abstain from all light and newfangled
Garments; either in color, or fashion, no ways beseeming the gravitie of
their persons and Places.

CHAP. XVI. Of things pertaining to the Church.
IN every Church, there shall be provided, at the charge of the Parochin, a
Bible, of the largest volume, with the Book of Common Prayer, and Psalms
newly authorized. The BIBLE shall be of the Translation of King JAMES. And if
any Parochin be unprovided thereof, the same shall be amended within two
months, at most, after the publication of this Constitution.

2. For ministering the Sacrament of BAPTISM, a Font shall be prepared, and
placed somewhat near the entire of the Church, as ancientlie it used to be;
with a Gloath of fine Linen, which shall likewise be kept to that use
allanerlie.

3. In like manner, a comely and decent Table, for celebrating the holy
COMMUNION, shall be placed at the upper end of the Chancell, or Church; which
in time of Divine Service shall be covered with a Carpet of decent Stuff; and
at the time of Ministration, with a white linen cloth.

4. Basins, Cups, or Chalices, of some pure Metal, shall also be provided,
to be set upon the Communion Table; and reserved to that only use.

5. A Pulpit lyke-wyse, decent and comely, must be provided, and placed in a
convenient part of the Church, for Preaching the Word of GOD. And if any
question arise, for placing the same, it shall be determined by the Bishop of
the Diocese.

6. A Chest for Alms shall also be provided, strong and sure; with a hole in
the upper part thereof; having three Keys: one of which shall be kept by the
Presbyter, and the other two put into the custody of two Churchwardens. The
Chest shall be set and fastened in the most convenient place; to the intent
the Parochiners may put in their Alms; vvhere-vnto the Presbyter shall exhort
the people at all occasions; but especially at the making of their Wills and
Testamentes. This Alms the Keepers of the Keys shall either yearlie,
quarterlie, or oftener, as need requires, take out of the Chest, and
distribute, in the presence of six chief Men of the Parish, to the most poor
within the same.

7. All these things aforesaid being furnished, and provided, at the Charge
of the Parochin, shall be carefully preserved by the Minister, and
Churchwardens. The Churchman serving at the Church, is to see that it be
repared sufficiently: The Windows well glassed, the Roof well covered, and
the Floor paved, and kept even and plain; and all things ordered there-in in
such sort, as best beseems THE HOUSE OF GOD.

8. The like care shall be taken, that the Church-yardes be well fenced, and
mayntayned; and that neither Church, nor Churchyard, be profaned with
Plays, Feasts, Banquets, Temporal Courts, Markets, Musters, or the like.

9 That all things aboue-sayde appertayning to CHVRCHES, may be kept in good
order, and frame, the Archdeacon shall visit every year once, videlicet,
about Michaelmas; and the Bishop every three years once. The Archbishop also
may METROPOLITICALLIE visit all the DIOCESSES within his Province; so that it
be but once in his lyfe-tyme; and that at such times, as the Ordinaries shall
think most convenient, for the good of the CHVRCH: And shall either of
themselves rectify such abuses as they find, or call for aid from the HIGH
COMMISSION, if any Man or Fault seem too strong for them.

CHAP. XVII. Of Tithes and Lands, dedicated to CHVRCHES.
FOr-as-much as the Goods of the Church, of what-so-ever sort, are not
committed to the disposing of persons Ecclesiastical, but only to their
dispensing; IT shall be lawful to any Archbishop, Bishop, Parson, Vicar, or
any Churchman, to set, alienate, or put away from the Church, and present use
thereof, his Benefice, Church-Rent, or any part of the same, to any person,
or persons; whether Wife or Child, Friend or Stranger, mediatelie or
immediately. And who shall be proved to do the contrary, shall either be
compelled to restore the same, or be deposed from his Office, Benefice, and
Living.

2. It is against all reason, that Ecclesiastical Livinges, should go after
the manner of Earthly Inheritances; or that the Incumbentes should exhaust the
same, by setting Leasses, which are not to run out for a long time after
their death; to the hurt and prejudice of their Successoures: THEREFORE IT IS
ordained, That no Churchman shall set any part of his Living and Rent, longer
than his own lyfe-tyme; under the pain of Deprivation, and Degradation.

3. And because it falls out often, that Churchmen, at the expyring of
Leasses, and other Rightes, made before their time, do renew the same, for a
little and rediculous augmentation of the yearlie Duty; IT IS ordained, That
no Churchman, from hence-foorth, shall set any Leasse, or make any Right of
his Benefice and Living, but for a reasonable Duty, answereable in proportion
to that which is set. And if he take any Grassume, or Entry therefore, to
the hurt and prejudice of the Church, the same shall be employed to the
profit of the Church, and Successor; as he will answer it before his
Ordinary.

4. No Bishop, or Presbyter, shall appropriate to his private use, any part of
the Lands and Goods pertaining to the Church, or doted to pious and holy
Uses. And if they do in the contrary, their Heirs, and Executors, shall be
holden to restore the same. And for eschewing such Questions, and freeing of
the deceassed Churchman from Scandal, IT IS thought expedient, That the
Things belonging to the Church, be known, and discerned from the things
appertayning in property to the Bishop and Presbyter: Lest after their death,
things Ecclesiastical, be converted to private uses; or things belonging to
themselves in property, be taken for things Ecclesiastical.

5. Things dedicated to Holy and Religious Uses, and such other things as
are offered willingly, or by Latter-Will left to any pious Use, shall be
carefully looked unto by the Bishop and Presbyter, that they be not lost, nor
converted to any other use. And if any man shall fraudfullie detayne things
offered, or left by Latter-Will to the Poor, or any pious Use, he shall be
suspended from all benefits of the Church, as a Murderer of the Poor, and
irreligious crosser of the good intentions of People.

6. If any Presbyter shall with-holde, detayne, or destroy, or deliver into
the hands of Competitors, any Writing, or Instrument what-so-ever, where-by
the Donation of Ecclesiastical Goods, or their Right, or Possession, may be
instructed, or in the pursuit of acquyring them, shall privatelie transact with
the party, without the knowledge and consent of the ORDINARY, to the hurt
and prejudice of the CHVRCH, in any sort, he shall refound the losses, which
came by his deed, and be deposed from his Function.

7. For the greater encowragement of people, to the works of Piety, and
Charity, If any Bishop, or Churchman, shall depart this life, leaving no
Children, nor Successor of himself, he shall leave his Goods, or a great
part of them, to the CHVRCH, and holy Uses. Or if he have Children, for whom
he must provide; yet according to his ability, he shall leave some
Testimony of his love to the CHVRCH, and advancement of RELIGION.

8. If any out of a devout mind, have dedicated any part of his Substance to
the CHVRCH, and either he or his Children fall thereafter into poverty, they
shall be supported by the CHVRCH, unto the which they have been beneficial,
according to the Means received from them.

9. VVhere-as some have taken too great liberty, in altering the Latter-will
of those who have mortified any thing to the use of Churches, Colleges,
Schools, or Hospitalls, which breeds no small offense, and is a great stay
to many well-affected people, from founding or making any such Dotations; IT
IS ORDAINED, That heere-after there shall be no alteration made of the
Benefactors Will: but that the same shall stand firm, and be preserved to the
use for which it was first appointed.

10. Every Archbishop, and Bishop, shall in their several Diocesses, procure
a true Note of all the Gleabes, Lands, Meadows, Orchards, Houses,
Implementes, and portion of Tithes, belonging to any CHVRCH; and take care,
that the same may be preserved in their Registers, for a perpetual memory.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Censures Ecclesiastical.
NO ECCLESIASTICAL IVDICATORIE, shall meddle with any thing, but that which
without all controversy is known to belong thereunto, as Heresy, Schism,
Swearing, Not-resorting to the Church on Sundays, and other solemn Days,
approved by the Church, Non-Communicantes, Disturbers of Divine Service,
Committers of Whoredom, Adulderie, Incest, Common Drunkenness, and all other
things what-so-ever, which ought to be censured by Laws Ecclesiastical. And
such as are tried, and found notorious Offenders, in any of these ways, or
the like, shall not be admitted to the Communion, till they have satisfied the
Church, according to the Order appointed.

2. The Censure of EXCOMMVNICATION, being the highest Censure which the Church
can inflict, may not be summarie, not ordinarily used; but after lawful
Citation, and due Admonitions preceding.

3. Neither shall any Presbyter pronounce the Sentence of EXCOMMVNICATION,
till he have shown the Process to the ORDINARY, and obtained His
Approbation under His Hand.

4. The names of persons excommunicated, shall be delivered to the ORDINARY:
and no Satisfaction received, nor Absolution given, till He have allowed the
same.

5. Intimation of the Sentence pronounced, shall be made in all the Churches
adjacent; to the end no person may pretend ignorance thereof. And if any
shall after intimation, resort to, or converse with any who is excommunicate,
(those excepted who are by natural duty bound to attend them, or who are
licenced by the Bishop) they shall incur the same Censure, and be
excommunicated themselves.

6. If any person be excommunicated in one Diocese, he shall not be
absolved in another, without lawful Warrant from the BISHOP, who caused
pronounce the Sentence. And the Contraveaner shall be suspended from his
Function, and the Absolution null; until he who is excommunicated have
performed his Satisfaction, in the place where he was sentenced.

7. No Presbyter shall alter the received form of public Satisfaction, or
make commutation thereof, by paying pecuniall sums; under the pain of
Suspension. And for the pecuniall sum exacted off the delinquent, the same
shall be employed to the relief of the Poor, and Strangers, and other pious
Uses; by the advyse of the PRESBYTER, and Churchwardens.

8. All Ecclesiastical Judges, shall have care, to make their Proceedinges
formal; and not deny the Extract of their Acts, and Processes, to such as
are interessed there-in.

9. Al-be-it SACRAMENTAL CONFESSION and ABSOLVTION, have been in some places
very much abused; Yet, if any of the people be grieved in mind, for any
delict, or offense committed, and, for the vnburthening of his Conscience,
confess the same to the BISHOP, or PRESBYTER, they shall, as they are bound,
minister to the person so confessing, all Spiritual Consolations, out of the
WORD of GOD; and shall not deny him the Benefit of Absolution, after the
manner which is prescrybed in THE VISITATION OF THE SICK; if the party show
himself truly poenitent, and humbly desire to be absolved. And he shall
not make known, nor reveal what has been opened to him in Confession at
any time, or to any person what-so-ever, except the crime be such, as by the
Laws of the Realm his own life may be called in question, for concealing
the same.

10. Sentence of DEPRIVATION, or DEPOSITION of a PRESBYTER, shall not be
pronounced by any other, but the ARCHBISHOP, or BISHOP of the Diocese* in
the presence of three or four grave PRESBYTERS, called thereunto by the
BISHOP.

11. If any person in holy Orders, lawfully suspended, or deposed, shall
presume to exerce any Ecclesiastical Function, during the time of his
Suspension, or after he is degraded, let him be excommunicated, and delivered
to THE LAY POWER, as incorrigible.

12. If any man shall find himself injured by his METROPOLITAN, let him
appeal to Delegates, or immediately to the KING.

13. If any BISHOP shall give Ordination to one notoriously ignorant, or
scandalous, he shall be suspended from the power of Ordination for a year,
and the person ordained, deprived.

14. If any BISHOP shall give Ordination to a Man that is not of his own
Diocese, concerning whom he has not received Letters Dimissorie from his
own BISHOP, let the BISHOP be suspended for a year, and the Ordained
punished, as the ARCHBISHOP shall think fit.

15. And since the residence of Bishops within their Diocesses, is no less
necessary, than is the residence of Presbyters within their Parochins;
Who-so-ever shall remain forth thereof, for the space of six months
together, unless he be employed by the KING, or by the CHVRCH, for the first
fault let him be suspended from the Profits of his Bishopric, for a whole
year; the second time, for two whole years: and for the third fault, deprived
of his Bishopric.

16. In like manner, If he do not hold his Visitations duly, and redress
such Abuses as are presented unto him, so far as he is able, or be
negligent in conventing Heretics of all sorts; so far at least as he is
tied by Law, let him be suspended a year from his BISHOPRIC, toties
quoties, he shall be found to offend.

17. If any Archbishop, or Bishop, shall directly, or indirectlie, be
proved to take Fee or Money; for admitting any into Sacred Orders, let him be
deprived, as a Simoniacke, in the highest degree, and declared, Not worthy of
any Charge in the CHVRCH.

CHAP. XIX. Of Commissaries, and their Courts.
NO man heere-after shall be admitted Commissarie, or Official, to exercise
any Spiritual Jurisdiction, except he be of age XXX years at least; and one
who is Master of Arts, or Bacheler of Laws, and well skilled in them; as
likewise well-affected in Religion, of good and exemplarie life, and obedient
to the Orders of the CHURCH.

2. The Commissarie so admitted, shall answer for the Procurators in Court;
and not suffer them to purloyne Causes, or wrong the Clients, in any sort. Nor
shall he admit ^^ie to procure, who are ignorant, or inexpert in the Laws of
the Country, and Church.

3. He shall content himself, and not suffer Clerk, Fiscall, or other
members of Court, to exceed the rates of Fees allowed: And, to that effect,
shall place a Table of them in the usual place of the Consistory, where the
Court is kept; that every man whom it concerns, may take a copy thereof.
And if he or they shall be tried to receive above that which is allowed, the
person so offending, shall for his first fault be suspended from his Office a
whole year; for the second, two years; and for the third, lose his Office.

4. It shall not be lawful to any Archbishop, or Bishop, to place or app^^^ a
Commissarie within his Diocese, or any part thereof, unless he reside, and
attend the Service. And if upon any necessary occasion, he be with-drawne
for a time, the Deputy shall be placed, with the Archbishop's or Bishop's
consent: and not other-wyse.

Lastly: In all this Book of Canons, vvhere-so-ever there is no Penalty
expresslie set down, it is to be understood, That (so the Crime or Offense
be proved) the Punishment shall be arbitrarie, as the ORDINARY shall think
fittest.

FINIS.
ABERDENE, Imprinted by EDWARD RABAN, dwelling upon the Marketplace, at the
Towns Arms, 1636.

With Royal Authority.


