EXODUS 8. 19.

DIGITVS DEI.

ESAIAS. 59. 1.

The Lords Hand is not shortened.

2 TIMOTHY 3. 8, 9.

Now as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth:
men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed
no farther: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.

To the Reader.
MY heart is inditing of a good matter: I Ps 45.
speak of the things which I have made touching the King; my tongue is the pen
of a ready writer.

God shall wound the heart of his enemies, Ps. 68.
and the hayrie scalpe of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses.

Lo they that are far from thee shall perish: thou have Ps. 73.
destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.

But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord
God, that I may declare all thy works.

Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that Ps. 97.
boast themselves of Idols.

It is time for thee Lord to work, for they have made Ps. 126.
void thy Law.

Thou have given a banner for them that fear thee, that Ps. 60.
it may be displayed because of thy truth.

The righteous shall see it and rejoice; and all iniquity Ps. 107.
shall stop her mouth.

So that a man shall say verily there is a reward for the Ps. 58.
righteous; verily he is a God that judges in the earth.

All men shall fear and shall declare the work of God: Ps. 64.
for they shall wisely consider of his doing.

The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them Ps. 111.
that have pleasure therein.

Who so is wise, and will observe these things, even they P. 107.
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Many O Lord my God are thy wonderful works which Ps. 40.
thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to us ward, they cannot be reckoned
up in order unto thee: when I would declare them, they are more then can be
numbered.

I have preached righteousness in the great Congregation: lo I have not
refrained my lips, O Lord thou know.

I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation:

I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the great
Congregation.

I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings and will Ps. 119.
not be ashamed.

Help me O Lord my God, O save me according to thy Ps. 109.
mercy.

That they may know that this is thy hand: that thou Lord have done it.

Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise let them be ashamed: but let
thy Servant rejoice.

Let my adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with
their own confusion as with a mantle.

As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Ps. 48.
Lord of Hoasts, in the City of our God, God will establish it for ever.

The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes: Ps. 9.
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands.

This shall be written for the generation to come, and the Ps. 102.
people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

DIGITVS DEI.
Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. There were present at that time, some that told him of
the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices.

And lesus answering, said unto them, Suppose ye that those Galileans were
greater sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things?

I tell ye, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloe fell, and slew them, think
ye that they were greater sinners above al men that dwelt in Jerusalem?

I tell ye, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.


IN the nine and fortieth Verse of the former Chapter, our Lord says, that He
is come to send fire on the earth. And in the one and fiftieth Verse, denies
that he is come to give Peace on the earth, but rather division betwixt Father
and Son, Mother and daughter, one friend and another.

This fire is his Word (Is not my Word like a fire, says Ier. 23. 29.
the Lord? and like a hammer that breaks the Rock in pieces?) the preaching
whereof has battered and shiuered asunder the Rock of Rome, and has
occasioned great divisions in the world in every age, filling it at this
present, with wars of all kinds, real and verbal. For this cause the Romish
Catholics (a politic people) have taken order to stop the free passage
thereof, lest men should burn their fingers with it, etc. Or indeed, lest
thereby their Babylon should be set on fire, as, doubtless, Rem. Test. Preface.
it must be so consumed, 2 These. 2. 8.

And surely they have seen a fair effect of this their policy; For from this
silence of the Scripture, proceeds that universal Peace amongst them, whereof
they so much boast, and whereupon others so resolutely build. In the beginning
and infancy of the world, the Serpent, Ier. 8. 11 12.
by Satan's procurement, found a means to betray our Parents, by teaching them
to seek a prohibited and curious knowledge, saying, Ye shall not dye, for God
does know that in the day ye eat thereof then your eyes shall be opened, Genesis
3. 4, 5.
and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. But now in the dotage of the
world, Antichrist, by Satan's inspiration, has found a way to betray the
Church, by closing our eyes against commanded and necessary knowledge, saying,
Ye shall not dye, for God does know that in the day ye fast from the
Scriptures, ye shall be as Innocents, knowing neither good nor evil. The
greatest part of the world, especially of the Feminine gender, believe this
newfound Paradox of Antichrist; and the rather, because it never troubles their
consciences, nor strains their wits, nor takes them off from their Canonical
hours devoted to Poetical fictions; which Legendarie stuff is the Divinity,
whereupon at this day the Faith of the Cloister Catechist, is principally
founded.

But the word of our Savior, though it be the Gospel of peace, is yet a Fire
that inflames, a Sword that deuides. It aims at another peace then worldlings
and fleshlings dream of; they cast their eyes upon peace with men, this
teaches a peace with God; they seek temporal peace, though therein they
sin against God and their consciences, and do obstinately pursue and often
obtain it, though it lasts no longer then until the stronger has gotten
advantage by it, for whose purpose and benefit it was only concluded; this
other aims to reconcile God and man together, and to breed peace of
conscience, the earnest and initiation of an eternal peace hereafter.

The Apostle says, If it be possible as much as lies in Romans 12 18.
you, have peace with all men. So far as is possible, Sana conscientia, with
a safe conscience, seek to have it: but Quod fidaei vestri conuenit. Sed
quando de pietate aut de virtute quaestio est, tunc nulla pax impijs.
seek it not by wounding the conscience, or proclaiming war with God. For
that, though it be possible to nature, is impossible to grace; thou can not
reconcile Light and Darkness, Hell and Heaven, God and Mammon, Christ and
Antichrist; nor can thou by humane policy bring these together, by causing
both sides to abate, and meet in the midst, through thy wisdom.

There is a worldly peace which men unhappily hunt after, whilst they neglect
the peace of conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost; which peace and joy the
Saints of God, whose hearts are inflamed with that Fire which Christ brought
into the world, feel even in the midst of John 14. 27.
tumults, wars, poverty, persecution, tortures, fire, death.

The worlds peace and Gods peace are diverse, their fire diverse, their
sectators diverse, even as Heaven and Earth is diverse or rather opposite. We
may be far mistaken then secking for peace, and behold it is war; peace
with men, may prove war with God. Beware.

In the five and fortieth Verse our Savior proceeds to tax the folly and
hypocrisy of man, who can judge of times and seasons by signs and tokens, but
know not the tokens of their own visitation, when after their internal Ps.
74. 10
vocation by Grace, storms of persecution and trial folfowes; as Sunshine,
and Clouds, and Wind, and Rain, and Frost, and Snow, have their several
turns. Ier. 8. 7, 8, 9.


Thus we all are wise and perfect politicians in State periods and reuolutions
of the world: but for discerning the incrochments made by Antichrist, and his
assotiates, either like Fools we observe them not, or like Hypocrites
dissemble what we see, as men wishing well to his silent and close invasion, to
his seacret and dark underminings. The Lord says by Jeremy, That he is
against those Prophets Ier. 23. 30.
that steal away his word every one from his neighbor: And doubtless then
he is against us, who sit still in the mean time, and will not join with him,
and take his part against these politic Thieves, who steal away the Word
from us and our neighbors, saying in the mean time that Truth commands us
neither to say nor do any thing to the contrary, but only to wink and show
our Es. 55. 10 11. Ps. 50. 18
consent to their Sacrilege, by silence, like blind and dumb dogs; as the
Psalmist says, When thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst to him, and
have been partaker with Adulterers. And thus being once robbed of the
Scripture, that part of the wisdom of God which is necessary for us to know,
what wisdom can be in us more ^er. 8. 9.
then in natural Fools, more then in beasts that perish? Man being thus in
honor has no understanding, but Ps. 49. 20.
may be compared to the beasts that perish; The greater man, the greater beast.

In the eight and fiftieth Verse, our Savior gives us advice to seek
reconcilement with God betimes, whilst we are in the way, whilst it is called
to day, before we be arrested and haled violently by death before the Judge;
for then there is no remedy.

We seek after worldly peace and clap hands with Antichrist and his
confederates, to procure spiritual trading in his Kingdom, and temporal
trading in theirs; but we neglect God and Christ, and make them our
adversaries; nor have we any care to be reconciled to them, and to make peace
with them, though we know they have power to kill both Body and Soul also.
Herein we do foolishly.

Whilst our Savior was thus teaching his Disciples and the multitude, there
were present certain persons who told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate
had mingled with their Sacrifices.

And this they did perhaps as supposing the History pertinent for that point
of Doctrine which our Savior taught; that is, To persuade us to make our peace
with our adversary betimes in the way; because no man is sure, either of the
time, place, or manner of his death, death coming to man so many ways: and
therefore it were good to be reconciled and prepared lest we be brought before
the Judge suddenly, by force or accident, whilst we expect to have fair
warning given us long before, by age, infirmity, and sickness.

Now though there be no History of those times extant, that tells of the cause
and manner of this massacre punctually; yet there is light enough given whereby
we may probably conjecture some of the principal parts and passages thereof,
most necessary for our purpose.

Josephus tells of one Judas the Gaulanite, borne in the Antiq. Iud. Li. 18. c.
1.
Town of Gamala, whom a little after he calls Judas of Galilee, that joining
in confederacy with one Sadoc a Pharisee, became Author of a new Sect,
diuersified from the Pharisees only in one singular point, consisting in an
obstinate pursuit of all courses for recovery of liberty from the Roman
yoke, and freeing themselves from the Imperial tax then imposed. And it is
very probable, that Judas and Sadoc under the color of sacrificing (as the
Prophets had wont) assembled the people to move ^ Sam. 10 17.
them to pursue this project: of which Pilate hearing, being then Governor of
Judea for Caesar, he sent armed Troops, and cut them asunder before they could
gather head, even whilst they were sacrificing.

To make this more clear, Gamaliel, the great Doctor of the Law, brings in
the example of this Judas in his speech before the Council, and there
mentions his cause, course, and end, briefly, Act. 5. 37.

This news being thus told our Savior by such, as it seems thought him
unprovided of examples to second and back his arguments, and supposing it
suited the purpose very well, to persuade men to reconcilement in the way,
lest they should be suddenly cut off, as these Galileans were, our Savior
takes occasion from hence to enlarge the point, and to enforce it farther, even
upon the consciences of such as produced it, saying, Suppose ye that those
Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such
things? I tell ye, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
Thus our Savior makes application of this Story, to all his Auditorie, and
causes it to reflect upon the consciences of the reporters, as well as upon
all the rest of his hearers.

The Galileans were not hereby wholly excused a toto (as the Schoolmen say)
but a tanto, and secundum quid, after a sort; nor was their act of sacrificing
(wheresoever, whisoeuer, or howsoever done) justified hereby; but our Savior
condemns the rash judgment of such, as make our sufferings from men,
infallible marks of our sins before God. Wicked men may prosper in evil
courses, good men may fall and suffer in holy undertakings. The Galileans might
be sinners in seeking disorderly to free themselves from the Roman servitude
and Imperial tax; and the Emperor, with Pilate his Officer, might be greater
sinners in laying this tax upon the people without their consents (for volenti
non fit iniuria) and so forcing them to wrestle for their liberties; yea, and
all the other Galileans might be sinners doubtless, above those that suffered,
whilst they sought and desired the same liberty, though they had not hearts to
use the same means. So if consent be a crime, where will is present, wanting
only courage to attempt, or power to accomplish what others adventure, then
the whole Nation were as faulty as these few, though these did only suffer in
their persons, because they did only enter into open action, which by the
vulgar is ever censured good or badde according to the success; and though
before followed, applauded, and effected never so eagerly, yet it is presently
disclaimed and condemned as soon as it is opposed by power, or crossed and
defeated by policy. Thus these fondlings could censure the Galileans to be
Rebles, Traitors, and Sinners above others, and so to suffer worthily for
endeavoring to do that which all of them desired to be done: but they could
not see their own notorious rebellions and treasons against God, who had been
a gracious King and Ruler over them, from whose easy and equal yoke
notwithstanding, they and their stiff neckt Fathers shranke and withdrew the
shoulder.

The sins against man, man censures severely, the sins against God we pass
over slightly. The judgment of Caesar or of his Substitute Pontius Pilate, who
have power only to kill the body, we tremble at, and count so terrible, as it
frights us even from good duties, or frights all men from acknowledging us, if
we fall into their hands, and be branded as capital offenders, under their
tyrannical censures, though it be for performing good duties: but the
judgments of God, who has power to kill soul and body, we extenuate, hide,
and pervert with our idle Glosses, Apologies, and Applycations, though we know
they be ever Just, Serious, Obserueable, Sacred, and never inflicted but for
notorious evil.

But how fond and foolish do men show themselves herein? For Caesar owes more
to God, then any man to Caesar: and yet Caesar that exacts more for himself
then his due, denies or neglects to pay God that which belongs to him; yea, all
men are more careful to pay Caesar more then they ought, then God what they
ought, and for this will rob God, to enrich Caesar. Shall they for this be
counted wise, religious, obedient, faithful? And Fools, Factious persons,
Rebels, Traitors for the contrary? Caesar can kill thee, Caesar cannot save
thee; die thou must when God determines. If Caesar therefore will neither pay
God his due, nor permit thee to do it, thou may deny Caesar whatsoever is
found to have Gods express Stipendium and Tyranno penditur, praedicatio non
nisi bono principi. Cass. var. Lib. 9. Ep. 25.
Stamp upon it. I do not mean the tax and tribute which he violently
exacteth, but prayers for his prosperity. That has Caesar's impression, this
Gods. Tribute is due to evil Princes, prayers to good. Give therefore to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods.

Besides, if thou offendest Pilate, there is no means to escape, he mingleth
thy blood with thy sacrifice; the Horns of the Altar are not privileged; no
place, no person, is exempted from the force of his fury; no repentance, no
restitution can serve the turn to redeem a delinquent from his rage. O
Profane and cruel heart of man! how severe art thou against man like thy
self? I say, like thy self, if thou be Gods Image and not Satan's; and if
thou be Satan's Image, then much thy better, like thy Master, like thy Maker?
Thus if man offend man, there is no mercy: but if man offend God, he may repent
and be saved. There is indeed no other remedy but repentance; but that remedy
is left us in the greatest extremity. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish. If ye repent, not one of you shall perish.

With Pilate there is no remedy, except you can work with his Wife underhand:
With Herod no remedy, except ye can get Herodias Daughter to dance you into
favor: With Caesar there is no remedy, except ye can give for a pardon to
Maecenas. It is not so with God; He forgiues, though we give nothing.
Repentance only paies all debts. Not the Minion, but the Son is the
intercessour. The one sels at a dear rate the temporal favors of Caesar; the
other gives freely, the eternal favors of his Father.

Ye shall all likewise perish, except ye repent. What all perish by Massacre as
these did? Perhaps not so, but by some violent, sudden, and unusual death, as
fell out to the greatest part of the Jewish Nation about forty years after,
under Vespatian and Titas; Or if not so, yet ye shall perish, dying upon your
beds, when others shall not perish, though they dye a violent death. For some
pass by Job 36. 12. Ps. 144. 10.
the Sword when others perish by it. The end of all examples, is to teach us
repentance; and executions are done for the living, that they live no longer in
sin, and not for the dead, who cannot be bettered by example or admonition.

To apply this then to our present purpose.
The Waldenses were a People in France, who took this their By-name from one
Waldus, a wealthy and honest Acts and Monuments.
Citizen of Lions. This Waldus chanced, with diverse of his rich neighbors, to
be one day making merry, when in the midst of their mirth one of their
company fell down suddenly dead. This accident amazed all, but wrought more
effectually with him, who was more sensible and apprehensiue of Gods hand in
the sudden and unexpected stroke; insomuch, as afterward fearing the like
death might befall him, he reformed his life, gave himself to alms, and
prayer, and to the frequent reading and meditating of the Scriptures; and
withal, exhorted others of his kinsfolk, neighbors, and friends to do the
like. Wherein he so far prevailed, that many sober Christians adhered to him,
and a great reformation followed in that place: at which the Devil, and his
Disciples, the Libertines of those days, repining, information thereof was
given to Rome, that Sinagogue of Satan, against these poor souls, and their
piety was accounted Heresy because they could not find the Popes Supremacy
(a maine and head Article of the Roman Catholic Faith) confirmed in the
Scriptures. For this and other such honest and holy Heresies, the King of
France was excited by the Papacy to butcher his own poor subjects, with he
performed which incredible cost and cruelty.

Now I demand (with our Savior) Think you were these Waldenses sinners above
all the people that dwelt in the City of Lions or in the Kingdom of France,
because they suffered these things? I tell you, nay; but except we repent we
shall all likewise perish.

The massacre in France is yet fresh bleeding in the memory of men that live
and saw it, when under color of reconcilen, of a marriage betwixt a reformed
and deformed Catholic, the innocent parties were won from their Serpentine
wisdom, and so charmed as there remained nothing in them but the simplicity,
sincerity, and security of Doves; wherein asleep in peace, they were at
midnight awaked with the shricks and groans of their murdered friends, and
all-togither be came sharers in the Crown of Martyrdom.

What then shall we think these holy Saints, sinners above all that dwelt in
the City of Paris and Kingdom of France, or now dwell in the Kingdom of
great Britain, because they suffered such things from Antichrist and his
followers? I tell you, nay; but except we repent we shall all likewise perish.

All these died for their saving Faith, even that Faith which was able to save
their Souls from the Justice of God and the violence and injury of Satan,
could not save their bodies from the Tyranny of their own Prince, who ought
to have been their safeguard: so merciful is God, so merciless is man.

But see the just judgment of God upon Shepherds that prone wolves; the King
never prospered after, but was often affrighted with the lamentable shrikes of
men, women, children intermixed, as if the massacre had still sounded vengeance
in his ears: which noise not only himself, but diverse of his near
attendants did profess to hear often with wonder, horror, and amazement.

And thus languishing a long time he fell at length into a strange and general
bleeding at all the open parts of his body, which could not be staunched till
he died: as if Nature by Gods commandment, would not strengthen the veins, to
hold in that guilty blood, which unnaturally and prodigally had powered out so
much innocent blood.

He that will take pains to read the history it self and to consider every
circumstance aright, shall be fully satisfied, in the particulars, and may from
thence see what foul dealing we are to expect from Papists, let their words
and promises be as fair, and their treatyes, conclusions, and vows as serious
and solemn as they please. There they may observe the simplicity of the
Admiral, otherwise a wise man, but wearyed with war, and believing that
reconcilement firm, which he desired might be so, and knew to be so upon his
part, he was won or wrought from himself by glorious promises, and rockt
asleep in senseles security and ease (the bane of bold and brave spirits) not
to be awaked by the thick and loud alarums of all his friends. There they may
observe how the contrary faction of the house of Guise, seemed to be disgraced,
and left the Court for a color, as if they took it ill to be iustled out by
the Admiral their adversary. There they may observe how the Queen Mother
tutors her son to dissemble; and still sets a head upon the faction she
hated, thereby to break them and betray them and religion together. For
religion never received greated blows then from false heads and false hearts
soulderd on for that end by art and deuilish policy. There they may observe
and see, (and be a stonished at it) a young King protest and swear publicly,
contrary to his inward purpose, and dissemble so artificially, that after the
fact, being retired, he demands of his Mother, and of other his flatterors in
private, If he had not playde his part well. Perhaps he expected a triumph for
lying, for perjury, for dissimulation, and for betraying the too-credulons
hearts of his faithful people, as Nero did for fidling, and fireing of Rome.

There is nothing written but is written for our learning, if examples can make
us to beware and to be wise.

We live intermingled in our Land with the subjects of Antichrist, unto whom
we are more odious then the Jews to Caesar, or Pontius Pilate, or to any of
the Romans: Those only sought subjection of the body, these of body and soul;
Those took, these watch to take occasion and opportunity of such massacres
amongst us, as in other places, with all bloody expression of unreconcilable
hate, they have found and effected.

Our Savior when he sent out his Apostles to preach, and to plant the Gospel,
told them they should go as Sheep among Wolves, and willed them therefore to
be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. We are their followers in Faith and
in Fortune; and it is no wisdom in us to arm the Romish Wolves against our
selves, or yet to suffer them to be armed or to arm themselves with Force,
Office, or Authority to do us a mischief. Especially, since we have the
Laws of the Land inabling us to disarme them, in these and all other respects.
And for my part, I believe it is no part of inhumanitie or tyranny to execute
the Laws for the general safeguard against the seacret and seditious
conspiracies intended or imagined against us; But I think it Treason to the
Church and State, and Rebellion against God, the King of Kings, to sit still
till these arm themselves, and disarme us, the more safely and speedily to
effect a Massacre: which (I am fully persuaded, and they will smart for it who
are not so persuaded with me) they will never forbear any longer, then till
they can fit and furnish themselves for it; nor will they abstain from it, for
any other respect of Age, Sex, Office, or Innocence, then for the attendance
of the first, nearest, and fittest occasion and opportunity offered to do it
surely; which rather then they will long be without, and long for when they are
fit for it, they will provoke it by force and all means possible in their
power: yea, they will feign a cause rather then want it, to serve their turn,
as a color for their cruelty.

Assuredly they will then call our Sacrificing Treason, if it can serve their
turn to breed a quarrel, when they have us under hatches, and have fitted
themselves with authority and strength to do us a displeasure.

But you will ask what should move me to think so, since they have not found
us bloody toward them?

I answer, though they have not found us such, they have feigned us such in
their writings, and what they feign us to be, we shall surely find them to be
in their works. Their Posterity believe their sayings, and in Foraine parts
they think, and will not be persuaded otherwise, but that we have used all
cruelties against them, and have cast them to be worried and torn assunder by
wild Beasts.

Notwithstanding, whatsoever they write of us at their pleasure, thereby to
exasperate their party, to breed a detestation of our Lives and Doctrine, and
to stir up compassion for the benefit of their persons (all which are as
easily effected by lies as by truth, when prejudice possesses the hearer, and
both sides cannot be heard indifferently) yet it is certain they believe not
their own lies, but in their own souls rest secure that we will do them no
violence, how much soever we know our selves to be their Masters, except we be
urged and provoked, beyond the patience of men. Yet this assurance of our
lenity does no good to win and soften their affection, but does rather much
hurt, to imbolden their presumption. They know our tenets, our practice, our
natures; It is the Romish Milk only which makes all that taste of those
Adulterate Teates to be unnatural Wolves, Fratricides, and Parricides. The
Powder Treason was trial enough of this truth, where Digby, Grant, and the
Winters, with others not of the worst natures; and Rookewood, who appeared to
be of himself a man of tender and good affections, apprehensiue of other men's
sufferings, and inwardly touched with natural hate of the evil intended, yet
all these were so hardened by their subtle and satanicall Guides, under color
of the Roman Catholic good, and the merit of the work, as they shut the
eyes of Nature against Grace, and obstinatly, and desperately resolved to pursue
the bloody plot to the uttermost, though the innocent suffered with such as
they judged nocent, yea-though that blow had given an end to the honor of our
Nation. Whereas upon the contrary part, our clemency and Christian charity
therein appeared, who fell not upon them in fury and rage to root them up,
when the occasion would have given countenance to such a reueng, nor importuned
our Superiors to extend the punishment answerable to the crime, but wept to
consider the scandal of our Countrymen, and thought it enough, that some few
of the chief Malefactors suffered a death appointed ordinarily for Traitors,
without the exact invention of any new torture proportionable and suitable to
the merit of their cause; when I am fully persuaded, had it been possible,
the Devil could have made our Religion guilty of such a villainous attempt, in
any place where they had been Masters, as we were here, it would have cost us
a general Massacre, and all Nations would have risen up against us, and expeld
us their Dominions, as persons unworthy to live in the World, or to breath the
common Air with bruit Beasts, much less with Christians. For never could
Hellish villainy before cause the Name of Christ be so blasted and blasphemed
as it might be now through the evil occasion of these Antichristians. Never
could that be thought the true Religion, which dig'd so deep for a false
foundation, and took so much help from Hell to advance it.

Notwithstanding, it may be feared through our remissness, not searching the
festered sore to the bottom, or through our too tender pity (for they will
not call it mercy, and Christian charity, though Rookewood alone had the
grace to acknowledge, that as their Act was without example, so his Majesty's
mercy in proceeding against them, the Actors only, was without president)
some of this Spiritual generation, may (as Cicero said of Cateline) creep
into the Senate House again, the place they would have blown up, to fire the
Commonwealth by Faction, whom their former trains of grosser Treason could not
blow up. For if the Lord in justice should so deal with us, and permit this to
be done, we had no more to say for our selves, then the Isralites to the
Prophet, 1 Kings 20. 42. Especially when men thus affected for point of Faith
(I speak not of their honors) are admitted into this high place of Council,
which by Justice might be that against them, as long as they continue of that
Religion, as the Sanctuary was against the Moabites, though Conuerts, for ten
generations, and against the Edomites, and Egyptians, unto the third
generation, Deuteronomy. 23. 3. It is dangerous having such blood in the Body of the
State, though in the extremest parts, but to have it in the heart and bosom,
nay, about the head, to hear, and see all, and to have a hand in the highest
and most seacret Council, and in compounding the fundamental Acts of State,
is so dangerous in my poor judgment, as it makes me say in this respect also,
If we do not repent, we are like all likewise to perisp.

What all perish with Massacres, as the Galileans did? Yes undoubtedly, except
we think the young Wolves not so cruel and bloody as their Syres, or that
they account us less Sinners, and less Heretics, then they thought the
Waldenses, and the Albigenses, and our innocent neighbors in France, Bohemia,
the Palatinate, Hassia, and other parts of Germany, and through the Christian
World to be, whom they have so served successively upon all advantages
presented or obtained. Assuredly if a Lamb be a Lamb still, a Wolf will be a
Wolf still, and their Spiritual guides (whom they follow with blind
obedience) both train them up, and lead them on in blood. You shall not hear
of a Minister in the Head of the Troops, pressing to enter a Work, or to
charge the Enemy with an ambitious and eager forwardness; well may they
inform, animate, and rectify the consciences and courages of such as go on,
and assist them by prayers, but they are no open Actors in blood; whereas it is
ordinary, as it appeared at Ostend, and all other places, for Friars, Priests,
and Jesuits armed with holy water, and a red Cross on their Shoulders, to
lead on the Troops most furiously and desperately, and to mount the place
which they are appointed to enter, before all others, except they be commanded
back by Leaden Bulls, or Iron Arguments. And what they do publicly, they
fail not privately much more to inculcate, thereby to breed a detestation of
our persons and profession together, and to beget and cherish an
unreconcilable hate betwixt us. For they know if Kings, Princes, and People,
recover their wits, and become sober, the kingdom of Antichrist must down at
an instant, and the deeper they have drunk of her dregs, the more they will
hate her, and their own former drunkenness.

Our blessed Savior proceeds farther, in the fourth Verse, to relate that
which befell to eighteen persons, who were buried under the ruins of a Tower,
being part of the Wall of Jerusalem, adjoining to the Fish-poole of Siloah,
whereof mention is made in the third Chapter of Nehemiah, the fifteenth Verse,
demanding of his Auditorie, whether or no they thought them greater sinners
then all other men that dwelt at Jerusalem, subioining his infallible
judgment, saying, as before I tell you, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish.

The first example proceeded from the tyranny and malicious cruelty of man,
under the colorable pretense of Justice: but this latter example is of the
nature of those, whom Ignorance, and Atheism call and account Accidents. An
accident in the judgment of this Dwarf Ignorance, and this Monster Atheism,
is such a thing whereof God takes no Of this mind was that Papist who being
told by a Reformed Catholic that the falling of Black-Friars House upon the
heads of their Idolatrous Priest and people, was a just Judgment of God: made
answer, That he protested he thought God did not know of it. Which speech of
his proceeded out of Ignorance, and then it was pitiful, or out of Atheism,
and then it was damnable. If God did not know of it, they might after be in
Hell also without his notice. (from whence there is no redemption.) Their
Saints and tutelar Angels therefore were very negligent in their cures and
charges, not to give information sooner: And therefore an old wife (one of
their company) being delivered from the danger, protested, she would never
pray to Saint or Angel more, nor before a Crucifixe or other Image, but only to
her Savior and Redeemer, who was able alone to hear and help of himself.
Ps. ^5. 1, 2. Es. 63. 16.
notice; a motion which proceeds without the assistance of the First mouer; an
action which is produced by a Secundarie cause, without a Primarie; or by a
cause caused, without a cause causing; neither of all which can be conceived by
any man that conceiues and grants that there is a God, and that that God rules
all the affairs of the World by an ouer-mastering power, and by his wisdom
and providence guides and orders all actions and passions, even the death of a
Sparrow, the loss of a hair from our heads (as our Savior says Math. 10.
30. 31.) that is, minutissima and maxima, the least and greatest passages, to
his glory.

There are others who speak of Accident right and properly, which is only so
in regard of us. So the Philopher says, Casus est inopinatae rej euentus,
Chance or accident is the sudden event of a thing unlooked for. Arist. Lib. 2.
Phys. And therefore the same man says in his Metaphys. Lib. 1. Imperitia casum
fecit, Want of knowledge has made Chance. S. Hierome says, in his Commentary
upon the Prophet Hieremie, Cap 12. Ver. 4. Quicquid in mundo vel bonorum
accidit vel malorum, non absque prouidentia, and fortuito casu sed iudicio Dej.
Whatsoever good or evil falls out in the world, does not happen by chance or
fortune, but by the providence, and judgment of God. Lament. Ierem. 3. 37. Who
is he then that says and it comes to pass, and the Lord commands it not?
Quia Deus voluit eos contingenter euenire, contingentes causas ad eos
praeparauit. Th. Acquin. S. 1. Q. 19 Ar. 8.

In the first example then, Man was used as an Instrument of punishment, in the
second senseless Stones. Gods hand of Justice (as our Savior says whilst he
threatens the like to all except they repent) was in both, and both fulfilled
Gods work alike; The last, namely, the Stones and materials of the Wall, not
knowing what they did; The first, namely, Pilate and his Soldiers intending no
more then the Stones, the performance of Gods will, or any such thing as the
Lord effected, but pursuing blindly their own plots and politic pretenses
Act. 3. 17 18. Act. 4. 27 28.
of Justice, did so effect Gods seacret will, for the punishing of a
thanklesse, headstrong, and rebellious generation, who began to forget what the
Lord had formerly done for them in many deliverances from Egypt, and the Red
Sea, even as we have forgot Eighty eight, the Massacre in France, and the
Powder Plot.

To bring this then to applycation, We see what lately has befalne the
Sinogogue of Satan, the Temple of The dolful Euen-song in the Black-Fryars.
Baal, the Image of Dagon, the Sons of Antichrist, the Children of Babylon,
who sought to bring all the Roman Idolatries, and Whorish Superstitions into
the Land: how the Lord overwhelmed them, and brought upon them sudden
destruction, as he had long before threatened in his Word.

Which Judgment I relate not as a man that took delight in blood, or in the
miserable and lamentable loss of my own dear Countrymen, or as one that hated
the persons of any that then dyed, or now so believe and live to dye worse,
except they repent: nay rather, I pity and bemone their loss, and that
obstinate blindness which led them into that Pitfall; yea though I cannot
absolutely with the Apostle desire to be wholly cut off for my brethrens Romans 9.
sake, yet I could wish my body so bruised, even to the loss of this life for
the salvation of their Souls that survive. As for those that are dead I judge
them not, I excuse them not, they stood or fell to their own Master, their
sentence is sealed up in seacret from us, till the general Judgment, when all
things shall be opened, nor dare I break open the Seal, to pass my sentence
with them or against them, till that time come when the day 1 Cor. 3.
shall declare it. But what I write is for the benefit of the living, and to
celebrate the Judgments of God, which none ought to conceal, nor for any
respect whatsoever, to cloak, cover, extenuate, or hide from the eyes of men,
since that is a notorious Sacrilege, to steal the honor of the everliving
God, for dead Idols and dead men, of which he is jealous, and for which theft
he will hold no man guiltless.

I would therefore advise in Christian duty, love, and charity, all
Magistrates supreme and subordinate, and all people whether interested in the
cause and loss or otherwise, to give glory to God by a free and open
publication of this great work of his Justice; lest Prince, Priest, and People
pay for the concealment by some severe and strickt Inquisition. For my own
part, these few things that I hear for truths confirmed, again and again by
eye witnessesse, I shall reveal to Gods glory and the Churches edification,
together with such simple observations as I am directed to make upon them for
the use of all men. For I believe this Judgment is the more remarkable, being
done upon them who stand upon Miracles, for the confirmation of their
falsehoods, and make every thing such, that may be wrested by wit for their
advantage, either touching our disasters or their own felicities. And I hope
even the most serious on both sides, who might otherwise judge my observations
rash and triuiall, sadly thinking upon this point, and withal considering and
well weighing that this befalls them at such time as they vainly hoped,
presumed, and proudly boasted of restautation, when they might rather expect a
Miracle from Antichrist, as an Omen of good luck, and would rather have fained
one (had not this cross come in their way) then wanted such a means to seduce
the people, and reestablish them in the common man's conceit, will not condemn
me altogether to be a trifler in my observations, but that some or all of them,
may profitably pass under the verdict of their severe censures. In assurance
whereof, I proceed to propound them, with such exhortations as our necessity
and this occasion give me life and courage to make, to my Superiors and Equals
upon our side and theirs.

First, Observe that the Roman Catholics (who are cunning in all their
courses) procured this House, and fitted it in all respects for their purpose;
when doubtless they suruaid the strength of the building and capacity of
every room. If the Law should take notice of their unlawful assembly (as
that was the least of their fears) then they had the French Ambassadors House
for a Cloak to which it was adjoining. Or if the People should rise (as this
was one of their assayes or trials before they durst appear to play in
public, to prove if all men were grown tame enough to be muzled and
hoodwinked, and whether they would start at holy Water, a Mass, a Procession,
or the like) then the Ambassadors House should be their Sanctuary, against
the force and rage of the people. And because it might be perilous to the
Spanish Ambassador to have the first publication at or about his House, who
has been the first and principal moouer to introduce or restore
Idoll-worship in this Island, to the general coffeehouse of the people,
therefore the French Ambassadors House must be chosen, not for the Papists
affection, but for ours, as less suspecting that Nation for all our ancient
enmities, then the Spanish for all their new friendship and high alliance hoped
for, which they proffred with one hand and snatched away with the other, as if
they had been too great for our Royal conjunction, when (I praise God) ours
was too good for their commixtion.

Thus the place is secured against man; but who can secure it against God? Not
the French or Spanish Ambassadors, though they have more power and privilege
in England to serve their Idols, then the Prince himself could have in Spain
to serve God. For though his Chaplains were sent thither to satisfy him and
us, yet might they say nothing (as we hear) when they came there, to satisfy
them.

Secondly, The time is obserueable; It was their fifth of November, wherein
they perished by anticipation, as they would have dealt with us before upon the
fifth of our November. Here is the difference, they fell down, as they would
have blown us up; and did alone feel the fury of that sudden confusion,
without stirring their Neighbors Houses, as they would have blown us up, with
the necessary ruin of diverse places adjoining. And this they suffered from
God, when from the King they had in their fond conceits and mistaken hopes,
obtained that, for which they would have made him and his, us and ours, so
miserably suffer without mercy. But we see though Pardons, and tollerations
pass freely at Rome, and in other places for politic respects, yet they are
not sure, till they be Sealed and Enrolled in Heaven.

Thirdly, Observe the Playhouse stands in that place unshaken, though too
often laden with sin-full multitudes of all sorts, sexes, and sects; because it
professes it self to be no better then it is, a Playhouse; and perhaps some
Houses of Corporal Fornication stand there also, because for custom sake,
that they may have the more commings in, they desire to seem what they are,
Brothels: But this House which professes it self for Christ, when it is for
Antichrist, and plays with the Word and Sacraments in a most Anticke or Apish
fashion, even when it pretends to be most serious; and teaches men to commit
Spiritual Fornication under the show of Sanctity and Holiness; this must not
stand, but the Lord makes it a spectacle of his Judgment; as he made the
Beare-Garden long since, whilst they profaned the Sabbath day (a day at the
Creation ordained for peace and rest) in that beastly sport of cruelty betwixt
the Creatures, proceeding from Gods curse upon our Forefathers sin; which
sight should make Adam, Abell, and Seth, with their pious posterity, weep; as
it makes Caine, Lamech, Cham, Nimrod, and Esau, laugh, with all their Savage
and impious Seed and succession. These Houses therefore must not stand when
they touch upon the skirt of Religion, to profane and pollute the holy things
of God, whereof man is not so careful a keeper and zealous defender, as of his
own right and interest. It may perhaps not seem frivolous to some that I
mention here, what I have heard for truth, concerning an other Playhouse
called the Fortune, in which, repeating their Plays upon a Sabbath day in the
afternoon, at night following the House fell on fire and was consumed to
ashes. The Gallorie in the preaching place at White hall, which stood from the
days of King Edward to King James, must fall then under the Spanish
Ambassadors feet, when he was sent the second time to perfect what he had
before but rough drawn. I do not wonder that it fell then, having stood so
long; I rather wonder it fell not before, being oftentimes as heauely laden
(except with the sin of Idolatry) But that Gods providence must reserve it to
that instant, at that I wonder; and me thinks it told me the Spanish footing
was not so certain in this Land as he presumed, but that whilst his power did
tread down the preaching places of the Land, he might hap to tumble with them,
and by opposition give a happy occasion to reedifie their ruins more strongly.

Fourthly, Observe no Idols, Crucifixes, Crosses, Holy Water, Medals, Beads,
or any sacred Relic or Agnus Dei, whereof doubtless there was great
provision laid in, could preserve or protect from this blow. Let this open the
eyes of their superstitious and bewitched Customers, and abate the price and
esteem of such Romish and Antichristian Revel. 18 11.
merchandise, teaching wise men to distinguish betwixt toys, trash, and real
safeguards.

And here I make bold to demand, What became of those Wafer-cakes which the
Priest had before turned into gods (for doubtless some were there or in the
room under (which was the Massing place) reserved for the sick) What were all
of them brayned with the Timber and Brickbats, and did they perish with the
Priest and the rest of the people? O blind men, lift up your eyes and see your
own absurdities! Should I fear the ruins of Heaven, if he who sits at the
right Hand of God the Father stood by me, to support the Roof from his own
omnipotent and my impotent Head? Reply not ye blind who make others blind with
your sophisticating tongues, but pray to God for your selves, as I do for you,
that he would vouchsafe to give you grace to acknowledge the truth which you
cannot choose but see. When our Savior rose from the Grave, the Priests hired
the Soldiers to say, His Disciples came and stole away his body Math. 28 11.
whilst they slept. Had he not risen alone, I should never have believed he
could raise me; now I can neither doubt his power or will; Saint Thomas his
seeing and feeling has resolved me. Hire you some Soldiers (if Soldiers will
be such hirelings, as doubtless you may fit your selves with some zealous
Reformados upon promise of absolution; or otherwise make shift with your own
equiuocating Locusts, armed at all points for the purpose with mental
reseruations and dispensations) to say, they saw the consecrated Cakes rise
alone from under the ruins, or I shall never believe your Transubstantiation,
nor can you persuade any to retain your erroneous opinion any longer, or
receive it farther; except such as you with the Cup of Abominations have
transubstantiated or transformed Spiritually (as Medea and Circes did their
Guests Corporally) into such Don Quixshots or Gorgantuahs as would eat up their
God Almighty at a mouthfull, or in their melancholy mood imagine themselves
to be such Monsters as could do it.

The Lord complains against his People that they robbed him of Tithes and
Offerings: But you have robbed Mal. 3. 8.
our Savior of Head, Heart, Hands, Feet, of a true Body, of his Humanity.

Fifthly, Observe how after the Fact, either those that were reserved or their
obstinate friends, clouded the work of God, and out of malice cast the
aspertion upon man, to their own disadvantage; as if God, who would not suffer
them to blow us up in Parliament, would yet fuffer us to pull their Baalitish
Temple over their ears in time of their devotions.

So in the Powder Treason it was their plot and purpose after the strocke, to
lay the fault (if Gods mercy had not prevented their malice) upon the Puritans
(as now they have gotten a trick for their advantage, to nickname even good
Protestants) and accordingly they had drawn a Proclamation to that effect
ready for the Press. Wherein they charged the Puritans (meaning hereby, all
honest men that are not like them) with that odious and execrable fact; and
with this draught they were found, and taken in the manner, beyond retracting,
or shadowing.

O what honest man can be safe among these Slanderers? The poison of Aspes is
under their lips. If they entend mischief, the Innocent man must suffer for
it; if they suffer from God himself, his Servants shall be blamed for it.

But they speak truer then they are aware (as Caiphas prophesied) It is true,
it is true, O Antichristians, those poor Christians vnpind and sawed asunder
the beam which vpheld the flore whereon you stood, from whence you fell.

But they did it only with Hands lifted up to Heaven, which will vnpin the
principals of Babylon also, and with Sampson, pluck the House over the
Phelistines, in the midst of their mirth, whilst they are rejoicing and
triumphing before their Idols.

Sixthly, Observe the silence of all men at that time and in that action,
prouokes God to speak and to do. Peter himself had here need of Paul to
reprove him to his face, for he was worthy to be blamed; yea, some of those
that ought to have honored their profession with Martyrdom, before they had
given silent way to the encrochments of Antichrist, show their readiness to
hold their peace if they should be requested, and say it is their Ps. 39.
duty to do so. Holy David, a man after Gods own heart, made once a promise
to do the like, but for all that when it came to the point, he would not, he
could not hold his word against God and his Truth, but we see his zealous heart
was moved to heat, and he spoke with his tongue. Silence in Gods cause was an
iniunction laid upon Peter and John by the Council, who answered, Act. 4. 19
20.
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more then unto
God judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard. It was Saint Paul's case, whose heart was so stird when he came to
Athens and saw that learned City devoted to Idolatry, as he could not hold his
peace, though his person was thereby in peril. That History betwixt
Theodosius the Emperor and Ambrose Bishop of Millan, makes more for the virtue
of the Emperor, then for the valor of the Bishop. It is no great matter to
say what the Bishop did, since he for so doing may be censured to be satis
audax, but what the Emperor did and said of the Bishop, when his anger was
over, is to the purpose. For as Sozomen records. Soz. l. 5. c. 18.
Theodosius dixit se solum Ambrosium dignum Episcopi nomine nosse. Theodosius
said he knew one Ambrose only worthy the name of a Bishop. And this was for
speaking truth, and discharging his conscience, though herein he plainly
condemned an action of the Emperors, and doubtless crossed his present desires.

Let no man cloak his luke-warmnesse or personal cowardice under the pretense
of modesty, patience, discretion, moderation, prudence, or temperance. He that
has a Soul hoping to be saved, will speak for his Savior. Shall there be so
many offer themselves to plead for Baal, because he cannot plead for himself,
whilst few or Iudh. 6. 31.
none pleads for Christ, who pleads continually for us all? No, no, Let all men
assure themselves if they will not speak because they will not be counted
factious, furious, and hotheaded fellows, but discreet, moderate, and prudent
persons, fit for preferment and employment, that yet God can raise up Stones to
do that which they should, but will not, or dare not; neither shall they
escape the Hand of God, but he will find them out, and punish their falsehood
and faintness in his cause.

Proceed to express your Christian courages, therefore O Princes, Nobles,
Priests, People! Behold God goes before you, Who will not follow? Remember what
Nehemiah said to that false Prophet, that hireling, who sought to discourage
him, that his example might discourage all the rest, Should such a man as I am
fear? Surely Neh. 6. 11.
it does not become his Place, his Profession. What could a Slave, a Coward, a
Traitor do more? O let it never be recorded of you, to your perpetual
dishonours, as it was of the ignoble Nobles amongst the Tekoites. Next Neh. 3. 5
unto them the Tekoites repaired, but their Nobles put not their necks to the
work of the Lord. And what I speak to Ephraim, I likewise speak to Manasses.
England and Scotland should be united in this. They both look for examples
from each other, both should be examples to each other; England as the richer
in regard of the world, Scotland as being no less rich in Spiritual treasure;
England as the stronger, Scotland as the freer; England as being more engaged
for the Royal Presence, Scotland as being more enterested in the Royal birth
and education; England as being nearest the danger, Scotland as being too near
to avoid it.

O all ye Peers, Priests, and People join with your Royal Head, and remember
what he has often said, written, and vowed, and caused you to say, write, and
vow, whilst he has proved by his learned Labors that the Pope is Antichrist.
The truth is too strong to be repulced or retorted, since Bellarmine, that
Romish Goliath, with all his assistants, could not wrest the Staff and Sling
out of his hand with Arguments. Nor is our David grown so 2 Samuel 21
faint now with age, that he must go no more to battle, for fear of
quenching the Light of Israel.

You that have fought Gods battles with him against the red Dragon, the seven
headed Beast, and her whorish rider, with all their army, and can tell how
bravely he has borne himself, and what blows he has dealt with his tongue
and with his pen. It was Saul and not David that fell upon his own Sword. If
the Pope be not Antichrist, why has he written so? It is Gods Word and his
Ier. 20. 7
Pen that has deceived us. If the Pope be Antichrist, then to make a Covenant
with him, or to trade with him in Spiritual Merchandise, is to make a Covenant
with Es. 28. 15
Death, Satan, and Hell, against God, his Son, and his Church.

To be a Mahumetane is to be an open professed enemy, which is in comparison
honorable; but to be an Antichristian, is to be a Traitor, For Christ in
show, against him in deed, which is superlatiuely detestable. To be a Judas,
though one of Christ's Apostles, is worse then to be a Pilate, though a
condemner of Christ. Antichrist of all the enemies of the Church, is the most
perilous and most pernicious.

But what need all this? What cause have we to fear the reentrance of
Antichrist? What shall every shadow afright us?

I answer, We doubt not the sudden reentrance of Antichrist, but his slye
insinuation, and their wiles who pretend to work reconcilement, and say that
humor is too much stird upon both sides. We would not have conference with the
Serpent, nor cast an eye upon the forbidden Fruit, though never so beautiful.
Is it not a little Genesis 19. 20.
one? made way for a great offense. We are willed to come out of Mystical
Babylon, as out of Spiritual Sodom, not to look behind us as if we longed to
turn Apol. 18 4. and 11. 8.
back, nor to touch any unclean thing, but to flee the garment polluted with
the flesh. This purity becomes Virgins and Angels, who will not mix with
Spiritual Fornicators. Such Soul chaste Spirits shall only see the face of
the Bridegroom in glory. We fear to look of a Moabitish woman, lest she
prove a snare and a stumbling Number. 25
block to the Princes and People; or to take a favor from Antichrist, lest it
prove to our Church and State as Achans wedge to the Host of Israel. Judge. 7.


What hope of reconcilement is there, where the erring side holds it to be a
fundamental verity, that they cannot err. To abate, is to deny their
grounds, they know it, they have set down their rest upon it, and this alone
forces them to maintain shameless errors with an obstinate and womanish
will, having nothing to defend their nakedness, but these arguments that they
are old, and belong to an infallible Chair. For if they should confess in
one, all Babylon were overthrown.

The experience of Charles the Fifth, and Ferdinand his successor, mighty
Emperors, armed with all advantages which man can think upon, to procure
reformation and reconcilement, and studiously and constantly employing their
power and policy to that end, with great zeal and affection to the cause, and
fair probabilities to effect it, may notwithstanding in their bootelesse
endeauours resolve the World how vain a work it is to undertake or attempt
such an enterprise which God has reserved to himself to accomplish. It is an
easy work to draw us to them by corruption, but it is too hard a work for
man to draw them to us by reformation, which is a kind of regeneration. The
passages of the Council of Trent may instruct us sufficiently what to hope of
their reformation, except we long to be deluded; and for us to come on upon
their side, and take upon us the least mark of the Beast which we have cast
off, thereby to buy our peace, and to endeare our entertainment, is to wound our
own Consciences, and to sin with a high Hand against the Light of Knowledge.
And having thus swallowed one abomination (which God forbid) a reprobate sense
will make room for all, and men, by the just Judgment of God given over, will
begin to believe those lies in good earnest, which at first they heard and
repeated in jest.

Leave that great work therefore, to the Reconciler of Heaven and Earth, to
the Moderatour and Mediator betwixt God and Man, who will consume the Man of
Sin 2 These. 2
(by degrees, not altogether) with the Breath or Spirit of his Mouth (by the
powrefull preaching of the Word, and effectual working of the Spirit) and will
abolish and destroy him with the brightness of his coming; till when we shall
have Antichrist, though impotent, old, and in a consumption. Thus let us guard
our own, for it is probable God will no more use the temporal power or
policy of Princes in the total and final supplantation and eradication of
Antichrist, then he did use them in the first planting of the Gospel of
Christ. They are to be nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers, not generating and
natural Parents to the Church, that Christ may be all in all.

Consider this well ye moderate minded men, and show us a way how we may be
such politic Christians, as to please God and the Devil, Christ and
Antichrist together; 1 Kin. 18 21.
Or let us leave haulting, and declare our selves plainly for Christ by open
action as well as profession.

Therefore leaving that which is improbable, and perhaps, impossible, Let us
follow after charity, and pursue 1 Cor. 14 1.
that which is both possible and probable, that is, The uniting of the Reformed
Churches within themselves. And to this end consider what things they are that
keep us divided. Whether they be points of Doctrine, or points of Discipline.
Whether matters substantial and fundamental, or ceremonious and
circumstantiall. Whether of necessity and unalterable verity, or of
indifferency and variable conueniencie.

If of the first sort, then consider whether they may be reconciled by clearing
or removing some terms diversely used and understood, or by silencing some
peremptory expressions and absolute definitions, setting a modest bound to the
inquisition of curiosity and singularity in matters unsearchable.

Whether we may be accorded in the general heads, and the branches and
consequences left free for the exercise of every man's several gifts, so they
depart not from common unity, and give not public scandal by obstinate
opposition.

Whether this or some other way may be found of reconcilement.

If the questions be of the second sort, then whether the forms and
diversities of government may be left free to every Nation and Church, without
the breach of brotherly love and charity, and of the union and communion of
Saints.

Whether, although we judge it fit to hold those forms amongst our selves in
Great Britain, and to continue them, being settled, without alteration, yea,
to persuade them what we can upon others for vniformities sake; If it be
charitable to suffer other Christian Churches without (holding the same faith
with us) to be embroyled and exposed to ruin, thereby to settle them amongst
such as hold them not to be indifferent. And whether upon the other side it be
charity in them who are at liberty, to condemn us and all other Churches of
Antichristianisme, who use those forms and esteem them indifferent.

Whether it can be imagined that we will in France by Treaties, Articles, and
Arguments, or in the United Provinces by real assistance, or in the Palatinate
by chargeable Armies, deal so seriously and effectually for the upholding and
replanting of Religion, as long as these differences remain undetermined,
unsettled, unreconciled, as the Papists do for the planting of their
Superstition, or, as we would do if in all respects we were perfectly one.

And whether the Religion in France the United Provinces, and the Palatinate,
be not the same in substance with that in Great Britain, which we should not
do well therefore to discountenance and abandon for the outward form sake.

These points in the humility of my Soul, and as in the presence of God the
Searcher of the Heart, and the Judge of all men, and all actions, I present
with all fear and reverence to the eye and consideration of my Superiors, not
with any purpose to contend or saucely to censure the contrary resolutions of
such as God has placed over me in authority, or to give them the least
offense or distaste by propounding these things publicly, or as a man that
thought my self able to direct in these bottomless Depths, or to sail in
these Seas by my self and my own skill without Compass, where no Land can be
seen; but hoping hereby to give occasion, to men of place and ability, to
study the point, and to pursue it to purpose to a final resolution and
determination. And if these poor unworthy papers of mine shall ever have the
happiness to kiss his Majesty's hands, or the hand of any that may whisper a
plain truth into his Iuditious ear, then I humbly desire he may know (and
from my Soul, and the sincerity and simplicity of my Heart, I speak it)
that nothing could have moved me to write what I have done (lest thereby I
should offend his Majesty, whose wisdom has been pleased to run a
contrary course) but only that I feared to offend God by concealing this
truth from the ears of his Majesty, and the rest of his loyal Officers and
loving Subjects, which I am fully persuaded God put in my Heart to the end I
should utter it. And to encourage me and provoke me the more to this work, the
infirmity of this Season and of my body with it, are continual messengers
telling me I must make have, for I am not likely to stay long here, but I must
appear before his Tribunal, where Kings and Beggars Pr. 12. 2.
stand upon even terms, and where men shall answer, as well for the concealing
of truth, as for the venting of falsehood. The Pestilence also walks about the
Street, and enters every man's door at night or noonday without knocking;
This also makes me the bolder, as men that are in the heat of war, dare do
more then upon cold blood. But my hope is in the unspeakable mercy of God,
that he will persuade the Heart of his Majesty, and all others that shall
read this Treatise, that whatsoever is herein vtrered, proceeds from an
upright and good intention, thereby to help to unite the reformed Churches in
one, and to remove or qualify such differences as hold them divided, to the
great advantage of the enemy: Wherein if I have tatled to little purpose, or
perhaps a little too much, it is because I am able to do nothing but tattle;
but were I able to do more, I would do it, that our deuisions might not be
told in Gath, nor our nakedness published in the Streets of Askelon, to the
rejoicing of the public enemy.

For I know how much it concerns the Reformed Churches that they should be
united in one (if it be possible) that the humors of men might be mittigated,
and made in love with Peace, which is so much in their mouths.

And I know how much it concerns the prosperity of our Church and State, and
the peace and prosperity of all Reformed Churches, that England and Scotland
should first be perfectly united.

I know what advantage even in opinion, much more in action, the enemy takes
from our division; and I fear even some of those who pretend to be Chyturgions
to close the wounds, do make them wider upon purpose by pressing the Flesh too
hard. Force never did good, especially with fiery natures, but mollifying
Oils of interchange and abatement, may by kind conference close and
consolidate all differences.

And upon the other side I know how much those Spirits have disaduantaged the
cause, that have made their breath bellows only to blow up contention by
opposing Superior powers with violence, and dipping their pens in Gall and
Vinegar, have exasperated the humor without any other profit to the cause then
provoking of farther prosecution, where patience, submission, and expectance
might have qualified and allaid the heat.

In which regard I could wish that men howsoever forward and zealous that way,
would be wary how they stir up coals of contention by writing against Judah,
as if they writ against Egypt, lest they kindle a fire to the great hurt of
the Reformed Churches, which may waste that strength and Spirit within, that,
employed abroad, would waste and consume the foundation of Babylon. I specially
I wish this course were taken at this time, when his Majesty has been
graciously pleased to condescend to our weakness, and to secure our fears and
iealousies, by open protestation, that his whole intention is to procure and
effect the good of the Reformed Churches and Religion, in all his designs;
that he will never entertain Treaty to the contrary; and to resolve us of
this (a thing that he need not) has made a fearful imprecation against
himself and his posterity, in case he do otherwise. It is no more then reason
that we believe what we hear him say and swear, and show so much good manners
at least, as to meet him half way upon our knees, when he wooes and inuites us
to come; attending a while with silence and patience his Majesty's leisure and
pleasure, for the timely fulfilling and perfecting of these promises; which as
it is my resolution to do out of duty, so I wish it were the resolution of
all others; especially considering if ever we may have hope in outward means
for effecting amity and unity amongst the Reformed Churches (a thing so much
desired by all that know how to desire that which is good) we may expect it in
his Majesty's peaceable Reign, who is made by God an able instrument to this
end, being acquainted with all the controversies that trouble the Church, and
exercised in all the differences both concerning fundamental and
circumstantiall points, and armed with power, art, and argument beyond all
other princes, to accomplish this work, which would make him more famous,
being finished and compounded by his means, then if he had conquered the whole
world.

And now to conclude by returning to the Roman Catholics, I desire them that
they would not slightly pass by that Judgment of God executed upon their
Brethren in the Black-Fryars, but that they would lay it to heart, and confess
ingeniously it was neither Chance nor Accident that did it, but the Hand of
Gods power, which is in all actions, yea, in the overthrow of that house wherein
the children of Just Job feasted. Shall there be evil in a Amo. 3. 6
City, and the Lord has not done it? Who is he that says and it comes to
pass, and the Lord commands it not? Confess then your wisdoms had charmed
many wise and sensible men, but you could not charm senseless Stones. Man may
be mocked and deluded, God cannot. Submit your selves therefore to him, Kiss
the Son lest Ps. 2. 12
he be angry, and so ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little.

Acknowledge your Pope to be Antichrist, that Man 2 These. 2
of sin, that Son of perdition, that sits in the Temple of God as God (that
is dispensing, pardoning, absoluing, binding the conscience, making new
Articles of Faith, which none but God can do) exalting himself also above all
that is called God, and worshipped, that is, above Kings, Princes, and
Governors, Civil and Ecclesiastical, above Saints and Angels, whom he
appoints to be worshipped, and canonizeth or condemns at pleasure.

All those that write, and despute, and labor the point so eagerly about
personal and visible succession, thereby to retain you still in their
superstitious bonds, do but labor to prove the Pope to be Antichrist. For
proving a visible Temple of God at Rome, they prove a visible Antichrist to be
there. The Field was well known to be Math. 13
the Householders, wherein he first sowed Wheat, and the envious man after
sowed Tares. If it had belonged to the envious man, why should the Householder
or his Servants complain? Might not he sow what Grain he would in his own
Field? But it was not his Field, it belonged to the Householder, and therefore
his intrusion, to intermingle Seed for the spoiling of the whole crop, was an
effect of Envy.

The Doctrine of Christ and Antichrist is mingled in your Church, as the Tares
and Wheat both in one Field; do but distinguish that which is of God, and that
which is of man, and the controversy is cleared.

We confess you have saving Truth amongst you, but it is mingled with
all-condemning falsehood, as Apotheocaries mix poison and preservatives. And
therefore the rising of Antichristianisme in the Church, is called, A Mystery
of Iniquity, for the subtle and close creeping in of Error, and winding
about the Root of Truth, so that they seemed all one, and of one age. This
Mystery began to work even in the Apostles time, and good men perhaps, out of
good entention, were made Seeds-men against their wills, whilst one invented
one thing, another man another; one added this Ceremony thereby to entice the
people, another that to win the Heathens from a grosser Idolatry to a less, as
they thought; and thus doubtless if Error be examined it shall be found to be
very old, and much of it fathered upon none of the worst men; nay, much of it
will be found to be so ancient, as the time when it was brought in, and the
person who introduced it, will hardly be found; yet if this be compared with
the pure Wheat of the Word, which God by his Son, and the Ministry of his
Servants the Apostles of Christ, has sown in the Church, it will easily be
found to be Tares and trash of humane invention. Do but cast Mar. 5. 15.
out the Devil therefore, whose name is Legion or Multitude, and the man is
ours which is amongst you, and will sit quietly at Jesus Feet.

Acknowledge also your Rome, as it is the Seat and Sea of Antichrist, and the
Head City of your Church, to be Babylon; and as in the ruins of Shilo,
Jerusalem was Ier. 7. 12
taught to see her future misery, so in this shadow, behold what the Lord will
do (though perhaps mystically, as Rome is mystical Babylon) to the Sinagogue
of Satan, which you now style the Roman Catholic Church, when it shall be
fulfilled which the Spirit of God proclaims, Apocal. 18. 2. Babylon the great
is fallen, is fallen, etc. Not that I believe the City it self shall be ruined
and burnt, the Houses and Temples pulled down, and your Pope no more named; but
that I think the Truth shall be revealed to such as now sit in darkness and
in the shadow of death, and then Kingdoms, and Countries, and Churches, will
one after another reform themselves, and forsake the Doctrine of Devils, that
absurd Superstition and Idolatry, which you now zealously, out of a scornful
Ignorace, exercise, thinking you do therein God good service. This seems to
be Hieroms opinion upon these words, 2 These 2. 8. Quem Dominus D. Hieron. Com.
in Mich, C. 5.
interficier Spirituoris. Haec interfectio non abolitionem significat (^aith
he) This interf^^tion does no signify a total abolition, but a cessation of
evil life which they led before. Et destruet illustratione aduentus sui. And
shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. Nun quam autem destrueret,
si interfectio, abolitionem sonaret, cum iam esse cessasset.

But let us return to consider the words used by the Angel, Apocal. 18. 2.
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils,
and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful Bird; For all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the wrath of her
Fornication. (Mark the note of universality, whereof the Church of Rome so
much glories, All Nations; Mark also the Metaphor used to express beguiling
Error, Drunk; The most wise and learned man, may be overtaken and mistaken in
drink.) And the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication with her. (Mark
the Metaphor, doting Lust will do much.) And the Merchants of the Earth, are
waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. (Mark the Metaphor, for
covetousness and commodity will prevail very far, and make even good men
look through their fingers; but for bad men they will easily be persuaded to
prove such Merchants as Judas was, and to sell their Master Christ for pleasure
and profit.) Here is the strength of Wine, of Women, and of Wealth, or of the
King, joined 1 Esd. 3. 10, 11, 12
against the strength of Truth, yet at length, Magna est veritas and preualet;
Truth is strongest, and bears away the victory. Yet Truth must struggle for
the victory, her opposites are strong enough to strive, and will not be
conquered till we have fought under her Banner, and resisted unto blood. Heb.
12. 4.


Now after you have heard and considered this advisedly, then attend to that
which follows immediately after at the fourth Verse. And I heard another voice
from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my People (God has a People, God has a
number of Elect names, God has a Church in Babylon.) that ye be not partakers
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; For her sins have
reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. Reward her even as
she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: In the
Cup that she has filled, fill to her double. How much she has glorified her
self and lived deliciously (Mark; what she has assumed, challenged, and
arrogated to her self.) so much torment and sorrow give her: for she says in
her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see Es. 47. 8.
no sorrow. (Does any Church boast so but the Romish?) Therefore shall her
plagues come in one day, death, and mourning and famine, and she shall be
utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God, who judges her. Stronger
then all the Kings that would defend her. And do not say, or hear others
saying, that such as perished were greater or less sinners then the rest of
the Romish Idolators that survive (since we judge not their persons, but
opinions and actions) For except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

The Lord open your eyes that you may discover Antichrist in the midst of his
masking, and open your ears that you may hear Christ in the midst of the
Candlesticks, and turn your hearts from following the vanity and Idolatry of
those superstitious Fathers of your Flesh, that you may believe the Verity of
God the Father of your Souls, and so possess an eternal habitation with him
in Glory and Immortality.

Amen.
FINIS.

