THE HOLY BIBLE FAITHFVLLY TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH, OVT OF THE AVTHENTICAL
LATIN.

Diligently conferred with the Hebrew, Greek, and other Editions in diverse
languages.

With ARGVMENTS of the Books, and Chapters: ANNOTATIONS. TABLES: and other
helps, for better understanding of the text: for discovery of CORRVPTIONS in
some late translations: and for clearing CONTROVERSIES in Religion.

BY THE ENGLISH COLLEGE OF DOWAY.

Haurietis aquas in gaudio de fontibus Saluatoris.

Isaiae. 12. You shall draw waters in joy out of the Saviors fountains.

Printed at Doway by LAVRENCE KELLAM, at the sign of the holy Lamb.

M. DC. IX.

APPROBATIO.
NOs infrascripti, in alma Duacensi vniuersitate Sacrae Theologiae Doctores and
Professores, hanc Anglicanam Veteris Testamenti translationem, quam tres
diuersi eius nationis eruditissimi Theologi, non solum fidelem, sed propter
diuersa quae ei sunt adiuncta, valde vtilem fidei Catholicae propagandae ac
tuendae, and bonis moribus promouendis, sunt testati: quorum testimonia ipsorum
syngraphis munita vidimus; cuius item Translationis, and Annotationum auctores
nobis de fidei integritate, and eruditionis praestantia probe sunt noti: his
rebus adducti and nixi, fructuose euulgari posse censuimus. Duaci. 8.
Nouembris. 1609.

GVILIELMVS ESTIVS Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, and in Academia Duacensi
Professor. BARTHOLOMAEVS PETRVS Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, and in Vniuersitate
Duacensi Professor. GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theologiae Doctor, and eiusdem in
Academia Duacena Professor.


TO THE RIGHT VVELBELOVED ENGLISH READER GRACE AND GLORY IN JESUS CHRIST
EVERLASTING.
AT LAST through Gods goodness (most dearly beloved) we send you here the
greater part of the Old Testament: as long since you received the New;
faithfully translated into English. The residue is in hand to be finished: and
your desire thereof shall not now (God prospering our The cause of delay in
setting forth this English Bible.
intention) be long frustrate. As for the impediments, which hitherto have
hindered this work, they al proceeded (as many do know) of one general cause,
our poor estate in banishment. VVherin expecting better means, greatter
difficulties rather ensued. Nevertheless you will hereby the more perceive our
fervent good will, ever to serve you, in that we have brought forth this Tome,
in these hardest times, of above forty years, since this College was most
happily begune. Wherefore we nothing doubt, but you Anno. 1568.
our dearest, for whom we have dedicated our lives, will both pardon the long
delay, which we could not well prevent, and accept now this fruict of our
labors, with like good affection, as we acknowledge them due, and offer the
same unto you.

If any demand, why it is now allowed to have the holy Why and how it is
allowed to have holy Scriptures in vulgar tongues.
Scriptures in vulgar tongues, which generally is not permitted, but in the
three sacred only: for further declaration of this, and other like points we
remite you to the Preface, before the New Testament. Only here, as by an
Epitome, we shall repete the sum of al, that is there more largely discussed.
To this first question therefore we answer, that both just reason, and highest
authority of the Church, judge it not absolutely necessary, nor always
convenient, that Scriptures being hard are not to be read of al.
holy Scriptures should be in vulgar tongues. For being as they are, hard to
be understood, even by the learned, reason does dictate to reasonable men, that
they were not written, nor ordained to be read indifferently of al men.
Experience also teaches, that through ignorance, joined often with Many take
harm by reading holi^ Scriptures.
pride and presumption, many reading Scriptures have erred grossly, by
misunderstanding Gods word. Which though it be most pure in it self, yet the
sense being adulterated lib. de Prescrip.
is as perilous (says Tertullian) as the style corrupted. S. Ambrose
observes: that where the text is true, the Arrians interpretation lib. 2, ad
Gratian. c. 1. Tract. 18 in Joan.
has errors. S. Augustine also teaches, that here sies and perverse doctrines
entangling souls, and throvving them down headlong into the depth, do not
otherwise spring up, but when good (or true) Scriptures are not well (and
truly) understood, and when that which in them is not well understood, is
also rashly and boldly avouched. For the same cause, S. Ierom utterly
disallowed, Epist. 103. c. 6.
that al sorts of men and women, old and young, presumed to read: and talk of
the Scriptures: whereas no articene, no tradsman dare presume to teach any
faculty, which he has not first learned. Seeing therefore that dangers, and
hurtes happen in many, the careful chief Pastores in Gods Church, have always
Reading. of Scriptures moderated.
moderated the reading of holy Scriptures, according to persons, times, and
other circumstances; prohibiting some, and permitting some, to have and read
them, in their mother tongue. So S. Crysostom translated the Psalms and some
other parts of holy Scriptures for the Armenians, Scriptures translated into
diverse tongues.
when he was there in banishment. The Slauonians Bibl. Sanct. lib. 4.
and Goths say they have the Bible in their languages. It was translated into
Italian by an Archbishop of Genua. Into French in the time of king Charles the
fifth: especially because the waldensian heretics had corruptly translated it,
to maintain their errors. We had some parts in English Lib. 1. Hist. c. 47
Linvvod lib. 1.
translated by Venerable Bede: as Malmesburie witnesses. And Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canturburie in a Council holden at Oxford, straictly ordained,
that no heretical translation set forth by wicliffe, and his accomplices, nor
any other vulgar Edition should be suffered, til it were approved by the
Ordinary of the Diocese: alleging S. leroms judgment of the difficulty and
danger in translating holy Scriptures out of one tongue into an other. And
therefore it must needs be much more dangerous, when ignorant people read also
corrupted translations. Now since Luther, and his folowers have pretended, that
the Catholic A calumnious suggestion of Lutheranes.
Roman faith and doctrine, should be contrary to Gods written word, and that
the Scriptures were not suffered in vulgar languages, lest the people should
see the truth, and vvithal these new masters corruptly turning the Scriptures
into diverse tongues, as might best serve their own opinions: against this
false suggestion, and practice, Catholic Pastores have, for one especial
remedy, set forth true and sincere Translations in most languages of the Latin
Church. But so, that people must read them with license of their spiritual
superior, as in former times they were in like sort limited. Such also of the
Laity, yea and of the meaner learned Clergy, as were permitted to read holy
Scriptures, did not presume to interpret hard places, nor high Mysteries, much
less to dispute and contend, but leaving the discussion thereof to the more
learned, searched rather, What part of Scriptures be most convenient for vulgar
readers.
and noted the godly and imitable examples of good life, and so learned more
humility, obedience, hatred of sin, fear of God, zele of Religion, and
other virtues. And thus holy Scriptures may be rightly used in any tongue, to
teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of ^ Tim 3.
God may be perfect, and (as S. Paul adds) instructed to every good work,
when men labor rather to be doers of Gods ^ac. 1.
will and word, then readers or hearers only, deceiving themselves.

But here an other question may be proposed: Why we Why we translate the old
Latin text.
translate the Latin text, rather then the Hebrew, or Greek, which Protestants
prefer, as the fountain tongues, wherein holy Scriptures were first written?
To this we answer, that if in deed those first pure Editions were now More pure
then the Hebrew or Greek now extant.
extant, or if such as be extant, were more pure then the Latin, we would also
prefer such fountains before the rivers, in whatsoever they should be found
to disagree. But the ancient best learned Fathers, and Doctors of the Church,
Tertullia^ li. 5. cont Marcion S. Ambrose. li. 3 deSpirit. San. c. 11 S. Ieron:
li. 1. con. Iouinia^.
do much complain, and testify to us, that both the Hebrew and Greek Editions
are foully corrupted by Jews, and Heretics, since the Latin was truly
translated out of them, whiles they were more pure. And that the same Latin
has been far better conserved from corruptions. So that the old Vulgate
Latin Edition has been preferred, and used for most authentical above a
thousand and three hundred years. For by this very term S. Ierom calls
that Version the vulgate or common, which he conferred with in 49. Isaiae.
the Hebrew of the old Testament, and with the Greek of the New; which he also
purged from faults committed by writers, rather amending then translating it.
Though in li. 20. c. 24 mora. Epist. dedicat. ad Leandr. li. 2. Doct Christ. c.
14. lib. 6. Etymol. c. 5. and li. 1 de Divine offic. c. 12.
regard of this amending, S. Gregory calls it the new versio^ of S. Ierom:
who nevertheless in an other place calls the self same, the old Latin Edition,
judging it most worthy to be followed. S. Augustine calls it the Italian. S.
Isidorus witnesses Received by all Churches.
that S. Ierom; version was received and approved by all Christian Churches.
Sophronius also a most learned man, Turned into Greek.
seeing S. Ieroms Edition so much esteemed, not only of the Latins, but also of
the Grecians, turned the Psalter and Prophets, out of the same Latin into
Greek. Of latter times what shall we need to recite other most learned men? S.
Bid S. Anselme, S. Bernard, S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, and the rest? Who al
uniformly allege this only text as authentical. In so much that al other Latin
Editions, which S. Ierom Prefat. in Iosue.
says were in his time almost innumerable, are as it were fallen out of al
Divines hands, and grown out of credit Al others grown out of use. S. Ierom
excelled al other Doctors in translating and expounding holy Scriptures.
and use. If moreover we consider S. Ieroms lerning, p^etie, diligence, and
sincerity, together with the commodities he had of best copies, in all
languages then extant, and of other learned men, with whom he conferred: and if
we so co^are the same with the best means that has been since, surely no man
of indifferent judgment, will match any other Edition with S. Ieroms: but
easily acknowledge with the whole Church Gods particular providence in this
great Doctor, as well for expounding, as most especialy for the His Edition free
from. partiality.
true text and Edition of Holy Scriptures. Neither do we flee unto this old
Latin text, for more advantage. For besides that it is free from partiality,
as being most ancient of al Latin copies, and long before the particular
Controversies of these days began; the Hebrew also and the Greek when they
are truly translated, yea and Erasmus his Latin, in sundry places, prove more
plainly the Catholic Roman Preferred before al other Editions by Beza.
doctrine, then this which we rely upon. So that Luc. 22. v. 20. Prefat. Noui.
Testam. Anno. 1556. Luc. 1. v. 1.
Beza and his folowers take also exception against the Greek, when Catholics
allege it against them. Yea the same Beza prefers the old Latin Version
before al others, and freely testifies, that the old Interpreter translated
religiously. What then do our countriemen, that refuse this None yet in
England allowed for sufficient.
Latin, but deprive themselves of the best, and yet all this while, have set
forth none, that is allowed by all Protestants, for good or sufficient.

How well this is done the learned may judge, when by mature conference, they
shall have made trial thereof. And if What is done in this Edition
any thing be mistaken, we will (as still we promise) gladly Preface before the
new Testam.
correct it. Those that translated it about thirty years since, were well
known to the world, to have been excellent in the tongues, sincere men, and
great Divines. Only one Diverse readinges resolved upon, and none leift in the
margent.
thing we have done touching the text, whereof we are especially to give
notice. That whereas heretofore in the best Latin Editions, there remained
many places differing in words, some also in sense, as in long process of
time, the writers erred in their copies; now lately by the care and diligence
of the Church, those diverse readings were maturely, and iuditiously examined,
and conferred with sundry the best written and printed books, and so resolved
upon, that al which before were leift in the margent, are either restored into
the text, or else omitted; so that now none such remain in the margent. For
which cause, we have again conferred this English translation, and conformed
They touched not present controversies.
it to the most perfect Latin Edition. Where yet by the way we must give the
vulgar reader to understand, that very few or none of the former varieties,
touched Controversies of this time. So that this Recognition is no way
suspicious of partialtie, but is merely done for the more secure conservation
of the true text; and more ease, and satisfaction of such, as otherwise should
have remained more doubtful.

Now for the strictnes observed in translating some Why some words are not
translated into vulgar English.
words, or rather the not translating of some, which is in more danger to be
disliked, we doubt not but the discrete learned reader, deeply weighing and
considering the importance of sacred words, and how easily the translatour may
miss the sense of the Holy Ghost, will hold that which is here done for
reasonable and necessary. We have also the example of the Latin, and Greek,
where some words Some Hebrew words not translated into Latin, nor Greek.
are not translated, but left in Hebrew, as they were first spoken and written;
which seeing they could not, or were not convenient to be translated into Latin
or Greek, how much less could they, or was it reason to turn them into
English? S. Augustine also yeldeth a reason, exemplifying in the li 2 Doct.
Christ. cap. 11.
words Amen and Alleluia, for the more sacred authority thereof. More
authority in sacred tongues.
which doubtless is the cause why some names of solemn Feasts, Sacrifices, and
other holy things are reserved in sacred tongues, Hebrew, Greek, or Latin.
Again for necessity, English not having a name, or sufficient term, we
either keep the word, as we find it, or only turn it to our English Some
words can not be turned into English:
termination, because it would otherwise require many words in English, to
signify one word of an other tongue. In which cases, we commonly put the
explication in the margent. Briefly our Apology is easy against English
Protestants; because they also reserve some words in Protestants leave some
words untranslated.
the original tongues, not translated into English: as Sabbath, Ephod,
Pentecost, Proselyte, and some others. The sense whereof is in deed as soon
learned, as if they were turned so nere as is possible into English. And why
then may we not say Prepuce, Phase or Pasch, Azimes, Breades of Proposition,
Holocaust, and the like? rather then as Protestants translate them:
Foreskinne, Passover, The feast of svvete breades, Show breades, Burnt
offerings: etc. By which terms, whether they be truly translated into English
or no, we will pass over. Sure it is an English man is still to seek, what they
mean, as if they remained in Hebrew, or Greek. It more imports, that nothing
be wittingly and falsely translated, for advantage of doctrine in matter of
faith. Wherein as we dare boldly avouch the sincerity of this Translation,
and that nothing is here either untruly, or obscurely done of purpose, in
favor of Catholic Roman Religion: so we can not but complain, and challenge
English Protestants, Corruptions in Protestants Translations of holy
Scriptures.
for corrupting the text, contrary to the Hebrew, and Greek, which they
profess to translate, for the more show, and mainteyning of their peculiar
opinions against Catholics. As is proved in the Discovery of manifold
corruptions. For example we shall put the reader in memory of one or two. Genesis
4. v. 7. whereas (God speaking to Cain) the Hebrew words in Grammatical
construction may be translated either thus: Unto thee also perteyneth the lust
THEREOF, and thou shall have dominion over IT: or thus; Also unto thee HIS
desire Of purpose against Catholic doctrine
shall be subject, and thou shall rule over HIM: though the cohere^ce of the
text requires the former, and in the Bibles printed 1552. and. 1577.
Protestants did so translate it: yet in the year 1579. and 1603. they
translate it the other way, Against* free will.
rather saying, that Abel was subject to Cain, and that Cain by Gods ordinance,
had dominion over his brother Abel, then that concupiscence or lust of sin is
subject to man's will, or that man has power of free will, to resist (by Gods
grace) tentation of sin. But as we hear in a new Edition (which we have not
yet seen) they translate it almost as in the Against Melchisedechs sacrifice.
first in like sort Genesis 14. v. 18. The Hebrew particle VAV, which S. Ierom,
and al Antiquity translated ENIM (FOR) Protestants will by no means admit
it, because (besides other arguments) we prove thereby Melchisedechs Sacrifice.
And yet themselves translate the same, as S. Ierom does, Genesis 20. v. 3. saying:
FOR she is a man's wife. etc. And against holy Images.
Again Genesis 31. v. 19. the English Bibles. 1552. and 1577. translate
Theraphim, IMAGES. Which the Edition of 1603* correcting, translateth IDOLS.
And the marginal Annotation well proves, that it ought to be so translated.

With this then we will conclude most dear (we speak This Edition dedicated
to all that understand English.
to you al, that understand our tongue, whether you be of contrary opinions in
faith, or of mundane fear participate with an other Congregation; or profess
with us the same Catholic Religion) to you al we present this work: daily
beseching God Almighty, the Divine Wisdoms, Eternal Goodness, to create,
illuminate, and replenish your spirits, with his Grace, that you may attain
eternal Glory. Every one in his measure, in those many Mansions, prepared
and promised by our Savior in his Fathers house. Not only to those which first
received, and followed his Divine doctrine, but to all that should afterward
believe in him, and keep the same precepts. For there is one God, one also
Mediator of God and men: Man Christ Jesus. Who gave himself a Redemption for all. VVherby appears his will, that al should be saved. Why then are not al
saved? The Apostle adds: that they must first come to the knowledge Christ
redeemed al, but al are not saved.
of the truth. Because without faith it is impossible to please God. This
ground work therefore of our creation in Christ True faith first necessary.
by true faith, S. Paul labored most seriously by word and writing, to
establish in the hearts of al men. In this he confirmed the Romans by his
Epistle, commending their faith, as already received, and renowned in the whole
world. He preached the same faith to many Nations. Amongst others to the
learned Athenians. Where it seemed to some, as absurd, as strange; in so much
that they scornfully called him avvord-sovver, and Preacher of new gods. But S.
Augustine Act. 17. v. 18. Ser. 42. de Sanct.
allows the term for good, which was reprochfully spoken of the ignorant.
And so distinguishing between Reapers, and Sovvers in Gods Church, he teaches,
that The twelve Apostles were first Reapers, before they were Sowers* S. Paul
at first a Sower, or Seminary Apostle.
whereas the other Apostles reaped in the Jews, that which their Patriarchs
and Prophets had sown; S. Paul sowed the seed of Christian Religion in the
Gentiles. And so in respect of the Israelites, to whom they were first sent,
calls the other Apostles Messores, Reapers, and S. Paul, being specially sent
to the Gentiles, Seminatorem a Sour, or Seminary Apostle. Which two sorts
of Gods workmen are still in the Church, with distinct offices of Pastoral
cures, and Apostolical missions; the one for perpetual government of Pastoral
cures and Apostolical missions.
Catholic countries: the other for conversion of such, as either have not
received Christian Religion, or are relapsed. As at this time in our country,
for the diverse sorts of pretended religions, these diverse spiritual works are
necessary, to teach and feed al Britan people. Because some in error of
opinions preach an other Gospel, whereas in verity New doctrine is falsely
called the Gospel.
there is no other Gospel. They preach in deed new doctrines, S. Aug. de v^^lit
creed 1. c. Mat. 15.
which can not save. Others follow them believing falsehood. But when the blind
lead the blind (not the one The seduced, and externally conformable are
punished with the authors of iniquity*
only, but) both fall into the ditch. Others conform themselves, in external
show, fearing them that can punish, and kill the body. But our Lord vvil bring
such as decline into (unjust) Psalmo. 124.
obligations, with them that work iniquity. The Relics and small flock of
Catholics in our country, have great sadness, and sorrow of heart; not so much
for our own affliction, for that is comfortable, but for you our brethren, and
kinsemen in flesh and blood. VVishing with our own temporal damage whatsoever,
your salvation. Now -. Cor. 6.
is the acceptable time, now are the days of salvation, the Grace in the new
Testament more abundant then in the old.
time of Grace by Christ, whose days many Kings and Prophets desired to
see: they saw them ( in spirit) and rejoiced. Luc. 10.
But we are made partakers of Christ, and his Mysteries; so that our selves
neglect not his heavenly riches: if we receive and keep the beginning of his
substance, firm unto the end; that is, the true Catholic faith; building
thereon good works by his grace; without which we can not think a good
thought, by which we can do al things necessary to salvation. But if we hold
not fast this ground, all the building fails. Or if confessing to know God in
words, we Tit. 1.
deny him in deeds, committing works of darkness; Both wicked works, and
omission of good works are damnable.
or omitting works of mercy, when we may do them to Mat. 25.
our distressed neighbors; brifly if we have not charity, the 1. Cor. ^3.
form and perfection of al virtues, al is lost, and nothing worth. But if we
build upon firm ground, gold, silver, and precious stones, such building
shall abide, and make 1. Pet. 1.
our vocation sure by good works. as S. Peter speaks. These (says S. Paul)
are the heirs of God, coheyres of Innumerable saved by Christ.
Christ. Neither is the number of Christ's blessed children Apoc. 7.
counted, as of the Jews, an hundred forty four thousand, of every tribe
of Israel twelve thousand signed; but a most great multitude of Catholic
Christians, which no man can number, of al nations, and tribes, and peoples,
and tongues, standing before the throne of the lamb, clothed in white robes,
and palms ( of triumph) in their hands: having overcome tentations in the
virtuous race of good life. Much more those which also endure persecution for
They are more happy that suffer persecution for the truth.
the truths sake, shall receive most copious great rewards in heaven. For
albeit the passions of this time ( in themselves) are not Vvorthie, or
comparable in dignity.
condign, to the glory to come, that shall be reveled in us: yet our
tribulation, which presently is momentanie, 2. Cor. 4.
and light, works ( through grace) above measure excedingly an eternal weight
of glory. What shall we therefore meditate of the especial prerogative of
English Catholics at this time? For to you it is given for Christ, not only
that you believe in him, but also that you suffer for English Catholics most
happy in this age.
him. A little now, if you must be made pensive in diverse 1. Pet. 1.
tentations, that the probation of your faith, much more precious then gold,
which is proved by the fire, may be found unto praise, and glory, and honor,
in the revelation of Jesus Christ. Many of you have sustained the spoil of
your goods with joy, knowing that you have a better and a permanent substance.
Others have benne deprived of your children, fathers, mothers, brothers,
sisters, and nerest friends, in ready resolution also, some with sentence of
death, to lose your own lives. Others have had trial of reproaches, mockeries,
and stripes. Others of bands, prisons, and banishmentes. The innumerable
renowned late English Martyrs, and Confessors, whose happy souls The due
praise of Martyrs, and other glorious Saints excedeth mortal tongues.
for confessing true faith before men, are now most glorious in heaven, we
pass here with silence; because their due praise, requiring longer discourse,
yea rather Angels, then English tongues, far surpasses the reach of our
conceiptes. And so we leave it to your devout meditation. They now secure for
themselves, and solicitous for us their dearest clientes, incessantly (we are
well assured) intercede before Christ's Divine Majesty, for our happy
consummation, with the conversion of our whole country. To you therefore
(dearest friends mortal) we direct this speech: admonishing ourselves and you,
in the Apostles words, that for so much as we have not yet resisted tentations
to (last) Patience necessary to the end of man's life.
blood (and death itself) patience is still necessary for us, that doing the
will of God, we may receive the promise. So we repine not in tribulation, but
ever love them that hate us, pitying their case, and rejoicing in our own.
For neither can we see during this life, how much good they Persecution
profitable.
do us; nor know how many of them shall be (as we heartily desire they al may
be) saved: our Lord and Savior having paid the same price by his death, for
them and for us. Love al therefore, pray for all. Do not lose your confidence,
which has a great remuneration. For yet a little, and a very little while, he
that is to come, will come, and he will not slack. Now the just lives by faith,
believing with Rom 10. Heb. 10.
heart to justice, and confessing with mouth to salvation. But Confession of
faith before men necessary to salvation.
he that withdraws himself shall not please Christ's soul. Attend to your
salvation, dearest countriemen. You that are far of, draw nere, put on
Christ. And you that are within Christ's fold, keep your standing, persevere in
him to the end. His grace dwell and remain in you, that glorious crowns may be
given you.

AMEN.
From the English College in Doway, the Octaues of AL SAINTS. 1609. The God
of patience and comfort give you to be of one mind, one toward another in
JESUS Christ; that of one mind, with one mouth you may glorify God.
THE SVMME AND PARTITION OF THE HOLY BIBLE.
With a brife note of the Canonical and Apochryphal Books.
By the uniform consent of al learned Divines, the holy Bible, S. Ierom.
Epist. ad Paulin. de omnib S. Scipt. libris. S. Aug. prefat in specul. li. 2.
dc doct christ. ca. 9. li. I. de Genesis co^tra Manich. ca. 4. li. de catechiz
rudib. c. 3. and 4. l. 2. qq. su per Exodus q. 73. li. 15. cont. Faust. Manich.
cap. 2. li 18. ciuit. ca 54. de vera relig. c. 27. li. 4. co^t. Faust. ca. 2.
S. Greg. h^. 6. in Ezech. I.
How the holy Scriptures contain al knowledge neceslarie to salvation. The old
and the new Testament show the same God, Christ, Church and other Mysteries of
Religion. The old more obscurely, with lesle helps. The new more expressly and
yeldeth more grace.
or written word of God, conteyneth Expressed orimplied, al things that man is
to believe, to observe, and to avoid, for obtaining of aeternal salvation. That
is, al matters of faith and manners, by which we may know and serve God, and so
be spiritually joined with him, in this life, and in eternity. For both the
old and new Testament propose and testify unto us, one and the same God, the
same Christ, the same Church, and other Mysteries of our belief, not differing
in substance, but in manner of uttering; the old more obscurely in figures and
prophecies foretelling those things, which the New declares (in great part)
as done and performed. Whereupon says S. Augustine: In the Old Testament the
New lies hidden: and in the New the Old lies open. And touching their names,
wherein appareth difference, the one (says the same Doctor) is called the old
Testament, either because it propofeth promises of temporal things (VVherwith
our old corruptnes is allured) Or in respect of the New, by which it is
fulfilled, and in some part abolished. The other is called the New, because by
it man is renewed, and has promise of eternal life: Which shall never wax old
nor decay. Likewise S. Gregory the great testifies this conformity, and
correspondence between the Old and New Testament, affirming that the same is
signified by the prophet Esccbiels vision of an hcele, which had four faces,
or appearance of four whiles, the shape whereof was, as it were, a wheel in
the mids of a wheel. What is this says he, nisi quod in Testamenti veteris
litera Testamentum nouum latuit per Allegoriam? but that in the letter of the
old Testament, the New lay hidden by an Allegory? In both Testaments, are
four sorts of Books.


And as the same is the sum and subject of both Testaments: so both are
divided (for the more principal parts thereof) into four sorts of Books:
Legal, Historical, Sapiential, and Prophetical. The Legal books of the old
Testament are the five Books of Moises; Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Legal.
Numeri, and Deuteronomie; whereto answer in the new Testament, the four
Gospels of S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. John. Historical books of the
old Testament, are the Books of Iosue, Judges, Historical.
Ruth, four books of Kings, two of Paralipomenon, Esdras with Nehemias,
Tobias, Judith, Hester, Job, and two of the Machabees; unto which, in the new
Testament, answer the Acts of the Apostles. Sapiential.
Sapiential, of the old Testament, are the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles,
Book of wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus; and of like sort are in the new
Testament, the Epistles of S. Paul and of other Apostles. Prophetical
Prophetical
books are David's Psalter (which is also Sapiential, yea like wise Legal and
Historical) the Books of Isaias, Ieremias with Baruch, Ezechiel, Daniel, the
twelve less Prophets, Osea, Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Michaeas, Nahum,
Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggaeus, Zacharias, Malachias. And in the new Testament, the
Apocalips of S. John the Apostle.

Al these Books are undoubtedly Canonical, as the Authors cited in All these
books recited are Canonical, and of infallible truth.
Cone. Carth. An. Dni 419. Conc. Laodic cap. 59. Florent Instruct. Armen.
decret. 7. Trident Sess. 4. S. Atha. in Synop. S. Aug. li. 2. doct Christ c. 8
Isider. li. 6. Elymol c. I. and alibi. Nicep. li. li. 4. cap. 15. Eusebius li. 5.
c. 8.
the inner margent testify. And consequently al, and all the parts thereof; are
of infallible truth. For otherwise as S. Augustine teaches, if any part were
false, or doubtful, al were uncertain. once admittiug falsehood (says he,
Epist, 8. ad Ieroni) in such sovereign authority, no parcel of these books
should remain, which any way should seem hard to manners, or incredible to
believe, but it might by this most pernicious rule be turned to an officious
fiction of the author. That is: If any error could be committed by the
authors of Scriptures, either through ignorance, oblivion, or any other
humane frailty, what soever were produced, exception might be taken, and
question made, whether the author had e^red, or no? True it is, that some of
these books (as we shall particularly Apochryphal of two sorts. 1. Not
declared canonical. 2. Rejected as erroneous.
discuss in their places) were sometimes doubted of by some Catholics, and
called Apochrypal, in that sense, as the word properly signifies hidden, or
not apparent. So S. Ierom (in his Prologue before the Latin Bible) calls
diverse books Apochryphal, being not so evident, whether they were Divine
scripture, because they were not in the jews Canon, nor at first in the
Churches Canon, but were never rejected, as false or erroneous. In which sense
the Prayer of Manasses, the third book of Esdras, and third of Machabees are
yet called Apochryphal. As for the fourth of Esdras, and fourth of Machabees
there is more doubt. But diverse others, as the book ascribed to Enoch, the
Gospels of S. Andrew, S. Thomas, S. Bartholmew, and the like recited by S.
Gelasius (Decreto de libris Ecclesiasticis did. 15. Can. Sancta Romana) S.
Innocentius the first (Epist. 3.) S. Ierom, Ep ad Laetam, S. Augustine li. 15.
cap. 23. de ciuit. Dei. Origin homis. 2. in Cantica. are in a worse sense
called Apochryphal, and are rejected as containing manifest errors, or fained
by Heretics. Neither can a Christian The Holy Ghost declares by the Church
which Books are Divine Scriptures.
Catholic he otherwise assured, Which Books are Divine and Canonical
Scriptures, but by declaration of the Catholic Church, which without
interruption Mat. 28. Joan. 14. 16. Act. 2. 20 1. Tim. 3.
succedeth the Apostles, to whom our Savior promised, and sent the Holy
Ghost, to teach al truth. For if in any thing more then others, assuredly one
chief and most necessary point is, to know and declare, which Books are Gods
holy Word: being of most singular importance.

THE SVMME OF THE OLD TESTAment, as it is distinguished from the new.
Not withstanding the subject, and general argument of both Testaments The old
and new Testament differ in time. In manner of uttering. Variety of Precepss.
Promises. Means.
is one and the same in substance, as is already said, yet they differ in time,
in manner of uttering of Mysteries, in variety of precepts, and promises, also
in means to observe the things exacted, and to attain to the end proposed,
Temo. 3. quest. 10 Algasiae.
In regard whereof S. Jerome says: Lex Moysi and omne vetus instrumentum
elementa mundi intelliguntur, quibus quasi elementis, and Religionis exordijs
Deum discimus. The law of Moses and all the old Testament are understood the
elements of the world, by which, as by first rudiments and beginnings, we learn
to know God. For that in it we have first the Law of nature: and asterwards a
law written, with promises of temporal rewards; as long life, land flowiug
with milk and honey, and the like; but it brought nothing Heb. 7. 9. 10. Gal.
4.
to perfection, as S. Paul says, when gifts and hosts were offered, which
could not according to conscience, make the obseruer perfect. For the helps of
that time, were but infirma and egena eleme^ta: Weak and poor elements.
Likewise in general, touching the punishments The old Testament conteyneth
figures of the new. A continual visible Church from the beginning of the world
to Christ. The same Mystical body, but different in state. Divided into six
ages. The first age continued. 1656. years.
that sometimes happened to the people of the old Testament, when they
transgressed, the same Apostle affirms, that all the same chanced to 1. Cor. 10
them in figure, and are written for our correption, upon whom the ends of the
world are come. so that the old Testament, or Law was Gal. 3:
but our pedagogue in Christ. Yet it sets forth to us the whole course of
Gods Church, for the space of four thousand years, that is, from the
beginning of the world until Christ our Redemer. which Divines divide into six
ages, wherein was variety and change of her state, three under the Law of
nature, and three others under the written Law. The seventh and last age being
this time of grace (wherein we now are) from Christ, to the day of general
Judgment: as the world was made in six days, and in the seventh God is said
to have rested, and therefore sanctified it, in other sort, then the former six.
The eight will be after the Resurrection, during for all eternity.

Which six ages of the ancient Church, and old Testament, are thus
distributed. Genesis 1.
The first from the Creation to Noes flood, containing the space of 1656.
years. The second from the flood to the going of Abraham out of his country,
The second 368. or 398. The third. about. 4^0.
Genesis 8. Gen 12. Genebrard Chronolog. S. Aug. li. 15. c. 8. ciuit. Gal. 3. Exo.
16. 3. Reg. 6. 3 Reg. 7. 1. Esdiae 1.
368. or counting Cainan (Genesis 11. iuxta 72. and Luc. 3.) 398. years. The
third from Abraham his going forth of his country, to the parting of the
children of Israel out of Egypt. VVhich-some count to have continued 720.
years, others (whom we follow) but 430. And thus far in the law of nature
before the written law. The fourth age dured, 480. years, from The fourth 480.
the delivery of the children of Israel forth of Egypt, to the fundation of
the Temple in Jerusalem. The fifth age was from the fundation of the Temple, to
The fifth 4^0. The sixth, nere 640. All the time from the creation to Christ
above. 4000. years.
the captivity and transmigration of the Jews into Babylon, about 430.
years. And the sixth age dured about 640. years, from the Captivity of
Babylon to Christ. In all which times God was acknowledged and rightly served,
by a continual visible Church, with true Religion; the same and no other, which
now that Church holds, that is called and known by she name of Catholic.
As we intend, by Gods assistance, to show by brief Annotations, concerning
diverse particular points now in Controversy, as the holy Text gives
occasion. And especially by way of Recapitulation after every one of the six
ages, when we come to those passages in the History, where the same are ended.

OF MOSES THE AVTHOR OF THE five first books.
Moses (so called because he was taken from the water, as the name MOSES.
signifies, taken from the water.
Exodus 6. N^m. 26. 1. Par. 6. Joseph li. 2 Antiq. cap. 9. S. Aug* ser. 88. de
temp. S. Greg. oration. in laudem Basilij magni. S. Aug. li. 18. ciuit. c. 39.
signifies) was borne in Egypt, the son of Amram, the son of Caath, the
son of Leui the Patriarch, and so of Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham. His marvelous
delivery from drowning, his education, excellent form, singular wisdom,
heroical virtues, rare dexterity in all affairs, and whole life most
admirable, are gathered out of holy Scriptures, by S. Gregory Bishop of
Nissen, into a brief Sum, most worthy to be read, but to large for this
place. He was borne about the year of the world two thousand The excellency
of Moses
four hundred, long before al profane writers, yea before many of the
Painimes false gods, as S. Augustine declares in diverse places of his most
excellent book entitled of the City of God. He lived in this world 120.
years* Of which 40. were in Pharaos court, as the adopted son of Pharaos
daughter: forty in banishment from Egypt in Madian: and forty more he
governed the people of Israel. His singular praises are also briefly touched in
the last chapter of Deuteromie, added by Iosue. and in the book of Deuteronomy. 34.
Eccli 45. Glos. ord
Ecclesi^sticus. He died in the desert, and was buried in the va^le of Moab, so
His sepulcher not known ^o any man.
secretly that no mortal man knew his sepulcher, lest the Jews, who were very
prone to Idolatry, should have adored his body with divine honor, for the
greatness and multitude of his miracles, and for the singular estimation, they
had of him for the same.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF GENESIS.
THIS first Book of holy Sripture, called Genesis, which signifies Genesis
written by Moses Always authentical. So known by Tradition, confirmed by
Christ. Alleged also by the Apostles. Religion reveled to special persons, and
so observed by Traditions.
birth or beginning, was written by Moses, when he was designed by God, to
instruct and rule the children of Israel. As also the other four books
following. The Author and authority of al which five books, were ever
acknowledged by the faithful, both of the old and new Testament: and so
accounted and esteemed by tradition, til Christ and his Apostles: who also Mat.
19. Heb. 11. Jacob. 2. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Pet. 2.
confirmed them by their testimonies, and allegations of the same, as of holy
Scriptures. From the creation until Moses writ (which was above two thousand
and four hundred years) the Church exercised Religion by Revelations made to
certain Patriarchs, and by Traditions from man to man, without any
Scriptures or Law written. But the peculiar people of God being more visibly
separated from other nations, and many errors abunding in the S. Aug. quest.
vet and noui Testam. cap. 3.
world, God would for correction and confutation thereof, have his will made
fu^^her known to his children, and so remain amongst them in written Why
Scripture was written. What Moses specially shows in this book.
record, by his faithful servant and Prophet Moses. Who therefore declares
the Author and beginning of al things, that is, How al creatures were made by
God, and of him have their being, and by him only are conserved. He teaches
expressly that there is one only God, against those that imagined and brought
into the fantasies of men many gods. That the whole or universal substance
of heaven and earth, with their ornaments and accidents, were made in time;
against those that thought the first fundation thereof had ever benne. That God
does govern the same; against those that say, al is ruled by d^stenie or by
the stars, and not by the continual providence of God. That God is a rewarder
of the good, and a punisher of evil; which sinners seem either not to know, or
grossly to forgete. And that God created al for man's use and benefit, which
should make us grateful. Wherefore Man most particularly described: The right
line from Adam to Noe.
holy Moses more particularly describes the beginning of man; what he was at
first; how he fell; how al mankind is come of one man: deducing the Genealogy
of Adam, especially to Noe. Then how men being more and more defiled upon the
earth, with wicked, especially carnal sins, were by Gods just wrath drowned
with an universal flood.

Again how a few reserved persons multiplied the world a new. But this of
spring also falling into many sins, especially Idolatry and spiritual
fornication, as those of the first age did to carnal offenses, God still
conserved some faithful and true servants* Of which Moses specially pursues
The principal Patriarchs from Noe to the 12. sons of I^cael.
the line of Noe by Sem his first begotten son. Then describes the
particular Genesis 10.
vocations, lives, manners, notable sayings, and noble factes, with sincere
religion of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and other holy Patriarchs: who
lived before the written law. Likewise upon what occasion, and in what
mane^, Jacob otherwise called Israel, with all his progeny, descended from the
Land of Canaan into Egypt, and were there entertained. So this book This
book divided into eight parts*
contains the history of two thousand three hundred and odd years. And it
may be divided into eight parts. The first contains the Creation of 1.
Heaven and Earth, and other Creatures, and lastly of Man chap. 1. and 2. The
second part is of the trangression and fall of man, and his casting out of 2.
Paradise, of multiplication of m^n, and of sin, though still some were just,
of the general flood, that drowned al except eight persons, and few other
living creatures of the earth. from the third chap. to the 8. The third part is
3.
of the new increase, and multiplication of the same. from the 8. chap. to the
11. The fourth, of the confusion of tongues, and the division of nations. in 4.
5.
the 11. chap. The fifth relates Abraham's going forth of his country, Gods
promise, that in his seed al Nations should be blessed, and the commandment of
Circumcision, from the 12. chap. to the 21. The sixth part recounteth the 6.
progeny, and other blessings, especially the great virtues of Abraham, Isaac,
and Ia^ob. from the 21. chap. to the 37. The seventh part reports the felling
7.
of Joseph into Egypt, and his advancement there. from the 37. chap. to the
46. The eight and last part is of Jacob, and his progenies going into 8.
Egypt, their intertainment there, and of Jacobs, and finally of Joseph's
death. in the five last cahpters.

The signification of the marks here used, for direction of the reader.
The numbers in the arguments of chapters point to the verse, where the matter
mentioned begins. This form of cross [] in the text, shows the beginning
of every verse. The numbers in the inner margent over against the cross, show
the number of verses in the same chapter. This mark* signifies that there
follows an Annotation after the chapter, upon the word, or words, whereto it
is adjoined. The number also of the same verse is prefixed to the Annotation.
These four pricks:: show that there is an Annotation in the margent, upon
that place. And when many occur, the first answers to the first marcke,
the second to the second, and so forth. In like manner the citations of places
in the inner margent, are applied to the authors alleged. But when there be
more such marginal annotations, then may easily be applied, we use the letters
of the Alphabete for direction. This form of a star [*] in the text or
annotations, points to the explication of some word or words, in the
margent. Sometimes we put the Concordance of other Scriptures in the inner
margent of the text. We have also noted in the margent, when the Books of
holy Scripture (or parts thereof) are read in the Churches Service. For their
sakes, that desire to re^d the same, in order of the Ecclesiastical Office.
THE BOOK OF GENESIS, IN HEBREW BERESITH.
CHAP. 1. God creates heaven and earth, and al things therein; distinguishing
and The first part. Of the creation of al things.
bevvtyfying the same; 26. last of all the sixth day he creates man: to whom
he subiecteth al corporal things of this inferior world. The Church reads
this book in her Office from Septuagesima til Passion Sunday. Also this first
chapter and beginning of the second on Easter Eve before Mass.

N* THE beginning GOD created heaven Act. 14, 15. 17, 24. Psalm. 32, 6. 135, 5.
Eccli. 10, 1. ^eb. 11, 3.
void and vacant, and darkness was upon the face of the deapth: and* the
Spirit of God moved over the waters. And God said: Be light made. The
firmament is all the space from the earth to the hieghest stars. the lowest
part divides between the waters on the earth and the waters in the air. S.
Aug. li. II. de Genesis ad lit. c. 4
a firmament Job. 38. Ier. 10, 13.
the waters, that were under the firmament, from those, that were above the
firmament. And it was so done. And Likewise heaven is all the space above the
earth. in whose lowest part are birds and waters, in the higher part stars.
the hieghest is the Empyrial heaven. Esa. 66.
Heaven: and there was evening and morning that made the second day. God also
said: Let grene herb, such as seedeth according to his kind, and tree that
bears fruit, having seed each one according to his kind. And God saw that
it was good. And there was The lights made the first day, are disposed the
fourth day in their proper courses for more distinction of times. S. Dionys.
ca. 4. de divine* nom. S. Tho. p. 1. q. 67. a. 4. and q. 70. a. 2.
for signs and seasons, and days and years: to shine in the firmament of The
Su^ne and Moon: for though the moon be the least visible star except
Mercury, yet it gives more light on the earth by reason it is nerer, and so
Moses speaks according to the vulgar capacity and use of things. S. Aug.
li. 2. de Genesis ad lit. ca. 16.
great lights: a greater light, to govern

And God saw that it was good, and he said " Let us make Col. 3, 10.
over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and the beasts, and
the whole earth, and al creeping creature, that moves upon the earth. And God
created man, to his Mat. 19, 4.
female he created them. And God blessed them, and says: Every creature in
nature is good, but al considered together make the whole world perfect* most
apt to man's use and Gods glory. S. Aug. li. 1 de Genesis cont. Manich. ca. 21.
they were very good. And there was evening and morning that made the sixth day.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. 1.
1. In the beginning.] Holy Moses tells what was done in the beginning The
Church had only Traditions and no Scripture above 2400. years.
of the world, and so forward even til his own time, writing above two
thousand and four hundredth years after the beginning. Al which being
incomprehensible by human wit or discourse, he knew partly by Revelations
from God, for he had the gift of Prophecy in most excellent sort: partly by
Traditions from his elders, who learned of their fathers. For until that time
the Church had only Traditions of such things, as were reveled to special men,
whereby we see the great authority of Traditions, before there were Scriptures.
Tradition^ necessary for three causes.
And since Scriptures were written they are also necessary, for three special
reasons. First for that we are only assured by Tradition of the Church, that
those books are in deed holy Scriptures, which are so accounted, and not by 1
the Scripture it self, for that were to prove the same by the same, until we
be assured of some part, that proves some other parts. And this made S.
Augustine to say plainly, that he could not believe the Gospel, except the Church
told him ^^^. Epist. ^und. c. ^5
which is the Gospel. Secondly holy Scriptures being once known to be the 2
word of God, and so of most eminent authority of al writings in the world,
Scripture of most eminent authority.
as S. Augustine S. Jerome, and al other Fathers agree, yet for the true
understanding of the same, both the Scripture it self, and the ancient Fathers
remitte us to the Church, namely to those in the Church, that are appointed by
Gods ordinance, in the high place that he has chosen. Which were the High
Priests in the old Testament, as appears: Deuteronomy. 17. Mat. 23. Joan. 11. And in
the new Testament, S. Peter and his Successors for whom Christ prayed that his
faith should not fail: and therefore commanded him to confirm his brethren
Luc. 22. Thirdly for things not expressed in particular in holy Scripture, the
Scripture Luc. 10, 16. Act. 15, 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Origin. super. Genesis c. 1. Aug.
li. 2. de Genesis cont Manich. ca. 2.
and Fathers do likewise remitte us to Traditions, and to the judgment ^
and testimony of the Church. Christ saying to his Apostles: he that hears
you hears me. The Apostles doubted not to say: It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us. And S. Paul willed the Thessalonians to hold the traditions,
which they had learned, whether it were by word, or by his Epistle.

1. In the beginning God made heaven and earth.] Al writers ancient and later
Scriptures hard.
find such difficulties in these first chapters, that some otherwise very
learned have thought it not possible to understand the same according to the
proper and usual signification of the words, as the letter may seem to sound,
but expound al allegorically, as that by the waters above the firmament should
be understood the blessed Angels, by the waters under the firmament wicked
spitites, and the like. So did Origin and diverse that follow him therein. Yea S.
Augustine in his books upon Genesis against the Manichees, written shortly
after his conversion, when he could not find as he desired a good and probable
sense agreeable to the words, in their proper signification, expounded them
mystically, but afterward in his other books de Genesi ad literam, lib. 1. c.
18. and lib. 8. c. 2.
he gratfully acknowledges that God had given him further sight therein, and
that now he supposed he could interpret al according to the proper
signification of the words* yet so that he durst not nor would not addict him
self to one sense, but that he was ready to embrace an other, lest by
sticking to his own judgment he might fail. So likewise S. Basil, S.
Chrisostom, Bas. ho. 9. in Genes. Chrisost. epist. 44. Amb. and Beda in examen.
Ieron. Epistol. ad Eustoch. Genesis 1. v. 3. and 14. Exo. 20, 5. and 18, v. 20.
Joan. 8, 25. Romans ^.
S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, S. Bid, and other greatest Doctors found and confessed
great difficulties in these first chapters, which they with much study
endeavored to explicate. And therefore it is a wonder to see our Protestants and
Puritans hold this Paradox, that Scriptures are easy to be understood. VVheras
both by testimony of those that have in deed studied and labored in them,
and by a why Scriptures are hard.
little due consideration, the contrary is most evident. For whosoever will
look into the holy Scriptures, shall find that some times in show one place
seems contrary to an other; some times the letter and phrase are obscure and
ambiguous; Three spiritual senses besides the Literal.
some times the sentences imperfect. Again many speeches are prophetical,
many parabolical, metaphorical, and uttered under other tropes and figures,
and that in the literal sense. Moreover there are three spiritual senses
besides the literal, very frequent in holy Scripture. Allegorical pertaining
to Christ and the Church; Moral pertaining to manners; and Anagogical
Allegorical Moral. Anagogical.
pertaining to the next life. As this word Jerusalem literally signifies the
head city of Iewrie: Morally the soul of man: Allegorically the Church
militant: and Anagogically the Church triumphant. And sometimes this (and the
like of others) metaphorically in the literal sense signifies the Church
militant, and not the city of Iewrie, as in the 12. chapter to the Hebrews:
and some ^
times the Church triumphant, as in the 21. of the Apocalips.

2. The Spirit of God.] In the Hebrew it is signified, that the Spirit of God
was on the waters to make them fertile, for that fishes and birds were to be
procreated thereof; the word is merahepheth, incubabat, sat upon, to produce
fruict (says S. Ierom) from the waters, as a hen by her heat, produces
Ieron. Epistol. 8^. ad Ocea. Tert. d^ Baptis.
life in the eggs. And the same S. Ierom, and before him Tertullian teach,
that this was a figure of Baptism, which consists of water and the Holy
Ghost. A figure of Baptism.
For as water in the beginning of the world received a certain vital virtue of
the Holy Ghost to produce living creatures: so also Baptism receives virtue
of the same Holy Ghost to procreate new men. Whereupon Tertullian calls
Christians called fishes.
Christians fishes, because they are gotten from the waters, and thence have
their first spiritual life. Let it not therefore seem strange (says he) that in
Baptism Waters give life.

16. Two great lights, and stars.] Here occurreth an other example of the
hardness of holy Scripture. For if the two great lights (towit the Sun and
the Moon) and also the stars, were made the fourth day, and not before, as
it may seem by the words in this place, then what was that light, and in what
Light being an accident remained without subject, by the judgment of some
learned Fathers.
subject was it, that was made the first day? S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen,
Theodoret, and some others, writing upon this place do think that the light,
which was made the first day, remained though an accident without his subject
til the fourth day. And albeit most other Doctors rather think that the
substance of the Sun and Moon, and of other planets and stars were created
the first day, and the fourth day set in that order and course which now they
keep, with more distinction for signs and seasons, and days and years: yet
it is clear that the foresaid ancient Doctors judged it possible, that
accidents may remain without their subject. which a Sacramentarie will be loath
to grant, The accidents of bread and wine can remain by Gods power without
their subjects. Ten prerogatives of man in his creation. 1. made like to
God. 2. The Mystery of the B. Trinity insinuated in his creation. 3. produced
by God him self.
lest it might be proved possible, as both these and al other Catholic
Doctors believed and taught, that the accidents of bread and wine remain in the
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist without their subjects. Which Protestants
deny.

26. Let us make man to our Image.] For better consideration of Gods bounty
toward us, and sturring our selves to gratitude toward him, we may here note
ten prerogatives bestowed on us, by our Lord and maker in our creation above
al other earthly creatures. First, whereas God by an imperial word of
commandment made other creatures, Fiat lux, Fiat firmamentum: Be there light:
Be there a firmament: intending to make man, he proceeds familiarly, by way,
as it were, of consultation, and as to his own use and service to make man
saying: Let us make man to our image and likeness, that is to say, a reasonable
creature with understanding and free will, which beasts have not. Secondly, in
this work God first insinuates the high Mystery of the B. Trinity, or
plurality of Persons in one God (because man is to believe the same) signifying
the plurality of Persons by the words Let us make, and to our: and the unity
in substance, by the words Image and likeness, the first in the plural number,
the later in the singular. Thirdly, other creatures were produced by the waters
and earth, Let the waters bring forth (fish and soul) Let the earth bring
forth (grass and cat^le, and other beasts) but God brought forth man, not by
the earth, though of the earth, nor by water, nor by heaven, nor by Angels, but
by him self, giving him a reasonable soul, not sensual only as to beasts,
and the same not produced of any creature, but created immediately of nothing.
Fourthly, God 4. placed in paradise. 5. Lord of al earthly creatures. 6.
innocence.
gave man Paradise a most pleasant place to dwell in. Fifthly, God gave man
dominion and imperial authority over alliuing creatures under heaven. Sixthly,
man was created in that innocence of life, and integrity of al virtues, that
his mind was wholly subject to God, his sense to reason, his body to his
spirit, and al other living creatures obedient to him: even the terrible
Lions, the cruel Tigres, the huge Elephants, and the wildest birds. Seuently,
God 7. excellent knowledge.
brought them al to man, as to do him homage, and to take their names of him.
Which by his excellent knowledge he gave them conformable to their natures.
Eighthly, God gave man in some sort an immortal body, that if he had 8. power
to live ever. 9. gift of prophecy.
kept Gods commandment, he had lived long and pleasantly in this world, and so
should have been translated to eternal life without dying. Ninthly, God did not
only adorn man with all natural knowledge, and supernatural virtues, but also
with the gift of prophecy. VVherby the knew that Eve was a bone of his bones,
and flesh of his flesh, though being a sleep he knew not when 10. God conuersed
familiarly with man.
she was made. Tenthly (which was the chief benefit of al) God conuersed
familiarly with man, and that in shape of man, which was a token of his
marvelous great love to man, and a singular incitment of him to love God. Read
more, if you please, of the dignity of man, and the benefits of God toward
him in his creation, in S. Bernard upon the 99. Psalm. And upon the 61.
chapter of Esaie.

28. Increase and multiply.] Whether this be a commandment or no, at least
Gods blessing always effectual.
it is a blessing, for so the words before convince, God blessed them and
said: Increase and multiply. He said the same also to brute creatures, which
are not capable of a precept, but by this were made fertile. VVherby we see
that Gods Especially in the holy Eucharist.
blessing always works some real effect: as of fertility in this and other
places, of multiplication of the loaves and fishes, Joan 6. And some real
effect Christ's blessing must needs work also in the blessed Sacrament. Mat.
26. Which can be no other but changing bread and wine into his body and
blood, seeing him self expressly says: This is my body* this is my blood.

And though Gods blessing in this place, be also a precept, yet it is not to al
men for ever, but for the propagation of mankind, which being long since Not al
men and ^emen commanded to marie.
abundantly propagared, the obligation of the precept cease the cause
ceasing. So S. Cyprian, S. Jerome, S. Augustine, and other Fathers expound this
place. And confirm the same by the text, for immediately God signifying to what
end he spoke, says: and replenish the earth. Which benig replenished, Gods
will is therein fulfilled.

CHAP. II. The work of six days being finished, God rested the seventh day
and blessed it. 8. Then placing man in paradise (planted with bewtiful and
sweet trees, and witered with four rivers) 16. comandeth him not to eat of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil. 18. and formed a woman of a ribbe of
Adam.
God creates not new kinds of creatures, yet still works. Io. 5, 17.
conseruing and governing al things and creatch souls, grace, and glory of the
same kind S. Aug. li, 4 de Genesis adlit. ^. 12.
THE heavens therefore and the earth were fully finished, Exodus 20, 11. Deuteronomy. 5,
14. Heb. 4, 4.
God ended his work which he had made: and Man's soul is immediately created
by God not produced of other substance as the souls of beasts and plants are.
rested" the seventh day, from al work that he had done. And he

These are the generations of heaven and earth, when 1. Cor. 15, 45,
became a living soul.

And our Lord God had Whether this paradise be now extant is uncertain,
though it be certain that Enoch and Elias are yet living in earth S. Aug. li.
2. cont. Pelagi. c. 23. See Perereus. li. 3. q. 5. and li. 7. q. vltima.
planted a Paradise of pleasure there is sound bdelium, and the stone onyx. And
the name

Our Lord God therefore took man, and put him in the

And Adam called al beasts by their names, and al fowls Mat. 19, 5. Mar. 10,
7. 1. Cor. 6 16. Ephesians. 5, 31.
therefore cast a dead sleep upon Adam: and when he was fast a sleep, he took
one of his ribs, and filled up flesh for it. And our Lord God As we say brick
is made of earth, and a house is built of brick: so Adam was made of earth and
Eve built of a ribbe of Adam. And that of one ribbe, as if God should build a
house of one brick, or as in deed he fed. 5000. men with five loaves. Chris.
ho. 15. S. Aug. Tract. 24. in Joan. S. Tho. p. 1. q. 92. a. 3.
built the ribbe which he took of Adam into a woman: and brought her to Adam.
And Adam said: This now, is bone of my bones, and flesh Not three, nor four,
nor more. for then two were changed to an other number. S. Ier. li. 1. cont.
loui.
two in one flesh. And they were both naked; to wit Adam and his

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. II.
2. The seventh day.] Al creatures benig made in their kinds in six days,
complete and perfect, God not neding (as men often do in their works) to
perfect, poolish, or amend the same, rested the seventh day: and therefore the
natural perfection of Gods works is attributed to the seventh day, and the
supernatural Observation of holy days by Gods institution.
perfecting of men in eternal life, after the Resurrection, is attributed to
the eight day. as S. Augustine and other fathers teach. And for this ^^ Psalm. 6.
and 11.
cause God blessed and sanctified the seventh day. and after we have in the
Decalogue, or ten commandments, that this day al should rest and abstain
from works, yea and keep it festiual, occupying them selves in spiritual
exercises service and special worshipe of God, as the Jews did even til
Christ's, and his Apostles time, praying and hearing the word of God read and
expounded in Act. 13, 14. Leuit. 23.
the Sabbath day. VVherby we see that distinction of days pertayneth to
Religion, Observation of festiual days is religious, not Iudaical, nor
heathnish.
the people of God thus observing the Sabbath in memory of the Creation, and
diverse other feasts in memory of other benefits. And we now keep the Sunday
holy, in memory of Christ's Resurrection, and other feasts in gratful
remembrance of other Mysteries of Christ's Nativity, the coming of the Holy
Ghost, and the like. Yea also feasts of his blessed Mother, and other
Saints, for the benefits received from Christ by them, and for more honor
to Christ in them. So this Catholic observation of feasts is neither
Iudaical (which also in the law was good but now is abrogated) nor heathnish,
for we honor not Jupiter, nor Juno, noranie false god or goddess, but our
Lord God Creator and Redemer, and for his sake, his best servants. VVherof
Honor of Saints is to the greater honor of Christ.
see the Annotations in the English new Testament. 4. chap. to the Galathians.
Hon^^* in 40. Martyr^s.
Whereto we here only add these words of S. Basil. Which may serve for a
general answer to the most common objection. Honor seruorum redundat in
commun^m Domin^m. The honor of the servants redoundeth to the common Lord, or
Master. So, says he, the honor of Saints is the honor of Christ their
Lord and ours.

17. Of the tree of knowledge.] Besides the law of nature, by which Man was
Why a particular positive law besides the general laws of God and nature, was
given to man. first reason.
bound to direct al his actions according to the rule of reason; and besides
the supernatural divine law, by which he was bound to believe, and trust in God,
and to love him above al things, having received the gifts of faith, hope, and
charity: God gave him an other particular law, that he should not eat of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil. And that for two special reasons, which S.
Augustine lib. 8. de Genesis ad lit. c. 11. Psalm. 15.
notes upon this place. First, that God might declare him self to be Lord of
man. Which was absolutely necessary for man, and nothing at al profitable to
God, who needs not our service, but we without his dominion should utterly fall
to nothing. Nec enim ipso non creante, etc. For he not creating us, neither
could we have been, no^ he not conseruing us, could we remain, nor he not
governing us, could we live rightly. Wherefore he only is our true Lord,
whom not for his, but for our ^. reason.
own profit and salvation we serve. The other reason was, that God might
give man matter wherein to exercise the virtue of obedience, and to show him
self a subject of God. Which could not be so properly and effectually
declared by keeping other laws, nor the enormitie of disobedience appear so
evidently* as by fulfilling of Gods will commanding him, or by doing his own
will, moved to the contrary, in a thing of it self indifferent, and only made
unlawful, because it was forbid. But let us hear S. Augustins own words. The
sin of disobedience.
Nec potuit melius aut diligentius co^^end^ri quantum malum sit sola
inobedientia, etc. Neither could it (says this great Doctor) be better, nor
more exactly signified how bad a thing sole disobedience is, then where a man
became guilty of iniquity, because he touched that thing contrary to
prohibition, which if he, not forbidden, had touched, he had not sinned at al.
For he that says, for example sake, Touch not this herb, supposing it is
poysenful, and does forwarne Joined with damage to him that disobeyeth.
one of death, if he touch it, death assuredly falls on the contemner of the
precept: yea though no man had prohibited, and he had touched, for he should
dye because the same thing bereueth him of health and life, whether it had
benne forbidden him or no. Also when one forbids that thing Joined with
damage of him that forbids.
to be touched, which would not in deed prejudice him that touches, but him
that forbids, as if one take an others money, being forbid by him* whose the
money is, it is a sin in him that is forbidden, because it is injury to him
that forbids. But when that thing is touched which neither should hurt him
that touches, nor any other, if it were not forbid, wherefore is it prohibited,
but that the proper goodness of obedience, and the evil of disobedience might
appear? Thus S. Augustine shows, that disobedience is a sin, because it is
against a precept, though otherwise the thing that is done were not evil. And
True obedience is blind and prompt.
amongst other good notes, teaches that true obedience inquireth not, wherefore
a thing is commanded, but leaving that to the Superior, promptly does that is
appointed.

17. Of the tree eat thou not.] This example of our first parents
transgression Not meat, but the di^obedience hurts him that transgresses
the precept of abstinence. Laws in things indifferent bind in conscience.
Temporal punishment due after sin is remitted. Death due to al for Original
sin. Yea to infants who have no other sin. Also other penalties insticted
upon infants.
shows, how frivolous an answer it is to say; that breaking of commanded
fastes, or eating meats forbidden can not hurt us, the meat being good Math.
9, Luc. 10. S. Epiph. in compe^. f^dei Cat. S. Aug. epist. 80.
and wholesome: for so the fruit of the tree was good, and should have hurt no
man, if it had not benne forbidden. Even so al meats of their own nature are
good, yet the precept of fasting (foretold by our Savior in general, and
determined by his Church in particular) and so of any other like law, though
it be in things otherwise indifferent, proceeding from lawful Superiors,
binds the subjects in conscience. And the transgression is properly
disobedience, what other sin soever may also be mixed therewith.

17. Thou shall dye the death.] Against the new doctrine, denying that after
Calvin l. 3. inst. c. 4 parag. 31. and 32.
sin is remitted, any temporal punishment remains for the same, this place
declares that death (whereof God forewarned Adam, if he should eat of the
fruit forbidden) remained due, and was at last inflicted upon him, for his
sin, which was presently remitted upon his repentance.

Again for so much as we are al subject to death, it proves that we were al
Romans 5.
guilty of this sin, by which death came upon al men, as S. Paul teaches.
Else God should punish us without our fault, which is impossible that his
goodness should do. Especially it appears in infants, who dying before they
come to lib. 13. de ciuit. c 6. lib. 2. de pec. mer. and remis. c. 34. Genesis 17.
Joan. 3. S. Greg. li. 4. Moral. c. 2.
use of reason, can never commit other sin. for though they were circumcised,
or had Sacrifice offered, or other remedy used for them before Christ, or
baptized since Christ: yet they suffer (as S. Augustine notes) both death and
many other penalties, of sickness, cold, heat, hunger, and the like, which
can neither be to them matter of merit (as to others it may be) nor profit
them for avoiding of other sins, seeing they dye in their infancy. Yea
moreover if they dyed without circumcision, or other remedy of those former
times, their souls perished from their people; and now without Baptism can
never enter into the kingdom of heaven, which could not stand with Gods
justice, if they were not guilty of sin.

CHAP. III. By the craft of the Devil speaking in a serpent, our first parents
transgressed The second part. Of the fall of man, and propagation of man and of
sin.
Gods commandment. 7. who being ashamed would hide them selves. 9 but are
reproved by God. 14. and besides other particular punishements (yet with
promise of a Redemer) are cast out of Paradise.
BUT Serpe^ts most crafty to escape harm, when they hurt men: so is the devil.
the serpent also was more subtle then all the beasts you should not eat of
every tree of Paradise? To whom 2. Cor. 11. 3.
what day soever you shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened: and you shall
be as gods, knowing good and evil.

The woman therefore saw that the tree was good to Eccl. 25. 1. Tim. 2, 14.
husband, who did eat. And the eyes of them both were After sin they were
ashamed, not before S. Chris.
perceived themselves to be naked, they sowed together leaves of a fig tree,
and made themselves aprons.

And hearing the voice of our Lord God walking in

And our Lord God said to the woman: Why have thou All this curse pertains to
the devil that spoke in the serpent. S* Aug, l. 2. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 36. S.
Beda in hunc locum.
accursed art thou among al catle, and beasts of the earth: upon thy breast
shall thou go, and Earthly or worldly and carnal men S. Greg. in Psalm. 101.
earth* shall thou eat all the days of thy life. I will put Though good men
resist tentations at the first assaults, and so bruise the serpe^ts head, yet
he ^^^^o^eth still to deceive especially in the end of man's life* signified by
the ^eele. S Gre. in cap. 1. Job.
of her heel. To the woman also he said: 1. Cor. 14.
thee. And to Adam he said: Because thou have heard the thee, that thou
should not eat, cursed is the earth in thy work: with All men travel one
way or other: and such as suffer wides to ouergrowe (in their souls) shall after
this life either sustain the fire of Purgatory or eternal pain. S. Aug. li
2. c. 20* de Genesis co^. Man.
much toyling shall thou eat thereof all the days of thy life. Thorns and
thystles shall it

And Adam called the name of his wife, Eve: for because She was mother rather
of all the dying: but in figure of our B. Lady who is mother of Christ, life it
self, she is called mother of the living. S. Epiph. her. 78.
she was mother of all the living. Our Lord God also

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. III
1 Why has God? [Here we may see how sin came first amongst men. For Sin
entered among men by the envy and craft of the devil, man co^senting to his
suggestions. Eve first sined in thought, then in words last in deeds.
the devil envying ma^s happy state tempted Eve the weaker person, beginning
Cap. 2. 24. Joan. 8, 44. S. Aug. lib. 14. deciuit. c. 11. Rupert. li. de
Trinit. and operibus eius c. 4.
with a question, thereby to allure her into conference, and by such a question
as might bring her into suspicion of Gods affection toward man, saying: Why
has God commanded you, that you should not eat of every tree of paradise?
insinuating by these words, and withal internally suggesting, that God dealt
hardly with them, abridging their liberty without cause. And when he had got
so much of her, that she was displeased with the precept, which she showed by
adding of her own (to make it seem more grievous) that they were forbidden to
touch the tree: and again by reporting the punishment as doubtful, saying:
lest perhaps we dye, then the tempter avouched boldly, and falsely, that they
should not dye, and charged God to be envious of the benefit they should get
by eating of that tree, saying their eyes should be opened, and they should be
as Gods, knowing good and evil. Upon which persuasion, and liking also she
had to the fruit, she did take and eat, and persuaded Adam also to eat. And
forthwith Bad sequels of sin.
they saw that they would not have seen, knew evil which they had better Lib.
de vera Religione c. 14. Lib. 1. Retract. c. 13.
not to have known, were ashamed, and endeavored to cover, and hide them
selves. Even thus the devil deals with men ever since, assaulting the weaker
persons, and weaker part, as the flesh and sensuality, and by them sets
upon No sin can be without freewil.
the stronger and superior part, to get consent of freewil, without which there
is no sin. According to that famous saying of S. Augustine: Pe^atum adeo est
voluntarium, vt nullo modo sit peccatum, si non voluntarium. Sin is so
voluntary, that in no wise it can be sin, if it be not voluntary. wherefore
it was no sin in Eve to Concupisce^ce no sin, but the effect, and occasion
of sin. Also occasion of merit.
be tempted by the serpent, which she could not avoid, nor in Adam to be
tempted by Eve, but they sinned when they consented to the evil suggestions.
And S Aug. lib. 1. de nupt. and con. c. 23. Gal. 5. 2 Timothy 2.
now in the regenerate, though concupiscence remain, which is the effect of
sin past, and occasion of sin in those that yield again to te^tations, yet
is it not sin, but punishment of sin, and matter of exercise in the just,
and if we resist, of merit: and therefore S. Paul exhorts us, to vvalle in
the spirit, and the lusts of the flesh we shall not accomplish. And in an
other place shows, that he which fights lavvfully, shall be crowned.

15. She shall bruise] Protestants will not admit this reading, ipsa conteret,
she The Latin text defended against Kemnisius and other Protestants. See Card.
Bellarmin. li. 2. c. 12. de verbo Dei. Both readings veld the same sense.
shall bruise, lest our Blessed Lady should be said any way to bruise the
serpents head. And Kemnisius amongst others says, that al ancient Fathers
read, ipsum, not, ipsa. But he is convinced of lying by Claudius Marius Victor.
lib. 1. in Genesis Alcimus Auitus lib. 3. carm. c. 6. S. Chrisostom bom. 17. in
Genes. S. Ambrose lib de fuga saeculi cap. 7. S. Augustine lib. 2. de Genesi
contra Manichaeos, cap. 18 and lib. 11. de Genesi ad literam cap. 26. S.
Gregory lib. 1. Moralium cap. 38. And after them S. Bid, Eucherius, Rabanus,
Rupertus, Strabus, and Lira upon this place, S. Bernard ser 2. super Misus est.
And many others, who read ipsa as the Latin text now has.

But whether we read, She shall bruise, or, her sede, that is her son Christ,
shall bruise the serpents head, we attribute no more, nor no less to Christ,
nor to our Lady by the one reading, then by the other: for by the text, I vvil
put ^nmit^es between thee and the woman, between thy seed, and her seed. It
is clear, that this enmity and battle pertained to the woman and her seed on
the one party, and to this devil, that spoke by the serpent, and all the
wicked, on the other party, and that the victory should happen to mankind.
Which being captive by Adams sin, occasioned by a woman, should be redeemed,
both As Adam was the cause, and ^^e an occasion of man's captivity: so Christ
is the true cause and his mother an occasion of our restoration.
sexes, though in far different sort, concurring thereto. And so it is most
true, that Christ by his own proper power, and his blessed mother by her most
immediate cooperating to his Incarnation (and consequently to other Mysteries)
did bruise the serpents head, break and vanquish his power. S ^^eneus li 3. c.
33. and lib. 5. circa med, S. Epiph, Haer. 78. S. Ieron. ep 22. ad Eustoch. S.
Aug. (or S. Fulgent) ser. 18 de Sanctis. de fide and Symb. de Agone Christiano.
Ser. 2. super Missus est.
As many ancient Fathers do excellently discourse: namely S. Bernard, writing
upon these words in the Apocalips. cap. 12. A great sign appeared in heaven,
a woman clothed with the sun: Albeit (says he) by one man and one woman we
were greatly damaged: yet (God be thanked) by one man and one woman al losses
are repaired, and that not without great increase of graces. For the benefit
does far excede the loss. Our merciful father giving us for a terrestrial
Adam Christ our Redemer, and for old Eve Gods own mother. Moreover Our B.
Lady resisted al evil suggestions.
as the same S. Bernard shows, this blessed Virgin in singular sort bruised
the serpents head, in that she quite vanquished al manner suggestions of the
wicked serpent, never yelding to, not taking delight in any evil moved by him.

19. Dust thou art] By these words Adam was admonished to humble him self,
considering the matter whereof his body was made, and into which he Job 42.
Esai. 58. Ierem. 6. Ionae. 3. Mat. 11.
should be resolved again. whereupon it came to be a ceremony amongst
penitents, The ceremony of ashes, on Ashwenesday.
to cast ashes on their heads. As appears in holy Scriptures for which cause
the Church now also uses this ceremony the first day of Lent, putting ashes
on her childrens heads: willing them to remember, that dust they are, and to
dust they shall return, to move us by this meditation to more serious penance.

22. ^^st perhaps] Notwithstanding Gods eternal decree in disposing al Gods
providence concurreth with man's free will.
things, and his omnipotency which nothing can resist, yet he produces good,
and either auoideth or disposes of evil which he suffers, by ordinary
means, as appears Act. 27, v. 31. and that because man has free will, with
de great. and liber. arb. c. 6. de corrept. and great. ad art. falso impos.
which God concurreth, and destroys not nor forces. as S. Augustine teaches.

24. Placed Cherubins] Man being cast out of paradise, the same is defended
Paradise defended by Angels and by fire and sword. God destroys not nature
with duble guard. with Angels, that are watchful, wise, and potent; and with
fire and sword, most terrible armoure to man. whereby again we see, that God
uses ordinary means in his providence, as the ministry of Angels and humane
terror, and would neither destroy the tree, nor deprive it of the virtue to
prolong life, nor bereue man of freewil, by which he might desire to return:
but conseruing nature in all creatures, preuenteth inconveniences otherwise.
Good Angels hinder devils of their desires.


These Angels also hinder the devil, that he can not enter paradise, lest he S.
Aug. lib. 11. de Gen ad lit. c. 40.
should take of the fruit of the tree, and give it to men to prolong their
lives, and thereby draw them to his service.

CHAP. IIII. Wicked Cain kills holy Abel. 9. whose blood cries for
revenge. 11. Cain a cursed vacabond, 17. has much issue. 25 Adam also has
Seth, and Seth Enos.
AND Adam knew Eve his wife: who conceived and A figure of the Lamb that was
slain from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13, v. 8.
offered Heb. 11.
of the first begotten of his flock, and of their fat: and our Lord" had
respect to Abel, and to his gifts. But to Cain,

And Caine said to Abel his brother: Let us go forth abroad. Sap. 10.
Cain: Where is Abel thy brother? Who answered: I know ^. 10. 3.
not: am I my brothers keeper? And he said to him: What Willful murder is one
of the sins that cry to God for revenge.
the voice of thy brothers blood cries to me out of, the earth. Now therefore
cursed shall thou be it, it shall not yield to thee her fruit: a roag and
vagabound shall thou be upon the earth. And Cain said to our Lord:

And "Cain went forth from the face of our Lord, and By the increase of
Abraha^s seed (by the line only of Isaac and Jacob, besides the issues of
Ismael and Esau) in little more then 400. years to above six hundredth thousand
men able to bear arms (Number. 1.) it appears that Caines progeny in as many
yeates might suffice to people a city, yea a whole country. S. Aug. l. 15
ciuit. c. 8.
he built a city, and called the name thereof by the name of his son, Enoch.
Moreover Enoch be This Lamech of Cains issue, is the first that is noted in
Scripture, to have taken two wives.
two

Adam also knew his wife again: and she brought forth a

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IIII
3. Offered giftes] Either God him self taught Adam, and he his children, or
else they knew by instinct of nature, that Sacrifice must be offered to God, to
acknowledge thereby his supreme dominion over man, and man's due subjection to
his divine Majesty. And that not only in internal affection, which External
Sacrifice due to God in every Law.
(as S. Augustine, and al Catholic Doctors teach) is principally required, but
Lib 10. de ciuit.
also in external things, because we consist of body, and not only of soul,
and have, by Gods goodness, the use of corporal things. As here we see example
^. 5. Leuit. 1 Dan 12. Mal. 1. Luc. 22.
in the law of nature: and the same was ordained by written precept in the law
of Moses: the Prophets* also foretold, that external Sacrifice should be
offered in the law of grace, and new Testament, to wit, the same which Christ
instituted, and left in his Church, to continue to the end of the world.
Moreover this homage of offering Sacrifice is so peculiar to God only, that
albeit Sacrifice due to God only, and to no creature.
many other exterior rites and services are used both to God and men, as to be
bare head, to be we, to kneel, and the li^e before them, either of great
hum^liti^ Lib. 10. ciuit. cap. 4. Aristot. li. 2 Meta his. ^tl i^. 9. Polit. 7.
c. 8.
(says S. Augustine) or of pestiferous ^latterie, to such as are homines
colendi, venerandi, si autem eis multum additur, and adorandi: men to be
worshipped, reverenced and of much be given them, adored (for this term of
adoring is also applied to men in holy Scriptures Genesis 23. v 7. 27. v. 29.)
yet Sacrifice is due to God only, and to no creature how excellent so ever. In
so much (says the same Doctor) that as al nations found it necessary to
offer Sacrifice, so none durst sacrifice to any nisi et, quem Deum autsciuit,
aut putauit, aut finxit: but to him whom they either knew, or thought, or
fained to be God.

4. Hadre^tect to Abel [Both Cain and Abel did well in offering external
Sacrifice, but they differed much in sincerity and manner of choosing or
dividing To. 3. q. 4. Quaest. Hebraie. Lib 15. ciuit c. 7. Mala. 1. Hebr. 11.
Leuit. 9. Iudic. 6. 2. Par. 7. 3. Reg 18. 2. Mac 1
their oblations, touching Gods part and their own, as S. Justinius Martyr,
Abels Sacrifice declared acceptable, and not Cains, by some external sign.
S. Hierom, S. Augustine and others teach. For Abel offered of the best things,
of the first begotten of his flock, and of their satte. And therefore God
respected and approved it. But to Cain and to his gifts he had not respect,
because he wanted sincere devotion. Which difference of Gods acceptance
appeared doubtless, as S. Hieromand S. Augustine supposed, by some external
sign, otherwise Cain had not understood it. Most like it was by fire sent from
God, which inflamed and consumed Abels Sacrifice, and not Cains. As we read of
diverse other Sacrifices in holy Scriptures.

7. Shall thou not receive:] Reward of good works, and punishment of evil are
Reward and punishment according to our works.
clerly proved by this place. God saying to Gain: If thou do well, shall
thou not receive again? what else but well for well doing? as Abel received
consolation of his Sacrifice well offered. but if thou do il, shall not thy
sin be present forth with at the door? afflicting thy conscience; and not
suffering thy mind to be in quiet, for remorse of thy wicked fact, and fear of
just judgment. For hence it came that Cains countenance fell, and his stomach
boiled with anger: punishment so beginning even in this life; and much more in
the next world our Savior will render (as him self says) to every man
according to his works: which Mat. 16. Romans 2.
the Apostle expresses more distinctly, eternal life, or wrath and
indignation.

7* Under thee [This Text so plainly shows freewil in man, also after his
Freewil in man also after his fall. Heretical translation.
fall, that the English Protestans to avoid so clear a truth, for these
words, the lust there of (to wit of sin) shall be under thee, and thou halt
have dominion over it, corruptly translate in some of their Bibles thus: Unto
thee his desire shall be Bible 1579.
subject, and thou shall rule over him. As if God had said, that Abel should be
under ^ain. As the fantastical Manichees perverted the sense, whose absurdity
S. Augustine controlleth maintayning the true construction of the words, ^b.
15. c. 7. ciuit.
Tu dominabe^ is illius; nunquid fratris? absit. Cuius igitur nisi pecuati?
Thou shall rule over: What, over thy brother? Not so. Over what then but
sin? In other English Editions, namely in the last, which we suppose they will
stand to, it is better, but yet obscure thus, Unto thee shall be the desire
thereof, and thou shall have rule of (...). Let us therefore examine the sense,
and if S. Hierome, the great scripture Doctor Quaest. Hebraic. in Genesis
did rightly understand it, God did speak to this effect to Cain: Because thou
have freevvil, I vvarne thee, that sin have not dominion over thee, but thou
over sin. The Hebrew also and Greek text prove freewil in Cain.
The Hebrew has thus: ad te appetitus eius, et tu dominaberis in eum, or, ei.
Unto thee the appetite thereof, and thou shall rule over it. Thargum
Hierosolomitanum concludes Gods speech to Cain thus: Into thy hand I have
given power of thy concupiscence, and have thou dominion thereof: whether thou
vvilt to good or to evil. The Greek has thus: To thee is the conversion
thereof, and thou shall bear rule over it: to wit, appetite, lust,
concupiscence is under thy will. Finally, al antiquity universality Freewil
testified by antiquity, universality, and consent of learned and reasonable
persons. Luther abhor red the name of freewil.
S. Augustine. li. de v^ra Rel. ca. 14.
and uniform consent of Christian Doctors, and other learned Philosophers, and
reasonable men hold it for certain and an evident truth, that man yea a sinner
has sreewil. Yet Luther, the father of Protestants, so abhorred this truth,
that he could not abide the very word, nor voutsafe (when he writ against it)
to title his beastly book, Contra liberum arbitrium, Against freevvil: but,
De seruo arbitrio. Of seruil arbitriment. And denies that man is in aniwise
free to choose, to resolve, or determine, but in all things seruil, tied,
constrained, and compelled to whatsoever he does, says, or thincketh. Further,
that man in all his actions is like to a hackney, that is, forced to go whither
the rider will have him. And knowing the whole world against him, shameth not to
confess, that he sets them al at naught in respect of him self, concluding
thus: lib. de seruo arbitrio.
I have not (says he) conferred with any in this book, but I have affirmed,
and I do affirm. Neither vvil I that any man judge hereof, but I counsel al
to obey, or yield to mine Calvin also misliketh the word freewil.
opinion. Calvin also for his part, conspireth in this heresy with Luther, but
more faintly rather wishes, then imagines that men be so mad as to flee
lib. 2. c. 2. par. 8. lib. 2. aduers. Iouinian.
from the name of freewil. I (says Calvin) neither myself would use this
word, and would vvish others, if they as^e me counsel, to abstain from it.
But we will be Where is necessity there is nether reward not punishment due.
bold to oppose S. Hieromes reason against Luther, Calvin, al Manichees, and
others that deny freewil. God made us (says he) with freevvil, neither are
we drawn by necessity to virtues nor to viees; otherwise where is
necessity, there is neither damnation nor crown.

16. Cain went forth] It is a mark of Heretics to make breach, and go 1.
Joan. 2. Tract. de Zelo and liuore.
forth of the Church. And commonly it comes of envy. Some run into heresies
Going forth of the Church a mark of Heretics.
and schisms (says S. Cyprian) when they envy Bishops, vvhilest one either
complains that him self was not rather ordained, or disdaineth to suffer an
other above him. Hereupon he kicketh, hereupon he rebelleth. Envy moved Cain
to kill his brother, because his 1. Joan. 3.
own works were wicked and rejected: and his brothers just, and esteemed.
So going forth became obstinate, obdurate, and desperate in his sin, and
being reprobate of God, began a wicked City, opposite to the City of God.
Wherefore Moses, as S. Augustine notes, intending to describe, and show the
lib. de Pastore. c. 8. etc. 20.
perpetual continuance of Gods City, the true Church, from Adam, which he does
by the line of Seth to Noe, and so forward to his own time, would not omit to
tell also the progeny of Cain, even to the floode, wherein al his offspring was
finally drowned and destroyed, that the true City of God might appear more
distinct, more co^spicuous, and more renowned. And that in deed the same only
(and not any broken and interrupted companies or conuenticles) might be known
to be the true Church of God.

23. I have slaine] So hard and obscure is this place, that S. Hierom required
Scripture hard
Tom. 3. ad 1. quaest. Damas^*
by S. Damasus Pope to expoundit, dares not affirm any one sense for
certain, but proposing diverse, which the text may seem to bear; wishes the
Pope (who was also very learned) to examine al more at large: putting him in
mind that Origin writ his twelfth and thirtenth books upon this only place.
The most probable exposition seems to be gathered out of the Hebrews A
probable sense according to the Hebrews Tradition.
Tradition, that this Lamech of the issue of Cain (for there was an other
Lamech of Seths progeny) much addicted to hunting, and his eyes decaying, used
in that exercise the direction of a young man his nephew, the son of
Tubalcain. Who seeing something move in bushes, supposing it to be a wild
beast, willed his grandfather to shoot at the same: which he did, and stroke
the mark with a deadly wound, and approaching to take the pray, found it to be
old Cain. VVhereupon sore amazed, afflicted, and moved with great passion, did
so beat the young man, for his il direction, that he also died of the dry
blows. After both which mishappes, and his passion at last caulmed, Lamech
lamenteth as the text says, that he had killed a man and stripling, towit, the
one with a wound, the other with dry blows, for which he feared seuenfold
punishment more then Cain suffered for killing Abel. Nevertheless S. Chris. ho.
20. in Genesis
S. Hierom and other Fathers think it probable, that Lamech killing the one of
ignorance, the other in passion, was not so seuerly punished as he feared. And
so they understand the rest of this passage, that seuenfold vengance was taken
of Cain, by prolongation of his miserable life til his seventh generation, when
Lib. 1. Antiq. ca. 2. Origin in Genesis Luc. 3.
one of his own issue slew him, and an other of the same lineage with him. And
Lamech was punished seventy seuenfold when his seventy seven children (for so
many he had, as Josephus writes) and al their offspring perished in the flood.
Mystically by seventy seven may be signified that the sin of mankind
Mystical sense
should be punished and expiated in Christ our Redemer. who was borne in the
seventy seventh generation from Adam.

26. Begane to invoke.] Seth was a most holy man, and so brought up his
Suidas vocabulo Seth. Joseph. l. 1. Ant^. S. Aug. epist. 99. ad Euod.
children, that they were called the sons of God. Genesis 6. Adam also and Eve
were penitent, and became great confessors, and are now Saints. And so it can
not be doubted but amongst other spiritual exercises they prayed and inuocated
God. And therefore that which is here said: He (towit Enos) bagane or (as the
Hebrew has) then was begune, to invoke the name of our Lord, can not Public
prayer besides Sacrifice in the Church of God.
be understood of private, but of some public prayer of many meeting
together, and observing some rites and set form in peculiar place dedicated
to divine Service, the Church being now grown to a competent multitude. And
that besides Sacrifice, which was also before, as appears both by Cain and
Abel.

CHAP. V. The progeny of Adam, and number of their years (with the death of
the rest, and translation of Enoch) in the line of Seth, to Noe and his three
sons.
THIS is the book of the generation of Adam. In the Sap. 2, 24. Eccli. 17, 1.
day, when God created man, to the likeness of God and daughters. And all the
time that Adam lived, came This Hebrew phrase vvalked with God, signifies
that he lived well and pleased God.
walked with God: and lived after The seventy two Interpreters say, God
translated him And so does S. Paul. Heb. 11.
took him. Mathusala This is the longest life of al here recited But if we
consider that Adam was as strong of body, the first day he was ere ated, as
these others were at the age of 60. years (before which, none are said no have
begot children) and so subsract 60. years from Mathusala, then Adam lived in
man's state longer then he by 21. years.
nine hundred The second prophecy before Male on Easter Eve.
Noe when he was five hundred years old, begat Sem, Cham, and Iaphat.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. V.
4. Begat sons and daughters.] Moses in this genealogy recites not
always S. Aug. li. 15. ciuit. c. 20.
The continual succession of Gods Church, and interruption of other communities.
the first begotten, nor the whole progeny by their names (for then he should
have repeated Cain and Abel, and have named many others) but those only by
whom the Church of God continued, signifying the rest in general, whose
succession was cut of by the flood.

5. And he died.] By this Gods word is verified saying, that Adam should dye,
if he should eat of the forbidden tree. And the devil is proved a liar,
saying, they should not dye. It is also most true that Adam dyed that day in
which How man died the day that he sinned.
he did eat. For he began that very day to decline to death; and so does al
mankind ever since, as truly said the woman of Thecua to king David: we do al
2. R. 14.
die, and as waters that return not, we fall down on the earth. And what
else (says S. Gregory) is this daily decaying of our corruption, but a
lingering death? And ho. 37. in Euangel. Psalm. 89. S. Ireneus li. 5. aduer.
Heret. Cicero li. de Senec. and q 1. Tuscul.
none of al these that lived longest reaching to a thousand years (which with
God is as one day) man dyed in that day in which he transgressed.

Morally ancient Fathers here note, that albeit the life of the Patriarchs
seems Al time is short in respect of eternity.
long to us, yet if we compare the same to eternity it is nothing. Neither by
the judgment of Philosophers may aniething be counted long, that has an end:
as Tullie bringing Cato wisely disputing, shows the longest life to be but a
short moment. Whereby again we may see what loss we sustain by sin:
seeing if sin had not benne, we should al have benne translated from earth to
heaven, and never have dyed.

24. Was seen no more.] That Enoch and Elias are yet alive is a constant
Enoch and Elias yet* living in body.
known truth, in the hearts and mouths of the faithful, says S. Augustine in
his first book, de peccat. merit and remiss. c. 3. and confirms the same in
diverse li. 20. ciuit. c 29. lib. 2. de gratia Christi c. 23. tract. 4. in Ioa^.
other places. And it is testified by very many both Greek and Latin Doctors.
S. Ireneus li. 5. S. Justinius Martyr, q. 85. ad Orthodoxos. S. Hippolitus li.
de Antichristo. S. Damascen, li. 4. de Orthodoxafide. S. Hierom. epist. 61. ad
Pamach. c. 11. S. Ambrose in Psalm. 45. S. Chrysostom. ho. 21. in Genesis ho. 58.
in Mat. ho. 4. in epist. 2. ad These. ho. 22. in ep. ad Heb. S. Greg. li. 14.
Moral. c. 11, ho. 12. in Ezech. S. Prosp. li. vlt. de promis. S. Bid in c. 9.
Marc. Manifest Scripture that Elias yet lives, and shall be slain and an other
with him* Likewise that Enoch did not see death.
Theophilact and O^cumenius in cap. 17. Mat. and others innumerable. Touching
Elias it is manifest in Scriptures, that he shall come, and preach, and be
Malac. 4 Apo. 11.
slain with an other witness of Christ, before the terrible day of Judgment.
Of Enoch Moses here makes the matter more then probable, saying of every one
of the rest, he dyed, only of Enoch says not so, but that he appeared, or
(...). Eccli. 44 Heb. 11.
was seen no more. For which the seventy two interpreters say, And he was
not found, for God translated him. Which can not signify death, but
transporting, or removing to an other place. VVhereto agrees the author of
Ecclesiasticus, saying: Enoch pleased God, and was translated. But most
clearly S. Paul says. Enoch was translated, that he should not see death. and
he was not found for God translated him. With what plainer words can any man
declare, that a These Scriptures speak of temporal not of spiritual death.
special person were not dead, then to say: He was translated, or conveyed
away, that he should not see death? Neither is it a reasonable evasion to
interpret this of spiritual death. For so Adam being eternally saved (as S.
Irenaeus li. 3. c. 34. Epiphan. con. haeresim 46. S. Agu^^in epist. 99. ad
Euodium, and others teach, and the whole Church believes) was preserved from
that death, and so undoubtedly were Seth, and Enos being most holy. and the
rest here recounted, as is most probable. Nevertheless for further confutation
of the contrary ho. 21. in Genesis lib. 1. de pec. mer. c. 2. and 3. l. 9. de
Ge^. ad lit. c. 6. S. Tho. in c. 11. ad Hebreos.
opinion of Protestants, the reader may also observe the judgment of S.
Chrisostom, who affirms that Though it be not a matter of faith, whether
Enoch The Fathers prove by the scriptures that Enoch is not dead.
be now in Paradise from whence Adam and Eve were expelled, or in some other
pleasant place: Dicunt tamen sacrae Scriprurae quod Deus transtulit eum, and
quod viuentem transtulit eum, quod mortem ipse non sit expertus. The holy
Scriptures say that God translated him, and that he translated him alive, that
he felt not (or has not experienced) death. And S. Augustine as expressly says.
Non mortuus, sed viuus translatus est. He (to wit Enoch) is translated, not
dead but alive. Yea he teaches how his life is sustained thus many thousand
years upon earth. And shows moreover that both Enoch and Elias shall dye. For
seeing Enoch and Elias (says he) are dead in Adam, and carrying the offspring of
death in their flesh, to pay that debt, are to return to this life (of common
conversation) and to pay this debt which so long is deferred.

Diverse reasons are also alleged, why God would reserve these two alive.
Causes why Enoch and Elias are reserved alive.
S. Chris. ho. 21. in Genesis et in 2. These. 2 Theodor. q. 45. in Genesis Aretas, in
11. Apoc. S. Greg. lib. 14. Moral. c. v^^. and ho. 12 in Ezech. Eccl. 44. Mala.
4. Eccl. 48.
First to show by example, that as their mortal bodies are long conserved from
corrupting or decaying, in like sort Adam and Eve and al others not sinning,
should have been conserved, and according to Gods promise, never have died, 1
but after some good time translated to heaven, and endued with immortality. 2
Secondly to give us an argument of immortality, which is promised after the
general Resurrection. For seeing God does preserve some mortal, so long from al
infirmity, we may assuredly believe that he will give immortal and eternal life
of bobie and soul to his Saints, after they have paid the debt of death,
and 3
are risen again. Thirdly these two (one of the law of nature, the other of
the law of Moses) are preserved alive, to come amongst men again toward See
D. Sand. lib. 8. c. 35. de Monar. Eccl. And F. Pererius in c. 12. Danielis.
the end of the world, to teach, testify, and defend the true faith and
doctrine of Christ, against Antichrist, when he shall most violently oppugn and
persecute the Church. Of Enoch it is said in the book of Ecclesiasticus, that
he was translated, vt det gentibus poenitenntiam, that he give repentance to
the nations, by his preaching, and reducing the deceived from Antichrist. And
of Elias Malachie prophicieth, that he shall come before the great and terrible
day of our Lord, and shall turn the heart of the fathers (that is the people of
the Jews) to the sons (the Christians) and of the sons (the deceived
Christians) to the fathers, the ancient true Catholics.

CHAP. VI. Man's sins cause of the deluge. 4. Giants were then upon the
earth. 8. Noe being just was commanded to build the Arc, 18. vvherin he with
seven persons more, and the seed of other living things were saved.
AND after that men began to be multiplied upon the The professors of true
religion were called the sons of God* the folowers of errors the sons of
men.
earth, and had procreation of daughters: The:: sons because he is flesh: and
his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. And * Giants were upon the
earth in those days. God who is immutable, and subject to no passion, yet by
the enormitie of sins seems provoked to wrath, and to repent that he had
made man. S. Amb. li. de Noe and arca. c. 4.
repented him that he had made man on the earth. And touched inwardly with
sorrow of heart, I will, says he: clean

But Noe found grace before our Lord: These are the Eccl. 44, 17.
In all generations God reserved some just. Much more in the law of Grace.
his generations, he did walk with God. And he begat payres of al sorts shall
enter in with thee, that they may live. Thou shall take therefore with thee of
al meats, that A right example of a just maa.
did Heb. 11.
al things, which God commanded him.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VI.
2. Sons of God.] The progeny of Seth, professing true faith and Religion,
Sons of God and sons of men was then such a distinction, as now Catholics
and Heretics.
were called the sons of God: and those of Cains issue and congregation, lib.
15. c. 23. ciuit. De vera relig. c. 7. con. epist. sund. c. 4 Trac. 32. in Joan.
following erroneous and wicked opinions, were called the sons of men. Which
were then the distinctiue terms of true and false Religion, as afterward
were the terms of Jews and Gentiles: after Christ, Christians and Paganes:
and lastly true and false Christians are distinguished, by the names of
Catholics and Heretics. As S. Augustine teaches, in his questions upon
Genesis, and other places. Which is confirmed by the like judgment of S. Ciril
Alexandrinus li. 9. aduers. Iulianum. S. Ambrose li. de Noe and arca. c. 4. S.
Pacianus epist. ad Symphorianum. Theodoret. and many others upon this place.

3 An hundred and twenty years.] Man's life was not here shortened to an
Philo. Josephus. Lactant. Rupert. Tostatus.
hundred and twenty years, as some have misunderstood this place. For after
This warning and expectation of repentance shows freewil in man.
this diverse lived much longer, as appears in the genealogy of Sem to Abram
in the 11. chapter of Genesis. And Abraham lived. 175. years (c. 25.) Isaac
180. (c. 35.) Jacob 147. (c. 47.) and Ioiadas borne 1500. years after, lived
130. years (2. Par. 24.) But 120. years were granted before the flood for
that generation to repent in, as the Chaldee Edition expresses more plainly:
Terminus dabitur ei centum viginti annorum si sort conuertatur. The term of
an hundred and twenty years shall be given them, if perhaps they may convert.
And so S. Chrisostom. S. Hierom. and S. Augustine expound this Scripture. Yet
whether God cut of 20. of these years, and brought the flood after a 100 (for
Noe had his sons when he was 500. years old, and the flood came in the 600.
year of his age) or that this warning was given twenty years before ho. 22.
in Genesis Tradit. Heb. lib. 15. c. 24. ciuit.
any of his sons were borne, is not so easily decided by the holy Doctors.
Scriptures not easy.
How easy soever Protestants say al Scriptures are. Though under correction of
better judgment, it seems more probable, that Moses by anticipation joins
the birth of Noes sons (when he was 500. years old) to the rest of the
geneologie of the first Patriarchs, in the former chapter, and then tells of
this admonition, given 20. years before their birth. And so God expected the
peoples repentance the whole time of 120. years prescribed.

4. Grants were upon the earth.] Some have thought that these giantes were
Erroneous opinions concerning these giants.
not men, nor begotten by men, but that either devils, which fell at first from
heaven, or other Angels allured with concupiscence, begat them of the
daughters of Cain. Philo Iudeus in his book de Gigantibus, writes that those
whom Moses here called Augels, the Philosophers called Genios. Qui sunt
animalia ae^ea, which are living creatures with ayrie bodies Josephus (li. 1.
Antiq.) says that Angels begat these giants. Tertullian also li. de habitu
muliebri) holds the same error, and diverse more otherwise good authors. But
S. Ciril of Alexandria (li. 9. aduer. Julian) S. Chrisostom (homil 22. in The
principal doctors prove that they were men, and begotten of men First reason
Gen) S. Ambrose de Noe and arca. c. 4.) S. Augustine (li. 15. c. 23. de ciuit)
S. Hierom (Tradit. Hebraic) and other most principal Doctors teach it to be
untrue, yea impossible, that these giants should have been begotten by any
other creatures then by men. For that Angels and devils are mere spirits
without al natural bodies. And if they had ayrie bodies (as they have not) yet
they could not have such generation. For the power or force to engender
belongs 2
to the vegatatiue soul, whose proper operations are to tuine nutriment into
the substance of the subject wherein it is, and to engender new issue or
offspring from the same, as Aristotle shows (li. 2. de anima, textu. 24.) And
in what bodies soever there is vegetative soul, it must needs be, that the
same was engendered, and must some times decay and die, and so devils should be
mortal. Moreover if they could have generation together with 3
mankind, then such issue should be a distinct species both from man and devil,
as a mule differs both from horse and ass. Again, if spirits had abused
women 4
in assumpted bodies, and shape of men, yet they did not take them to 5
wives as the Scripture says they did, who begat these giants. Finally the
holy Scripture here expressly calls the giants men. These be the mighty
ones, famous men. The modesty of Scripture terming them famous, whom our
common Giants most monstrous in body and in mind.
phrase would call infamous being more monstrous in wickedness of mind, then in
hugenes of body. For they were most insolent, lascivious, covetous, cruel, and
in all kind of vices most impious.

5. All the coigtation bent to euel.] Luther (in his 21. article condemned by
Leo the tenth) would prove by these words, and the like following, Al siesh
Luthers argument that al men's works are sins.
had corrupted his way upon earth, that al works of men are sins For (says
he) seeing the hearts of al men are bent always to evil, and al humane actions
proceed from the heart, it must needs be that the heart as the fountain being
corrupt, the streams also issuing from the same must be corrupted. Again al
flesh having corrupted his way upon earth, there is not any just man (says he)
nor any man without sin: and with Protestants al sins are mortal. But
Heretics arguments are like to that the Poets feyne of Sisyphus laboring to
Heretics like to Sisyphus.
earie a great stone to the top of an high hill, which when he has brought
almost to the height, it still falls from him, and tumbleth again to the
bottom. Even so their arguments that make greatest show of proving their
opinions, The sins before the flood very grievous in four respects,
are nothing but vain traueling, when they come to be tried by the true sense
of holy Scripture. In this place Moses describes the enormitie of sin that
reigned in the world before the flood, for which God sent that destruction. For
it was heinous in deed, and that especially in four respects. First the
malice and wickedness was general, which is signified by those words, al flesh
has 1
corrupted his way upon earth. Secondly it was great malice, signified by the
words 2
much, and, all the cogitations of their heart is bent to evil. For they
committed al manner of wickedness in hautines of pride, in all lasciuiousnes of
the flesh, in all cruelty of robbing, sacking, and murdering, in all impiety,
against God and man. 3
Thirdly, it was of long continuance, and daily iterated. For Cain once fallen
into damnable sin never repented, and al his progeny was exceeding wicked and
after that Adam and Seth were dead, and Enoch translated, many of the faithful
fell to the wicked sort, and became worse and worse omni tempore, always, or
every day. Fourthly they were obstinate and obdurate, not repenting 4
when Noe built the arc, and preached justice (as S. Peter testifies) and
therefore 2. Pet. 2.
God saved him and his family, bringing in the deluge upon the world of the
impious. Al which makes nothing at al for Luther. For although the malice of
man, and corruption of flesh, was then very genaral, great, of long
continuance, Luthers argugument answered.
and obstinate, yet was it not so universal, but that God him self excepted
Noe, saying to him I have found thee just in my sight in this generation,
whereby it is clear that these general terms, al cogitation and al flesh, have
exceptions. As likewise other as general propositions in this same chapter,
concerning the punishment threatened, comprehend not absolutely al, and every
one, but almost al, very few excepted. I vvil clean take away, or destroy man
whom I have created, from the face of the earth. The end of al flesh is come
before me. again, that I may destroy al flesh wherein is breath of life under
heaven. These are very general speeches, that al should be destroyed, and yet
eight persons of mankind, that had the same natural flesh, and amongst other
living creatures, that had breath, diverse payres were saved alive. So that this
place (nor any other in holy Scripture) will not Ezech. ^. Luc. 1 and 2. Apoc.
22.
prove that Protestants paradox, that al men's actions are mortal sins, or
that no man in this life is or can be just: but many scriptures tell us plainly
that some men were just, as Noe, Job, Daniel, Zacharias, Elisabeth, Simeon and
others Of Noe see more in the next annotation.

9. Noe was a just and perfect man] Here Noe is not only called just, but
also Noe just and perfect.
perfect. The hebrew word tamim of the verb tamam (which signifies to finish
or accomplish) shows that Noe was a perfect or complete man doing all that he
was commanded, and performing the offices of al virtues that pertained to him;
and that not in a vulgar and mean sort, but in a high degree, and heroical
manner, as sundry ancient Fathers have gathered upon this place. We shall cite
some few of their sayings for example. S. Hierom (Tradit. Hebraic. in Gen.)
distinguishing between consummate justice (of the next life) and justice of this
generation (or transitory life) says: Noe the just man was perfect in his
generations: Noe did walk with God: that is, did follow his steps. S.
August. (li. 15. ciuit. c. 26.) says the like, that Noe was called just in
his generation, tovvit, not as the citizens of Gods city are to be perfected
in that immortality, in which they shall be equal to Angels, but as they may
be perfect in this pilgramage. And in his book de perfectione contra
Caelestium. he describes him to be a perfect man, that runs Who is perfect
in this life.
without blame toward perfection, void of damnable sins, and is not
negligent to cleanse venial sins, by alms, prayers, and other good works.
S. Ambrose also testifies, (li. de Noe and arca c. 4.) that albeit the world
was very wicked, yet some were just, saying: By the grace (or favor) which
Noe found, is shevved that other nens offense does not obscure the just man,
who is pray^ed, not by the nobility of his birth, but by the merit of his
justice and perfection. S. Chrisost. most largely (ho. 23. in Gen) sets
forth the justice and perfection of Noe. Where after he has showed that Noe
deserved in deed the name of a man, because he by flying vices, and following
virtues conserved the image of man, when others like beasts were led away
and ruled by their wicked lusts, proceeds thus in his commendation. Behold
(says he) an other kind of praise: Noe is called, just, which denomination
comprehends al virtue. For this name just we use to pronounce of them, that
exercise al manner of virtue. And that you may learn, how he arrived to the very
top which was then also required of our nature, the Scripture says, he was
just, being perfect in his generation. He petformed what things soever it
behooves one to do that embraces virtue, for such a one is perfect, he
intermitted nothing, he halted in nothing, he did not well in this thing, and
sinned in that thing, but was perfect in every virtue, which was requisite for
him to have. Moreover to make also this just man more conspicuous to us in
regard of the time, and by comparing him with others, the Scripture says, he
was perfect in his generation: in that time, in that perverse generation,
which declined unto evil, which would not so much as pretend any resemblance
of virtue. In that generation therefore, in those times, that just man not only
pretended, but arrived to that height of virtue, that he became perfect, and in all things absolute. And that which I said before, to do well amongst the
enemies of virtue, amongst them that forbid virtue, does always testify a
greater poyse of virtue, so by this occasion the just man got greater praises.
Neither does divine Scripture here make an end of praising him, but further
shows the excellency of his virtue, and that he Diuin^ calcuio.
was approved by Gods own censure, for besides saying: He was perfect in his
generation, it adds, that Noe pleased God. So great was the renown of his
virtue, that he deserved to be praised of God. For Noe pleased God says the
Scripture, that you may know that he was approved of God. He pleased that eye,
that can not be deceived, by his good works. Thus far S. Chrisostom and much
more to the same effect. S. Gregory the great in his fifth book of Morales,
and 36. chapter upon the third chapter of Job, recounting certain principal
Patriarchs among the rest says: Noe for that he pleased Gods examination was
saved aliu^in the unclean world. and after a large catalogue of other just
men in confirmation of this doctrine, that some were just in the law of nature
concludes thus: Neither is it to be believed (says he) that only so many
were just before the law was received, as Moses contracteth in his most
brief description.

15. Three hundred cubites] Apelles an old heretic, scholar of Marcian, but
after Appelles an old Heretic, that denied Christ to have true flesh.
leaving him, and amongst other new coined heresies, rejecting the Law and the
Prophets, would by this place impugn Moses, saying it was impossible that in
so small rowme, as was the arc by this description, the designed payres of al
kinds of beasts, foul, and serpents, should be contained, with the eight
persons, and al their provision of meat for a whole year. Whereupon he
concludes that this narration (which he calls a fable) has no probability,
nor possibility to be true. To whom and al such calumniators it may be
answered, A general answer to al calumniators of wise and learned men.
that Moses even in an heretics own co^ceipt, if malice obscured not his
sense, must needs be thought wise enough, if he had benne disposed to feign
fables, to frame them probable, or possible, especially when he pretended not
to signific a miracle, in the smalnes of the rowme to receive so much, as he
reports. Origin to answer him supposes a cubite here mentioned, to have
contained Origens opinion of long cubits not probable.
six ordinary cubits: and so doubtless the arc might easily contain al ^o 2.
in 6. Genesis
things that are here spoken of, for so it were like to a great city. But
this opinion neither has good warrant, that ever the Egyptians (of whom he
supposes Moses might have learned it) or any other nation used such long
cubits, neither can this measure of a cubite, be agreeable to Moses meaning,
who no Moses in other places can not be understood to speak of o long cubits.
doubt speaks of the like cubits here, as he does in other places. And in
Exodus he describes an Altar to be made five cubits long, five broad, and
Exodus 27.
three in height. Which would be by Origens measure (euetie cubite containing
six ordinary cubits, that is nine foot at least) in length, and likewise in
breadth 45. foot, and 27. foot in height. Again (Deuteronomy. 3.) Moses tells of
an iron bed of Og King of Basan, that was nine cubits long, and four broad.
Which make according to Origens measure of a cubite, fourscore and one foot
in length, and in breadth 36. foot: which in deed have no probability. And
therefore S. Augustine and other Doctors, supposing that Moses in all l. 15.
ciuit c. 27.
these books, written for instruction of the same people, whom he brought
forth of Egypt, speaks of one sort of cubits, do likewise judge that he
means ordinary and known cubits, which contain a foot and a half every
cubite, as Vitruuius Agricola and others do prove, or a foot and three
quarters of a foot, which is the greatest cubite, that seems to be mentioned
in holy Scripture, called a man's cubite, or cubite of a man's hand. And so the
Arc Deu. ^.
was atleast in length 450. foot, in breadth 75. in height 45. or at most in
length 525. foot, in breadth 87. and a half: in height 52. and a half. And
either of these capacities was sufficient to receive all the things here
mentioned, considering the loftes and partions, that were in the whole arc.

CHAP. VII. Noe with his family, and paires of al kinds of beasts and
fowls, being entered into the arc, 12. it raineth forty days and forty
nights. 21. Al men and other living creatures on the earth, without the arc,
are destroyed.
AND our Lord said to him: Get thee in, thou and al Noe was just not only by
the estimation of men, but in deed and before God.
in my sight in this generation. Of al beasts that are Observation of clean
and vncleanne beasts by tradition, before the law of Moses.
clean, Mat. 24. Luc* 17.
of his sons with him into the arc, because of the waters of the flood. Of
beasts also the clean and the unclean, The Hebrew word Thehom signifies a
gulf of water, from whence new fountaynes sprang, more abundantly the^ ever
since or before.
great deapth were broken up, and Arubbah signifies great pipes or windows,
by which water fell down in great abundance from the air, here called heaven,
S. Hier. quest. Heb. S. Epiph, ad Io. Hierosolom. S. Chr. (...). 25. in Genesis
the flood gates of heaven were opened: and the rain fell upon the their kind,
and al cattle in their kind, and all that moves upon the earth according to
their kind, and al foul according to their kind, al birds, and all that fly
went to Noe Sap. 10. 4. ^cl. 39.
earth, from man even to beast, as well it that creeps, as the fowls of the
air: and they were destroyed from of the earth:* but only Noe remained, and
they that were with him in the arc. And the waters held on above the earth 1.
Pet. 3.
an hundred fifty days.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VII.
16. Shut him in] God who by his only will could in a moment have drowned all the
rest of the world, saving whom he pleased, not needing in any thing the help
of his creatures, yet would use both natural, and supernatural means, God
uses both natural and supernatural means, as secundarie causes, in producing,
conseruing, governing, punishing, and in rewarding his creatures.
as the labor of Noe to build the arc, new fountains springing, and the
heavens pouring down water forty days together, afterward the wind to
dry up the earh, and because the door being great (for Elephants^ to enter in)
and was to be firmed without (as S. Ambrose notes) for better enduring the li.
de Noe and area, c. 15.
forcible waters, could not commodiously be closed by Noe, our Lord (by the
ministry of Angels) shut him in on the out side, to teach us by all this, and
the like disposition of things, that albeit his Divine omnipotency can do what
he will al alone, yet he will have his creatures to concur and cooperate as
secundarie causes, sometimes naturally, sometimes supernaturally, or
miraculously, as it pleases his goodness to impert to them power and virtue.

23. But only Noe] As there is not any thing in all the old Testament, from the
creation of the world til the coming of Christ, more notable, more admirable,
or of greater importance, then this history of the general flood; so was there
nothing (though al, or most chanced to them in figure) that ever more Al or
most things in the old Testament be in figure of the new, and no figure more
exact then the flood of Noe.
1. Cor. 10
aptly, more lively, or more exactly prefigured Christ and his Church, with the
rest of al mankind, then did Noe and the arc, and the drowning of the rest of
the world in that deluge. Which S. Augustine declares in many places, but Ep.
95. l. 5. de Baptis c. 28. de vnitate Eccles. ca. 5. In Psalm. 103. and 131 Ser.
69. de te^pore. 1. Pet. 3. Mat. 24. Luc. 17.
most especially and of purpose in his twelfth book against Faustus the
Manichee, from the 14. chapter to the 22. and in his fifteenth book of the
city of God, in the two last chapters: where he shows at large both the
certainty of the history, and that as certainly it was a figure of things in
the new Testament, and withal the great congruitie between the figure and the
things figured. The same did Origin explicate (homil 2. in Gen.) S. Gregory
(homil 12. in How the Doctors apply the figure to the things figured
Ezech.) Rupertus (li. 4. comment. in Genesis c. 71. and sequent.) and diverse
other ancient Doctors, confirming their expositions by S. Peter's testimony,
saying: In the arc a fevv, that is eight souls (or persons) were saved (from
drowning) by water, whereunto Baptism being of the like form now saves you
also. And by our Saviors words saying: As in the days of Noe* so shall also
the coming of the son of man be. In sum the Doctors teach, that Noe
signifying rest was a figure Noe signified Christ. The arc the Church.
of Christ, the very rest of man's soul. Whom who soever follows shall find
rest for their souls. The arc signifies the Church, the form thereof being
six times so long as broad, and ten times so long as hiegh, resembles the
proportion of man's body, lying prone or prostrate. The door in the side
represents the wound in Christ's side, from whence flowed the holy
Sacraments, Entrance into the Church by Baptism. Virtue of Sacraments comes
from Christ's Passion Doctors and Pastores in the Church.
by which the faithful enter into the Church, and are sanctified. The timber
whereof the arc is made, and the water bearing it up, signified the Cross of
Christ and Baptism. For as Noe (says S. Augustine) with his, was delivered
by li. 12. de Baptis. c.14.
the water and the wood, so the family of Christ, by Baptism signed with
Christ's Passion on the Cross. Likewise the squarnes of the timber which both
sustained the burden of al contained in the arc, and resisted the boystrous
waves of the flood beating without, did signify such men in the Church, as be
constant and stand firmly in all sorts of tentations: especially godly and
learned Doctors and Pastors, who by word and example uphold and confirm the
faithful people in all afflictions within, and withstand and convince al
Heretics, and other Infidels that oppugn the Church without. Again the
hiegher and lower rowmes with the middle chambers and third loftes, and other
distinctions of cabinets, and Variety of states and orders in the Church
partitions, and al sorts of living creatures clean and unclean, received
therein, did signify the varieties of al states and functions, and diversity
of manners and merits in the Church, in which are persons of al degrees,
Clergy and Good and evil in the Church Perpetuity o^ the Church.
Laity, Potentates, Princes, subjects, good and evil. The most strong kind of
glue called bitumen, signified the permanent or everlasting stabilitie, and
inseperable co^nexion of the Church, by the grace and continual assistance of
the Holy Ghost conseruing the same. The consummation of the arc in one cubite
signified the unity of the same Church, which is one in all times, and places.
Unity of the Church.
Neither would God almighty have many arkes, for Noe and his sons or other
creatures, nor many chief rulers (though he would that of them should come
many Nations) but one only arc, and one chief governor thereof, and that al
without the same should corporally dye, to signify that al One chief
governor in the Church
which dye without the Church do perish, and are eternally damned. whereupon
Epist. 57. ad Damasum.
S. Hierom, amongst other Fathers, shows that al within the Church, that
communicate with the Sea Apostolic (wherein S. Damasus sat then governor)
are as those in the ark of Noah, and al Schismatikes, Heretics No salvation
out of the Church.
and other Infidels are in like case, with the rest of the world, that were
drowned with the flood.

The end of the first age.
A BRIEF REMONSTRANCE OF THE STATE OF THE CHVRCH, AND FACE OF Religion, in the
first age of the world. From the creation to Noes flood: the space of 1656.
years.
HERE according to our purpose mentioned before, we will briefly recite certain
principal points of Religion, taught and observed in the first age. In which
the foundations of the true manner of serving God (that should be continued to
the end of the world) were laid, and prospered in some, as appears in these
seven first chapters of Genesis. But first of al, we shall in two words repete
(as it is clerly geathered in the same holy Scripture) the state of man
before, and immediately after his fall, being the subject to whom all this
pertayneth.

After therefore that God had created other things, both in heaven and Man made
to Gods image, and in happy state.
earth, last of al he made Man, to his own image and likeness, with
understanding and freewil, therein like to Angels, and superior to al other
creatures, and so made him Lord and master of al earthly things. Neither were
these the greatest benesits which God bestowed on man: for his divine goodness
ind^ed also this his reasonable creature, with innocence and original justice,
whereby al things were most rightly ordered within him, and about him. Man
obeyed God, and al earthly creatures obeyed man.
His mind, will, and reason were obedient to God; his senses and inferior part
of his soul were subject to reason; his flesh and body obeyed the spirit;
and al earthly creatures obeyed him. God also adorned man with excellent
knowledge, both natural and supernatural. And albeit his body was of
corruptible substance, yet the same, and al his posterity, if they had not
sinned, should have benne conserved, and without dying, have benne translated
Man placed in Paradise.
to everlasting life. Thus man was placed in Paradise, and E^^ there made of a
ribbe of his side, to be his mate and inseperable companion, as man and wife
joined in Marriage, with Gods blessing, for increase and multiplication. As
appears in the two first chapters of this book.

But God having made man right, he entangled him self (^^ holy Eccle. 7, 30
sap. 2. 24.
Man sell by yelding to tentations.
Scripture speaks) with infinite questions. For the devil envying man's
felicity in^^gled our mother E^e with questions and lies, and then by her,
first seduced and deceived, allured also Adam to the transgression of Gods
commandment. And so they lost original justice, which Adam had received for him
self and al mankind: and al proceeding from them by natural propagation are
borne the children of wrath, in original sin contracted from Original sin.
Adam, slaves of the devil, not only subject to temporal death, but also are
excluded for ever from heavenly bliss and glory: except by Christ's redemption
particularly applied, they be restored to grace and justice in this life.

And touching Adam and Eve, whose sin was not original but actual, Adam and
Eve, were penitent.
directly committed by them selves, Gods mercy so reclamed them by new grace,
that they despared not (as Cain, and some orhers did afterward) but with hope
of remission were sorry and penitent, and accordingly received penance, and
redemption. For God brought Adam from his sin (as Sap, 10.
holy writ testifies) and the same is collected of Eve, God showing the
like signs of his provident mercy toward them both, of which we shall by and
by note some for example.

Now let us see the more principal points of faith and Religion professed and
observed by the Church of God before Noes flood. First they believed in Faith
in one God.
one Eternal and Omnipotent God, who made the whole world and al things therein
of nothing. which is easily confessed of all that are not plain Atheists, and
may be proved against them by reason. And therefore Adam and other Patriarchs
could not err in this Article, nor others be ignorant thereof, except they were
very wicked.

The Mystery also of the Blessed Trinity, three Divine Persons in one God,
The blessed Trinity.
though far above the reach of man's reason, yet was believed more expressly by
some, more implied by others, and conserved from age to age by tradition, at
least amongst the chief heads and leaders. whereupon Moses afterward
insinuated the same great Mystery, by diverse words and phrase^, writing of
God and his works. The two words God created if they be rightly considered
importe so much. For the word Elohim, God, in the plural number, signifies
plurality of Persons (for many Gods it can not signify, seeing there is but
one God) and the verb bara, created, in the singular number signifies one God
in nature and substance, albeit three Persons. For whatsoever Though the B.
Trinity work jointly in all creatures, yet diverse works are atributed to
distinct Persons.
God does in creatures, is the work of the whole Trinity: though holy
Scriptures do oftentimes appropriate some work to one Divine Person, some to
another. which also proves distinction of Persons in God. So the words God
created heaven and earth signify the Father, to whom power is Genesis ^.
attributed. In the beginning, signify the Son, to whom wisdom is
appropriated, and the words, The Sprite of God moved over the waters, signify
the Holy Ghost, by whose bountiful goodness, the waters were made fruictful.
Likewise Gods own words: Let us make man signify the plurality of Persons,
and Image and likeness in the singular number, signify one God.

Men also knew by faith many things perteyning to them selves. As that the
body was made of the slime of the earth: the soul not produced of any thing
formerly existing, but created immediately of nothing and naturally By faith the
state of man past and present was known.
immortal: that the soul of Adam was endued with grace and justice: that he
fell from that happy state, by yelding to tentation, and breaking Gods
commandment of abstinence: that for the same sin Adam and Eve were cast forth
of Paradise, and al mankind subject to death, and other calamities.

For remedy against sin, and restoration to grace, they believed in Christ
Belief in Christ to come.
promised to be borne of the woman's seed, who by his death should conquer the
wicked serpent, deliver man from captivity, and restore him to spiritual life.
And this is the cause of the perpetual enmity between the woman (especially the
most blessed Virgin Mother, of whom Christ took flesh) and the serpent, and
between her seed, the spiritual children of Christ, and the serpents seed, the
whole company of the wicked. Of this battle and conquest Targhum
Hierosolimitanum thus speaks. There shall be remedy and Remedy for men but
none for Angels that fell. Heb. 2, 16.
health to the children of women, but to thee, o serpent, there shall be no
medicine, yea they shall tread thee under their feet, in the latter days, by
the power of Christ their King. Likewise Gods familiar conversation with diverse
men in man's shape (Genesis 2. 3. 4. 6. and 7. was a sign of Christ's incarnation
And The Sacrifices immolated did prefigurate his death, in respect whereof it is
said in the Apocalips, The Lamb^ was Apoc. 13. 8.
slain from the beginniing of the world. But more expressly S. Paul testifies,
that Abel, Enoch, and Noe believed in Christ, naming them for example of the
first age, and others of other times, and in the end concludes, that many
more being approved by the same faith, received not the Heb. 11.
promise (to wit in their life time) God providing that they without None
admitted into heaven before Christ.
others (of the new Law) should not be consummate, that is, not admitted into
heavenly joys and fruition of God, until the way of eternal glory were
opened by our Lords Passion and As^ension.

Neither did the true servants of God, in those first days, only believe in
heart, but they also professed their says, and Religion by external Rites,
namely External Sacrifice.
in offering of Sacrifice (the most special homage and service to God) which is
clerly testified, cha. 4. as well bloody in figure of Christ's Passion, as
unbloody in figure of the holy Eucharist. Also the accepting of the one
rightly offered by Abel, and rejecting the other not done sincerly by Cair,
was declared by external signs, which Cain disdayning and envying his brothers
good work, knowing his own to be naught, of mere malice killed his brother.

Besides Sacrifice they had also other Rites in public Assemblies, praying
Public prayer with other Rites.
and inuocating the name of our Lord, in more solemn manner, from Enos time and
so forvvard, according to that is recorded of him, in the end of the fourth
chapter. for douteles Adam, Abel, and Seth did also pray and call upon God, and
therefore it was some addition or increase of solemnity in the service of God,
which is referred to Enos,

They had moreover other ceremonies: of the seventh day particularly blessed
Ceremonial observations. Feasts. Abstinence. Clean and unclean Places
dedicated to prayer.
Genesis 2. 3.
and sanctified by God, kept holy by Adam and other Patriarchs as Abben Ezra
witnesses in his commentaries upon the ten commandments. Of abstayning Genesis
29. Genesis 9, Genesis 7, 2. Genesis 4. 26.
from meats, for it seems the more godly sort did eat no flesh, before the
flood, which was after permitted. Observation of clean and unclean beasts
for Sacrifice. Of peculiar places dedicated to religious uses where people
met together to pray. Likewise diverse other things in the first age were
figures of Christ's Sacraments: the Spirit of God giving power to the waters,
Figures of Christ's Sacraments. Baptism Marriage.
Genesis 1.
(as Tertullian S. Hierom and others expound it) and the flood of Noe, by S.
Peter's testimony, were figures of Baptism. Marriage instituted in Paradise, is
1. Pet* ^.
the very pattern of holy Matrimony, a Sacrament in the Church of Christ,
where one man and one wife are on lie lawful, and not more at once in any
wise, Christ reforming that which in Moses law was tolerated (for hardness Mat*
19.
of men's hearts, and for avoiding murder, to put away one wife, and take an
other) to this first institution as it was in the beginning, two in one flesh,
Ge^. 2, 24
not three nor more. The repentance of Adam and Eve was a perfect and examplare
Penance.
figure of the Sacrament of Penance. First they were ashamed, covering their
nakedness, and hiding them selves, which showed their grief and Contrition.
Genesis 3.
sorrow for the sin committed Secondly they confessed their fault, and by what
means it happened. For God examining Adam, he answered truly Confession.
and simply saing: The woman which thou gave me, to be my companion, gave me
of the tree and I did eat. Likewise Eve confessed sincerly, saying: The serpent
deceived me, and I did eat. Thirdly God gave them penance (besides death
before threatened and other penalties Satisfaction.
annexed) that Eve should in pain and travel bring forth her children; and
Adam should eat his bread, in the sweat of his face. And withal cast them
forth of Paradise. But not forth of his favor, as appeared by his making them
garments of skins, granting them and their posterity, From hence is taken
the ceremony of ashes, on Ashwene day.
the rest of the earth to live and labor in, especially to serve him, and do
penance, with admonition to remember, that of duct man was made, and into dust
he shall return. Al which were signs of love, and that finally he would bring
them, and many more to eternal salvation.

The first borne and heads of families were Priests all the time of the law of
nature, until the law being changed, God took Priests only of the stock of
Priesthood.
Aaron, and the rest of the Levites to assist them in that function, Aaron and
Priesthood and Law stand and change together.
N^m ^. 10, 12. 45.
his sons thou shall appoint, says our Lord, over the service of Priesthood,
for I have taken the Levites of the children of Israel for every first borne.
And ^. Paul teaches, that changing of Priesthood and changing of the law go
always together, showing evidently that every lawful community or
commonwealth under God, has external Priesthood. So that if there had benne no
distinct order of external Priesthood in the law of nature, or now were none in
the law of grace (as Protestants say there is Latherli. de abroganda Missa.
not) there were no law at al. See more of this point in the Annotations, chap.
7. ad Hebre. Here we only observe that Abel, Seth, Enos, and other Patriarchs
were Priests, and exercised priestlie functions: yea Cain also was a Priest
(though a bad one) and offered Sacrifice.

But external offices or ministry, without a well disposed mind, and sincere
virtues producing Good works, did never justify any man. And Good work
necessary.
therefore Cains Sacrifice, offered with a perverse mind, was not respected by
Genesis 4.
God, as Abels was: whereupon he becoming worse, and more malicious, God sharply
reproved his anger and envy, conceived without just cause, saying: If thou
do well, shall thou not receive again: but if thou do il, shall not thy
sin forwith be present at the door? clerly showing that every one shall
receive according to his works.

This place also evidently shows Freewil, yea in a wicked man. For this
Freewil.
expostulation had never benne uttered, by our most reasonable Lord, and
Master, if Cain had benne deprived of freewil. For he might have excused
himself, and must needs have benne holden excused, if he had benne forced to
do as he did. But God charged him as inexcusable, and as one that knew, or
ought to know, that he had freewil. And does further inculcate, that he had,
and should have power, and freewil over his concupiscence, to correct the same,
if he would, saying: The lust thereof shall be under thee, and thou shall have
domion over it. So that no sinner, be he never so ^^. de ser^^ arbit. li 2.
Instit. ca 2. par. 8. Genesis 3.
wicked, much less a just man, lacks freewil. yet Luther abhors the very
word, and Calvin wishes it out of the world.

Temporal punishment is proved to be due for sin remitted, by that Temporal
pain due for sin remitted.
both death, and other penalties are inflicted, by Gods justice upon men, after
justification, and by the particular punishments laid upon Adam and Eve,
confessing their faults.

Purgatory is also proved by the same justice of God. For when any dies
Purgatory.
penitent, and yet have not madeful satisfaction, they must suffer for that
remains after death, and be purged, before they can enter into rest. which
remnant of debt our B. Savior calls The last farthing, and says, it must
Mat. 5.
be paid. The jews also at this day hold the doctrine of Purgatory by
tradition. And consequently they Pray for souls departed, not only to God,
Prayer for the dead. And to Saints.
but also to the ancient Patriarchs (which likewise shows Invocation of
Saints) in these words: Ye fathers which sleep in Hebron, Offici^ pro
defunctis.
open to him the gates of Eden. that is of Paradise, which was planted in Eden.
And Hebron is the place where Adam was buried, and his sepulcher Sepulchers of
Patriarchs religiously conserved
religiously conserved in the time of Iosue, above 1500 years after his Iosue
14. Genesis 23.
death. The same is the place which Abraham bought, and there buried Sara:
where also him self, and Isaac, and Jacob were buried: and to which finally
the bodies of the twelve sons of Jacob were translated from Sichem. As
Josephus li. 2 Antiquit
writes. And sichem also was specially honored, because such persons had benne
buried there, as S. Hierom witnesses, of his own knowledge Epist. ad Pamach.
in his time.

Again by religious care of burying the dead in this first age, Enoch Enoch
translated alive.
was more certainly known to be Translated alive, and not to be dead. For the
seventy Interpreters, and S. Paul say He was not found, which Gen ^. Heb. 11.
imports that they sought diligently for him, and that his body could not be
found, for God translated him.

By all which we see mutual offices, and communion of good works amongst
Communion of Saints.
good men alive and dead, which is called Communion of Saints. And herein
Angels lacked not their offices. For God set Cherubins to keep Ministry of
Angels.
Genesis 3. 24.
the gate of Paradise, that neither man should enter, being justly expelled for
sin, nor devils, as S. Augustine notes; left they should take fruit of li.
11 d^ Gen ad lit. c. 40.
the tree of life, and giving it to men, allure them to more sin. And now
Saints being exalted to Angels glory, have like honorable offices toward
Honor of Saints*
other men, as Angels have. Yea the blood of Abel unjustly shed by Cain, Genesis 6.
and justly to be revenged by God, shows the peculiar honor, which God
bestows upon his Saints, for their virtues and merits in this life, and
especially Psalm. 11^.
in their death. For Precious in the sight of our Lord, is the death of his
Saints.

Hence also is proved, that seeing in this life the good are afflicted, and
General Judgment.
the bad oftentimes prosper temporally, there must needs be an other Court of
exact Justice, and an other Reaconing day, wherein every one shall receive,
according as they have done good or evil. which was sufficiently intimated by
Gods discussing, and manifesting Abels and Cains deserts, which were hidden
before, and in part rewarding them accordingly, yet reserving the full reward of
the one, and punishment of the other to the next world. Of the Judge and his
sentence Enoch (alleged by S. Jude the Judge of the world.
Epist. Iudae. v. 14.
Apostle) proficied clerly, saying: Behold our Lord comes in his holy
thousands, to do judgment aganst al, and to reprove all the impions, of all the
works of their impiety, whereby they have done impiously, and of all the hard
things which impious sinners have spoken against him. Thus holy Enoch preached
touching the wicked, which thought there was no Judgment to come, nor Judge to
be feared.

At this Judgment al shall appear in body and soul returning to life. For
that Al men shall rise from death is proved, by the immortality of Resurrection.
man's soul, which God did not make nor produce of corruptible matter, but
immediately Breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became Genesis 2. 7.
a living soul. so the soul being immortal, and having a natural inclination
to the body, man's natural perfection requires the conjunction of body and
soul. for neither soul nor body separated is a man, but both joined in one
subsistence are a man, in so much that mankind should perish, except the bodies
shall rise again, and live with the souls. And then shall the bodies be
qualified according to the state of the souls, happy or miserable for ever.

Of Eternal life the translation of Enoch is a figure. For seeing God
preserves Genesis 5.
Everlasting life.
his corruptible body so long, from death and infirmity, it is a token and
manifest sign, that by the same power of God, the bodies of men shall The
blessed in eternal joy.
at last day, after that al men are once dead, rise again, and remain with
the souls for ever. The good in Eternal joy: the wicked in Eternal pain. The
wicked in eadles pain.
Both signified by the custody of the gate of Paradise by Angels; who for Genesis
3. 24.
ever keep out these, that are still defiled with sin, and so they depart into
fire everlasting, and admit the innocent and just into the kingdom of heaven,
which is everlasting joy and perfect felicity.

Thus we see the face and brief sum of Religion, in the beginning of Church
ever visible. Succession of Patriarchs.
the world, til the flood: and the state of the Church, which was always
Visible, consisting of men good and bad, with a continual Succession of Rulers,
as well spiritual as temporal. For the first borne were both Priests and
Princes in every family. And amongst the same one ever chief of al. From One
supreme head of the Church.
which rank Cain was excluded, or rather excluded him self, by Going Genesis 4,
16. Gen 5.
forth from the face of our Lord. Whereupon holy Moses r^^teth this
Monarchical succession of one chief, and Supreme Head, from Adam by the line
of Seth, Enos, Cainan, Malaleel, Iared, Enoch. Mathusala, Lamech, and Noe.
Nevertheless he sets down also the progeny Genesis 4, 17. S. Aug. li. de
Pastore. c. 8. and. 20.
of Cain, the first beginner of a worldly, schismatical, and heretical
conuenticle, opposite to the City of God. He denied Gods providence (as Cains
negative doctrine.
Thargum Hierosolomitanum testifies) protesting to Abel, That there was no
Justice nor Judge, nor other world then this, no reward for virtue, nor
punishment for sin, and so desperately he killed Abel. of these negative
principles proceeded other like detestable opinions, and most wicked life,
savage and barbarous cruelty, and al kind of impiety. And in process of time
albeit many True faith still remained in many. Some also just and perfect.
remained in true faith, and unity of the Church, yet by conversation with
such miscreantes, especially by occasion of Marriages between the Genesis 6.
faithful and infidels, almost the whole world was corrupted in manners. But Noe
was just and perfect. In punishment therefore of so great and enormious
Interruption of heretical Sinagogues.
sins, God sent the general flood, whereby al Cains progeny, and al other
infidels were wholly destroyed and extinguished, and the true Church notably
purged; only just Noe and his family reserved. By whom the same Continuance
of the Church
true Church was continued, and the world again replenished with men.

CHAP. VIII. The waters diminishing by little and little, 6. Noe sends forth a
crow, 8. The second age of the world.
after him a dove, thrice: 18. lastly goes forth with all that were with him in
the arc. 20. erecteth an Altar, and offers Sacrifice.
AND God remembered Noe, and all the beasts, and all the The third part of this
book. Of the newincrease and multiplication of the world.
cattle, which were with him in the arc, and brought a wind upon the earth,
and the waters decreased. And the The crow returned not into the arc, but (as
appears by the He brew text) going and returning rested upon the arc.
not return, til the waters were dried upon the earth. He sent forth also a
dove after him, to see They entered into the arc the 17. day, the second month
of the other year: so they remained there 12. months and ten days.
the second month, the seven and twentyth day of the Go forth of the arc,
thou and thy wife, thy sons and the In the whole year of the flood was no
sowing nor reaping, nor pleasant variety of times, but al desolate and
miserable: hence forth God promises more seasonable times S. Amb. ii. de* Noe
and Arca. c. 23.
seedtime

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VIII.
20. Built an Altar] Noe without express commandment, and without Noes
sacrifice many ways commendable.
delay, offers Sacrifice to God, for the benefit received, in his, and his
families conferuation, with the other living creatures, in that general deluge
of the world, Well knovving (says S. Ambrose) That to be true thankesgeuing,
which Li. de Noe and Arca c 22.
1. Voluntary, 2. Speedy.
is presented, not commanded: therefore he made no delay. For the virtue of a
gratful mind excludes doutful deliberation, and he that expects, til the
d^bt of thanks be exacted, is an vngratful person. For more solemnity, he
dedicated an apt and 3. Solemn.
permanent place, for this peculiar divine service, Building an Altar to our
Lord. The Hebrew word Mizbeach (of the verb Zabach, to kill, or make sacrifice)
Heb. 13, 10.
and the Greek Thysiasterion, signify an Altar to sacrifice on, not a common
table for meat. He offered of the clean and best things because pure and 4.
Pure.
devout Sacrifice is due to God. Moreover it was large and bountiful, for he 5.
Bountiful.
offered of all the kinds of clean beasts and fowls. Finally he offered them
in Holocaustes, where al was burned and consumed in the honor of God. How 6.
Holocaust.
gratful all this was to God, Moses signifies saying: Our Lord smelled a
svveete Leuit. 1. Psalm. 50. Isaie 1. Amos. 5. ^^al. 1. Just. Mar. li 3. q. 4.
S. Hiero. ^. Heb.
Sacrifice is pleasant to God: not for the external things but for the sincere
mind.
savor. not that either any sweet corporal savor could of it self delight
God, who is the most spiritual substance, or that the burning of flesh, bones,
and bowels of beasts could yield sweet savor; but the deuou^ mind declared by
such external duty greatly pleased God. For God requires both, but specially
a sincere heart. As not only divine Scriptures, and holy Fathers, but also
moral Philosophers teach us. It were a greu us thing (says Plato writing of
sacrifices) If God had respect railier to the gifts, and sacrifices of men,
then to their mind. lib. perites proseuches.

CHAP. IX. God renews the blessing of multiplication, 3. allows the eating
of flesh, but not of blood. 8. promises never again to destroy the world by
water 22. Chamsaw, and reported his fathers nakedness, which Sem and Iapheth
covered. 24. For which he his cursed, and they are blessed.
AND God blessed Noe and his sons. And he said to Of this commandment, or
rather blessing see the Annotations. chap. ^. v. ^8.
Increase, and multiply, and replenish the earth. And your terror and dread be
it upon all the beasts of the Leuit 17.
and at the hand of man, at the hand of eech man, and of his brother, will I
require the soul of man. Who soever shall

Thus also said God to Noe, and to his sons with him: The rainbow was before,
but was not a sign, as God says henceforth it should be, for men to remember
his promise. Seuerianus in Genesis S. Tho. Quod^^b. 3. a. 30.
my bow God and every living soul of al flesh which is upon the earth. And
God said to Noe: This shall be the sign of the By this it is clear that Noe had
no more children after the flood. S. Chrisost. b^. 29. in Genesis
of these was al mankind spread over the whole earth.

And Noe a husbandman began to til the ground, and Apoc. 13. 8.
be the Lord God of Sem, Chanaan be his servant. "God Heb. 11.
whole nine hundred fifty years: and he died.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IX.
3 All that moueth] S. Justinius Martyr, S. Chrisostom, and other ancient Ad. q.
119. Ho. 27. in Genesis
Voluntary abstinence without commandment.
Doctors prove, that flesh was lawful to be eaten before the flood: but being
not necessary, because men were stronger, and other things also of more force,
the better sort which were of Seths race abstained from it. But after the
flood flesh being more necessary, God alters that custom of abstinence,
with this limitation and commandment, that they shall not eat blood.

4. Flesh with bloud] Though this positive precept, of not eating blood,
served well to make men more abhor manslaughter (which is forbid by the
Abstinence from blood some times commanded not alwaeys.
law of nature, and the revenge thereof here and in other places seuerly
threatened) yet it was specially given both immediately after the flood, and in
the law of Moses (with many the like) to exercise men in obedience. And the
Leuit 17.
same was renewed, for a time, by the Apostles, to appease a controversy in
the primitive Church. For that the Jews converted to Christ, having benne Act.
15
long accustomed to this observation, could not endure to see it broken, by
themselves, or other Christians, and being no great burden, for the Gentiles,
it was decreed that al should keep it. And so peace was made Nevertheless it was
abolished when the cause ceased. As S. Augustine declares against Faustus li:
32. ^. 13.
the Manichee. Sach is the authority of the Church to decree, and again to
disanul an observation of a thing of it self indifferent.

21. Dru^e] Noe sinned not, by the common judgment of ancient Fathers, Noe
sinned not in drunkenness:
S. Chrisost ho. 29. S. Theod. q. 65. S. Amb. 6. 30. de Noe and Arca. Li. 72.
6. 24. cont. Faust.
in that he was overcome with wine, because he knew not the force thereof,
having drunck only water al his life before. But this external rebuke, and
worldly disgrace happened to Noe, in figure of Christ naked on the Cross. As
S. Cyprian (Epist. 63. ad Coecilium) S. Augustine (li. 16. de ciuit. c. 2. Noe a
figure of Christ Sem and Iaphet a figure of the Church, Cham of Insidels.
and li. 12. contra Faustum Manicheum. c. 23. and. 24) Eucherius, Repertus and
others (upon this place) do teach. And likewise that Sem and Iapheth were a
figure of the Church consisting of Jews and Gentiles, and Cham of Heretics,
and other Infidels, that deride the infirmities, which our Savior sustained.
Go to now (ye Manichees, says S. Augustine) object calumnies to the ancient
holy Scriptures, do so, ye children of Cham, to whom naked flesh seems
vile, by which your selves were begotten. For neither could ye by any means
have benne called Christians, except Christ's as he was fortold by the
Prophets, had come into the world, had drunck that cup of his vinyard, which
could not pass from him, had slept in his passion, as in drunkenness of folly
(which is wiser then men) and so the infirmity of mortal flesh (which is
stronger then men) had become naked, by the secret counsel of God, which
infirmity unless the WORD OF GOD had taken upon him, the very name Christian,
whereof ye also glory, had not benne at al in the earth.

25. Cursed be Chanaan] Why Chanaan the son is cursed, and not his Why
Chanaan is cursed rather then Cham.
father Cham, diverse yield diverse reasons. S. Theodoretus reports out of the
q. 57. l^ Geu.
Hebrew Doctors, that Chanaan a boy first saw his grandfathers nakedness, and
told the same to his father, and so they both derided that they should have
covered, Chams other sons not offending, and therefore not his whole progeny
but only Chanaan and his posterity were here cursed by Noe. S. Chrysostom ho.
29.
supposes that for so much as God had blessed Noe and his three sons coming
forth of the Arc, he could not presume to curse any of those, whom God had
blessed, therefore cursed Chanaan who in wickedness was like to his father. S.
Gregory brings this, for example of wicked men, escaping punishment Sins
punished in the posterity.
in this life, and are punished in the next, and in their posterity, following
their vices. What means it (says he) that Cham sinning, Chanaan his son
Li. 26. Moral. c. 18.
had sentence of revenge, but that the sins of the reprobate prosper here in
this life unrevenged, and are punished afterward? And clear it is that
Chanaans most wicked The effect of blessing and cursing.
posterity were subdued in the end, and most of them destroyed by the children
of Israel (who were of Sem) under the conduct of Iosue, according to Act. 13.
Romans 11. Ep hes. 2. Tradit Hebra. Li. 16. ciuit. c. 2. Li 12 c. 24. cont Eaust.
Li 4. c. 38. in Genesis
Noes prophetical blessing of Sem, and cursing of Chanaan.

27. God enlarge] This blessing of Iapheth was literaly fulfilled, when
(according Iapheths blessing. Literal Mystical.
to his name, which signifies Latitude or enlargement) his plentiful issue
possessed most ample countries, both in the Continent, and Islands. But
mystically it had effect (As S. Hierom. S. Augustine. Rupertus and others
expeund it) when the Apostles, being Jews of the race of Sem, first builded
the Christian Church, wherein the most part of that nation refused to dwell,
contemning Christ's Gospel and grace, and the fulness of Gentiles entered in, and
were made inheriters. Finally Chanaan is servant to both Sem and Iapheth, in
How Heretics serve Catholics.
that Heretics being under the Jurisdiction of the Church, geathered of Jews
and Gentiles, serve to stur up Catholics diligence to more exact knowledge of
al truth; and their patience to more merit and glory.

CHAP. X. The genealogy of Noes children, by whom the World was increased
again, after the flood.
THESE are the generations of the sons of Noe, Sem, That is in his sight who
can not be deceived.
before our Lord. Thereof rose a proverb: As it were Nemrod the valiant hunter
before our Lord. And the Hence S. Augustine geathereth that the people of Israel
were called Hebrews of this Heber. l. 16. c. 3. ciuit.
father of Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram. The children of Aram: Heber having a
son borne when the tongues were divided called him Phaleg, which signifies
division S. Aug. li. 16. c. 11. ciuit
because that in his days was the earth divided: and his brothers name was
Iectan. The which Iectan begat

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. X.
8. Nemrod.] To this Nemrod the son of Chus, first builder and king of Nemrod
king of Babylon, a su^tle and cruel giant.
Li. 1. c. 4. Antiqi^. l. Antiq. Chalda. ^i. 1. c. 2. in Osee. li. 16 c. 3. 4.
and 17. ciuit. Berosus Annian. li. 4. c. 5. Eusebius in chron. and ali^.
Babylon, Josephus, S. Epiphanius, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, and generally al
ancient writers ascribe the first tyranny, and first setting up of an earthly
city opposite to the City of God after the flood. He was a Valiant, or rather
a Viol^nt hunter a giant hunter (says S. Augustine, according to the seventy
Interpreters) who by falsehood and force brought many under his dominion. For
he sturred up pride (says Josephus) and contempt of God in men, auoching that
they were not beholding to God for present felicity, but to their own virtue;
An Arch-heretike.
and so supposing men would fall from God to him, if he offered him self a
leader, and helper against a new flood, by little and little drew al to tyranny.
He was otherwise called Saturnus, and was at length amongst others accounted a
god. After him his son Belus Jupiter (as most authors affirm) reigned 65
years. And then succeeded Ninus the first king of the Assirians.

11. Assure builded Niniue] Here is great difficulty, and much dispute amongst
writers, who this Assuris. Briefly, we may either say with Josephus, and S.
Augustine, that Assure the son of Sem built a city, which afterward Assure,
son ^f Sem, or (...) king of Assirians.
Ninus of Chams race enlarged, enriched, and changing the name called it li. 1.
Antiq. c. 4. Li. 16. c. 3. ciuit. Eusebius. in chron.
Ninum: or else that this word Assure here signifies (as. 4. Reg. 15. Psalm. 82.
Esaiae 10. and 31.) the king of Assirians, to wit Ninus the son of Belus, who
as al histories greek and barbarous report (says S Hierom) was the first
that reigned over al Asia, and among the Assirians built Ninum a city of his
own name, which the Hebrews call Niniue. He set up the Monarchy of the
Assirians, called the golden kingdom, which stood 1240. years. And made his
father Belus to be honored for a god. To whom the Babilonians, as Pliny
testifies, Iud. 19. Number. 25. 4. Reg. 1. 3. Reg. (...).
first erected statuas, altares, and temples. Of this Belus or Bell of Babylon
were First false gods.
also derived other false gods, as Belial the god of Libertines, or without
yoke, Beelphegor god of the Moabites, Beelzebub of the Acharonites, Baal in
Samaria, Baalim amongst the Philistims: and the like in other nations.

32. The Nations] How many Nations and tongues were in the world immediately
after the tower of Babylon, is more commonly supposed, then clerly The common
opinion o(...) tongnes is not clear in Scripture. Yet this number of nations
and tongues may be probably geathered in this and other places of Genesis.
showed by old or late writers. Only it seems certain and evident, that there
were just as many tongues as Nations But to find precisly (as the common
opinion holds) 72, is hard. For in this chapter (where they would count this
number) are not mentioned so many. Nevertheless if we add certain that begane
distinct Nations afterward, til Jacob with his children went into Egypt (in
whom only the Hebrew Nation and Tongue continued to Christ's time, the number
will come right. Of Iapheth were borne 7. sons S. Aug. 16. c. 3. ciuit.
chief of Nations. Again of Gomer (besides his supposed successor, who can
not be counted beginner of an other distinct nation) came 2. other heads.
Likewise of Iauan (besides his first son) rose 3. more nations. Of Cham by his
first son Chus were 6. nephews princes of nations. Again of Regma (besides
his successor) came one more. And Nemrod besides his kingdom of Babylon, raised
up other 6. By his second son Mesraim came 8. nations, Chams third son Phut
made ouly one nation. And Chanaan his sons made 11. more. Of Sem (last
mentioned for better connecting the maine History, and succession of the
Church) came the chife and principal Nation The Hebrews chief of these nations.
the Hebrews, descending from him by Arphaxad, Sale, Heber, and so directly to
Jacob. Of Sem also were borne 4. other sons beginners of ^ations. Again of
Aram (besides his first son) were 3. fathers of nations. Likewise of Heber
(besides the Hebrews descending by Phaleg) were borne to his other son
Iectan 13. heads of nations. These are all that are named in this place: to
wit, of Iapheth, 12. of Cham 33. and of Sem 21. which make in all 66. whereunto
if Genesis 24. 19. 17. 25, 6. 25, 23.
we adioyne Nachor (Abraham's brother) Moab, and Ammon (Lots sons) also Ismael
(Abraham's eldest son) and his issue by Cetura, and finally Esau (Jacobs
brother) who made 6. more distinct nations, the whole number is 72. This
probable collection, with the rest, we submit to better judgment.

CHAP. XI. God hinders the vain purpose of building a hiegh tower, 7. by
confounding The fourth part of this book. Of the division of tongues and
nations.
men's tongues. 9. whereof it is called Babel. 10. The genealogy of Sem to Abram.
AND the earth was of one tongue, and al one speech. they have begun to do
this, neither will they leave of from their determinations, til they accomplish
them indede. Come ye therefore," let us go down, and there confound He that
spea keth so confusedly that he is not understood is said to babble.
because there the tongue of the whole earth was confounded: and from thence
our Lord dispersed them upon the face of al countries.

These are Moses here shows the succession of Patriarchs, from Sem to
Abraham, as he did before from Adam to Noe. S. Aug. li. 16. c. 10. ci.
the generations of Sem: Sem was an hundred Vr a city, or territory of
Chaldea. 70. Interpret. and Josephus li. 1. Antiq.
Vr of the Chaldees. And Abram and Nachor married wives: the name of Abram
children. Their therefore:: took Abram his son, and Abram was commanded to
go forth of Chaldea, as appears Act. 7. v. 4. Though this journey is here
ascribed to Their as the principal person.
Lot the son of Aran, his son, and Sarai his daughter in law, the wife of
Abram his son, and brought them out of Vr of the Chaldees, for to go into
the land of Chanaan: and they came as far as Haran, and dwelled there. And
the days of Their came to two hundred five

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XI.
4. Let us make] Here we may see in Nemrod the common causes of heresies, Pride
is cause offchisme and heresy. False pretenses deceive the simple.
and the manner of Hertikes ptoceding. For he having a sutle proud, and aspiring
mind, first detracted from God, persuading men (as is noted before) not to
depend upon Gods providence, and finding some others of like humor, they
conspired together, and drew more folowers, by bearing the simpler S. Chris.
ho. 30. in Genesis Cassian. ^ollat. 4. c. 12.
sort in hand (for it was impossible wise men should believe it) that they
would make a tower of defense against a new flood, if God should thinck to
Heretics prosper for a time, but are confounded in the end. Ministry of
Angels.
drown the world again. But their principal intention was to make themselves
great and strong for the present, and famous to posterity. Al which God
overthrew neither suffering them to build up their imagined castle of strength
nor to be praised for their work, but made them infamous to the worlds end.

7. Let v^ confound] God in dissipating this vain work of men, would use Li
de t^fus. ling. ho. 11. in Numer. li. 16. c. 6 ciuit. li. 2. Moral. in. c 1.
lob.
the ministry of Angels. As not only Philo Iudeus, and Origin, but also S.
Augustine, S. Gregory, and other fathers expound these words, Come, let us
descend, and confound their tongue. Where they also note Gods singular wisdom,
God turns the offense of men to good. Two miracles In privation of one tongue
and giving a new.
mercy, and justice, so punishing the offense, that he turns it to his own
glory, and the profit of al men: showing his power and sovereign Majesty by
two great miracles. First by so suddenly and utterly depriving al those
builders, of their usual tongue, that presently they could neither speak it,
nor understand it. Secondly, by giving diverse distinct languages to several
sorts or families, which they immediately understood, and spoke most promptly,
as if they had long before learned and used the same. But to no man was given
more then one language. And so, to the more commodity of al mankind, they were
forced to part into sundry coasts of the earth, which they inhabited and
replenished Division among evil men is profitable.
with distinct Nations, having the same Angels their spiritual Patrones and
Protectors, which had severally changed their language. In particular, Li. 34.
Moral. in. c. 41. Job. ho. 11. in Genesis l. 16. c. 11 and li. 18. c. 39. ci. S.
Aug. li. 6. c. 4. ciuit.
it was profitable to the good who being before oppressed by the united power
of many wicked, were relieved (as S. Gregory teaches) when their persecutors
were divided. These good were the family of Heber, as S. Chtisostom, The
member offending is punished.
and S. Augustine prove. For seeing the change of tongues was inflicted for
punishment, it appears that Heber and his family were innocent of the vain
attempt, whose tongue was not changed, but remained the same, and of Heber and
his family consented not to the building of Babel.
him was called the Hebrew tongue for distinction sake after there were many
tongues, which before had no distinct name being the only tongue of al men.
Again touching the offenders (who were punished in their tongues, that they
could not be understood commanding one an other, because they would not
understand God justly commanding them al) they also reaped this profit, that
they were forced to leave of that bad work, and withal to seek more ample
habitations, who If they had there more increased in number and streingth,
would without doubt (says S. Chrisostom) have attempted worse things. And
infinite Ho. 30. in Genesis S. Greg. ho 30 in ^^an.
manslaughter would have benne committed, amongst so many for possession of
that one city and tower. Finally the fathers note that as God wrought Gift of
tongues most profitable to the Church.
here much good by division of tongues: so he wrought much more by communion of
tongues, given to the Apostles, thereby inabling them to gether one Church of al
Tongues and Nations.

12. Begat Sale] Here is an intricate difficulty. For the Hebrew and Latin
text, both here and in Palalippomenon, saying Arphaxad begat Sale, the 72.
Scriptures hard
1. Par. 1.
Interpreters and S. Luke place Cainan between them, as son of Arphaxad, Iuc.
3. v. 36. Li. 16. c. 10. ciuit.
and father of Sale. Eusebius also in his Chronicle, with most Greek Doctors,
and S. Augustine, count Cainan in this Genealogy of Sem. Whereupon many do
number him in this rank, and suppose that Moses omitted him for some Some
think Moses omitted Cainan for a mystery.
Mystery, and yet writes truly, that Arphaxad begat Sale, not his proper
son, but his sons son: as S. Matthew says, Ioram begat Ozias, who Mat. 1.
was his nephews nephew. But against this solution it is replied, that then
Arphaxad should have been a grandfather at 35. years of age: which were
strange in those days, how soever it is now. And a greatter difficulty, or
rather absurdity must also be granted, that Arphaxad begat both Cainan
Refutation.
at the age of 35. years, according to the 72. Interpreters, and that Sale was
also begotten the same year, according to the Hebrew, being both true. Which
inconvenience is not in the Genealogy written by S. Matthew. Others therefore
according to the Hebrew and Latin text, with most Latin Doctors, omit Cainan in
this place, and Paralipomenon, namely with S. Hierom, Others conjecture Cainan
should not be in the text of the 70.
Quest. Hebra.
who diligently examining and reconciling varieties, between the Hebrew and the
Greek, makes no mention at al of this difference. Which makes some to
conjecture, that in S. Hieroms time Cainan was not in the Greek copies, at
least not in those that he had, and held for the best. And at this day some
have him not. Which may be admitted for a probable answer touching Editio
quedam vaticana
the Hebrew and Greek of the old Testament. But for so much as al But never
any Catholic (nor heretic before Beza) put Cainan out of S. Lukes Gospel.
copies, both Greek and Latin, also S. Hieroms Edition of S. Lukes Gospel have
Cainan, the difficulty still remains between Moses and S. Luke. How then shall
this doubt be solued* we can not solue it. And no marvel. For venerable Bede
could not. Whose words are these: S. Luke uses rather the Greek Prefat.
comment. in Acta. Apost.
testimonies then the Hebrew: whereof hapeneth that I much marvel at, and for
dulnes of wit, being stricken with great admirrtion, I can not thoroughly scan,
seeing in the Hebrew verity are founed only ten generations from the flood
unto Abraham, by what means S. Luke, who (the Holy Ghost governing A
memorable sentence of S. Beda.
his pen) could in no sort write false, would rather set down eleven
generations in the Gospel, Cainan adjoined according to the seventy
Interpreters. Thus writes S. Beda, reverently admiring that he could not
understand. For being assured that the Holy Ghost governed the pens both of
Moses and S. Luke, and that he is not contrary to him self, it must needs be
Beza sacrilegiously proud.
true which each of them writes, though other learned men can not reach the
profoundnes of some difficulties that occure. And therefore Beza was extreme
saucie to dash Cainan out of S. Lukes Gospel, and that wittingly and most
impudently saying, in his Annotations: Non dubitauimus expungere: We doubted
The heretical English Editions differ in this point.
not to put it out. The former English Editions, otherwise corrupt in many
1552 1577.
places, have Cainan in the text of S. Lukes Gospel, but their latter
translaters are in this point pure Bezites.

The end of the second age.
THE CONTINVANCE OF THE CHVRCH AND RELIGION, IN THE SECOND AGE OF THE WORLD.
From Noes flood to Abraham's going forth of his country. The space of 368.
years.
NO MAN can well doubt nor will deny, that the same Church continued all the
second age which was in the first, considering that Noe Noe and Sem lived in
Abraham's time.
lived above 50. years after the birth of Abraham, and sem 150. more: and that
these three, and some others of that time are renowned in holy scripture, for
sincere professors of true Religion. But for more manifestation of their faith,
and that the Church was then very conspicuous, we shall repete certain Articles
of Religion professed in the second age.
principal points of Religion professed and practiced all that time, by a
continual known visible company united in one mystical body: though in the
mean while, the wicked sprung and grew in number and worldly force, much
oppressing yet never suppressing the good.

First just Noe coming forth of the arc with his family, professed his
religious Genesis 8.
One God. External Sacrifice Priesthood Altares. Christ. Cross. The B.
Trinity. Redemer.
mind to One God almighty, supreme Lord of al, by Offering external
voluntary, speedy, pure, solemn, and bountiful Sacrifice of Holocaustes, as
a Priest upon an Altar. After which most gratful office, God Genesis 9.
making a covenant with him and his seed, never again to destroy the world by
water, confirmed the same by the sign of the rainbow, which represented the
second Person of the B. Trinity, the Son of God, Christ our Lord to be borne
The Son of man, and extended upon the Cross: in whom Heb. 11.
Noe believing was instituted heir of the justice, which is by faith in our
Redemer.

We have here again Gods operative blessing, with the effect of increase Genesis
9.
Gods blessing operative. Fathers blessing and cursing
and multiplication, the issue of Noe by his three sons, in short time making
many Nations. By the way also we have an example of Fathers solemn ^. 9. v.
25.
Blessing and Cursing their children. The effects whereof succeeded afterward
accordingly. Likewise in this age was given a particular precept Not ^. 9. v. 4.
^. 9. v. 20
Abstinence from blood. Clean, and unclean.
to eat blood. And Noe observed distinction of Clean beasts, offering
Sacrifice in them only, as before the flood, he was commanded to take more of
them into the arc, then of the Unclean.

In that so ample mention is made of sin and wickedness, there is no ^. 10,
10. ^. 11. 2. Pet. 2.
Penance preached and inflicted.
doubt, but Noe, the preacher of justice, admonished and exhorted sinners to
Repentance: yea he Punished Cham and Chanaan, by his curse in their posterity.
And God him self Threatened to exact the blood of man unjustly ^. 9. 5. ^. 11.
shed. In the mean time Inflicted also some punishment upon the builders of
Babel, by confounding their tongues. And that by the Ministry Ministry of
Angels.
of Angels.

Which punishment in part, and threats of more importe a General Resurrection,
and Judgment, where al things shall be exactly discussed Resurection Judgment.
Eternal joy, and pain.
and Judged. And then will follow Eternal life to the good: and Everlasting pain
to the damned.

Al these points of Religion (and others mentioned in the former age, and no
doubt taught by Noe and his sons) show clerly a Visible Church, Church
visible Good and bad in the Church
consisting of good and bad. Noe remaning the same man as before the flood;
Cap. 8. and 9. c. 10, 21.
Sem and Iapheth are commended and blessed for well doing; Cham blamed, and
cursed in his posterity: yet neither he nor any of his sons or daughters
fell into heresy, or other infidelity, for any thing that appears in
Scripture, or other authentical testimony. Heber also and his family are
particularly commended by Moses, as the right folowers, and the spiritual
children of Sem (who had innumerable other carnal children) as those that were
innocent touching the presumptuous building of others, who for the Ho. 3^, in
Genesis li. 16. c 11. and li. 18. c. 39. ciuit.
same fault lost their old tongue, which the family of Heber kept. As S.
Chrisostom and S. Augustine do prove. Again, diverse of this family falling
afterward Always some good.
by little and little to other nations, the Family of Their, says the same S.
Augustine (li. 16. c. 12.) albeit not al, or not always, yet ever some of them,
and Abraham continually, with Sem, Heber, Phaleg, and L. 5. c. 35. Moral in 3.
Job.
many others, not mentioned by Moses in his brief description (as S.
Gregory doubts not to suppose) were just, and kept the true faith, and
undefiled Religion.

But Nemrod Chams nephew, and son of Chus described for a valiant Nemrod an
Arch-heretike.
hunter, a violent giant, and tyrant, was an Archheretike, a deviser and Joseph
li. 1. c. 4. Antiq.
teacher of false doctrine, against God and true faith. By sutletie and tyranny
he induced many of liking or of fear to follow him, and so in schism he
maintained heresy, That men were not beholding to God, but to His proud
heresy.
them selves, for temporal prosperity.

VVherof begane a new and cruel confederacy, against the City of God, and the
second great Sect of Infidels. For Barbarism being the first, begun by The
first Sect of Infidels was Barbarism before the flood. The second Scythisme.
Cain and ended by the flood: The second mother of al Sects beginning Li. de
heresibus
after the flood (as S. Epiphanius writes) was Scythisme: so called of the
Scythians a most cruel people. Who according to Nemrods heresy (not thincking
themselves beholding to God for temporal happiness, but to their own forces)
tyrannized over the weaker, and many wicked banning together extremly
oppressed the more peacable, especially the Church and true servants Cruelty.
of God. And this was one special cause of building Babylon, besides their
ambicious desire of perpetual fame, and their bearing the simple in hand of a
defense against a new flood, to make it in deed, a strong hold for tyrants to
offend others, and to defend themselves. Wherefore God (who before destroyed al
Infidels by the flood) confounded these builders by dividing their tongues, and
so forced them to break, and part into many countries.

Thus mankind being divided upon the earth, opinions also were multiplied
Untruths are unconstant.
concerning Religion. For shortly the perswation of men's trusting in
themselves, and in other mortal men appeared absurd, even the strongest
feeling adversities, or failing sometimes of their purposes, saw there was
need of supernal help, and that earthly things depended much upon divine will
and power. But bauing forsaken God Almighty, the only maker and conseruer of
al, they begane to imagine and serve false gods, both famous dead men, which
had prospered in this world, and diverse other things, by which they received
commodity, or feared damage.

Hence therefore rose the third principal Sect called Grecisme, beginning The
third Sect was Grecisme.
also in this second age, as the same S. Epiphanius writes. For Ninus the
first king of the Assirian great Monarchy, brought to pass that his father
Belus Idolatry.
Jupiter was esteemed and worshipped for the only great God by the Assirians.
To him the Babylonians erected first Temples Altares and Statuas. Nemrod also
by the name of Saturnus, as the progenitor of Belus, and first great Satur
d^^rum.
King or Tyrant of Babylon, was accounted a god, and the father of gods.
Dinastae were those that reigned in Aegipt by force and policy: and after were
great gods, and little gods.
About this time likewise begane the Dinastae among the Egyptians, and not
sowner, as they vainly brag to have benne before the flood: yea much longer
then in deed the world has benne. Moreover the Chaldees worshipped the fire.
Others the sun, the moon, and innumerable other feaned gods. Against al
which (and likewise against al heresies) are two special arguments. First that
they were not from the beginning, as the true God, and al truths are known
and received by continual Tradition, but brought in Idolatry and Heresy are
confuted, by that they begin disorderly; and are at dissension in their
imagined Religions.
afterward by men, and commonly by il men. Secondly they are not accepted and
esteemed for gods, or truths, in all places, but with great diversity and
dis^ention, one sort allowing that others despice, as holy Athanasius notably
writes in his oration against Idols in these words. Quot sunt gentes totidem
deorum genera confinguntur etc. How many nations (says he) so many kinds of
gods are feaned. Also the same country, the same city dissenteth within it
self in superstition of Idols. The Phenicians certes acknowledge not the
Egiptians gods, neither do the Egiptians adore the same Idols with the
Phenicians: Nor the Scithians receive the gods of the Persians, nor the
Persians of the Scithians: The Pelasgies refuse the Thrasian gods, the
Thrasians know not the Thebians. The Indians are against the Arabians, the
Arabians against the Aethiophians: and in like sort the Aethiopians differ in
their religious affairs from the Arabians. The Syrians worship not the gods
of the Cilicians, and the nations of Capadocia besides al these have gods of
other names. The Bithinians also fea^ed diverse gods, the Armenians again
diverse from them. What need we many words? Those that are in the continent
honor other gods from the Iland-people. In brief each city and eech village
not knowing the gods of their neighbors, sets forth their own, and
estemeth them only in place of gods. Thus far S. Athanasius. Name we like
countries, provinces, cities, and towns Luthers progenies differ as much in
opinions of Religion, as Painimes do in their false gods.
in these parts of Europe, where Luthers scholars have set their feet,
consider the form of Religion, and opinions which they hold, and we shall see
as vnorderlie beginnings, and as horrible dissentions in heresies (which S.
Hierom calls the Idols of the New Testament) as the ancient fathers have in.
c. 11. O^ee.
discryed in Paganism. For Lutherans or Protestants having no lawful
generation, but proceeding of bastards race, vpstartes of unknown progeny, are
no less at discordes among them selves, only al agreing against Catholics,
like syncretisantes against their common enemies, or Herod, Pilate, and the
Jews against Christ. And in England alone are diverse Sects without Sects in
England diverse from Luther, and eech one from the rest.
possible means to agree in one. For albeit the civil state endeuoreth
prudently and seriously to bring al to uniformity, at least in public show,
yet they are but like many faces under one hood, every sort keeping their
own opinions; yea almost every preacher and mean scholar (to say nothing of
artificers and common ministers) arrogating to be his own Judge, contemns to
stand to Luther or Calvin, to Geneua or Parliament, to Convocation or Synod of
their own, but to his own only understanding, and interpretation of Proud and
co^tentious spirits are hardly persuaded to the truth.
holy Scripture. Nor yet to that always; for when he is pressed with that he
once said, he will forgete it, or eat his own word, if he have not written it,
or that you have ready witness against him, so hard it is to make a deceived
Protestant or Puritan confess that he is convinced, except by very pregnant
means you can first cast out of him, or bind fast the spirit of presumption,
dissension Unlearned Catholics believe the same says in all points with the
learned.
and contention: whereas the simpliest Catholic in the world has the self
same faith in all points, with the whole Church, in which he remains, and upon
whose judgment he depends.

To return therefore, from whence we are not unnecessarily digressed, we li.
16. c. 10. ciuit*
conclude with S. Augustine; When Moses had showed the beginning and progress
of Nemrods earthly city, leaving it in Babylon, that is confusion, as needles
to prosecute it futher, he returns to declare the pertual succession of the
City of God, the Church, as before the flood from Adam The succession. of
Patriarchs from Noe to Abraham.
to Noe, by the line of Seth, so after the flood from the same Noe, by the line
of Sem, Arphaxad, Sale, Heber, Phaleg, Reu, Sarug, Nachor, Their, and Abraham.
The rest of Sems children, and all the progenies of lapheth and Cham, as not
pertaining to this purpose, omitted, so connecting those in order of
generations, by whom the succession is directly brought to Abraham, Prince of
the elected people, a most special Patriarch, to whom new Abraham a principal
Patriarch.
and great promises are made of multiplication of his seed, and possession of
the land of Chanaan, but especially of Christ our Redemer, and the same many
ways confirmed, as will appear in the next age.

CHAP. XII. Abram commanded by God to leave his country, with promise to be
blessed The beginning of the third age.
in his Seed, 5. taking his wife Sarai, and his nephew Lot, 6. wandreth in the
land of Chanaan, 7. erecteth an Altar in Sichem, 8. an other in Bethel. 10.
Thence by occasion of famine passes into Aegipt. 14. where The fifth part of
this book. Of Abraham's leaving his country, Gods blessing of his seed, and
commandment of Circumcision.
his wife (called his sister) is taken into the kings house, 19. but untouched
is restored to him.
AND our Lord said to Abram: Go forth of thy country, Act. 7.
and out of thy kindred, and out of thy fathers house, and come into a land,
which I will show thee. And In Christ borne of Abrahames seed al nations are
blessed. Gal. 3.
IN THEE shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Heb. 11.
Abram therefore went out as our Lord had commanded Abram dedicated Altars to
God especially in those places where he received promises, or benefits. S.
Chrisost. ho. 31. in Genesis
an altar to our Lord, that had appeared to him. And marching thee. * Say
therefore, I pray thee, that thou art my sister:

When Abram therefore was entered into Egypt, the God by corporal affliction
hindered Pharao and his men from doing violence to Sarai S. Chrisost: ho. 32.
in Genesis
scourged Pharao

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XII.
13. Say therfore] Abraham concealed that Sarai was his wife, and lied not Genesis
13.
in saying, she was his sister: as he also called Lot his brother, being his
brothers Men are bond to do their lawful endeuoures, and to commit the test to
God.
son, and she his brothers daughter. VVherby he prevented danger of his own
life, using such lawful means as lay in him, committing his wives li. 16. ^.
19. ciuit. and q. 16. in Genesis
chastity to Gods protection, which him self could not provide for. In which
case if he had not done his own endeavor, he had rather tempted God (says S
Augustine) then trusted in God. And so God preserved her, though she was in
Pharao his house. v. 17.

CHAP. XIII. Abram and Lot return from Egypt into Chanaan, 6. and being rich
separate themselves, 10, Lot choosing the country about Iordain, Abram
dwells in Chanaan. 14. where again God promises him that land, and
multiplication of his seed. 18. And he erected an other Altar to God.
ABRAM therefore ascended out of Egypt, he and his coast. And he was very rich
in possession of gold and

But Lot also that was with Abram, had flocks of s^eepe, Four sorts of
brethren inholie writ: ge^man brothers, as Jacob and Esau: of kindred, as
Abraham and Lot: of the same nation, as the Jews and Samaritanes: in Religion
as al Catholics.
brethren. Behold the whole land is before thee: go aparte

Lot therefore lifting up his eyes, saw all the country about Not the children
of the flesh but the children of promise are the seed. Romans 9. and are
innumerable. Apoc. ^. ^. 9.
thy seed

CHAP. XIIII. The king of Sodom with other four kings are overcome in battle,
by four others: 12. where Lot is taken 14. but Abram with 318. persons
prosecuting and ouercoming the victorers, 16. rescued Lot, with all the captives
and pray. 18. Melchisedech King and Priest blessed Abram, 20. Abram paid
tithes to him. 21. and rendered the spoil to the king of Sodom.
AND it came to pass in that time, that Amraphel the dwelled in Sodom. And
behold one, that had escaped, Abraham enriched by God, would take no more of
man, but his soldiars sustenance. The proper hire of spiritual work men, S.
Chrisost in Genesis
lest thou say: I have enriched Abram: except such things, as the young men
have

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XIIII.
18. Melchisedech] S. Hierom being earnestly requested by Euagrius, to Tomo 3.
prope initium.
Old heresie^ concerning Melchisedech.
give his judgment touching Melchisedech, whom a nameles author had endeavored
to prove to be the Holy Ghost, plainly confuteth that error: as also an other
error of Origin and Didymus saying, he was an Angel. Likewise S. Epiphanius (
heresi 55. and 76) relates and condemns a third error, of some that thought
him to be the Son of God. These two Fathers, and S. Augustine ( li. de
heresibus her. 34.) and diverse others, whom S. Hierom alleges prove
evidently, that he was a very man, a Priest and a king, yea the hiegh Priest
(at least of that countric) Superior to Abraham, and a figure of Christ.
Besides these heresies the same S. Hierom relates two probable opinions. The
Jews Rabins generally hold that Melchisedech was Sem the son of Noe A
probable opinion that Sem and Melchisedech was al one.
from whom Abraham and all the Hebrews descended. Which they seem rather to
affirm, as loath to confess that any man, of other nation then their own,
should have been greater and more excellent then Abraham in spiritual causes,
then for any reason they do, or can allege. Yet many especially latter
writers as Liranus, Tostatus, Genebrardus and others do embrace this opinion as
most probable. Though S. Hierom seems only to have added Ep. ad Euag.
the Hebrews opinion (as he says) because he would intimate al to his friend,
when he had first cited grauer authors, S. S. Ireneus, Hypolitus, Eusebius
More probable that Melchisedech was a Chananite.
Cesariensis, Eusebius Emissenus, Apolinarius, and Eustathius, al agreably
affirming that Melchisedech was a Chananite, king of Salem, which was
afterward called Jerusalem. To this opinion agrees Philo Iudaeus continually
speaking of him, as of a stranger to the Jews nation. Josephus also a Jew
writes plainly ( li. 7. de bello Iudaico. c. 18.) that he was of Chanaan, and
Prince of the Chananites. Also S. Dionysius Ariopagita, ( Caelest. Hier. c. 9.)
S. Epiphanius ( her. 55. and 67) Theoderetus ( q. 63. in Gen.) and Suidas, are
of the same mind, and many other christitian Doctors. Who confirm their
assertion by that Heb. 7. v. 6.
S. Paul says to the Hebrews: He whose generation is not numbered among them,
Proved: by S. Paul's words.
took tithes of Abraham. For what else can S. Paul mean, but that
Melchisedechs kindred and people, was diverse from the kindred, and people of the
Jews? which he could not say of Sem, from whom Abraham and al Jews descended:
as it can not be said, that Adam and Noe are of diverse genetation from any
people that now lives, because we al come of them. Of this difficulty (not
pettaining to any controversy of our time) the studious may see more in F.
Pererius his commentaries upon this. 14. chap. of Genesis. disp. 3.

18. Bringing forth] Seeing the Royal Prophet David, and S. Paul say Christ
Psalm. 109 Heb. 7.
is a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, we demand of
Protestants, Christ is a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech.
if Christ fulfilled not Melchisedechs figurative Sacrifice offered in bread
and wine, by offering his own body and blood at his last supper in forms of
bread and wine, and by instituting the same to be offered by his Priests til
the end of the world, what other figurative sacrifice of Melchisedech they can
find performed by Christ, by which it may appear that he is a Priest for ever
according to that order? Calvin (li. 4. Instit. c. 18. para 2.) Kemnisius (par.
2. exam. page 740. and. 747) Peter martyr (in 1. Cor. 5.) and most English
Protestants grant that Melchisedech was a Priest, and that the peculiar
function Why the Protestants have ministers and no Priests
of a Priest is to offer Sacrifice, wherefore they having no sacrifice will have
only ministers and no Priests, but they deny that Melchisedech offered
Sacrifice in bread and wine. Whereupon we join issue with them to prove that
he did. and that by this place amongst others of holy Scripture.

Kemnisius complayneth that the Latin text has Obtulit for Protulit, Offered,
for Brought forth. And to disprove the same, he alleges the Hebrew, Chaldee,
Greek, and S. Cyprian. But Catholics more justly complain of him, for lying.
For all Latin Editions have Proferens, bringing forth. The question therefore The
state of the controversy.
in controversy is, to what end and use Melchisedech brought forth bread and
wine? Calvin and Kemnisius say it was only to refresh or feed Abraham and his
men, and not for sacrifice. which their bare saying is without reason, for that
there was store of victuals in the pray (v. 11.) and they had eaten thereof. v.
24. S. Chris. ho. 36. in Genesis
Moreover the Hebrew word Hotsi, brought forth, is a word pertaining to
Sacrifice, as in the 6. chap of Judges. (v. 18. and 19) and imports that the
bread and wine were first offered in Sacrifice, and then doubtless they did
participat: though they wanted not other fufficient corporal food. Again the
words following For he was the Priest of God most hiegh, can have no other
sense, but that he did the function of a Priest in the bread and wine which he
brought, Melchisedech offered sacrifice in bread and wine.
otherwise if the only cause of bringing that provision had benne to releue the
camp with victuals, the reason would rather have benne yielded, because he was
a bountiful King, a liberal Prince, a special friend to Abraham, as in deed he
was, but none of these reasons, or the like fitted this purpose so well, nor
touched the cause of bringing forth bread and wine, as to signify that he was
a Priest, whose office is to offer Sacrifice.

Here again some Protestants take exception against the Latin text, that the
The latin text justified by other places, yea by Protestants translations
causual conjunction Enim, for, is not agreeable to the Hebrew, but should be
the copulative Et, and, which is a mere wrangling. For the learned know well
enough, that the Hebtew particle is better expressed in such places, by Enim
or, quia, for or because, then by and. And so the English Bible printed in the
year of our Lord. 1552. reads: Melchisedech king of Salem brought forth
bread and wine: for he was the Priest of the most hieghest God. The latter
Editions also in like places have not the copulative And, but some other word
as the sense requires. Genesis 20. v. 3. Thou art but a dead man, for the vvomans
sake which thou have taken: for she is a man's wife. where the Hebrew phrase
is, And she is married to a husband. Genesis 30. v. 27. they read thus: For I have
proved that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake, where precisly construing
the Hebrew they should say, I diuined (or coniectured) and the Lord blessed me
for thy sake. Likewise Esaie, 64. v. 5. they read: But Lo, thou have been
angry, for we offended, the Hebrew is thus. Lo thou art angry, and we have
sinned In the same place, they translate, Yet shall we be saved, which the
Hebrew expresses by the copulative, And we shall be saved. So when they think
it convenient, they translate the Hebrew particle, For, that, yet, which
strictly signifies And.

Now let us also see the original in this place. In the Hebrew it is thus: The
Hebrew text shows that Melchisedec did the office of a Priest in bread and
wine.
VMALCHI TSEDEC MELEC CHALEM HOTSI LECHEM VAIAIIN. VEHV COHEN LEEL ELION. VAIE
VARECHEHV, etc. In English word for word thus: And Melchisedech king of Salem
brought forth bread and wine. And he the priest to God most hiegh. And he
blessed him, etc. where albeit the causual word For, is not expressed, yet
these words, And he the priest, further declaring that besides the office and
dignity of a King (which was said before) Melchisedec was also a Priest, must
needs signify that he did something about the bread and wine belonging to a
Priests office. And what that something The proper office of a Priest is to
offer Sacrifice.
was, perhaps the University of Cambridge will testify, whose late professor
of Divinity teaches plainly, that Melchisedech offered Sacrifice, and was
therein a figure of Christ (Page 6. Reprehen) Sacerdotes (says he) ij vere and
proprie Guiliel. whitaker. contra Gregor. Martin.
sunt, qui sacrificia faciunt; qualis fuit Aaron, and Aaronis silij, and
Melchisedechus, and quem illi adumbrabant, Christus. Priests truly and
properly are they, that offer sacrifices, such as was Aaron, and the sons of
Aaron, and Melchisedech, and Christ, whom they prefigured. If then both Aaron
and Melchisedech were truly and properly Priests, because they offered
sacrifices (according to this Professors definition) and both were figures of
Christ, it must needs be granted that as Christ fulfilled the figure of Aarons
bloody sacrifices, in offering him self upon the Cross: so he also fulfilled
the figure as well of unbloody sacrifices of Aaron, as especially of
Melchisedechs Sacrifice in some other besides that on the Cross, seeing the
prophet David and S. Paul say, Christ is a Priest (not according to Aarons
order, for that was to have an end, but) For ever according to the order of
Melchisedech. And what other Sacrifice did our Savior offer to remain
perpetual, but of his own body and blood in unbloody manner, under the forms
Christ still exerciceth the office of Priesthood according to the order of
Melchisedech by the ministry of Priests.
of bread and wine, with commandment to his Apostles and Priests to do the same
til the end of the world? Let the indifferent reader weigh it well. And
whosoever is not very proud will for his better instruction, or confirmation,
esteem the uniform judgment of many, ancient, godly, and learned Fathers
writing upon this place. We will only recite their words, without other
deduction for brevity sake.

S. Clemens Alexandrinus (li 4. Strom. versus finem). writes thus:
Melchisedech king of Salem, Priest of God most hiegh, gave wine and bread
santified nutriment in type of the Eucharist.

S. Cyprian (Epist 63. ad Caecilium) Christ is Priest for ever according to the
The ancient fathers prove that Melchisedech offered Sacrifice in bread and wine
in figure of Christ, and of other Priests of the new Testament.
order of Melchisedech, which order is this coming from that Sacrifice, and
thence descending, that Melchisedech was Priest of God most hiegh, that he
offered bread and wine, that he blessed Abraham. For who is more a Priest of
God most hiegh, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered Sacrifice to God the
Father, and offered the same, which Melchisedech had offered, bread and wine,
to wit, his own body and blood. And a little after: That therefore in Genesis,
the blessing might be rightly celebrated, about Abraham, by Melchisedec the
Priest, the image of Christ's Sacrifice consisting in bread and wine went
before, which thing our Lord perfecting and performing, offered bread and
chalice mixed with wine, and he that is the plenitude, fulfilled the verity of
the prefiguted image.

Eusebius Cesariensis. (li 5. Demonst. Euang. c. 3.) Even as he who was Priest
of Nations was never seen to offer corporal sacrifices, but only bread and
wine, when he blessed Abraham: so first our Lord and Savior him self, then
priests that come from him, exercising the spiritual office of Priesthood in all
nations after the Ecclesiastical ordinances, do represent the mysteries of his
body, and healthful blood in bread and wine. which mysteries Melchisedech knew
so long before by divine spirit, and used as representations of things to come.

S. Ambrose (li. 5 de Sacramen. c. 1.) We know the figure of the Sacraments*
went before, in Abraham's times, when Melchisedech offered Sacrifice.

Idem. in cap. 5 Heb. It is clear that oblations of cattle are vanished, which
were in Aarons order, but Melchisedechs institution remains, which is
celebrated all the world over in administration of the Sacraments.

S Hierom. (Epist. ad Marcellamo vt migret Bethleem.) Have recourse to Genesis,
and you shall find Melchisedech king of Salem, prince of this city, who even
then in figure of Christ offered bread and wine, and dedicated the Christian
mystery in our Saviors body and blood. Idem Epist. ad Euagrium: Melchisedech
offered not bloody victims, but dedicated the Sacrament of Christ in bread and
wine, simple and pure sacrifice. Idem. Quest. in Genesis c. 14: Our mystery is
signified in the word of order, not by Aaron in imolating brute victims, but in
offering bread and wine, that is the body and blood of our Lord Jesus. Idem in
c. 26. Matthei* Melchisedech the Priest of God most hiegh, by offering bread
and wine, prefigured the Mystery of the Eucharist.

S. Chrisostom (ho. 35. in Gen.) Seeing the figure; thinck also I pray thee, of
the verity ho. 36 After that Melchisedec king of Salem brought bread and wine
(for he was Priest of God most hiegh) Abraham received his oblations.

S. Augustine (Epist. 95.) Melchisedech bringing forth the sacrament (or
mystery) of our Lords table, knew how to figurate his eternal ptiesthood. Idem
li. 16. c 22 ciuit There first appeared that sacrifice, which is now offered to
God by Christians in the whole world. Idem li. 17. c. 17. li. 18. c. 35. and
upon the Psalm. 109. li. 1. contra aduers. Leg. and prophet. c. 20. Ser. 4. de
Calvin co^temneth all the ancient fathers. in ca. 9. Heb.
Sanctis Innocentibus. But it is bootles or nedles to cite more places, or more
authors. for whosoever will not submit their judgments to these, would not, it
is like, believe, if their own masters, should rise agane and warn them, lest
they be damned for their incredulity.

19. Blessed him] Calvin (in cap. 7. v. 9. Heb) Musculus (locis com. c. de
Missa Papist) and some other Protestants to avoid the connection of
Melchisedechs Priesthood and bringing fo^th of bread and wine, will needs have
these words, He was a Priest, referred only to that which follows, he
blessed Abraham. And some English translaters for this purpose have corrupted
the text, Bible 1579.
Heretical translation.
by changing, And into Therefore, saying thus: And he was a Priest of the most
hiegh God, therefore he blessed him. which is also a false gloss. For
Melchisedech did not bless Abram because he was a Priest, for Abram was also a
Priest, but because he was a greater Priest then Abram. which S. Paul urges
saying: Without al contradiction that which is less, is blessed of the
better, Heb. 7, Iosue 8. and. 22. 3 Reg. 8.
The greatter blesses the less.
concluding thereupon that Melchisedech was greatter then Abraham. Agane other
Superiors that are not Priests may bless their inferiors. As Iosue and Solomon
blessed the people, and parents bless their children.

20. Gave tith^s] This is an other prerogative of Melchisedec, that Abram
Paying of tithes in the law of nature.
paid tithes to him, which S. Paul likewise explicateth (Heb. 7.) and proves
thereby that Christ's Priesthood is greatter then the Leuitical. Moreover this
paying of tithes by Abraham shows the antiquity of this tradition, being
practiced in Abraham's time, that the spiritual Superiors received tithes of
their inferiors.

CHAP. XV. Abram doubting and lamenting that he should have no child, God
promises him much issue, 6. who believing is justified, 9. offers Sacrifice
prescribed by God, 13. and is forwarned that his seed shall be in strange land
400. years. 14. shall be delivered from servitude 18. and possess Chanaan.
WHEN these things therefore were done, the word Abram" believed God, and it was
reputed to him unto To. 4. Gal. 3. Iac. 2.
justice. And he said to him: I am the Lord that brought These three kinds of
beasts and two of birds signify that the Israelites should be three
generations in a strange land, the fourth in the desert, the fifth in
possession of Chanaan, Theod. q. 65. in Genesis
Take me a cow of three years old, and a she goat of three years, and a
ram of three years, a turtle also, and a pigeon. Who taking al these,
divided Act. 17.
know that a pilgrim shall thy seed be in a land not their own (and they shall
bring them under bondage, and afflict them) Abraham and his seed werein strange
land 400 and odd years, but in servitude and affliction about 140.
four hundred years. But the nation, whom they Exo. 12.
with great substance. And thou shall go to thy fathers God deferreth to
punish, either that the wicked may amend, or the good be exercised by them. S
Aug. Psalm. 54. or because the iniquity is not come to that great measure which
his wisdom for^eeth, and will punish in the end, to his own more glory, and
more good of others. S. Greg. ho. 11. in 3. Ezech. To believe Gods word without
staggering is an act of justice.
as yet the iniquities of the Amorrheanes are not at the full until this present
time.

Therefore when the sun was set, there arose a dark

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XV.
6. Believed God] S. Hilarie (li. 9. de Trin) and S. Ambrose (li. 1. de Abraham.
c. 3) by this exa^mple teach us, what manner of faith is reputed to justice. to
wit, such a faith as without tergiuersation, or requiring of proof or reason,
does simply believe that which God once says, because he is omnipotent, how
farsoeuer the thing that is said surmounteth our understanding. For so heroical
was the act of Abraham's faith, promptly believing Gods word in a matter most
hard to his former conceit, that for the same he received singular praise; and
for the like afterward was called The father of mamenation* (c. 17. v. 5) and
by Not works before faith but joined with faith are meritorious.
S. Paul. The father of all that believe (To. 4. v. 11) where the Apostle
teaches that Abraham had no justice, nor estimation of justice before God,
until he believed in Christ (v. 18. 19, 20) because al works before that faith
are insufficient. Neither was this a sole faith but had other necessary
virtues of hope, and charity, humilite, reverence, obedience, and the like
joined with it. wherefore S. James testifies that Abraham was justified by
works (that is by Only faith does not justify.
works following faith not going before faith. For Faith (says he) if it have
not works, is dead in it self. (c. 2. v. 17) And by works Abraham's faith was
consummat. v 22. And concludes thus: Do ye see, that by works a man is
justified and not by faith only. v. 24.

CHAP. XVI. Sarai gives her handmaid Agar as a wife to Abram. 4. who
conceiving despises her mystresse, is therefore afflicted, and flies away. 7.
But is warned by an Angel to return and humble herself, 15. which she does
and bears Ismael.
SARAI therefore, the wife of Abram, had brought forth Some obey whilst they
are rude, or in low state, but having got a little knowledge, or advancement
disdain their aduancers. S. Gregory. li. 21. in 1. Reg. 3.
perceauing that she was with child, despised her mistress. And Sarai said to
Abram: Thou do unjustly against me: to thy mistress, and humble thy self
under her hand. And

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI.
3. To vvife] The Manichees did calumniat holy Abraham, and other Patriarchs
Manichees, condemned plurality of wives in the Patriarchs. Luther allows*
it in Christians. Other Protestants in some case.
S. Aug. li. 22. c. 47. cont. Faust. Luther propsit. 62. 65. et 66.
triarches for having many wives, condemning them of incontinencie and
adultery for the same. Luther in the contrary extreme held it not unlawful,
but indifferent, now in the law of grace, for a man to have more wives then one
at once. And some English Protestants hold, that for adultery, the innocent
party may marie an other, the first living. But the Catholic doctrine
distinguishing times and causes, shows how plurality of wives was lawful
sometimes, and at other times, especially since Christ, altogether unlawful,
and vndispensable. The sum of which verity is this. By the first institution
of Marriage in the state of innocence, and law of nature, and by the law of
Christ, it is unlawful for any man to have more wives, and for any woman to
have more husbands, then one. In the one part of which Law notwithstanding S.
Aug. de bono coniugali. ca. 17.
God sometimes dispensed. For there be two kinds of precepts Two sorts of
preceptsin the law of nature.
pertaining to the law of nature. One sort are as first principles of the law
of nature, in which God never dispe^seth, much less any man. As that one
woman may not have more husbands then one, because the same would rather hinder
procreation, and so were directly against the fruict of marriage. The other
sort are as conclusions drown from the first principles, in which God
sometimes dispenses, but never any man* As in this present example: seeing it
is against natural procreation that one woman should have many husbands, it is
convenient also, there being ordinarily as many men as women in the world,
that every man likewise should be restrained to one wife, for so procreation
may rather be increased, then if some men have many wives, and others by that
occasion have none at al, except in some special case. As after the flood, when
there was searsetie of people, God dispensed with such men as indeed were like
to make greatter procreation by plurality of wives. Which appears
sufficiently by that Sarai persuaded her own husband, to marie an Plurality
of wives sometimes allowed.
other wife, and he a true servant of God agreed thereto, not as a new thing but
as a lawful practice of those times. And Moses here and in other places still
Deuteronomy. 21.
speaks of it, as of a custom known to the people for lawful. If a man
(says he) have two vviues, one beloved and the other hated, and they have
children by him, and the son of the hated be first borne, he can not prefer
the son of the beloved. whereby is clear that two wives were then lawful, and
the children of both legitimate, and that the first borne must be preferred,
without respect of first or last marriage. Yet this dispensation either ceased
before Christ's time, the cause ceasing, when the world was replenished; or at
least our Savior took By the law of Christ in no case lawful.
it away, restoring Matrimony to the first institution of two in one flesh.
who Math. 19. Genesis 2.
pleases to see the Doctors that understand, and expound the Scriptures to
this effect, may read S. Augustine li. 22. c. 30. and. 47. con. Faust. Manich.
li. 16. c. 25. and 38. ciuit. and li. 1 de adulter. coniugijs. S. Christom ho.
56. in Genesis S. Amb. li. de Abraham. c. 4. Also S. Chrisost. S. Hierom. and S.
Bid in. 19. Mathei.

CHAP. XVII. God renewing his promises to Abram, 5. changes his name, 10. and
commands Circuncision. 15. changes also his wives name, promises a son of
her. 20. Likewise that Ismael shall prosper. 23. and the same day Abraham
circuncised himself, and Ismael, and all the men of his house.
ANd after that he began to be nyntie and nine years He is perfect in this
life, that sincerly and diligently tends toward perfection of the next life.
And this God here commanded to Abraham, and Christ to al Christians. Math. 5.
S. Aug. li. de perfect. cont. Caelest. See Genesis 6. v. 9
perfect. And I will make my covenant between me and thee: and and thy seed
after thee: All the malekind of you * shall be circumcised: and you shall
circumcise the flesh of your prepuce, Circumcision and name received the eight
day signified the association of Saints in heaven after the seven days travel
of this world. Ser. de circum. apud S. Cyprian.
eight days shall be circumcised among Abraham laughed not doubting but
rejoicing. S. Ambro. li. de Abraham c. 4. S. Aug. li. 16 c. 26. de ciuit.
laughed, saying in his heart: Temporal blessings were common to Ismael, but
spiritual pertained properly to Isaac and Israel, and their successessors.
Isaac, whom Sara shall bring forth to thee at this time an other year. And
when he had leaft of speaking Conformity in Religion conserueth peace in every
family. Tho. Anglus in hunc locum.
all the men of his house, as well the home

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVII.
5. Many nations] Abram signifying Hiegh or Noble father, changed into
Changing of names is mystical. S. Aug. li. 16 c. 28 and 39. ciuit. S. Hierom.
Tradit. Hebraicis.
Abraham, which signifies Father of many (nations) and Sarai signifying My
Princes, changed into Sara, which absolutely signifies Princess, importe great
Mysteries intended by God. For by this changing of names was declared and
confirmed, that Abraham by the issue that he should have of Sara, should be the
father of many nations, which S. Paul expressly applies to his spiritual
children* those especially that should believe in Christ, of the Gentiles
prefigured by Isaac borne of the freevvoman, by the promise, as the Jews were
prefigured Gal. 4. Isa. 54.
by Ismael borne of the bondvvoman according to the flesh, concluding with the
Abraham natural father of four nations: spiritual father of all that do believe
in Christ. Romans 4, 11. The Church of Christ ever consists of many nations.
prophet Esai, that Many are the children of the desolate, that before was
barren. For albeit Abraham was natural father of four nations, The Ismaelites,
Madianites, Idumeans, and the Israelites, yet he was spiritual father of many
more, to wit, of al nations that believe in Christ from his own time to the ^d
of the world, of which some are Jews, but the greatest part Gentiles* as the
same Apostle shows. Romans 4. Gal. 4. Ephesians. 3. Collos. 1. and in other places.
whereby is clear, that the Church of Christ does always consist of many
nations, not as Donatistes and Protestants absurdly say, sometimes of few
invisible or unknown persons, for so Abraham should sometimes be father of few
or no nations, which d^rogateth either from Gods omnipotency if he could not,
or from his fidelity if he should not maintain his promise, made to Abraham
for ever.

10. shall be circumscised] The Sacrament of Circumcision here first instituted,
Circumcision a figure of Baptism.
about 400. years before the Law of Moses, is a perfect figure of Baptism,
resembling it in four things. First by both these Sacraments the faithful are
distinguished from infidels. Secondly proffession of faith is made in them
both, either by those that receive the same, if they be of discretion, or by
others for them, if they be infants. Thirdly by both these Sacraments entrance
is made into the Church, and to the participation of other Sacraments and
spiritual rites. Fourrhly both these Sacraments induce subjection to the
jurisdiction, and laws of the Church. But Baptism does farie excel
Circumcision Baptism excels Circumcision.
in that it is more easy, or less painful, more universal, for it pertains
to al nations, and both sexes; and especially in virtue and efficacy, for
Baptism as an instrumental cause remitteth sin and justifies, Circumcision
was only a sign that grace was given, and sin remitted. Again Baptism
imprinteth a character in the soul, the other leaves a marck only in the
flesh. Finally Baptism opens the gate of heaven, in virtue of Christ's
passion now past, which circumcision could not before Christ suffered death. Of
which both resemblance and difference S. Augustine treats in many places,
especially li. 3. de doct. christ c. 9. Epist. 118. and Ianuarium. li: 19. c.
13. cont. Faust and in Psalm. 73. where he also makes like comparison between
other Sacraments of the old and new Testament.

14. Shall be destroyed] Here occur two difficulties about the true sense of
Two difficulties.
this hard place* First whether this punishment belonged to them only, by whose
fault circumcision was omitted; or to infants also that should be circumcised
and were not. Secondly whether temporal punishment, or eternal* was here
threatened sor transgression of this precept. Touching the first doubt, it
seems probable, that this punishment pertained only to those, by whose To whom
the punishment pertained when circumcision was omitted.
negligence themselves, or others of their charge, were not circumcised: for
that the reason why such a one is punished is aleaged, Because he has broken
Gods covenant. Which is only in their power to keep or break, that are of
discretion, and not in the power of infants. The indifferency also of the
Hebrew and Greek text favors this sense, for where according to the Latin we
read, The male whose flesh of prepuce is not circumcised, The Hebrew and Greek
may be translated, The male that does not circumcise the flesh of his prepuce,
which can not be meant of an infant of eight days old. This exposition is
likewise confirmed by example, Exodi. 4. where Moses was in danger to be
slain by an Angel, because his son was not circumcised. Nevertheless S.
Augustine (li. 3. c. 18. cont. Inlian. li. 16. c. 27. ciuit. and in other
places) proves that this commination pertained also to infants. whose
judgment is confirmed by the 70. Interpreters adding for explication these
words, the eight day. which necessarily include infants, as subject to this
punishment. not for that they could transgress this precept, or commit a new
sin, but for lack of circumcision. The reason whereof is, for that God now
determined this only remedy for original sin, in the male sex of Abraham's
seed, in place of sacrifice, or other profession of faith used before, and
that in case it could conveniently be applied for otherwise the former remedies
were still aualable.

Concerning the other difficulty many ancient fathers expound these words,
shall be destroyed out of his people, of only temporal punishment; either what
punishment was threatened.
death, as the like phrase signifies, Exodi. 12. Whosoever shall eat leuened
bread, his soul shall perish out of Israel; or temporal separation from the
people of God, as Number. 19. Every one that touches the dead corse, shall perish
out of Israel. But S. Augustine (li. 3. c. 18. cont. Julian. li 5. hypog. and
alibi) S. Gregory (li. 4. Moral. c. 2. and. 3.) S. Prosper (li. de promiss.
Dei. p. 1. c. 14.) S. Beda (li. 2. in Lucam. c. 8) and S. Bernard (ser. 3. de
circum) understand this threatening not only of temporal punishment, but also of
eternal separation from God, and the Circumcision instituted to distinguish the
people of God and for remedy of original sin in some persons, but not in all.
society of Saints. And that also infants are so secluded only for lack of
this remedy, as now children which dye without Baptism, committing no new
fault are deprived of the vision of God, for their original sin not remitted.
Whereupon is geathered that albeit Circumcision was principally instituted to
distinguish the people of God, which should come of Abraham's seed, from other
nations, yet it was also for remission of original sin: not in all, but in
those to whom God appointed this particular remedy.

CHAP. XVIII. Angels entertained as ghests by Abraham 10. tell when Sara shall
bear a son, whereat she laughing, they confirm that they had said. 16. They
also fortel the destruction of Sodom. 22. for which Abraham prayed six times.
ANd God appeared to him in the vale of mambre as he he ran to meet them
from the door of his tent, and adored to the ground. And He said Abraham saw
three, and adored one. professing three divine persons and one God. S. Aug. li.
16. c. 29. ciuit.
Lord, if I have found grace Heb. 13.
in thy sight, go not past thy servant: but I will fetch Romans 9.
have a son. Which when Sara heard, she laughed behind the door of the tent.
And they were both aged, and far Abraham laughing with admiration for joy was
not reprehended, but Sara laughing of diffidence was reprehended, by him that
sees the heart. S. Aug. q. 36. in Genesis and li. 16. c. 31 ciuit.
It is not so, says he: but thou did laugh. When the men therefore

Therefore said our Lord. The cry of Sodom, and Gomorre is multiplied, and
their sin is aggrauated excedingly. I will descend, and see whether they have
in act what a wall are just men to their country? their faith saves us,
their justice defends us from destruction. S. Amb. li. 1. de Abraham. c. 6.
If there

CHAP. XIX. Lot receiving Angels in his house, is abused by the Sodomites. 12.
He with his wife (26. who for looking back is turned into a statua of salt) and
his two daughters are delivered. 24. Sodom and Gomorre are burned. 31. Lot
lies unwitting with both his daughters, begat of them Moab and Ammon, of whom
came the Moabites and Ammonites.
AND the two angels came to Sodom at even, and Lot Abraham and Lot by
hospitality met^ted to receive Angels in steed of me^. Heb. 1^.
into the house of your servant, and lodge there: wash your feet, and in the
morning you shall go forth on your way. Who said: No, but we will abide in the
streat. He compelled This sin cries to heaven for revenge.
their cry is waxen loud before our Lord, who has sent us to destroy them.
Therefore Lot daughters, because our Lord spared him. And they led a little one
earth, and Lot entered into Segor. Therefore our Lord rained Lots wife turned
into salt, admonishes the servants of God to proceed in virtue, and not to
look back to vice. Luc. 17. S. Aug. li. 16. c. 30. ciuit.
looking behind her, Lot neither perfect, nor very wicked was delivered for
Abraham's ^^^e. S. Aug. ^. 45 in Genesis
remenbring Abraham, delivered Lot out of the subversion of the cities wherein
he had dwelt. And Lot ascended out of Segor, said to the younger: Behold I lay
yesternight with my father, let us make him drink wine also this night, and
thou shall lie with him, that we may save seed of our father. They Moabites and
Ammonites were two distinct nations. perhaps of the 72. See. p. 43.
father of the Moabites even to this present day. The younger also bare a
son, and

CHAP. XX. Abraham seiorning in Geraris, his wife is taken into King Abimelechs
house, but by Gods commandment is restored untouched, 14. with great gifts,
17. and Abraham praying Abimelechs house is cured.
ABRAHAM removed from thence into the south See page 52.
my sister. Abimelech therefore the king of Gerara sent, and took her. And God
came to Abimelech in called also for Abraham, and said to him: What have thou
done to us? what have we offended against thee, that thou have brought upon me
and upon my kingdom a great sin? that which thou ought not to do, thou
have done to us. And Not his fathers own daughter, but of his progeny. S.
Aug. li. 22. cont. Faust. c. 35. and li. 16. c. 19. and 30. de ciuit.
the daughter of my father, and not the daughter of my mother, and I took her
to wife. And after that God brought me out of my fathers house, I Kings of the
earth esteming the Church only for a laudable people of God, seek to subject
her to them selves: but knowing her to be the inviolable spouse of Christ,
subject them selves to her, and offer to her most honorable gifts. S. Aug. il.
22. cont. Faust. c. 38.
took sheep and oxen, and

CHAP. XXI. Isaac is borne. 4. circumcised, 8. and weaned. 9. Agar and Ismael
are put The sixth part of this book.
forth of Abraham's house, 15. but after desolation are nourished, and prosper
in the desert. 22. King Abimelech and Abraham make a Of the progeny and other
blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
league confirming it with oath.
AND our Lord visited Sara, as he had promised: and Abraham and Sara laughed
(he admiring, she doubting) at the joyful promise of a son, and therefore he
is called Isaac, which signifies laughter S. Aug li. 16. c. 31. ciuit.
Isaac: and he circumcised made to me: whosoever shall hear of it, will laugh
with me. And again she said: Who that shall hear of it would See chap. 17. v.
21.
in Isaac shall Romans 9. Heb. 11.
seed de called to thee. But the son also of the handmaid well of water, which
his servants had taken away by force. And Abimelech answered: I knew not who
did this thing: well of oath
Bersabee: because there both did swear. And they made a league for the well of
oath. And Abimelech

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXI.
12. Let it not] It seemed so hard, inhumaine, and unjust to cast Agar and
Ismael Separation to be made in families, when just cause requires.
out of the house, that Abraham would not have done it, onles God had commanded
him in this to hear the voice of Sara. But when he knew Gods will therein, not
respecting flesh and blood, nor disputing further of the lawfulnes of the fact,
sent them both away, commending them to Gods protection: and so by this
separation the family was made quiet. It represented also a notable Mystery
of the Synagog of the Jews and Church of Christ. As S. Augustine Mystical sense
li. 15. c. 2. ciuit.
does excellently expound the same, according to S. Paul (Gal. 4.) That Ismaels
playing with Isaac was persecution, because it tended to pervert him, showing
it to be a greater injury, to delude and deceive any, in drawing The true
Church does not persecute but justly punishes offenders. Heretics and other
infidels do persecute when either by word, or sword they impugn the truth.
them to new and particular companies, then corporally to persecute them: and
Epist. 48. and. 50.
that the Church, and Catholic Princes punish heretics for their good, to
make them return to the truth, or finally to cease from seducing others. Ecce
libera afflixit ancillam, and non illam vocat persecutionem. Apostolus, ludit
seruus cum Tract. 11. in Joan.
domino, and persecutionem vocat. Afflictio ista non vocatur persecutio, and
lusi^ illa vocatur persecutio. Behold the freewoman afflicted the handmaide,
and the Apostle calls it not persecution, the servant plays with the
master, and he calls it persecution. This affliction is not called
persecution, and that play is called persecution. Again, he says of Sara,
Illusionem vidit in illo lusu, animaduertit Tract. (...).
serui superbiam, displicuit illi, eiecit soras. She saw foul play in that
play, she noted the servants pride, it displeased her, she cast him forth of
the doors. S. Hierom also teaches that the spiritual never persecuteth the
carnal: but spares him in 4. Gal.
as his rustical brother, knowing that he may in time be profitable.

CHAP. XXII. The faith and obedience of Abraham is proved in his redines to
sacrifice his son Isaac. 11. He is stayed from the act by an Angel. 16.
Former promises are renewed to him. 20. And his brother Nachor has also much
issue.
WHICH things being done, God" tempted Abraham, The third prophecy in the
office before Mass on Easter eve. And the first on whitsuneue.
and said to him; Abraham, Abraham. But Judith. 8. Heb. 112.
he answered: Here I am. He said to him: This history is clear, and a most
notorious example of perfect obedience.
Take thy only sticking fast by the horns, which he took and offered an
holocaust instead of his son. And he called the name of It is a gratful and
religious thing, by naming of places, to co^serue the memory of Gods
benefits, that posterity may know them. S. Chrisost. ho. 48. in Genesis
Our Lord sees. Whereupon even to this day it is said, In the mountain our
Lord will see. And the angel of Nachors progeny is here mentioned to show
whence Rebecca came, whom Isaac married.
told Abraham that Melca also had borne children to Nachor his brother, Hus the
first be gotten, and

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXII.
1. Tempted.] God tempts none to evil (as S. James teaches) but by God
tempts not to evil, but by experience makes known what virtue is in men.
Isaac figured Chists divinity, the Ra^me his humanity.
Iac. 1. 13.
trial and experiment makes men known to the world, as here Abraham's Heb. 11,
19. S. Aug. li. 16. c. 32. ciuit. Theod. q. 72. in Genesis
faith and singular obedience were manifested, when he doubted not To offer his
only begotten in Sacrifice, accounting that God is able to raise up even from
the dead. Whereupon he received his son again in parable, that is, in figure
and mystery of Christ dead and alive again. Isaac also in this action
signified the divinity of Christ which suffered not, and the ram among the
briers figured his humanity, that should be offered in Sacrifice to God.

CHAP. XXIII. Sara dying Abraham solemnizeth her funeral. 4. byeth a field with
a duble cave of Ephron, 15. for four hundredth sicles. 19. and there burieth her.
AND Sara lived an hundred twenty seven years. Hebron, in the land of
Chanaan: And Abraham came to mourn, and weep for her. And after that he was
risen A clear example of religious office in burying the dead, See. 2. Reg. 1.
and 2. Paral. 35.
the funeral obsequies, he spoke to the children of Heth, saying: I am a
stranger and pilgrim among Adoration used for reverence done to men. See also
c. 27. v. 29. c 33. v 37 and S. Aug. q. 6^. in Genesis
adored And the field was made sure to Abraham, and the cave,

CHAP. XXIIII Abraham's servant adjured and sent by him into Mesopotamia, to
seek a wife for Isaac, 12. prays to God for a sign, finds Rebecca, 34. and
demanding her for this purpose, 50. with her parents, 58. and her own consent,
she goes with him, 67. is married to Isaac: who thereby is comforted for the
death of his mother.
AND Abraham was old, and of many days: and our In choosing a wife a virtuous
stock and family especially true faith and religion, are before al other
things to be considered and preferred. S. Amb. li. 1. c. 9. de. Abrah. S.
Chrisost. ho. 48. in Genesis
take not a wife for my son, of the daughters of the Cananites, among whom I
dwell: but that thou go unto mine own I beseech thee, and do mercifully with
my master Abraham. Behold I stand nigh to the fountain of water, and Her
father having perhaps many wives and every one a several house she went to
her mother house.
her mothers house al things that she had heard. And Rebecca had a brother
named Laban, who in all haist hands, and had heard al her words reporting: These
words spoke the man unto me: he came to the man which stood beside the camels,
and nighe to the fountain of water: and said to him: Come in, thou blessed of
our Lord: Why I drank, and she watered the cammels. And I asked As children
ought not to mary without their parents good liking: so the parties own
consent is most necessary. S. Amb. Epist. 43.
ask her will. And being called, Suach signifies to speak consideratly with
heart or mouth. Here S. Ambrose (li. 1. c. 1. de Isaac) and S. Aug. (q. 69. in
Gen) understand it of mental praye^
meditate in also, when she saw Isaac, lighted of the camel, and said

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXIIII.
14. The maid to whom I shall say] Observation of speeches called ominous,
Ominous speeches sometimes supersticious.
which are interpreted to signify good or evil luck, are sometimes
supersticious, and suggested by evil spirits, who now and then telling, or
insinuating some truth, get credit, and so allure men to attend to such vain,
uncertain, and unlawful signs, as S. Augustine testifies (li. 2. de Genesis ad
lit. c. 17. and li. 12. c. 22.) Nevertheless such signs are sometimes lawfully
observed, and desired from Some times lawful.
God, as the same Doctor disputes (li. quest. super Gen q. 53) and S.
Chrysostom teaches more clerly (ho. 45. in Gen) likewise S. Theodoret (q. 73.
in Gen) But whosoever will not err in particular cases, must follow either
express Holy scripture and the Church are judges of doubtful observations.
Scripture, or the judgment of the Church, which is always directed Joan. 14.
by the spirit of truth. And touching this prayer of Abraham's servant, and his
desire of this determinate sign, to know the maid, whom God had provided to
be Isaachs wife, the fathers generally hold that it was religious, devout, and
discrete. For he being careful of his masters business, and not trusting his
own judgment, but relying upon that Abraham had said, Our Lord shall send his
Angel before thee, commended so weighty a cause to God by prayer, the Angel
Eliezers prayer, for a particular sign, was lawful, devout, and discrete.
suggesting both to him to desire, and to the maid to perform (as the event
shows) such qualities and virtues in her, as were most agreeable to the great
charity and hospitality daily practiced in Abraham's house, most convenient
and necessary (as he discretly considered) for that family, and good of
many. The like observations were approved in Gedeon, and Ionathas. And Iudic.
7. 1. Reg. 14
to pray for such signs in some case, or for manifest miracles is also
approved by the Apostles example praying God To show by lote which of the
two he had chosen to the Apostleship, in place of Judas. And that he would
extend his hand to Act. 1. and. 4.
cures, and signs, and wonders, to be done by the name of his holy son
JESUS.

CHAP. XXV. Abraham having many children by his wife Cetura, died at the age
of 175. years: 12. Ismael also having twelve sons dukes, died. 19. Isaac
praying for his barren wife, she has Esau and Jacob twins. 30. Esau sells
his first birth right to Jacob for a mess of potage.
AND Abraham married an other wife named Cethura: The life of the just has
fulness of days though it be otherwise short; the days of the wicked are void
of fruict, be they many or few. S. Ambrose li. de Abraham.
a good old age, S. Augustine (^q. 72. in Gen) disputes but could not decide,
whether Rebecca went to some Priest, or Prophet, or Altar, or whither else, or
only retired to private prayer.
went to consult our Lord. Who answering said: Two Holy Scripture premonisheth
Jacobs sincerity, lest in the Mysteries following he might be suspected of
false dealing S. Aug. li. 16. c. 37. ciuit.
a plain man dwelled in tents. Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXV.
6. To the children of his concubines] S. Augustine (li. 16. c. 34. de ciuit)
Why Agar and Cetura being lawful wines are called co^cubines. Their children
signified Pagaines and Heretics.
shows that both Agar and Cetura, being Abraham's lawful wives (for so they
are called in holy Scripture) are also called concubines, because they had not
like privileges to Sara, whose son was sole heir to his father, and the
children of the others had only gifts (or mouable goods) not attayning to the
promised kingdom. And all this for mystery sake. For Ismael signified the
carnal people before Christ, the children of Cetura prefigured Heretics, who
suppose themselves to pertain to the new Testament, but are separated no less
then the Jews from Christ's Kingdom. And albeit there was also an other
particular reason, why Agar was called concubine, because she was a second
wife, the first then living, yet this learned father says, he did not see, why
Cetura being married after the death of Sara, should be called concubine, but
only for this Mystery.

21. Heard him] Notwithstanding Gods assured promise, that Isaach Gods
predestination and for seeing include, and not exclude the means by which his
will is done.
should have issue (Genesis 21. v. 12) yet he prays instantly for the same. And
Moses here attributes Rebeccas conceiving to Isaachs prayer. whereby we see
that Gods sorseing, predestinating, and promising exclude not, but in deed
include secondarie causes, and ordinary means, by which his eternal will and
pleasure is fulfilled. For as God did sorsee that Rebecca should have children,
so he did forsee, that Isaac should pray for it, and obtain it; and the one
was as sure to come to pass as the other. And the same consequence is true
concerning eternal life as S. Gregory teaches. li. 1. c. 8. Dialog.

23. The elder shall serve the younger] As before (c. 17. v. 21. and. c 21. v.
12.) The covenant made to Abraham pertaned only to Isaac, and Jacob, not to the
rest of his issue.
the covenant and great promises made to Abraham's sede, are declared to
pertain only to Isaac, and not to Ismael, nor to the other brothers: so the
same belong not to Esau, the elder, but only to Jacob the younger son of
Isaac, the Holy Ghost saying, The elder shall serve the younger. And withal
signifies, (says S. Augustine) that the elder people of the Jews shall serve
the younger li. 16. c. 35. ciuit. 2. Reg. 8. Psalm. 59.
Christian people. For although it may be understood literally to be fulfilled,
in that the Idumeans coming of Esau, were subdued by King David coming of
Jacob; yet it is more conveniently believed, that this prophecy tended to a
greater thing. And what is this, but that which is evidently fulfilled in the
Jews and Christians?

An other great document of grace S. Paul geathereth upon this Mystery: Gods
mere mercy in electing any, his justice to the reprobate.
that the twins being not yet borne, nor having done any thing good or evil,
Romans 9.
without any good merits, the younger is elected, the elder reprobate. For
doubtless (says S. Augustine) touching original sin they were both equal, and
concerning proper sin, neither of them had any at al. By which example he
shows Gods mere mercy in the elect, and justice in the reprobate. as is more
largely noted in the English New Testament, upon the ninth chapter to the
Romans.

31. Sell me thy first birth right] Jacob instructed by his mother, that God
Jacob lawfully bought but Esau sinned in selling the first-birthright.
had chosen him in place of his brother Esau (for to her God had reveled that
the elder should serve the younger) did lawfully use this opportunity to get
Esaus grant of the right pertaining to the first borne, but Esau in selling it
finned, showing himself an intemperate profane man. Heb. 12.

CHAP. XXVI. Isaac by reason of famine goes into Gerara, 3. where God renews
to him the promises made to Abraham. 9. King Abimelech blames him for calling
his wife his sister. 15. the people envying his Wealth, quareleth for his
wells 26. At last Abimelech makes league with Isaac.
AND when a famine was risen in the land, after that God by Abraham's exa^plar
life invited the Egyptians to true religion: now commands Isaac to stay in
Gerara to the like end. S. Theod. q. 76. in Genesis
Go not down And I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven: and See
page 52.
my sister. for he was afraid to confess that she was married to him, thinking
lest peradventure they would kill him because of her beauty. And when Adultery
a great sin also among Painims
a great sin. And he commanded all the people, saying: He that The chanel
where sometimes a vehement stream runs, sometimes none at al.
Torrent, and found living water: but there also the Wrangling.
Calumne. And they dug also an other: and for that they brawled foreward
from thence he dug an other well, for which they contended not: therefore he
called the name thereof, Latitude, saying: Now has our Lord dilated us, and
made us to increase upon the earth. And he went up from that So nations of the
world first enuyed the Church of Christ, but after made peace with it.
let us make a league, that thou do us no harm, as we also have touched Esau
by marying against his parents will, made breach from them.
offended

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXVI.
5. My ceremonies] These were not the same ceremonies and laws which External
ceremonies in the law of nature.
were afterward prescribed by God, and delivered by Moses, but other
obseruances by which Abraham and other holy Patriarchs before him, served God
with certain external worship, differing from the rites of the Gentiles,
especially from Enostime (Genesis 4.) and so forward.

12. An hundred fold] For this increase of wealth the King and people at first
envied Isaac, but afterward perceiving that God almighty, whom he Christian
for titude prevails more by suffering, then by forcible resisting.
served, so blessed him, the rest of the land remaining barren, they sought to
make league with him (v. 28) Even so the Kings and nations of the world, first
envying and persecuting Christ's Church, at leingth seeing it still prosperous
became with all humility children of the same Church, and servants of Christ,
being overcome not by force of arms but by patience, and peacable endeavors of
those whom they most hated. VVherof excellently says S. Leo (Ser. 1. in
Natali. Apost) Although Rome renowned by many victories, dilated her Empire by
land and by sea, yet was it less, that martial travel subdued, then that which
Christian peace has obtained. The Bishops of Rome having larger Jurisdiction
spiritual, then ever the Roman Coesars had temporal Dominion.

CHAP. XXVII. Jacob by his mothers counsel gets his fathers blessing in
place of Esau, 42. And by her is advised (for avoiding Esaus wrath, who
threatened to kill him) to fly to his uncle Laban, in Haran of Mesopotamia.
AND Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, and he The Epistle on Saturday the
second weke in Lent.
commandment, she said to her son Jacob: I heard thy Jacob secure in
conscience that the right of first-birth belonged to him, yet feared to give
occasion of offense to his father.
I fear lest he will think I would have deluded him, and I shall bring upon me
a curse for a blessing. To whom his mother said: This curse, my son, It was
truly Gods will, but not in that s^^ as Isaac understood it.
It was the will of God that that which I would came quickly in my way: And
Isaac said: Come hither, of his hunting, saying: Arise my father, and eat of
thy sons hunting: that thy soul may bless me. And Isaac Isaac now knowing
it to be Gods will, ratified that he had done.
and he shall be blessed. Esau having heard his fathers words, roared out with
worldlings blessing consists in transitory wealth.
the fat of the earth, and in the deaw of heaven from above shall thy blessing
be. Thou shall live by the sword, The Idumeans being subdued by king David (2
Reg. 8.) revolted from king Ioram, and had a king of their own (4. Reg. 8.)
they were again subdued by Hircanus (test Iosepho. li. 13. Antiq) but again
Herod an Idumean reigned in Iewrie Math. 2. Luc. 1.
the time shall come, when thou shall shake of, and loose his yoke from thy
neck. Esau therefore always hated Jacob for the blessing wherewith

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXVII.
19. I am thy first begotten Esau.] Jacob was not by nature the first begotten;
Jacob did not lie, nor sin in saying he was Esau. etc.
but by Gods ordinance, and by covenant made with Esau, had right to the
preeminence, and priuilegies belonging to the first borne. So he did not lie,
but spoke a truth, meaning that he was that son, to whom by divine election
the first-birth-right was dew, which his father supposed to pertain to Esau.

But because some scorners of Christian doctrine (like to the old Manichees) use
to say, that Catholic Doctors, and Schoolmen excuse, and condemn whom they
list by such glosses, let such reprouers understand, that both modern He is
proved innocent by the text.
and ancient Catholic writers auow this defense of the holy Patriarch Jacob,
not by private spirit, but by the most true and proper sense of holy
Scripture itself. Where it may appear, if they will axamine the text, that
Jacob in all this procurement of his fathers blessing, neither did any thing
unjustly, nor said any thing falsely. First it was reveled to his mother (chap.
1.
25. v. 23.) That the elder (of her twins) should serve the younger.
Secondly, holy 2.
Scripture testifies in the same chapter (v. 27.) That Jacob was a plain (or
sincere) Man, void of unjust dealing Thirdly, for more quiet enjoying that 3.
right, which God had ordained for him, he procured his brothers consent and
confirmation (v. 33) Fourtly though he was secure in conscience that 4.
the blessing was dew to him, yet he feared (v. 12.) lest he might give
occasion of offense to his father, to whom this mystery was not yet reveled.
Fifthly 5.
Isaac perceiving at last Gods will, that Jacob should be preferred, was neither
offended with him, nor revoked his blessing, as unlawfully surprised, but
condescending thereto, ratified that he had done, saying (v. 33.) I have blessed
him, and he shall be blessed. Sixthly, God himself from this time forwards often
6.
appeared to Jacob, and with great promises, and many temporal and spiritual
benefits, declared his singular love to him. Seuently, these three Patriarchs
7.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are special renowned Saints of the old Testament:
yea the Lord and Creator of al would peculiarly be called (Exodi. 3.) the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Moses praying instantly for Gods mercy and
clemency toward the people (Exodi. 32.) besought him to remember Abraham
Isaac, and Jacob his servants: and so in both old and new Testament these three
are often mentioned as chief Princes in the Kingdom of Heaven. Al which show
the great virtues and holiness of them al.

And touching this fact of Jacob, where (if ever aniewhere) might seem The
Fathers prove his innocence in this fact.
to be some great sin. S. Augustine at large proves that he did not herein
sin at al: That which Jacob did (says he, li. cont. mendacium c. 10.) By
his mothers instruction to deceive his father, if it be diligently considered,
was no lie, but a mystery, and therefore for the samiliar counsel of the
Holy Ghost, which his mother had received, he is excused from sin. The same
he confirms. q. 74. in Genesis li. 16. c. 37. de ciuit. and li. 22. c. 34 cont.
Faust. The same also teach S. Chrisostom ho. 53 in Genesis S. Hierom Epist. 125.
S. Theodoret. q. 79. and 80. in Genesis S. Gregory, ho. 6. in Ezechielem. S.
Bid, Isidorus, Innocentius 3* Rupertus and others upon this place, al agreing
absolutely that every lie is a sin, declare that Every lie is a sin.
Jacob lied not, but still spoke the truth, confirming their exposition by other
like places of Scripture. As when our Savior said of S. Iehu Baptist (Math.
11.) He is Elias meaning that he was Elias in spirit not in person. So Jacob
said truly that he was Esau, not meaning in person but in right of the first
borne, by Gods ordinance: Esau also having condescended thereto by covenant and
oath. In that also he deceived his father, was no sin. For it was a lawful
Some deceit good.
and good deceit, such a one (says S. Chrisostom) as Hieremie speaks Ho. 6.
ad Col. Hier. 20. Epist. 125.
of, Lord thou have deceived me, and I am deceived, so Isaac was deceived, not
as we commonly call deceit, but to his own and others good, by Gods
disposition.

23. Knevv him not] S. Damasus demanding of S. Hierom, what might be the reason
why God would suffer his holy servant Isaac not to know Jacob, but to be
deceived, and through ignorance to bless whom he would not; It was good that
Isaac knew not Jacob. when he blessed him.
declares that it happened not only to Jacob, but also to many other like
holy men, to be ignorant of many things, and to be deceived in error of
opinion: and that this error was profitable to Isaac and his house For if he
had given this blessing (which was a spiritual Jurisdiction) to Esau, as he
purposed, he had committed a noxious error in deed, by preferring a bloody
man, one that was ready, if he could, to have killed his brother. (v. 41.)
omitting him, that was sincere and very virtuous, and had done his own will,
not Gods will therein.

But why would not God revel his will to Isaac (as he had commanded a far
greater thing to Abraham to sacrifice the same Isaac) that he might wittingly
have blessed Jacob by Gods commandment? The Fathers do probably allege this
for one reason, that if Esau, being a fierce and cruel man, had perceived Good
in respect of Esau.
that his father had willingly preferred Jacob, he would have been incensed
against his father, conceived and attempted evil against him. An other reason.
S. Chrisostom and Theodoret do yield, that by this strange manner of imparting
More to Gods glory, and Jacobs commendation.
Ho. 53. q. 79. in Genesis
this blessing, it might more manifestly appear to be Gods will and ordinance,
and not to proceed from man's affection, that Jacob should be preferred.

CHAP. XXVIII. Jacob with his fathers blessing, and admonition not to take a
wife of Chanaan, but of the daughters of his uncle Laban, goes into
Mesopotamia: (6. Esau in the mean time marieth a third wife, his uncle Ismaels
daughter) 11. Jacob sees in sleep a ladder reaching to heaven, Angels
ascending and descending, and our Lord leyning thereon renewed the promises made
to Abraham and Isaac. 16. And be away king makes a vow.
ISAAC therefore called Jacob, and blessed him, and commanded increase, and
multiply thee: that thou may be into multitudes of peoples. And Isaac
again confirms the blessings of Abraham to Jacob, and his sede, omitting
Esau: yea and God repeteth the same. v. 13.
give he thee the blessings of Abraham, The Epistle in a votiue Mass for
trauelers.
to Haran. And when he was come to a certain place, Sap. 10.
upon the earth, and the top thereof tooching heaven: the angels also of God
ascending and descending by it, and House of God.
Bethel, which before shall be with me, and shall keep me in the way, by the
which I walk, and shall give me To whom enough is not enough, to him nothing is
enough Aulus Gell.
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, and I shall be returned prosperously to
my fathers

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXVIII.
11. Took of the stones] Jacob traueling into a strange country went in such
Why Jacob traueled in poor state.
poor state, the better to hide his departure from Esau* who otherwise might
have killed him by the way. It was also thus disposed by God, that Jacobs faith
and confidence might, to his greatter merit, be exercised: and that Gods
providence might more manifestly appear, as it did in his return after
twenty years, when with most gratful mind he recounted Gods benefits saying
(Genesis 32) With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now with two troops I
do return.

12. A ladder] He that was in temporal distress, was maruelously comforted A
notable example of Gods comforth to the afflicted. Al nations believing in
Christ are blessed in him.
spiritually, by seeing a ladder that reached from the earth to heaven; Angels
passing up and down the same, and the Son of God leaning upon it, as he that
reigns both in heaven and earth, who in particular promised him, and his sede
that whole land, that he and his sede should be blessed, yea that in His Sede
al nations should be blessed, and that he would keep and protect him where
soever he went. How all this was performed is briefly rehearsed in the book of
wisdom. chap. 10.

18. Erected it, povvring oyle] To erect a stone, and power oil upon it, was
nowise supersticious in Jacob Neither did he learn it of Idolaters: for
Erecting and anointing of Altares is a religious office being done to Gods
honor. The Church lerneth not rites of Idolaters, but they of the Church.
Difference in religious, supersticious, and civil honor consists in the
persons, and intentions.
he abhorred and detested al idolatrical obseruances But as S. Justinius Martyr
S. Clement of Alexandria, Origin, Eusebius and others testify, idololatrical
superstition did rather imitate true religious ceremonies For the devil always
affecting that honor, which he sees done to God, persuaded those whom he
seduced, and blinded with errors, to serve him in such manner of external rires,
as God was served, that thereby he might either have like worship with God, as
it happened among Painim Idolaters: or else deprive God of this kind of honor,
as now we see Protestants reject and pull down consecrated Altares, pretending
them to be supersticious. VVherin they show most gross ignorance, if in deed
they so judge of ignorance, and not of mere malice. For who is so simple, but
he may see, that the chief difference between Religion and Superstition in
external things, consists in the persons to whom they are done, and in the
inte^tion of the doers, and by the same difference of persons civil honor is
also distinguished, from both religious and supersticious. As he that kneeleth
to God, religiously honoreth God. Kneeling to the sun, moon, or other false
Gods, supersticiously honoreth the devil, and kneeling to the King, ciuilly
honoreth the King. Jacob without doubt did al to Gods only honor. And that
which he did in this place, is now used in the Catholic Church. For so
Rabanus a diligent obseruer and writer of Ecclesiastical Rites, Ceremonies, and
Customs touching the use of holy oil witnesses (li. 1. c. 45. Institut.
cleric.) that the Altar being first sprinkled with water, is anointed with
Chrisme, to the example of the Patriarch Jacob, who after that dreadful vision,
erected a stone for a title (or monument) pouring oil thereon, and calling that
place The house of God. S Cyprian Two sorts of holy oil.
also writing of Chrisme, mentions the two sorts of holy oil used in the
Church; one of simple oil consecrated by a Bishop, which is used for
Catechumes before Baptism, persons possessed, and the sick; the other is made
of oil and balm, also consecrated by a Bishop, and this is used in Baptism,
Confirmation, and in consecrating Altares, Kings, and Priests.

20. Vovved] It can not be understood that Jacob here vowed, or promised Vows
are properly of things which are not otherwise commanded.
only to serve God, as the Sovereign Lord of al creatures, for to that he was
bond, whether he should prosper temporally or no; but that he vowed particular
godly works, to which he was not otherwise obliged. As here he expresses two
things. Presupposing before al, that the Lord Omnipotent shall be his God, he
adds, first And this stone, which I have erected for a title, shall be called
the house of God. whereby he promised the building of a Church, performed at his
return (chap. 35.) Secondly he added, And of al things which thou shall give
me I vvil offer tubes to thee. And this Likewise was of free devotion. For
tithes also in the law of nature were dew to Priests, and by inferior Priests
Genesis 14.
to the chief Priest, as Abraham gave tithes to Melchisedech. And so al his
tithes were dew to his father, and after his father him self was chief: yet
he promised them to God, that is, to offer them in Sacrifice, and bestow them
in other uses pertaining to Gods service.

CHAP. XXIX. Jacob entertained by Laban, 15. serves him seven years for
Rachel, 23. but first receiving Lia, 27. seven days after receives also
Rachel, and serves for her seven years more. 31. She remaining barren, Lia
bears four sons.
JACOB therefore going on his journey, came into the East with his flock. And
Jacob said: There is yet much day S. Augustine. (q. 87. in Gen) commends
familiar kissing of kinsfolk and friends as a laudable custom in some
countries. It is no where more civil and modest then in England.
kissed her: and lifting up his voice wept, and he Without ^^^ges?
gratis? Tell me what wages will thou take. He had in deed two daughters, the
name of the Laban greeously offended, neither could Lia be excused, but Jacob
was innocent, in this fact.
he brought in Lia his daughter to him, giving his After seven days he had
Rachel who was his first spouse. S. Hierom Tradit Heb. S. Aug. q. 89. in Genesis
week of days of this match: and I will give the this same also, for the work
that thou shall serve me other seven years. He

CHAP. XXX. Rachel yet barren, delivers her handmaide to Jacob, Who bears
two sons. 9. Lia ceasing to bear gives her handmaid also, and she bears
two more. 17. Then Lia bears other two sons and one daughter. 22. Rachel
bears Joseph. 25. Jacob desirous to return home, is hired to stay for a
certain part of the stocks increase. 43. Whereby he becomes exceeding rich.
AND Rachel seeing she was unfruitful, Not properly (...)* but grief and ^^^^ul
(...)* S. Aug. li 22* c 5^* cont. Faust.
envied her sister, Of plurality of wi^^s see page 62.
marriage: who, when her husband had compained with me a son. and therefore she
called his name, Dan. And again Bala conceauing bare an other, for whom Holy
Scripture (says S. Augustine) would never h^^e mentioned such womanly de^ires,
but to admonish us to ^^ke great mysteries therein. li. 22 c. 56. ^o^t. ^austum.
mandragores. She answered: Do thou think it a small matter, that have
served thee, and how great thy possession has benne in my hands. Thou hadest a
small thing before I came Jacob did justly use this means to recover th^^ which
Laban withheld s^o^ him being du^ for the dowry of his wives, and recompense
for his service. Rupert li. 7. c 39. in Genesis
taking grene rods of the poplare, and of the almond, and of the plain
trees, in part pilled them: and when the barks were taken of, in the parts
that were pilled, there appeared whitnes: but the parts that were whole,
remained grene: and by this means the color was made diverse. And he put them
in the troughes, where later coming was, and the last conceauing, he did not
put them. And those that were late ward, became Labans: and they of the prime
time, Jacobs. And the man was enriched

CHAP. XXXI. Jacob by Gods commandment parts secretly with all he has toward
his father. 21. Laban pursues him. 26. expostulating why he went in secret
manner. 30. especially charge him with stelling his gods. 31. Jacob excuses
himself, not knowing that Rachel had taken a way the Idols. 34. and she
deludeth his diligent searching for them. 36. Then Jacob expostulateth with
Laban for this unkindness. 43. Finally they make a league and depart ^ch to his
own country.
AFTER he heard the words of Labans sons saying: Jacob? And I answered: Here
I am. Who said: Lift up Anointing of Altar^, and free vows are gratful
(...)es to God. See. chap. 28.
annointe the stone, and did vow the vow unto me. Now therefore arise, and
go out of this land, returning into the land of thy nativity. And Rachel and
Lia answered: Have we any thing Ter(...)
confess to his father in law that he fled. And when he my goods? Jacob
answered: In that I departed unwitting (...) sinned (...). Psalm. 4.
angry said in chiding manner: For what fault of mine, and for what offense of
my part have thou so chaffed after me, and searched al my household stuff?
What have thou Laban called The witness heap: and Jacob called The hillock of
testimony, either of them according to the propriety of his language. And
Laban said: This heap shall

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXI.
19. Id^ls.] Images of false gods (as these were) are most properly Images of
false gods are idols. Some images are neither religious nor supersticious.
Some are religious.
called idols. And so the hebrew word Teraphim is here rightly translated
idols* which in other places signifies other things As The statua which Michol
put in David's bed, covering the head thereof with a hearie goats 1. Reg. 19.
skin, to deceive Saules seriants who sought David's death, is called
Teraphim, and may there be translated a statua, image, or similitude, but not
an idol. Again. Osee the Prophet fortelling the lamentable state of the
Israelites, says, they shall be long without King, prince, sacrifice, altar,
ephod, and (...). 3.
Teraphim, which last word in the Protestants English Bibles remains
untranslated Where if they had translated Images* (as here they do) it would
prove, that some images pertain to true religion, the want whereof is lamented
among other principal things.

These idol* Rachel stole from her father, to withdraw him from idolatry.
Rachel took away her fathers Idols, for h^^ good.
as S. Basil (in lib. Proverb.) S. Gregory Nazianzen. (orat. de Pascha^e) and
Theodoret (q. 89. in Gen.) expound it And in this, says Theodoret, she was a
right figure of the Catholic Church, which depriueth idolaters of their
idols. It is probable also by her base using of them, that she held them not
for gods, when she put them under the camels litter* and sat upon them.
Finally that she reserved them, and did not cast them away* nor burn, nor
bury them, argues that they were perhaps of precious metal, or other She
kept them in recompense of wrongs.
matter, which she might turn to profit: and that lawfully in part of
recompense, that she and her sister, had no other dowry, but rather were sold
to^acob. Who also had suffered much injury at their fathers hands.

CHAP. XXXII. Angels mete Jacob by the way. ^. He sends messengers and gifts
to pacify his brother Esau. 24. wrestling with an Angel is not overcome, in
fine the Angel benummeth his thiegh, blesses him, and for tells that he shall
be called Israel.
IACON also went on his journey that he had begun: and dilate my seed as the
sand of the sea, which for multitude can not be numbered. And when he had slept
there that The changing of his name here promised, is performed chap. 35. S.
Hieron. Tradit* Heb.
shall not be called Jacob, but Israel: for if thou have been strong against
God, how much more shall thou prevail against men? Jacob asked him: Tell me by
what name halted on his foot. For which cause the children of

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXII.
7. Feared exceedingly] Justly may we meruel, why Jacob so often assured Jacobs
fear was just, and without fault.
by Gods promises, confirmed by his many blessings, protected in all former
dangers, accompained the night before with armies of Angels, endued also with all virtues, and namely with perfect charity (which expels fear) 1. Joan*
4. q. 102. (...) Genesis
was for all this so vehemently afeard! S. Augustine answers, that he neither
distrusted in God, nor did any unlawful thing: but did his own endeavor
wisely and confidently, lest by presuming or desparing he should rather have
tempted God, then trusted in him. The causes of his fear were in respect of
The causes of his fear. The humble conceit of him self.
him self and his brother. For considering Gods former promises, benefits and
protections were not to be presumed as absolute signs of his perpetual love
but conditional, if him self perseuered sincerly in Gods service. And seeing
Eccle. ^.
The just man / novveth not whether he be vvorthie of love, or of hatred, he
might doubt, lest by his twenty years conversation among Infidels in
Mesopotamia, he had contracted some sins, for which God might suffer him to
fall into calamity and affliction. And though he was in deed still more and
more virtuous, and consequently in Gods more favor and protection: yea so much
the more, by how much less he presumed of his own good state and merits: yet
by the vehement apprehending of his brothers inclination to revenge, Esaus
inclination and means to revenge.
the greatness of the occasion by procuring the first-birth-right, and his
fathers blessing from him, the news of his speedy coming toward him with
four hundred men, the natural situation of the place, where Esau might es^aly
inu^ron him, and (as he humbly thought) his own unworthiness, he was possessed
with natural fear (such as happens to constant men) and was sore afflicted
for the tender care of his family. But reflecting upon Gods goodness, he
prudently disposed of his people and flocks, and besought God to protect him
and his, by prayer qualified with requisite conditions, to wit, with Jacobs
prayer qualified with Humility. Gratitude. Confidence. Meeknes.
humility, not asking for his own but for Abraham and Isaacs sake, and for
Gods own promise, acknowledging himself to be less then Gods mercies toward
him, with gratitude recounting great benefits received, saying, With my
staff I passed over this Jordan, and now with ^vvo troops I do return,
with confidence in that God had said, he Would dilate his sede as the sand of
the sea, and with meeknes in sending gifts and good words to Esau. Thus
finally he pacified him, and so his own fear was turned into joy.

24. A man vvrastled] This wrestling with an Angel assumpting a body
Iacobwrestled with an Angel corporally and spiritually.
in form of a man was corporal, as the effect showed in Jacobs sinow shrunck
Osee. 12.
up, which made him to halt. v. 25 and 31. It was also spiritual, as appears
by his earnest prayer, urging and at last obtaining the Angels blessing. S.
Dionys. c. 4. cel. Hierer* S. Greg. prefat. in Job. Theodoret, q. 91. in Genesis

CHAP. XXXIII. Jacob seeing Eau come with a great troop of men, fears harm,
but is most courteously entertained by him. 10. He hardly persuades Esau to
take gifts, 13. and to return home. 17. So Jacob coming by Socoth to Salem,
there byeth a field, pitcheth his tents, and erecteth an Altar.
AND Jacob lifting up his eyes, saw Esau coming, and Jacob seeing Gods hand in
this change of his brothers mind, not of flaterie, but sincerly acknowledged
his benignity, as Gods countenance toward him.
the countenance of God: be gracious to me, and take to be able, until I come
to my lord in Seir. Esau answered:

CHAP. XXXIIII. For rauishing Dina, the Sichimetes (being first circumcised)
are slain by Simeon and Leui her brothers. 27. The rest of Jacobs sons
spoil the city. 30. Jacob blames them, fearing harm may come by this fact.
AND Dina the daughter of Lia went forth:: to see the O Dina (says S. Bernard)
what nedewas there to see women of a strange country? Tract. de gradib.
humilitatis.
women of that country. Whom when Sichem had wife: and let us contract
marriages one with an other: They offended by falsely pretending religion, and by
excess in revenge, and therefore are reproved by their father. v 30. and chap.
49 v 5. Otherwise their zeal was just to punish so foul a fault Judith. 9.
in guile, being wrath for the deflouring of their sister: We can not do that
heardes, and asses, their little ones also, and their wives

CHAP. XXXV. Jacob purging his whole family of idols, goes by Gods
commandment into Bethel, 7. There builds an Altar. 8. Debora dies. 9. God
appearing again to Jacob blesses him, and changes his name into Israel. 16.
Rachel bearing Benjamin dies, and is buried in Bethleem, 22. Ruben lies with
Bala. 23. Isreal's twelve sons are recited. 28. Isaac dies at the age of 180.
years. and his sons Esau and Jacob bury him.
IN THE mean time God spoke to Jacob: Arise, and go An execrable tree
terebinth,that is behind the city of Sichem. And when they were God (when it
pleases him) makes the weak stronger then the mighty; and few more terrible
then ^^nie. S. Ch^isost. ho. 59. S. Aug. q. 112. in Genesis
the terror of God invaded all the cities round about, and they durst not
pursew them going away. And to Jacob after he returned from Mesopotamia of
Siria, and he blessed him, saying: Thou The name of supplanter not sufficiently
expressing his valor he is also called Israel. See the Annotation.
shall not be called any more Math. 2.
same is Bethleem. And Jacob erected a title over her sepulcher: For this fact
Ruben was excluded from the chief dignity among his brethren. Genesis 49.
slept with Bala his fathers concubine: which thing he was not ignorant of. And
the sons of Jacob were twelve. The sons of Lia: Ruben the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXV.
2. Cast away the strange goddes] Jacob preparing to perform his vow Clensing
from sin is the first office of the servants of God.
of building a house and altar to God, first extirpateth al Idolatry from
amongst his people; and then by Sacrifice appeaseth Gods wrath provoked how
soever and specially by Simeon and Leui killing the Sichemites. Duly
considering that what people or person desires Gods protection and blessings,
must first be pure in Religion, and cleansed from sins: Quia e^ nulla no^ebit
aduersitas, si nulla e^ dominetur iniquitas: because no adversity shall hurt
him, if no iniquity have dominion over him. orat. fer. 6. post cineres.

10. Called him Israel.] As the Patriarch now performs his vow to God: The
name ISRAEL signifies special prerogatives in the Patriarch Jacob.
so God fulfilleth his promise, giving him a new name. For Jacob a supplanter,
signifying too small force and praise for such a champion, God therefore honored
him with the name of Israel. That is, One that sees and contemplateth God, as
most ancient writers expound it. Also A prince, or valient with God, as S.
Hierom shows Tradit. Heb. For Isra in Hebrew signifies To dominier, or rule
over, and El signifies God. And so this name given to him testifies that he,
by Gods gift and grace, was valient even against an Angel representing God,
much more against men, and other adversaries. Others interpret it, The right
one of God. as witnesses the same S. Hierom both here, and in his commentaries
in 44. Isaie. Al do importe a great excellency in this Patriarch. And the
success of things confirms the same. Particularly in that not only some one
of his sons (as in the issue of Abraham and Isaac, the rest being excluded)
but his whole progeny of twelve sons, making twelve Tribes, were participant
of the peculiar blessings, in their offspring possessing Al his twelve sons in
their posterity were heirs of the promised land.
the promised land, and excedingly increasing became the most principal nation
in the world, the selected people of God, called by the name and title Of the
children of Israel. Of whom not only Moses, but all the old Testament most
specially treats, and of whom and in whom the promised Messiah, the Redemer
of mankind should be borne.

CHAP. XXXVI. Esau with his wives and children parts from Jacob. 9. His
genealogy is recited, with their habitations.
AND" these are the generations of Esau, the same is Oolihama bare Iehus and
Ihelon and Coree. these are the The separation of Esau from Jacob.
Esau took his wives and sons and daughters, sons of Sobal: Aluan and
Manahar, and Ebal, and Sepho and Onam. And these were the sons of Sebeon: By
the common opinon of Latin and Greek fathers, this was holy. Job. as we shall
discuss when we come to his book against the hebrew doctors, who say Job was
of Nachors race.
Iobab the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXVI.
1. The generations of Esau] As before Moses described the genealogies chap.
4. 10 22. 25.
of Cain, of Iapheth and Cham, of Nachor, of Ismael, and other sons of
Abraham, so here he records an other collateral progeny of Esau, that the
difference and distinction of them, and the selected people of God might be By
comparison of interrupted companies the continual succession of the Church is
more glorious.
more conspicuous, because contraries opposed are seen more clerly. And so the
Churches succession and perpetual light, compared with the interrupted and
obscure companies, shines the brighter. For albeit in those other generations
there might be many faithful and just persons, among the infidels and wicked,
and of some we are assured (as of Lot and Job) yet faith and religion decayed,
and was extinguished in their carnal children, and only continued in the right
line from Adam to Jacob, whose twelve sons were fathers and beginners of
twelve* Tribes, and in them the same true Religion was still conserved and
publikly professed, as in the only known visible Church, til the coming of
Christ. as S. Augustine clerly shows in his excellent work of the City of
God: especially in the 15. and 16. books, in many chapters.

2. Ada the daughter of Elon] In the 26. chap. (v. 34.) Esaus two wives, One
place of Scripture feemeth contrary to an other but is not.
which he took in Chanaan are called Judith the daughter of Beeri the
Hetheire, and Basemath the daughter of Elon of the same place, and here the
same two wives are named Ada the daughter of Elon the Hetheite, and Oolibama
the daughter of Sebeon the Heueite. Which neither agree in names nor country.
Again his third wife Ismaels daughter, here named Basemath, in 28. chap v. 9.
is called Maheleth. For reconciliation of which and otherlike difficulties, or
seeming contradictions, albeit he learned expositors say, that either these
persons had diverse names, or one was true and natural father, an other legal,
or adoptiue, for there were such also before the law of Moses, as appears in
the history of Thamar: yet it were hard to Holy Scriptures not easy to be
understood.
give a determinate solution of this difficulty. Which example, with many
others (by us omitted in these brief annotations) convince the Protestants
presumptuous error, holding that Scriptures are easy to be understood.

6. Departed from his brother. 8. Dwelled in Mount Seir] Here is an other
difficulty (though not so intricate as the former) how Esau now parted into
Esaus last parting from Jacob.
Mount Seir, seeing he dwelled there, when his brother Jacob came from
Mesopotamia. chap. 22. v. 3. Which S. Augustine (q. 119. in Gen.) solueth
saying: Esau first dwelt in Seir after he was disapointed of his fathers
blessing, but dwelt again with his father, after Jacobs return from
Mesopotamia, and now went to Seir again after his fathers death.

CHAP. XXXVII. The seventh part of this book. How Joseph was sold into Egypt,
and there advanced.
Joseph informing his father of his brethrens faults. 5. and telling his
dreams, is by them more hated. 13. being sent to visit them, 18. they first
think to kill him, 26. but by Judas co^sel sell him to the Ismael^tes. 29.
vnwiting to Ruben. 33. his father lamenteth supposing him to be slain by some
wild beast. 36. He is sold again to Putiphar in Egypt.
AND Jacob dwelt in the land of Chanaan, wherein his These things following
happened to Jacob* in his generations, that is in his children. See S. Chrisost.
ho. 23. in Genesis
these are his generations: his brethren being yet a boy: and he was with the
sons of Bala and Zelpha his fathers wives: and he accused his brethren to his
father of That for il life they were infamous* the hebrew word d^^^a signifies
infamy.
a most wicked crime. And Israel The Epistle on friday, in the second weke of
Lent.
his Brothers easily envy eech other: but the parents are glad of their
childrens advancement.
I seek my brethren, show me where they feed the flocks.:: So Christ, and al
good Pastors.
And the man said to him: They are departed from this cesterne: and we will say
A naughty wild beast has devoured him: So the Jews thinking to prevent
Christ's exaltation cooperated unwitting thereto Prosper. li. de promiss. Dei.
and then it shall appear what his dreams do profit him. And Ruben hearing
this, endeavored Some read thirty: And as the reading is diverse, so Christ whom
Joseph signified is more and less estimed of diueres. S. Aug. Ser. 81. de temp:
twenty pieces of silver, who brought him into Egypt. And Ruben returning to
the cesterne, finds

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXVII.
3. In his old age] This being one cause why Jacob loved Joseph above The least
offensive cause is alleged, why Jacob loved Joseph above his brethren God
turns evil to good effect. S. Aug. li. 14. c. 27. ciuit.
al his other sons, for that he was the youngest of the eleven (for Benjamin
the twelfth was yet an infant) it is alleged in holy Scripture (says S.
Chrisostom. Epist. ad Olympiam) as least offensive to his brethren. For a more
special cause was, for his mother Rachels sake, but most principal cause of al
was, for his great virtues, and mature judgment; for which God also preferred
him above them al, and now forshewed the same by visions in sleep. Which they
envying and meaning to prevent, did in deed unwitting cooperate thereto, Gods
providence turning their evil work to infinite good. As the same holy Joseph
truly interprets it to them, after their fathers death, when they justly
feared revenge, for so gteat and inhumane injuries done unto him. chap. 50. v.
20.

35. Into hell mourning.] Protestants denying more places for souls after Grave
for hell corruptly translated.
this life, then Heaven for the just, and Hell for the wicked, translate the
hebrew word Sheol, grave for hell. Because if they should grant that Jacob, or
other holy fathers of the old Testament descended into hell, they must confess
some other hell, then where the damned are tormented, whither no Christian will
say that those fathers went. If they contended only about the sense and meaning
of the text, it were more tolerable, for therein they speak, according See. ^.
Hiero. Ep. 119. S. Aug. li. 20. c. 15. ciuit.
to their erroneous opinion, as they think. But knowing as some Willful
corruption.
of them do, that Hell is the true word of the text, there is no sincerity nor
moral honesty in putting Grave, in place thereof. And that they know it, the
second table of the Bible, printed at London 1602. witnesses, noting for a
common place, that in the 37. chap. of Genesis. v. 35. Hell is taken for grave,
thereby confessing, that the true English word of the holy Scripture in that
place is Hell, but that they would have it to signify grave. Whereupon any
reasonable man would think to find the word Hell in the text, with some gloss
to show that grave were to be understood. But in all their Editions, also in
that which was printed the year next following, 1603 whereto the same table is
adjoined, they read grave, and not hell in that place, though in some Nu 16. 2.
Reg. 22. Job. 17 Psalm. 15 17. 85
other places, they much disagree in translating the same word.

As for the sense, it can not be that Jacob meant the grave: for when he said he
would go to his son, he supposed him to be devoured by a wild beast, and
Jacob spoke of hell not of grave.
not buried in a grave. And therefore must necessarily mean, that he would go
where he thought the soul of his son to be. Which was neither in heaven,
for then he would rather have ascended thither joyful, then descended to any
place mourning; neither did he mean the hell of the dammed, for that had been
desperation; but to a low place, where the just souls then remained in rest,
which was called Limbus Patrum, or Abraham's bosom. That is, says Abraham's
besome.
Iue. 16.
S. Augustine, in his answer to Bishop Euodius (Epist. 99.) secretae cuiusdam
quiet is habitatio. The habitation of a certain secret rest.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Judas having three sons by a Chananite. 6. marieth the first,
and after his death, the second to Thamar. 10. who also dying, he delayeth to
match the third with her. 15. But him self begets of her (taking her for a
harlote) two sons twins, Phares and Zara.
THE Moses in serteth here this history, because Christ should be borne of
the genealogy of Judas and Phares. Mat. 1.
same time Judas going down from his brethren, Thamar sinned desiring to be a
mother without lawful marriage: and Judas sinned lying with a supposed harlot S.
Aug. li. 22. c 61. 62. and 63 cont. Faust.
Thamar that her seen, he supposed her to be an harlot: for she had covered
her face, lest she should be known. And going unto Adultrie punisable by
death, in the law of nature.
that she may be burnt. Who when she

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXVIII.
8. Raise sede to thy brother] By this it appears, that in the law of nature,
How a man might marie his brothers wife in the law of nature. The Churches
decree is now our rule.
when a married man died without issue, his brother might lawfully marie the
widow; whose first son should be counted and called the son and heir of
his uncle dead before. The same was established by the law of Moses (Deuteronomy. 25)
Which being now abrogated, it remains in the Churches power to constitute a
law in this behalf, and consequently to dispense in the same, so far as is
agreeable with the law of nature. VVherof see more. Leuit. 18.

CHAP. XXXIX. Joseph being in great credit with his master, has the whole
charge of his house. 7. Contemning his mystris solicitation to incontinencie,
13. is falsely accused by her to his master: 20. and cast into prison, 21.
Where again he gets credit, and has the charge of all the prisoners.
THEREFORE Joseph was brought into Egypt, and Putiphar Joseph endued with all
virtues was a special mirrhor of chastirie S. Amb. li. de Joseph. c ^.
our Lord was with him, The four cardinal virtues reigned in him.
lands al his substance. Neither knew he any other Temperance.
in no wise assenting which is not in my power, or that he has not delivered
to me, beside thee, that art his wife: Justice.
how therefore can I do this wicked thing, and sin against my God? With these
Fortitude.
day by day both the woman was importune upon the young man: and he refused the
aduoutrie. And it chanced on a certain day, that Joseph went into Prudence.
leaving the cloak in her hand, fled, and went forth abroad. And when the woman
saw the God is more specially with his servants in affliction then in
prosperity S Amb li. de Joseph. c. 5
our Lord was with Joseph, and

CHAP. XL. Joseph interprets the dreams of two Eunuchs prisoners 12. that
the one should be restored to his office, 16. the other be hanged, 20. The
third day the event declares the interpretations to be true, but Joseph is
forgotten.
THESE things being so done, it chanced that two wrath against them (for the
one was chief of the cupbearers, the other chief baker) he sent them into the
prison Death on the cross was most cruel, and most ignominious. Cicero. 7.
Ver: yet suffered by Christ, and by him madeglorious. Sap. 2. Philip 2.
on the cross, and the fowls shall tear thy flesh. The third day after this
was the birth his place, to reach him the cup; the other he hanged on

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XL.
8. Does not interpretation belong to God?] Dreams do come of diverse Some
dreams are natural.
causes. Some of natural complexion, or disposition, whereby Philosophers or
Physicians may probably judge of the state of man's body. Some are rather
effects of things past, then signs of any thing to come. Of which sort the
wise man says: Dreams do follow many cares. (Eccle 5.) Some are suggested
Some are illusions of evil spirits.
by evil spirits, either to flatter worldlings with great pretenses, or to
terrify weak minds with dangers and afflictions, or to vex and truble those
in sleep, whom they can not easily move waking. as. S. Gregory discourses
(li. 8. Moral in cap 7. Job) Some dreams are of God, as in Jacob, Joseph, Some
are from God.
these Eunuchs, Pharao, Nabuchodonosor, and others both good and evil men. But
to discern, and assuredly to judge of some dreams, whether they Dan. 4
be from God, by holy Angels, or illusions of evil spirits, is a special gift
of Holy Scripture and the Church are judges of doubtful dreams.
God, as also the interpretation thereof belongs to God, as Joseph here
testifies. Whosoever therefore will be secure must rely either upon express
Scripture, or judgment of the Church, as in ominous speeches was noted before
(chap. 24.) Otherwise the general rule is, not to observe dreams. Deuteronomy. 18.

CHAP. XLI. Pharao dreaming of fat and lean kine* 5. also of full and thin
ears of corn, 8. no other being able to interpret, 9 Joseph is remembered 25.
who interpreting the same* ^8. is made ruler over al Egypt. 50. marieth, and
has two sons, Manasses and Ephraim.
AFTER two years Pharao his dreams, and his Eunuchs were prophetical. For by
them God for showed things to come: v 25. yet they were no prophets, but
Joseph: who had the gift to interpret them. S. Aug. li. 12. c. 9 de Genesis ad
lit. S. Greg. li. 11. Moral. in c. 13. Job.
Pharao saw a dream. He thought Seven ears of corn grew forth upon one
stalk full and fair: there sprang also other ears as many, thin and These
things came to pass by Gods particular providence. Psalm. 4. God called (or
caused) a samine upon the land.
the things that he will do. The seven fair kine, and the seven" full ears:
be seven years of plentifulnes: and both contain the self same meaning of the
dream. Also the seven lean and thin kine, that came up after name, and
called him in the Egyptian togue" the Savior of the world. And he gave him to
wife Aseneth the daughter of Putiphar Cohen signifies priest; as not only the
latin, but also the 70. and Philo and Josephus here translate though sometimes
it signifies prince* as the Chaldey paraphrasis interprets, whereby it is
probable that this Putiphar was both a priest, and a prince.
priest of Heliopolis. Joseph therefore went forth to the land of Egypt ( and
he was thirty years old when Obli^^^n.
Manasses, saing: God made me to forget al my labors, and my fathers house.
The name also Fruitful or Growing.
Ephraim, saing: God has made me to increase in the land of my poverty.
Therefore when

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLI.
43. Made gouernour] It is easy in the eyes of God, suddenly to enrich the
Holy Joseph suddenly advanced.
poor. For who would have thought (says Philo) that in one day a boudman
E^^li. 11. li de Joseph.
should be made a lord, a poor prisoner the chief of the nobility, an under
gaolor the viceroy, or kings deputy, for a common prison to have a kingly
court of his own, from extreme ignominy, to ascend into so hiegh a room of
dignity!

45. Savior of the vvorld] In the original text the new name and title given
by Pharao to Joseph is expressed by these two words, Saphnath pahanaach: the
former saphnath in Hebrew signifies a secret or hidden thing, of saphan to
hide: but the signification of the other word pahanaach, is more uncertain,
being found no where else in the holy Bible. The Rabins do commonly interpret
them both together, The man to whom secrets are reveled, or, The reueler
Joseph truly called the reueler of secrets.
of secrets* and so this name agrees well to Joseph, in respect of the gift of
interpreting dreams. But besides his interpreting, he also gave most wise
counsel, that tended to the saftie of many, which, it is like, Pharao meant to
express by this new name. And S. Hierom, who doubtless with great diligence,
and no less judgment, searched the true signification thereof, says, But more
honorably, the Savior of the world. Therein a figure of Christ.
that albeit this name in Hebrew sounds The finder out of secrets, yet seeing
it was imposed by an Egyptian (who knew no Hebrew) the reason thereof must be
had of the same tongue; and these two words in the Egyptian language are
interpreted The Saniour of the world: for that he delivered the world from the
iminent ruin of famine. Thus says S. Hierom. And so most aptly the figure
answers to Christ, the true SAVIOVR of the world.

CHAP. XLII. Jacob sends ten of his sons to bye corn in Egypt. 7. where
Joseph knowing them, they not knowing him, with hard speeches puts them in
prison. 18. At last Simeon remaining in castodie, til Benjamin be brought, the
rest are dismissed, 25. with their money, unknown to them, in their sackes.
AND Jacob hearing, that victuales were sold in Egypt, weaker parts of the
land you are come. Who said: It is If these things which ye say be proved
false, ye are to be held as spies, for your lying. S Aug 1. 139. super Genesis
otherwise by the health of Pharao you are spies. Therefore sack. And being
astonyed, and trubled amongst themselves, they said: What is this, that God
has done unto us? And they came to Jacob their father into the land of Mine old
age or, me an old man. S. Aug. q. 142.
my hoare hears with sorrow" unto hell.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XLII.
7. Some what roughly] Joseph afflicted his brethren to bring them into
consideration of their former faults, and to true contrition. Without which,
Contrition necessary for the remission of sins.
though injuries be remitted by men, yet the offenders are not absolved before
God. Therefore he loving them and hating their sin, by affliction brought them
to understanding. Who being at last truly penitent, he acknowledged and most
lovingly embraced them, and provided for them in their necessity. S. Aug. ser.
82. de temp. And this example S. Gregory (ho. 22. in Ezech) applithe to the
instruction of pastors of souls: that they procure true repentance before
absolution of sins. Ne si inordinate culpa dimittitur, is qui est enlpabilis,
Disorderly remission is hurtful.
in reatu grauius astringatur. Lest, if the fault be disorderly remitted he
that is faulty be more grievously entangled in guilt of conscience: therefore
with much discretion severity in show, and elemencie in mind are required.

9. You are spies] To the same purpose he calleh them spies. After the Joseph
calls his brothers spies for their good.
manner of examiners calling suspected persons, as they may seem to be: thereby
to try what they would answer. Al for their wholesome penance, and withal to
procare them afterward more compassion among the Egyptians. S. Aug. q. 139.
super. Genesis

15. By the health of Pharao.] Joseph in swearing by Pharaos health, honored It
is lawful to swear by creatures.
God, the geuer and conseruer of health, life, power, dignity and all that was
in Pharao. whereby we see that this manner of swearing was lawful. As now
likewise Christians lawfully swear not only by God, but also by his creatures,
saying: As God shall help them, and his holy Gospels: so it be with due
circumstances, and requisite conditions, namely with those which the Prophet
Hieremie mentions, in truth, in judgment, and in justice: not salfe, rash,
nor of an ^ier. 4.
unjust thing: nor in frequent and common talk (a most bad custom) for so
thou must neirher swear by God himself, nor (as our savior teaches) by Mat.
5.
In some case more convenient then to name God expressly.
heaven, nor by the earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy head, nor any thing
else: signifying that in some case, and due manner we may swear by any of these.
And in this particular Joseph did rather name Pharao in his oath then God, as
well to conceal himself as yet from his brethren, as to strike more terror in
their hearts, by naming his master the King, in whom he had more interest then
they.

38. Unto hell.] To that place where souls remain, as before. chap. 37. v. 35.
For this phrase, of bringing unto hell, and descending into hell, usually spoken
Diverse mansions in hell.
in the old Testament, of al sorts of souls both just and wicked, signifies
that al went that time to hell, that is, to a low place, far distant from
heaven. But some to rest, and some to pain. Whereupon S. Hierom says: Hell is
a place. wherein souls are included, either in rest, or in pains, according to
the quality of their deserts.

CHAP. XLIII. The famine pressing, the land, Jacob willith his sons to go
again int. Egypt to bye more corn: 3. who refusing to go without Benjamin.
11. he is sent with them, and presents and duble money, lest the former were
brought back by error. 16. Joseph seeing Benjamin, 23. delivers Simeon, and
intertaineth them al at dinner.
IN THE mean time the famine did oppress all the land youngest brother with
you. If therefore thou will send Guilt of si^ne is a greater bond then the life
of Rubens sons; which he offered, and Jacob yielded not thereto* and yet
granted to this offer of Judas.
guilty of sin against thee for ever. If del^y had not Calumniam.
a false accusation, and forceibly bring both us, and our asses into bondage.
Wherefore in the very door stepping to the hear us. Now once before we came
down to bye provision: which being bought, when we were come to the They now
adore him, whom they sold, lest they should adore him. S. Greg. ho 22. in Ezech.
they adored prostrate to the ground. But he courteously resaluting See Exodi.
8. v. 26.
they think such a feast profane). they sat before him, the first begotten
according Every one having five portions, Benjamin had duble. Josephus li. 1.
Antiq.
by five parts. And they drank and were" in ebriated with him.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLIII.
34. Inebriated.] Not that they did eat or drinck to much, or fell into
excess, Moderation to be used in feasting.
but competently. As the earth is said to be inebriated with rain (Psalm. 64.)
being sufficiently watered, and so made fructful, not drowned, nor ouerflowed,
for so it is vnfructful. S. Hierom. Tra dit. Heb. S. Aug. q. 144. super Genesis

CHAP. XLIIII. Joseph causes their sackes to be filled with corn, and their
money to be put again therein, and in Beniamins sack also a silver cup, 4.
and when they were parted, sending after them, charge them with theft. 12.
And the cup being fond in Beniamins sack, they al much afflicted return to
Joseph. 17. who threatening to keep Benjamin, 18. Judas entreats, 32. and
finally offers himself to servitude for him.
AND Joseph commanded the steward of his house, By this Joseph tried his
bretherens affection, whether they would intrete for Benjamin, or suffer him to
be captive: as they had be sore sold him self to captivity. Theod. q. 105. in
Genesis
of the younger put my him die, and we will be the bondmen of our lord. Who O
torments of mercy* he vexes whom he loves. S. Greg. ho. 22. in Ezech.
renting their garments, and loading their asses again, returned into the
town. And Judas foremost with his Joseph being in deed a propher, knowing
more then al sorcerers in Egypt spoke of himself as he was esteemed in that
place. S. Aug. q. 145. super Genesis
of divining. To whom Judas said: What shall we answer, not. If you take this
also, and ought befall him in the way, See page 130.
my hoare hayres with sorrow unto hell. Therefore if I shall enter to thy servant
our father, and the

CHAP. XLV. Joseph manifests himself to his brethren. Who being much
terified he comfort them, and weeping embraces every one 16. The brute
whereof coming to Pharao, he congratulating commands Joseph to call his father
with all his family into Egypt. 21. So the eleven brothers aresent away with
gifies and provision for Jacobs journey. 26. Al which the father understanding
is revived in spirit.
JOSEPH could no longer refrain many standing by in Gods providence turned
their evil dealing to the good of the whole family chap. 50. ^. ^0.
God sent me before you into Egypt for your preservation. For it is up on the
earth, and may have victuals to live. Not Joseph's pr^ de^t proceeding before he
made him self known to his brethren and them to Pharao, procured all this joy
and favor toward them in Egypt.
Pharao was glad, and al his family. And he spoke to Joseph that he should
command his he dismissed his brethren, and when they were departing he said to
them:" Be not angry in the way. Who

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLV.
24. Be not angry in the vvay] Trauelers in journey are easily provoked to
Occasion of sin to be avoided.
anger and brawling: especially if they avoid not probable occasions. Therefore
Joseph admonishes his brothers to beware thereof, lest in talking of him, and
how they had sold him to strangers, some of them might accuse others, and
excuse themselves, and so fall in to new offenses. S. Chris. ho. 64. in Genesis

CHAP. XLVI. Israel warranted in a vision from God, goes into Egypt with all
his famimlie, The eight and last part of this book.
8. who are here recited. 28. Joseph meeting him in Gessen, advises him to tell
Pharao, that they are shepherds by their trade of life.
AND Israel taking his journey, with all things that he Of Jacob and his
progenies going into Egypt; Of his and Joseph's death.
had" came to the well of the oath, and killing there victimes to the God of his
father Isaac. He heard him in the Land of Chanaan: and he came into Egypt with all his sede, his sons, and nephews, daughters, and all That is, She bare
their fathers in Mesopotamia. S. Aug q. 151. in Genesis
in Mesopotamia of Syria with Dina his daughter. All the souls of his sons
and daughters, are thirty three. The sons of meet him. Whither when he was
come, Joseph addressing Egyptians honoring sheep, goats, and kyne for gods,
detested them that did govern, kill, or eat those cattle.
their cattle, and heardes, and all that they could have, they have brought with
them. And when he shall call you,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLVI.
1. Came to the well of oath] In this holy place (called Bersebee, that is,
well of oath, where Abraham and Isaac had confirmed by oath, their league with
the God reueleth his will in holieplaces.
Kings of the country, and erected Altares, Jacob also consulted God, about
his going into Egypt, and was commanded to go with all that he had.

26. Sixty six. 27. Seventy.] The difficulty in these two verses, concerning
the number of Israelites, that were at first in Egypt with Jacob, is easily
explicated, that just sixty six, of his own issue, came in with him; and
himself being counted makes sixty seven, adding also Joseph (who was there
before) and his two sons Manasses and Ephraim (borne there) they were in all
seventy. But a far greater difficulty remains: for besides these seventy A
difficulty how many Israelites came at first into Egypt.
persons, the Septuagint Greek Interpreters number and name five more; to wit,
a son and a nephew of Manasses (the first called Machir, the other Galaad,)
and two sons of Ephraim (called Sutalaam, and Taam,) and one nephew (named
Edem) which number of seventy five. S. Steven also cites, Act. 7.
following the vulgar known Scripture of the Septuagint, rather then the Hebrew
text. Now in what sense, these five could be said to have entered into Egypt
with Jacob, being not then borne; may some of them not borne during Jacobs
life, for Jacob lived but seuentene years in Egypt (chap 47. v. 28) and
Joseph being married but nine years before (for this was the second dear
year, after the seven plentiful years) his sons could not excede seven or
eight years, when Jacob came to Egypt; and so being but 24. or 25. years old
at his death, could not then be grandfathers: how therefore these five named by
the Septuagint, and some others, not then borne, of the lines of Phares and
Benjamin, recited here by Moses, could be said to come Numbers mystical,
sometimes no^ explicable in the literal sense.
with Jacob into Egypt, S. Augustine finds so insoluble, that he doubts not
to affirm, some great hidden mystery to be understood by the Septnagint
Interpreters, in these numbers, not otherwise perhaps explicable according to
the letter.

CHAP. XLVII. Jacob with his sons being come into Gessen, Pharao grants
them the same place to dwell in. 13. The famine forces the Egyptians to sell al
their goods, lands, and possessions to the King, 22. except the Priests part,
to whom the king aloweth necesarie food, without paying for it. 27. After
seuentene years Jacob adiureth Joseph, to bury him amongst his ancesters.
JOSEPH therefore going in told Pharao, saing: My father::Every man's life is
short, and replenished with many miseries. Job. 14.
they are not come to the days of my fathers, in which they were pilgrims.
And blessing the king, he went forth. his fathers house, alowing victuales to
every one. For in The priests, of Egypt being not forced to labor for their
living, found out the Mathematiques, as wituesseth Aristotle. in princ. Metaph.
to whom also a certain alowance of victuals was given out of the common
barnes, and therefore they were not driven to sell their possessions. Joseph
therefore said to years. And when he saw that the day of his death approached,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLV
22. Saving the land of the Priests.] Let them hear which now live (says S.
Chrysostom) what great care men had in times past of the priests, of idols: H^.
65. in Genesis
The immunitie and care of Priests in the law of nature. Yea amongst Insidels.
and let them learn at least to yield like honor to true priests, to whom the
ministry of al divine offices is committed. For if the Egyptians, in their
errors, had so great care of Idols, thincking them to be more honored, if their
ministers were respected, how great condemnation do they not deserve, that now
diminish that, which pertains to the provision of priests? Do ye not know
that the honor pertains to God himself? Regard not therefore him to whom the
honouris exhibited. For it is not for his cause to whom thou Much more amongst
Christians, Priests ought to be respected.
do it, but for his sake whose priest he is, that of him thou may
abundantly receive rewards. Wherefore he said: He that shall do it to one of
these, has done it for me: and He that receives a prophet, in the name of a
prophet, shall receive the revvard Math. 25. and 10.
of a prophet. VVil our Lord reward thee according to the worthiness or meannes
of his ministers? According to thine own alacrity, he either crowns or
condemns. etc. I say not this for the priests sakes, but for yours, desiring
to gain you in all things. For in lieu of that little you give, you shall receive
immortal rewards, and unspeakable good. Let us consider these things, and
haste to serve them, not looking upon the cost, but upon the gain, and
increase that rises thereof. etc. For whatsoever you bestow upon Gods priests,
he accounts it as bestowed on himself. And he that so bestows, shall not
only receive like retrbution, but manifold greater: our merciful God, always
of the abundance of his mercy, exceeding the things which are done by us. Let
us not therefore be worse then infidels, who for the error of idols gave so much
to their servants; for how much error and truth do differ, so much difference
is there, between theirs and Gods Priests. Thus much and something more writes
S. Chrisostom upon this place. Cohen in some place signifies Prince, but is
here translated Priest, in all the English Bibles.


22. Priests] The Hebrew word Cohenim is here universally translated Priests,
in all languages and Editions: which (chap. 40. v. 45.) some translate Prince:
and more probably (2. Reg. 8. v. vlt.) where David's sons are called Cohenim:
who were in deed Princes, and not properly Priests. But in this present place
it signifies those, to whom Pharao allowed particular provision in the time of
dearth, which al understand of Priests, and not of Princes.

30. I vvil sleep with my fathers] Albeit neither the lack of burial, nor
any Special place of burial lawfully desired, and spiritually profitable.
cruelty nor contumely used against dead bodies, can annoy the just, for
those that kill men's bodies, can afterward do them noe more harm: yet it is
both a lawful Luc 12*
natural desire, and a spiritual comfort and profit, to be buried in special
places, where their own friends, or holy persons are buried, or where God is
more specialy served, Sacrifice, and other prayers offered. And so both Iaeob
and Joseph desired to rest in the land of Chanaan, where their parents were
buried and where Christ should be borne and redeem mankind. But wordlie pomp
But pomp avails not the dead.
and honor of funerals, are rather the comfort of the living, then the relief
of the departed. as S. Augustine teaches, in Psalm. 115. For in the sight of
men, the troop of servants (says the same S. Augustine lib. 1. c. 13. de
ciuit.) made solemn and glorious exequies to the rich glutton, that was
clothed in silk, and fared delicately in his life, but in the sight of God,
the Angels ministry made far more excellent to poor Lazarus, though they
carried not his body into a marble tomb, but his soul into Abraham's bosom.

31. To the beds head.] S. Paul alleging this place says: Jacob adored the
top Heb. 11.
of (Joseph) his rod, following the Septuagint, who for the same Hebrew word
(being without points, that is, without vowels) in this place say, rod, and in
The Septuagint are not contrary to the Hebrew and Latin text, but supply that
was omitted.
the next chapter (v. 2.) interpret bed. For Matteh signifies a rod, and
Mittah, a bed. The Latin rherfore translating bed, as the Hebrew is pointed,
and the Septuagint, and S. Paul reading rod, both are true, and both together
express the whole action, that Jacob taking Joseph's rod into his hand, and
turning to the beds head, leaned on the top of the rod, and adored not only
God, the Lord and geuer of al good, but also his son Joseph now the chief
ruler and Prince of Egypt. as S. Augustine expounds. q 162. in Genesis And
herein says S. Chrisostom (ho 66) Joseph's dream was fulfilled, that the sun
and moon should adore him. The like says Theodoret (q. 108 in Gen) And
Procopius Adoration of God and creatures is not repugnant.
adds that Jacob adoring Joseph's rod, adored also Christ's kingdom,
prefigured by the same rod. But how adoration of creatures redoundeth to the
honor of God, more is noted upon the said place of S. Paul. Heb. 11.

CHAP. XLVIII. Joseph visits his father being sick. 5. Who adopteth his two
sons Manasses and Ephraim, 13. and blesses them, preferring the younger
before the elder, contrary to Joseph's mind. 22. And gives a portion of land
to Joseph, above his brethren.
THESE things bei^ng so done, it was told Joseph that his of peoples: and I will
give thee this land, and to thy sede after thee for an everlasting possession.
Thy two Mat. 2.
her by the way side to Ephrata, which by an other name is called Bethleem. And
seeing his sons he said to him: By this he made a cross prefiguring the
Cross of Christ. Isidor in hun^ locum.
the left upon the head of Manasses, that was the elder, " changing hands. And
Jacob blessed the but his younger brother shall be greater then he: and his sede
shall grow into nations. And he blessed them at

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLVIII.
14. Streatching forth his right hand.] As nature has made the right hand The
right hand also in spiritual things, preferred before the left.
Arist. li. 2. de caelo. textu. 8. and de inces. animal, ca. 4.
readier to move, stronger to work and resist, and apter to frame and fashion
any thing, so generally we use it more then the left. And when we use both
hands at once, we ordinarily apply the right hand to the greater, and more
excellent effect, both in spiritual and corporal things. As in confirmation of
fidelity or freindship, in blessing, writing, fieghting, playing, and in most
others things, we use the right hand, either only or chiefly. So the Patriarch
Jacob laid his right hand upon Ephraim, knowing by prophetical spirit, The
younger brother preferred signified the Gentiles before the Jews.
that he should be preferred, before his elder brother Manasses Literally
fulfilled in Iosue, Jeroboam, and other chief Princes of Ephraims issue. And
mystically in the Gentiles, being later called of God, and yet preferred before
the Jews. S. Cypri li. 1. c. 21. aduer. Iudeos: S. Amb. li. de Benedict.
Patriarch. c. 1. S. Aug. li. 16. c. 42. de ciuit. etc.

14. Changing hands.] The mystery, of the Gentiles excelling the Jews Procop.
Isidor. in Genesis
in time of grace, often prefigured by preferring the younger brother before
the elder (Abel before Cain; Abraham before Nachor; Isaac before Ismael; Jacob
himself before Esau; and now Ephraim before Manasses) is here further
represented by Jacobs forming of a cross, with his arms laid one over the
other, when he blessed his two nephews: who otherwise might have The form of
the Cross prefigured by Jacob crossing his arms.
laid his right hand first upon one, and then upon the other; or have caused
them to change places; but he wittingly crossed his arms, and changed his
hands; or according to the Hebrew, made his hands understand, that is, by his
hands made it to be understood, not only that the younger should be in place
of the elder, Ephraim before Manasses, and much more the Gentiles before the
Jews, but also that this greater Mystery should be effected by Christ dying
on a Cross. For what else could the very crossing of his arms, so wittingly
and purposly done, signify, but the form and figure of Christ's Cross? As else
where the wood, which young Isaac carried on his back unto the mountain
prefigured the mattet or substance of the same Cross Al accomplished when
Christ was crucified: whereby the Jews were scandalized, and the Gentiles
called and saved. Our Savior himself for telling, that he being exalted (to
Joan. 12. Collos. 2.
wit upon the Cross) would dravv al unto himself. And S. Paul teaching that
Christ sastned the hand vvriting, that was against us; upon the Cross.

16. The Angel that delivers me.] It is evident by this plain text, that
Jacob was delivered from euiles by an Angel, and that he inuocated the same
Angel Protection and Invocation of Angels.
to bless his nephews, S. Basil ( li. 3. cont. Eunom in initio) shows by
this place amongst others, that an Angel is present with every one, as a
pedagogue, and pastor, directing his life. S. Chrysostom also ( ho. 7. in
land. S. Pauli) cites this place in testimony, that proper Angels are deputed
to protect men. Yet Protestants say, that this Angel must be understood of
Christ: remitting their gloss to the. 31. ca. v. 13. and 32. v. 1. of Genesis,
where it can not be proved. But the ancient Fathers teach the patronage and
Iuuocation of Angels grounded in holy Scripture. Namely in this place, and
many other places in the old Proved by ancient Fathers.
Testament. Also Mat 18. Act. 12. 1. Cor. 11. and the like. For example, S.
Justinius Martyr in explic. qq necess. q. 30. affirming it for a known truth,
declares that those Angels, which receive the charge of guardi^g men, co^tinew
the same office either to both soul and body, or to the soul after it is
parted from the body, S. Cyril of Alexandria (lib. 4. cont. Julian. prope
init.) showing how God uses the ministry of holy Angels, for men's
salvation, says: Hi noxias a nobis abigunt feras etc. These (Angels) drive
away noisome wildbeasts from us: and reskew those that are caught, from their
cruelty, and teach what soever is laudable, to make our passage free, and not
pestered, when with us they glorify one sovereign God. S. Chrysostom (ho. 60,
in Math 18) S. Hierome upon the same place, S. Ambrose, in Psalm. 38. S.
Augustine li. 83. qq. q. 79. and li. Soliloq. c 27. S Gregory li. 4. c. 31. in
3 Job S. Bernard ser. 5. Dedicat. Eccles. and ser. 12. in Psalm 90. and others,
so universally teach the same, that Calvin (li. Instit c. 14. sect. 38.) dare
not deny it, and yet will needs doubt of it.

16. Be my name called upon them.] This place has two good literal God for his
Saints sake shows favor to their friends.
senses. For first it imports that Ephraim and Manasses were made participant
among the Tribes, of the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Secondly that
God would bless them, for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs sake: so Moses praying
for the whole people (Exodi. 32.) besought God to remember, Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, and God was therewith pacified.

CHAP. XLIX. Jacob replenished with the spirit of prophecy, a little before
his death, fortelleth his sons many things, that shall happen to their
posterity. Charge some of them with faults past, blesses every one. 29.
Appoints where to bury him. 32. and dies.
AND Jacob called his sons, and said to them: Come These are predictio^s not
al blessings. S. Amb. li. de Benedict Patriar.
may show you the things that shall come to you in the last days. Come
together, and hear

Ruben my first begotten, thou art my strength, and A prophecy not an
imprecation. S Aug. li. 16 c 22. ont. Faust.
increase thou

Simeon and Leui brethren: " vessels of iniquity warring That these are most
profound Mysteries, is easy to conceive, but most hard to understand them. In
some the Patriarch recounteth things past in his life, for telling the effects
thereof to come. Other things he forsheweth pertaining to the division of the
Land of Chanaan, others to the times of the Judges, of the Kings, of the
Captivity, of Delivery from thence, of Christ, of Antichrist, and of the end
of this world. Of al which diverse ancient fathers have written large
commentaries, and godly treatises.
Cursed be their fury, because it is stubborn: and their

Judas, thee thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in



Issachar a strong ass lying at rest between the borders.

Dan shall judge his own people as also an other tribe in



Aser, his bread is sat, and he shall give daynties to kings.



Joseph a child increasing, increasing and comely to the Almighty shall bless
thee with the blessings of heaven from above, with the blessings of the
deapth, that lies beneath, with the blessings of the pappes and of the womb.
The blessings of thy father were strengthened with the

This prophecy S. Augustine understands of S. Paul, of the tribe of Benjamin;
who was first a persecutor, and after an Apostle of Christ. Ser. 14. de Sanctis.
a ravening woolfe, in the morning shall eat the pray, and in the evening shall
divide the spoil.

Al these in the tribes of Israel twelve: these things

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLIX.
4. Because thou did ascend thy fathers bed] For this crime of incest Ruben
Ruben for his sin was put from the prerogatives of the first borne
was deprived of his first birthright. Who being by order of birth former in
guiltes, whereby he should have had duble portion; and greater in Empire, whereby
he should have been Prince or Lord over his brethren, the former prerogative
was given to Joseph, whose two sons were heads of two Tribes, the other was
given to the Tribe of Judah, in David and his posterity. He was also deprived
of his prerogative in Priesthood, which was after annexed to the Tribe of Leui,
whereupon the Chaldee paraphrasis speaks thus to Ruben: It belonged to thee to
have received three better lettes then thy brethren, Priesthood, Best portion,
and the Kingdom: But because thou have sinned, the duble portion is given to
Joseph, the Kingdom to Judas, and Priesthood to Leui.

5. Veselles of iniquitie] Albeit Simeon and Leui were moved with just The
zeal of Simeon and Leui was commendable: but their manner of revenge, was many
ways faulty.
zeal to punish the soul crime committed by Sichem, against their sister and
Judith. ^.
whole family: yet in their manner of revenging were many sins worthily
condemned by Jacob, both immediately after the fact, and here at his death. For
before the slaughter they committed there great sins; in that they rashly
did it unknown to their father thereby putting him and themselves in extreme
danger, if God had not maruelously protected them; in falsely pretending
agreement and league with the Sichamites, which they meant not to perform; and
in sacrilegiously abusing the Sacrament of Circumcision, making it a cloak to
deceive their ennemies. In the fact also they committed other four gross
crimes: cruelly killing those, that offered other abundant satisfaction;
murdering others that were altogether innocent; sacking and destroying the
city, and carrying away women and children captive. Mystically S. Ambrose,
Ruffinus, Isidorus, and others understand this prophecy, The Priests and
Scribes fury, obstinacy, and hard hearts against Christ.
of the Scribes and the Priests, descending of Simeon and Leui, who were most
eagre against our Savior, as himself more plainly fortold, saing: The son
of man* balbe betrayed to the chief Priests, and to the Scribes, and they
shall Mat. 20.
condemn him to death. Their furic was cursed above al surie, Because (as
Jacob here says) it was stubborn, or obstinate, for they did not only
condemn Christ Joan. 11.
to death in their wicked council, but also urged and pressed Pilat,
endeuoringe to save him, and sturred up the people to cry: Take him away,
Crucisie him. Joan. 18.
Yea their indignation was so hard, that they preferred Barabbas before Christ.

10. The scepter shall not be taken away.] Here the Patriarch Jacob fortelleth
the time, when the promised Messiah should come into the world, Taking away of
the regal scepter from the Jews a sign of Christ's coming.
by this sign that the scepter should not be taken from Judah, til the same
Redeemer of mankind were at hand. Not that the regal scepter should remain in
the Tribe of Judah, from Jacobs death ^il Christ's coming: for that Kingdom
began first in David, above six hundred years after Jacobs death, and after
the captivity of Babylon the high Priests of the Tribe of Leui did govern
also the state, and not only the Church, other six hundred years. But the
sense is, that of the Tribe of Judah should rise most gloriouse Kings, whose
crown and Kingdom should remain with the Jewish Nation, until their expected
Messiah should draw nere, and then be taken from them by the Gentiles Which
was down by Herod, whose father was an Idumean, his mother an Arabique. Thus
the Ancient fathers with one accord understood this prophecy. S. Justinius
Martyr. Ser. cum Triphone. Eusebius Cesarien lib Hist. Eccles. cap 6. S.
Athanasius. lib. de Incarnat. S. Ambrose lib de Benedict. Patriarch c. 4. S.
Chrysostom. Ilo. 67. in Genesis S. Augustine lib. 18. c. 45. de ciuit. Theodoretus.
q. vlt. in Genesis

11. He shall vvash hisstole in wine.] By wine, and blood of the grape, what
Our Lords real presence in the B. Sacrament prophesied.
li. 2. Ep. 3.
other thing is showed (says S. Cyprian Epist ad Coecil. 63) but the wine of
the Chalice of our Lords blood? Likewise Tertullian (lib 4. contra Marcionem)
expounds the stole to signify Christ's flesh, and the wine his blood. In all
which book his drift is to show that Christ did not destroy the old
Testament, but fulfilled the figures and prophecy thereof. And not that Christ
gave his body in figure only, as our adversaries allege him.

17. Be Dan a snake in the way.] This prophecy most ancient Fathers
understood Ancient Fathers suppose that Antichrist shall be of the tribe of Dan.
of Anti Christ. namely S. Irenaeus, lib. 5. aduers. Haeres: S. Hyppolitus
Martyr Orat* de consumma^. soeculi. S. Ambrose. c. 7 de Benedict. Patriarch. S.
Augustine. q. 12. in Iosue. Prosper, lib. de promiss. and praedicts Dei. P. 4.
Theodoret. q. vlt. in Genesis S. Gregory, lib. 30. Moral. c. 18, and many others
upon the 7. chap. of the Apocalips. where they suppose S. Joan did omit Dan
from amongst the Elect of the Israelitical Tribes, in detestation of
Antichrist, to be borne of that Joan. 5.
Tribe. And certain it is, that the Jews will receive, and follow him for
their Messiah. as our Savior himself says; Which makes it very probable,
that he shall be a Jew borne, else they would not so easily admit him.

22. Joseph a child encreasing] Joseph was in many respects a figure of
Joseph in many things prefigured Christ.
Christ, especially in that he was loved of his father before al his brethren,
sold by his brethrn to the Gentiles of envy, and for money, advanced to
dignity and authority, the deliverer of Egypt from famine, and called
Savior of the world; al performed in Christ, the true Child increasing.

CHAP. L. Joseph causes his fathers body to be embawmed; 3. the days of
mourning being expired, 6. with Pharaos leave, Joseph with the ancients of
Egypt, al his brethren, and elder sort of Israelites go, and solemnly bury
the body in Chanaan. 14. After their return, his brethren fearing, le^t
joseph will now revenge former injuries, he freely forgeueth al. 22. At the age
of 110. years, adiuring the posterity to carry his bones into Chanaan he
dies, and is put in a coffin.
WHICH Joseph seeing, fell upon his fathers face Jacob dug a sepulcher for
himself, though it be not hertofore mentioned when he did it. S. Aug. q. 170.
in Ge^.
which I dug for my self in the land of Chanaan, thou shall bury me. I will
go up therefore, and bury my father, and return. And Pharao said to him: Go
up and bury thy father as The mourning of Egypt. Therefore the sons of Jacob
This word adoring often in holy Scripture signifies civil honor: as here it
can have no other sense.
adoring prostrate on the ground they said: We are thy servants. To whom he
answered: Fear not: can we resist

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP L.
20. You thought evil.] This plain distinction shows, that sin is wholly
Man's will, not God the cause of sin.
of the sinner; and that God has no part therein, but turns it to good For
those things which Joseph's brethren did against him, were occasions of his
advancement in Egypt, through the omnipotent wisdom of God. Whose ^^opeitie
is, out of every evil to draw good. S. Chrisost. ho. 67. in Genesis S. Aug.
Enchirid. c. 11. and li. 14. c. 27. de ^^^it.

25. Carry my bones with you.] For the same reasons Joseph would be finally
buried in Chanaan, for which Jacob desired to be there buried (chap. 47.)
Joseph, for his brethre^s sake, differred his desired burial in Chanaan.
but Joseph would not presently be carried thither, lest it might have given
offense to the Egyptians, or at least have diminished their favor toward
his brethren: and withal he would confirm his brethren in their hope of
returning, seeing he was content, that his body should expect in Egypt, til
the whole Nation should return into Chanaan.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF EXODUS.
MOSES having prosecuted in Genesis, the sacred history of the The
continuation of this book with Genesis. The increase of the Israelites was
enuyed, feared, and their religion hated.
Genesis 50.
Church, unto Joseph's death, containing the space of 2310. years, continues
the same in Exodus, for 145. years more. Where he first briefly recounteth,
Exodus 1.
how a small number of Israelites, especially after the death of Joseph, being
much increased, a new King (risen in the mean time, who knew not Joseph)
together with other Egyptians, envying their better parts, both of body and
mind, and more fortunate progres in wealth; fearing also lest they still
multiplying, either by their own forces, or joining with other foreners, might
spoil Egypt, and return into Chanaan; and hating their Religion, because
they acknowledged, one only, eternal, omnipotent God, denying and detesting
the new imaginary gods of the Egyptians; resolved and publicly decreed, by
oppression to hinder their increasing, and Their persecution.
to keep them in bondage and servitude. But God almighty, who had chosen them
for his peculiar people, did not only so conserve and multiply them, that of
seventy persons, which came into Egypt, in the space of two hundred and Their
greater multiplicatio^.
Exodus 2. Number. ^.
fiefteene years, there were six hundred thousand men, able to bear arms,
besides women, children, and old men, which by estimation might be three
millions in all, but amongst other most strange and miraculous works, especally
delivered Exodus 2.
one Hebrew infant from drowning. whom afterward he made the The persecutor
admonished, and punished. Gods people mightily delivered.
3.
Guide, and supreme Governor of the same people; by him admonished the 5.
King to cease persecuting, and diverse ways plagued him and his people, for
their 7.
obdurat and obstinate cruelty. In fine called away, and mightily delivered 12.
his own people; drowned that king and al his army, in the red sea, the
Israelites 14.
wonderfully passing through, as in a dry chanel, the waters standing on both
sides, like two walls. In the desert, fed them miraculously with Manna,
Miraculously sustained in the desert.
16.
and gave them al necessaries, defending them also from enemies. Then God,
having 17.
thus selected and severed his people from al other nations, gave them a
written law, as well of Moral, as Ceremonial and Judicial precepts, with the 20.
manner of making the Tabernacle, erecting Altares, consecrating Priects, with
Instructed with Laws, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial.
26.
the institution of daily sacrifice, and of al vestures, veselles, and other
holy 27.
things belonging to the service of God. So this book may be divided into
three 30.
parts. First is declared the Israelites servile affliction in Egypt, with
their and seq.
delivery from thence: in the fieftene first chapters. Then how they were
maintained in the desert, and prepared to receive a law: in the four next
chapters. In the other 21. chapters, the law is prescribed, instructing them
how to live toward God, and al men.

THE BOOK OF EXODUS. IN HEBREW VEELLE SEMOTH.
CHAP I. The small number of Israelites much increasing in Egypt, 6. especially
after the death of Joseph and his brethren, 8. a new king, that knew not Joseph
in vain strives to hinder their multiplication, 11. by imposing works upon
them, 15. and by commanding to kill, 22. and to drown all the malchildren of
them. God in the mean time rewards the midwiues, that fearing him, killed
not the children.
THESE be the names of the children The first part of this book. Of the
Israelites servile affliction in Egypt, and their delivery from thence.
of Israel, that entered into Egypt with Jacob: they did enter in every one
with their houses, Ruben, Simeon, Envy, vain fear, ( v. 10.) and hatred of
true religion (v. 13.) are the causes why Infidels persecute the faithful.
the people The first persecution was in temporal losses and bodily pains, by
pressing them with works.
lest perhaps it the children of Israel, and deriding afflicted them: and The
second was secret murder.
When you shall be midwiues to the Hebrew women, and the time of delivery is
come: if it be a manchild, kill it: if a woman, reserve her. " But the midwiues
feared God, and The third was open murder.
cast it into the river: whatsoever of the female, reserve it.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. I.
17. But the midvviues feared God.] In commendation of the midwiues not God
must be feared before Princes commanding contrary things.
obeying the kings commandment, Moses opposes the fear of God, to the fear
of Princes; showing thereby that when their commandments are contrary, the
subjects must fear God, and not do that the Prince commandem. So Mat 10. Luc.
12. Act. 4. and 5.
did our Savior himself teach, and that for fear of damnation, saying: Fear
him who has power to cast into het And so his Apor^les endued with the Holy
Ghost, practiced, answering in this case, that they must hear God rather then
men. Again, God must be obeyed rather then men. Always understood, when they
Princes must be obeyed in lawful things.
are contrary For otherwise both S. Peter and S. Paul teach us, that Princes,
1. Pet 2. To. 13.
yea Infidels, of whom they especially speak, must be obeyed:

19. Hebrew women are not.] Herein the midwiues sinned. For it is never
lawful to lie. Because the law of God is truth, whereby S. Augustine proves
(li. coot. mend. c. 10) Allies are sins and unlawful.
Psalm. 11^ v. 142.
that whatsoever varieth from truth is unlawful. When therefore (says he)
examples of lying are proposed to us out of holy Scripture, either they are
not lies, but are thought to be, whiles they are not understood, o^ if they be
lies, they are not to be imitated, because they are unlawful. ^ Gregory
teaches the same (li. 18. Moral. c. 20.) Q^^a proselt^ ab (...) discrep it,
quitquid^ ^eritate discord^t: Because assuredly whatsoever disagreeth from
verity, differs from equity. Yet these fathers* hold such an officious lie,
as this Venial sins.
was, to be a less sin, and more easily pardoned, and purged by good works
following.

21. Because the midwiues feared God.] Fear of God ^s (...) is properly taken
in holy Scripture is that holy feare^ by which the children of God re^^aine
Fear of God. meritorious.
from sin, and that with temporal dange^* lest they should ofend the divine
Majesty. So these midwiues endangering their own lives, by not fullfiling
Pharaos commandment, had the true fear of God, and for the same were rewarded,
Temporal rewards promised in the old Testament, eternal in the new.
as is most probable, eternally: though mention be here made only of temporal
reward; afte^ the (...) of the old (...). Where such promises were made to
Abraham, and other most godly Patriarchs, for an assay only and ^aist of
everlasting life, which is more expressly promised in the Gospel of Christ. as
S. Hierom teaches, Epist. ad Da^danum.

CHAP. II. A child of the Hebrews, and Tribe of Leui, being exposed to the
water, 5. is taken from thence by Pharaos daughter, 8. who commits him to be
nursed, unwitting to his own mother, adopteth him and calls him Moses, II.
He afterward visiting his brethren, kills an Egyptian; 15. flies into
Mad^an; 21. marries a wise, and has two sons.
AFTER th^se things there came forth a man of the kind of (...)l^vv, so
(...)lled.
the lit^e infant, and laid him in a sedgie place by the rivers brinke, his
sister standing a far of, and considering the I will give thee thy hyre. The
woman took, and nursed the child: and when he was grown, delivered him to
Pharaos daughter. Whom she adopted into the place of a Mos, in the Egyptian
tongue signifies water, and Ises, saved. Joseph. li. 2. Antiq. and Clemens.
Alexan. li. 1. Stromat.
Moses, saying: Because from the water I did take him. In those days after
that Moses The guilty person rejected Moses for lack of known authority,
but God confirmed his commission. Act. 7. So the Jews rejected Christ, Judge
of the world.
Who has appointed thee prince and judge He feared to tempt God by staying,
but not the sierc^^es of the king. Heb. 11.
feared, and said: How is this thing come abroad? And Pharao heard of this
talk, and sought to Oppression of innocents cries to heaven for revenge.
their cry ascended unto God from the works. And

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. II.
3. VVh^n she could not conceal him.] These godly and prudent parents, Moses
parents did prudently expose him to some danger, to avoid greater.
considering that when the Egyptians should perceive such an infant to be
borne, and not drowned according to the Kings Edict, they would destroy both
the child, and whole family: to avoid the greater danger, chose the less. To
bring him to the water side, not omitting their own industry, as well by
closing him in a basket, that would draw no water, as by setting his sister to
watch what became of him: that if better success happened not the first day,
the mother might at evening give him suck, and minister other necessaries; and
so expect an other day, or many days Gods providence, til his divine pleasure
should more appear.

Josephus writes that Amram Moses father, being solicitous, when his
Revelations and Gods determinations do not exclude but include man's endeavor.
Though Moses justly killed the Egyptian, yet others may not imitate his
example.
wife was great, how to save the infant, if it were a man child, God reveled to
li. 2. Antiq.
him, that she had conceived a son, who should not only be saved from Pharaos
fury, but also be the deliverer of the whole Hebrew nation from thraldom, and
servitude of the Egyptians. Whereupon they assuredly trusted li. 16. c. 19.
de^iuit.
that God would protect and prosper him, yet so, if they did their own
endeavor, which S. Augustine teaches to be always necessary.

12. He stroke the Egyptian.] Moses not of carnal love toward his brethren,
nor of private passion, but by divine inspiration killed the Egyptian, as S.
Augustine proves (li. qq. in Exodus q. 2.) by the testimony of S. Steven
saying: Moses thought his brethren had understood, that God by his hand,
would Act. 7.
save them. VVherby appears that Moses himself knew it was Gods pleasure,
he should kill that Egyptian inuading an Hebrew. Yet others may not imitate
such particular examples. Catech. Romans p. 3. c. 6. q. 5.

CHAP. III. God appears to Moses in a bush burning but not consuming, 7.
designeth him the Governor of the children of Israel, 10. with commission to
tell them, that they shall be delivered from Egypt: 21. and shall spoil the
Egyptians.
AND Moses fed the sheep of Iethro his father in The three first lessons on
the 4. sunday in Lent.
law the priest of Madian: and having driven the flock to the inner parts of
the desert, he came to the mountain of God, Horeb. And * our Lord appeared to
him in a see, he called him out of the mids of the bush, and said: Moses,
Moses. Who answered: Here I am. But he said: See what manner of reverence and
devotion is prescribed; to go bare foo^e to holy places.*
for the place, wherein thou stand, is Of holy places, and of christian
devotion in going to them. S. Hierom writes largely. ^pist. 17. 18. and 27.
holy ground. And he said: I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham,
This is the most proper name but the most common is GOD, derived in many
languages of Good. Mat. 19. v. 17.
this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial into generation and to
generation. Go, and geather together the ancients of forth out of the
affliction of Egypt, into the land of the Chananeite, and Hetheite, and
Amorrheite, and Pherezeite, and Heueite, and Iebuseite, to a Land that flows
with milk and honey. And they shall hear thy voice: and thou

But I know that the king of Egypt will not dismiss you All that any man
possesset^ in this world, is but lent by God. And therefore he justly takes
away, and lends to others; disposing of al as pleases him.
shall spoil Egypt.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. III.
1. Our Lord appeared.] S Steven reciting this vision says, an Angel appeared
Act. 7.
to Moses: and so it is in the Hebrew text, in the Chaldee Paraphrasis, and in
the Septuagi^t Interpreters. Neither is the latin Edition (reading Lord)
contrary to the other which read Angel, no more then one place of holy Al
appatition^ to the Patriarchs and Prophets were made by Angels, though
sometimes attributed to God. Proved by holy Scriptures and Fathers.
Scripture, is contrary to an other in the same language, but very consonant
in sense, sometimes attributing the same apparitions and other works to God,
as the author and principal Agent, and sometimes to Angels, the next and
immediate ministers of God. For so not only S. Steven in the place alleged,
but also S. Paul says plainly (Gal. 3.) that the Law was delivered by
Angels. And in his Epistle to the Hebrews, proves the excellency of Christ's
Law above the old law, by the difference of the persons, by whom both were
given: affirming that the former was s^^^en by Angels, the other declared by
our Lord Jesus Heb. 2.
Christ. VVherof S. Cyril of Alexandria discourses largely (li. 8. c. 2.
Thesau.) showing that in deed Angels delivered the law, yet not by their own
authority, but as servants and legates of God. And before him S. Dionyse of
Ariopagite (li. coelest. Hietar. c. 4.) taught the very same, the law (says
he) as holy vvrittes testify, was given to us by Angels: yea al apparitions,
made to the ancient fathers before the law, and after it, were made by Angels.
A little after obiecting to himself, that divine Scriptures also testify, that
the law was given Exodus 19. 20.
and granted to Moses by God, to teach us that in deed it has the form of
sacred and divine law, answers, eam Angelorum ad nos opera peruenisse, that
it came to us [from God] by the means of Angels. In like manner S. Justinius
Martyr ( inexplic. qq. necess. q. 142.) says, al those Angels, which have
appeared in Gods place, or have spoken with men, have also benne called by the
name of God, as he that spoke with Job, and with Moses. S. Augustine after a
large discourse of this matter, in his second, third, and fourth books de
Trinitate, has these words: (li. 4. c. vlti.) If it be demanded of me, how
either the voices, or sensible forms, and shows were made before the
incarnation of the word of God, which prefigured the same, I answer that God
wrought them by Angels, which also I suppose I have sufficiently showed by
testimonies of holy Scriptures Likewise S. Gregory ( Prefat. in Job. c. 2)
says plainly, that an Angel appeared to Moses in the fiery bush, yet is
called God, because he was the legate of God, and therefore spoke, as if God
himself had spoke in divine Person, explicating the same by two examples,
David said: My people attend my Examples.
Psalm. 77.
law, yet neither the people, nor law was David's, but Gods. And the reader
daily amiddes the people proclameth: I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
Exo. 3.
and the God of Jacob. Neither does he truly say, that he is God, nor by that
he says, does he go from the rule of truth. He also confi^meth the same
doctrine, li. 28. Moral. ca. 5. And further teaches that Angels protect men,
and God executes his will by Angels.
provinces, and execute Gods will in this infe^ior world. And so do the other
Doctors of the Church. S. Gregory Nazianzen, orat. ad 150. Epistop. and orat.
2. de Theologia. in sine vtriusque. S. Basil. li. 3. cont. Funom. S Athanasius
ser. 4. cont. Arian, longius a princ. and Epist. de senten. Dioni^ij Alexan. in
sine. S. Ambrose, ser. 1. in Psalm. 118. S. Chrysostom. ho. 6. and S. Hierom. li.
3. comment. in Mat. 18.

14. I am which am,] Al other things besides God, once were not; and being are
limited in nature; neither could persist unless God conserved them; mame things
also have lost, or shall lose their propet essence and being, and whiles they
remain have continual alterations. Only God eternally is without beginning,
ending, limitation, dependence, or mutation, consisting only of himself, and
al other things ar^ of him Therefore this name, QVI EST, HE WHICH IS, The most
proper name of God is, (...) WHICH IS.
is most proper to God, not determining any manner, but indeterminatly
signifying al manners of being, for so it imports the very infinite immensitie
of Gods substance. S. Damascen. li. 1. c. 12. Orthodoxae sidei. S. Tho. p. 1.
q. 13. a. 11.

CHAP. IIII. Moses receiving power to work miracles in confirmation of his
mission, 14. and his brother Aaron being designed to assist him, 20. goes
with wife and children toward Egypt, 25. is in danger to be slain for not
sooner circumcising his son. 27. Aaron meets him, 29. so they go together,
and declare to the people, that God will deliver them.
MOSES answering said: "They will not believe me, our Lord said: Sretch thy
hand, and catch the tail thereof. He stretched it forth, and took hold of it,
and it was turned into a rod. That they may believe, quoth he, that the God
designed a rod for an instrument to work miracles.
This See that thou do all the wonders, which I have put in thy hand, before
Pharao: See the Annotations cha. 7. v. 3.
I will indurate his heart, and he will not dismiss the people. And thou shall
say to him: This says Sephora cast the prepuce at Moses feet: and said::: I
had lost thee my spouse except I had redeemed thee with the blood of my child.
And: the Angel let Moses go. S. Aug. q. 11. in Exodus iuxta 70.
touched his feet, and said: Miracles a motive to true belief
A blouddie spouse thou art to me. And:: he let him go after she

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
^. They vvil not believe me.] Moses wisely considering that the children of
Israel, much less Pharao, would hardly believe his bare word, affirming that
he was sent to them by God, proposed this difficulty before he took the
Embacie upon him. For without good proof both the Israelites, and Egyptians
Miracles necessary and sufficient to prove extraordinary vocation of new
preachers
might have rejected him, as seming to come of his own private spirit, being
no ordinary superior, neither of the whole people, nor of his own tribe, nor
first of his family; for Aaron was his elder brother. Therefore God gave him
power of working miracles, to prove his extraordinary mission true and lawful.
Which sufficed to make even Pharao him self to know, that he was sent from
God almighty, though it mollified not his stubborn heart, to obey Gods
commandment: and it fully satisfied the children of Israel touching al things
which he denounced, believing him that God mercifully looked upon their
affliction and would deliver them. Whereupon they adored prostrate* as the last
words of this chapter testify. Where we see both the necessity, and
sufficiency of miracles to prove the extraordinary vocation of such as preach
otherwise then was taught before. For this cause our Sauio^^ himself
confirming his doctrine by miracles, said to the Jews: If you vvil not believe
me, believe by works. Again he said of them: If I had not done among them
works that no other Joan. 10. Joan. 15. Mat. 9. Mat. 16.
man has done, they should not have sin. And co^formably sending his
Apostles to preach the Gospel, gave them power to work miracles in his name.
So did S. Peter and S. John heal the lame. Act. 3. And S. Paul avouched
miracles for the signs of his Apostleship. 2. Cor. 12.

CHAP. V. Moses and Aaron require of Pharao in the behalf of God, to let his
people the Hebrews go and sacrifice in the desert. Which he contemning, 5.
oppresses them more, denying them straw, and yet exacting the accustomed
number of brickes. 20. The people oppressed impute their misery to Moses and
Aaron. 12. But Moses prays to God for them.
AFTER these things Moses and Aaron went in, and VVordlie men think Gods
people increase most by rest, but indede they multiply more, when they are
oppressed. S. Cyprian de exhort. Mart. c. 10.
how much more if you give them rest from their works? Therefore neither shall
any thing of your work be diminished. And The crafty devil knowi^g that
weak men afflicted are easily moved to murmur, sturred this people against
their own leaders S. Greg. li. 29. c. 14. Moral.
you have made our savor to stink before Pharao and his servants, and you
have given him a sword, for to kill us. And Moses returned to our Lord, and
said: Lord Gods providence suffers his children, to be most afflicted, when
relife is nere at hand. Theod. q. 13 in Exodus
why

CHAP. VI. God reueling himself more to Moses then he had done to former
Patriarchs, 6. commands him to tell the children of Israel, that he seeing
their miseries, will deliver them from Egypt, and give them possession of
Chanaan. 14. The genealogies of Ruben, Simeon, and especially of Leui are
recited, 26. to show the origin of Moses and Aaron.
AND our Lord said to Moses: Now thou shall see out of his land. And our Lord
spoke to Moses, saying: Adonai is not the name here uttered to Moses but is
read in place of the unknown name.
ADONAI I did not show them. And I made a covenant with them, to Joseph died
first of the twelve brethren. Genesis 50. Leui lived lo^gest and so the years of
their lives are recorded in holy Scriptures, and not of the rest* Chronolog.
(...).
the years of the life of Leui were an hundred thirty seven. The sons of
Gerson: their families. And Amram took to wife locabed See Number. 26. v. 59.
his patr^^^ lem pr^ patrua, quae latin^ non d(...)r.
aunt by the fathers side: who bare him Aaron and Moses. And the years of
Amrams life were an hundred thirty seven. The sons also of Isaar: Coree, and
Nepheg, and Zechri. It perteined not to Moses present purpose, to prosecute
the genealogies of Jacobs other sons, being come to the origin of the
Priestlie tribe in Leui the third son. ^. Aug. q. 15. in Exodus
these are the heads of the Leuitical families by their kinreds. This is Aaron

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VI.
3. My name Adonai] Here and in many other places of holy Scripture in the
Hebrew text, is that name of God of four letters, which the Jews say is
ineffable Yet sure it is, that Moses heard it pronounced, and afterward
writ it as he did the rest in Hebrew letters (which are al consonants)
without In place of the name of God counted ineffable, is commonly read Adonai.
vowels. But the Rabbis that long after put points or vowels to al other
words, put none to this. For all then read Adonai in place thereof. And so the
Latin, and al vulgar Catholic versions, keep the same word untranslated. The
Septuagint in Greek translate KYPIO^, which in Latin is Dominus, in English
Mat. 4. v. 7, 10. Romans 15. v. 11.
Lord. So also al ancient Fathers, and (which is most of al) our Savior, and
his Apostles, alleging sentences of the old Testament, where this name is
contained, still express it by words that signify Lord. Only certain late
writers have framed a new word, by putting the points of Adonai, to the proper
letters of this unknown name, which are Iod, He, Vau, He, and so sound it
Jehovah: Jehovah is not the right name of God.
S. Dionyse. S. Hierom. Theodoret. Damas^^^.
which was scarce heard of before an hundred years. As Bishop Genebrard,
Cardinal Bellarmin, and F. Pererius prove, for that neither ancient Fathers,
writing whole Treatises de Diuinis nominibus, nor the elder Rabbis, nor later
most learned Hebricians, as Rabbi Moses, Aben Ezram, Lira, Paulus Burgensis
and others, never mention Jehovah amongst the Names or titles of God.

CHAP. VII. Moses being constituted as God of Pharao, and Aaron as the prophet
of Moses, they declare Gods commandment to Pharao; 10. turn the rod into a
serpent; 17. and the water into blood, which is the first plague. 22. The
magicians do the like by enchantments, and Pharaos heart is indurate.
AND our Lord said to Moses: Behold I have appointed Aaron also was the
prophet of God, but subordinate under Moses, and over Pharao. S. Aug. q. 17.
in Exodus
thy prophet. Thou shall speak to him al things Iannes and Mambres. 2. Tim.
3. known by tradition.
the wise men and the enchanters: and "they also by Egyptian enchantments and
certain secrecies did in like manner. And every one did cast forth their
rods, the turned into a dragon, thou shall take in thy hand. And Induration
of heart (says S. Bernard) is neither cut with remorse, nor softened with
pity, nor moved with prayers, nor yeldeth to threats: yea is more hardened by
punishments. li. 1. de consid. ad Eugen.
thou would not hear. This therefore says our Lord: In this thou shall know
that The first plague in water, in which the Aegyptia^s drowned the Hebrews
infants. Theodoret q. 19. in exodus the like Ap. 16 Because the wicked spil the
blood of Gods Saints, he will give them blood to drink.
which was turned into blood. And the fishes, that were in the river, died: and
the river,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VII.
1. The God of Pharao.] The name of God, which essentially is proper only to
the three Divine Persons of the B. Trinity, and incommunicable to any
creature The name of God attributed to men.
(Sap. 14.) is nevertheless by similitude attributed in holy Scripture to other
persons. As (Exodus 22. v. 8.) Judges, or princes, are called gods, for the
eminent authority and power which they have from God. So Moses was Judges
called gods. Moses the God of Pharao.
constituted the Judge and God of Pharao, not only to punish him, for his
obstinacy, and finally to compel him to dismiss the Israelites out of Egypt,
but also to terrify him so in the mean time, that he being otherwise a
mighty King, and extremly and often afflicted by Moses, yet durst never lay
violent hands upon him, left himsefe, and al his nation should presently have
been destroyed. As S. Hilarie ( lib. 7. de Trinitate) and S. Gregory ( ho. 8.
in EZech.) note upon this place. Likewise Priests are called gods ( Exodus 22.
v. 28.) for their Priests called gods Other title^ of God given to men.
sacred function, pertaining to Religion and Service of God. Prophets also are
called Videntes, Seers (1. Reg. 9.) because by participation of divine
knowledge, they see sometimes the secrets of other men's hearts, things
supernatural, and future contingent, though properly and naturally only God
almighty is Scrutator cordis, the searcher of the heart, and knows al things
( Sap. 1.) Again S. Peter Moses a Holy Prophet, Priest, and Prince.
says (2. Epist. c. 1.) that just men are made partakers of divine nature.
Which is rather more then to participate in name. Al which titles rightly
perteined to Moses, being in life Holy, in knowledge a Prophet, in function
a Psalm. 98. v. 6.
Priest, and in power a Prince. In the same sense of participation, Saints are
called our Mediators, Advocates, Redemers, Deliuerers, and the like.

3. I vvil indurate] According to our purpose mentioned in the Annotations upon
the 9. chap. to the Romans, we shall here recite the sum of S. Augustins
Protestants hold God to be the cause that men do sin, yet not the cause of
sin.
doctrine ( Ser. 88. de tempore) touching the hard question: How God did
indurate Pharaoes heart. And withal we shall briefly explicate, according to the
doctrine of the same, and other most learned Fathers of the Church, the true
sense of this and like places, by which Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, and other
Sectaries, would prove that God not only permits, but also commands,
inclines, inforceth, and compels men to do that which is sin: yea that
God is the author, internal mouer, and inforcer, that man transgresses; though
they deny that God sins, or is cause of the malice of sin. For example,
Zuinglius Zuinglius doctrine.
( Ser. de prouidentia Dei, ca. 5) says: Numen ipsum auctor est eius, quod
nobis est iniustitia, illi vero nullatenus est. The divine power it self is
author of that thing, which to us is injustice, but to him in no wise is. And
alitle after, Cum igitur Angelum transgressorem ^acit, and hominem, ipse tamen
transgressor non co^stituitur. When therefore God makes Angel, and man
transgressor, yet himself is not made a transgressor. Cha. 6. Vnum igitur atque
idem sacinus, puta adulterium aut homicidium, quantum Dei est auctoris,
motoris, impulsoris, opus est, crimen non est: quantum hominis est, crimen
acscelus est. Therefore the self same act, as adultery or manslaughter, as it
is of God the author, mouer, inforcer, is a work, is not a crime: but as it is
of man, is a crime, and a wicked act. Calvin ( li 8. Instit. c. 17. para. 11.)
affirms that the devil, and the Caluins doctrine.
whole band of the wicked can not conceive, nor endeavor, nor do any
mischief, nisi quantum Deus permi^erit, imo ^isi quantum ille mandarit. but so
far as God permits (which al Catholics firmly believe) nay ^ut so far as
he commands: which al Catholics abhor and detest. Likewise ( li. 2. c. 4.
para. 4) alleging Gods words, saying he had aggrauated, and hardened Pharaoes
heart, affirms, that which God did more, besides not mollifying his heart, was,
quod obstinatione pectus eius ob^irmandum Satanae mandauit, that he committed
his heart to Satan to be obdurated with obstinacy: making God the author, and
Satan only Bezas doctrine.
the minister of hardening Pharaos heart. Beza following this race ( in Respon. ad
Castallionem, Aphorismo 22.) says, God so works by euel instruments, that
he does not only suffer them to work, nor only moderateth the event, sed etiam
vt excitet, impellat, moueat, regat, atque adeo (quod omniu^ est maximum) etiam
creet, vt per illa agat quod constituit: but also sturreth them up, drives
them forward, By their doctrine it necessarily follows, that God should he
author of sin.
moves them, rules them, and (which is most of al) even creates them, that
by them he may work that which he appointed. Al which (says he) God does
rightly, and without any injustice. So in deed these men say, when they are
pressed with the blasphemous absurdity, that they make God author and cause of
sin, which necessarily and evidently follows of their doctrine. For by the
very light of nature, it is clear, that the commander or inforcer is author of
that evil which an other does, by his commandment or inforcement, and by all
law of nature and nations, diuiue and humane, is condemned as culpable and
guilty of the fault, which the other commits: but these ministers say (in
the places above cited) God c^mandeth, inforceth, and works all that a sinner
does. Ergo, God by this doctrine must be author, culpable, and guilty of sin.
Which is so blasphemous, and horrible to Christian ears, that they dare not
say it in express terms.

Seeing then God is said to have indurated Pharaoes heart, and al, confess that
The state, of the controversy.
induration of heart is a most grievous sin, the controversy is: Whether God
commanded, enforced, and wrought the induration in Pharaoes heart, or only
permitted it? or what else God did to Pharao, whereby his heart was indurate; and
finally by whom it was properly indurate, by God, or by Pharao him S. Augustins
doctrine. ser. 88 de temp. God forsakes not, til he be forsaken.
self? Al which S. Augustine explicateth, laying first this ground (which
every one is faithfully and firmly to believe) that God never forsakes any
man, before he be first forsaken by the same man: yea God also long expects,
that a sinner which much and often offends, convert and live. But when the
sinner Ezech* (...).
abides long in his wickedness, of the multitude of sins rises desperation,
of desperation is engendered obduration. For when the impious* is common to Pr^.
18.
the depth of sins, he contemns. Obduration therefore comes not of Gods
power compelling, but is engendered by Gods remisnes, or indulgence, and so not
divine power, but divine patience did harden Pharaoes heart. How often soever
therefore our Lord says: I vvil indurate the heart of Pharao, he would nothing
God by not punishing permitted Pharao to indurate him self. And that for his
former sins.
else to be understood, but I will suspend my plagues and punishments, whereby I
will permit him through mine indulgence to be obdurate against me. Perhaps some
will ask, why did God by sparing him, let him be indurate? why did God take
from him his wholesome punishment? I answer securely: this was done, because
Pharao, for the huge heap of his sins, deserved not as a child, to be
corrected unto amendment, but as an enemy was suffered to be indurate. For of
them, whom Gods mercy suffers not to be indurate, it is written: God Heb 12.
Apoc. 3. Prou. 8.
scourges every child whom he receives. And in an other place. Whom I love
I correct and chastise: Again Whom God loves he chastises. Let no man
therefore with Paganes and Manichees presume to reprehend or blame Gods justice,
but certainly believe, that not Gods violence made Pharao indurate, but his own
wickedness, and his untamed pride against Gods precepts. Again, what else is it
to In absence of grace sin obdurateth.
say, I vvil indurate his heart, but when my grace is absent from him, his own
wickedness will obdurate him?

To know this by examples: water is congeled with vehement cold, but the heat
of the sun coming upon it, is resolved, and the sun departing, it freezeth
again. In like manner by the lasines of sinners, charity wa^eth cold, Gods
grace in the obstinate, like the heat of the sun in cold water.
and they are hardened as yse: but when the heat of Gods mercy comes upon
them, they are again so^tned. So Pharao without pity or compassion
afflicting the Hebrews, became as hard as yse, but Gods hand touching him with
afflictions, he made humble supplication, that Moses and Aaron would pray to
God for him, promising what they demanded: again, when the plagues were
removed, he was more indurate against God and his people, then before. VVherby
we see, Gods gentleness, indulgence, and sparing of Pharao, not his ^igour, nor
his will or set purpose, but his permission, and Pharaoes own wilful As a
father for not punishing is said to spoil, so God to indurate.
malice hardened his heart, and brought him to obstinate contempt of Gods
co^mandments. And therefore God did only indurate him, in that common phrase of
speaking, as a father, or a master having brought up his child or servant
delicatly, and not sufficiently punished his frequent faults, whereby he
becomes worse and worse, desperate and obdurate, at last the father or master
says: I have made thee thus bad as thou art I by sparing thee and suffering
thee to have thine own pleasure, have nourished thy perverseness, and
carelesnes: All the wicked may justly be dam^^d* but some are justified and
saved.
yet he says not this, as though by his will and intention, but by his goodness
and gentleness the man became so wicked. It may here be demanded again; why did
not our Lord so mercifully punish Pharao, as wholly to reclame him, for it
seems that had benne greatest mercy? and God deals so with some, why does
he not with all, that al might be saved? First it is most justly and rightly
ascribed to their iniquity, which deserve to be indurate: again why this
sinner is reclaimed, and not an other of the same il deserts, is to be referred
to Gods inscrutable judgments, which are often secret, never unjust. Let it
therefore suffice piously and humbly to believe, that as Moses Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm.
5. Romans 9.
God never wills but only suffers sine.
testifies, God is faithful and without any iniquity, just and right: and
as the royal Prophet also professes, Thou art not a God that vv^^^ iniquity,
and as the Apostle teaches, there is no iniquity with God. By all which and
some more to the same effect (which we omit) S. Augustine concludes again,
that properly Pharao Pharao abusing Gods benefits hardened his ow^e start. And
^^^fully perished
hardened his own, heart, God only by bestowing benefits upon him, which he
abused, and not plaguing him so much, as he deserved, but letting him live, and
reign, and persecute the Church for the time, until he and al his army were
in the mids of the sea. VVhither (as the same learned father notes (ser. 89.)
their own desperate boldness drew them, vain fury through their own madness
provoking them to go so far, where God not working, but only ceasing to
continue his miracle, the waters returning to their own nature, and meeting
together inuolued and drowned them al.

Other like expositions the same learned father has in other places. As, q. 18.
Other places of S. Augustine
super Exodum, he teaches that Pharao being already so wicked through his own
fault, other things were done to him and his people, which partly were to the
correction of others, and might have been to his, but he abusing al* became
worse and worse, by Gods suffering and dispensation, not only for his (...)*
but evidently just punishment. Li. 5. cont. Julian c. 3. touching the ground of
tentation ^^^^. 1.
Gods justice ^^de (...)nt when (...) are ^o^^ notorious.
he alleges the Apostle saying: Every one is tempted of his own
concupiscence, abstracted and allured: but touching one kind of Gods punishing
some, that are overwhelmed in obstinate sins, he alleges the saying of an
other Aopstle. God has delivered them into passions of ignominy; and into a
reprobate ^^n^e, Romans 5.
to do those things that are not convenient, for God delivers them (says he)
conveniently: that the same sins are made both punishments of sins past,
and are deserts of punishments to come. Yet he makes not the wills evil, but
uses the evil as he will, who can not will any thing vniu^^ly. Again, q. 24.
It appears Gods patience of it self profitable, by evil hearts made
unprofitable.
(says he) that the causes of induration of Pharaoes heart, were not only for
that his Inchanters did like things (to those which Moses and Aaron did* but
the very patience of God, by which he spared him. Gods patience according to
men's hearts is profitable to some to repentance, to some unprofitable to resist
God, and persist in evil: yet not of it self unprofitable, but through the
evil heart.

Briefly. q* 36. I have harned Pharaoes heart, that is, I have been patient over
him and his servants. Epist 105. God does not indurate by imperting malice, but
by not imperting mercy (or grace) Li* de Proed^st* and Great. c 4. God is said
to Miracul^rum (...)bera ^^^bra (...)sabat.
Not doing called sometimes doing the contrary.
indurate him, whom he will not mollisie. So, to make him blind whom he will not
illuminate. So also to repel him, whom he will not call. And ^* 6 what is that to
say: I vvil indurate his heart, but I will not mollify it* cap 14. It ought to
have auailed Pharao to salvation, that Gods patience de^erring his just and
deserved punishment, multiplied upon him frequent stripes of miracles, or
miraculous punishments. Cap 15. Did not Nabucodonosor repent being punished
after Freewil the cause of diverse ends in Pharao and Nabucodonosor.
innumerable impieties, and recovered the kingdom which he had lost? But
Pharao by punishment became more obdurate, and perished. Both were men, both
Kings, both persecutors of Gods people, both gently admonished by punishments.
What then made their ends diverse, but that the one feeling Gods hand mourned
in remembrance of his own iniquity, the other by his freewil fought against
Gods most merciful verity?

Neither is this the doctrine of S. Augustine alone, but of other Doctors also.
Other ancient Doctors teach the same. Origin.
Origin ( li. 3. Periarch. c. de Libert. arbitrij) says: the Scripture
shows manifestly, that Pharao was indurate by his own will. For so God said
to him: Thou would not: If thou vvilt not dismiss Israel.

S. Basil. ( Orat. quod Deus non sit auctor malorum) says, God beginning with
E^o. 4^*
less scourges, proceeded with greater and greater to plague Pharao, but did
S. Basil.
not mollify him being obstinate, neither yet did punish him with death, until
he drowned himself, when he presumed through pride, to pass* the same way, by
which the just went, supposing the red sea would be passable to him, as it
was to the people of God. S Chrysostom. ( ho. 67. in Joan.) God is said in
holy Chrysostom.
Scripture to have indurate some, and delivered some into reprobate sense, not
for that these things are done by God (coming in deed of man's own proper
malice) but because God justly leaving men* these things happen to them. And (
in cap. 1. Rom.) He delivered (into reprobate sense) is nothing else, but he
Damascen.
permitted. S. Damascen ( li. 4. ca. 20. de fide orthodoxa) It is the manner of
holy Scripture to call the permission of God his act. As, He has given them
the spirit of Isa. 6. Romans 11. v. 8.
com^unction; eyes, that they may not see: and ears that they may not hear,
and the like; al which are to be understood not as proceeding of Gods action,
but as of Gods permission, to wit, for man's free power of working. S. Hierom (
Epist. Hierom.
150. resp. ad q. 10.) Not Gods patience is to be accused, but their hardness
who abuse Gods goodness to their own perdition. Theodoret. ( q. 17 in Exodus.) It
Theodoret.
is to be noted, that if Pharao had been evil by nature, he had never changed
his mind. And (after diverse mutations recited, how sometimes he would dismiss
Israel, other times be would not) al these (says he) Moses recorded to teach
us, that neither Pharao was of perverse nature, neither did our Lord God make
his mind hard and rebellious. For he that now inclines to this part, now to
that, plainly shows freewil of the mind.

S. Gregory ( li. 11. ca. 8. Moral.) God is said to indurate by his justice,
when he does not mollify a reprobate heart. And ( li. 31. c. 11.) Our Lord is
said to Gregory the great.
have indurated Pharaoes heart, not that he brought the hardness itself, but for
that his deserts so requiring, he did not mollify it, with sensibilitie of
fear infused from above. S. Isidorus ( li. 2. ca. 19. de summo bono.) Sin is
permitted Isidorus.
for punishment of sin, when a sinner, for his desert forsaken of God, goes
into an other worse sin.

Finally conference of holy Scriptures, as in other hard places, so in this,
gives light for better understanding thereof. For diverse places do not only
show that in all these resistances, mutations of mind, and obstinacy of heart,
Pharao was never deprived of freewil, as the Doctors before cited do note, but
also The act of induration attributed to Pharao himself in diverse places.
expressly attribute the act of induration to himself. Cha 8. v. 15. Pharao
seeing that rest was given he hardened his own heart. v. 32. where the latin
reads in the passive voice, ingrauatum est cor Pharaon^^, Pharaos heart was
hardened, which is Bible. 1552. 1577. 160^.
more obscure, the Hebrew says actiuely, and the protestants so translate,
Pharao hardened his heart this time also. Likewise cha. 9. v. 7. the Hebrew
says, Pharaoes heart hardened it self. Also v. 35. He hardened his own heart,
he and his servants. Cha. 13. v. 15. When Pharao had indurated himself. And,
1. Reg* 6. v. 6. How it (...), God cast Pharao into the sea* when himself
ran in wilfully*
Why do you harden your hearts, as Egypt and Pharao hardened their heart? Al
which are reconciled with the other textes, that say God indurated Pharaoes
heart, understanding that phrase in like sense to this. (cha. 15. v 4.) God has
cast Pharao his chariotes, and his army into the sea. Where God only
permitted, and no way forced Pharao and his army, to follow the Hebrews
between the walls of water. As before is here noted out of S. Basil, and S.
Augustine, and the text it Ser. 89.
self makes it evident. Again many other places confirm, that not God, Not
God but man the cause of sine: proved by other scrptures.
but the sinners own wilfulnes, is the proper cause of his sin. Job. 24. v.
23 God has given him place for penance, and he abuses it unto pride. Eccle.
8. v. 11. Because sentence is not quickly pronounced against the evil, the
children of men commit evils without al fear. Osee. 13, v. 9. Perdition is
thine, o Israel, only in me thy help. Romans 2. v. 4. The benignity of God
brings thee to penance: but according to thy hardness, and impenitent heart,
thou heapest to thy self wrath. Ephesians. 4. v. 19. Gentiles have given up
themselves to impudicitie ( or vvantonnes.) And many like places show, that
God is not the mouer, author, nor forcer of any thing, as it is sin: but man
him self is the author by wilfully consenting to tentations of the devil, the
flesh, and the world, and by abusing Gods benefits, and resisting his grace.

11. They also] True miracles, being above the course of al created nature,
True miracles do certainly prove the truth.
can not be wrought but by the power of God; who is truth it self, and can
Mar. 16. v. 20. lib. 2. v. 4.
not give testimony to untruth, and therefore they certainly prove that to be
true, for which they are done* Other strange things done by enchanters, false
prophets, and devils, are not in deed true miracles* but either sleights, by
quicknes and nimblenes of hand, called legier-demain, conueing one thing Some
strange things done by sleight, by deceit of senses, and by course of nature,
especially by devils.
away and bringing an other; or false presentations deceiving the senses* and
S. Aug. li. 18. c. 18. ciuit.
imaginations of men, by making things seem to be that they are not; or else are
wrought by applying natural causes known to some, especially to devils; who
also by their natural force can do great things, when God permits them. And
so by enchantments and certain secrecies, these sorcerers either conveyed away
the rods, and water, and brought dragons, and blood* in their place, and more
frogs, from other places; or else by the devils using natural agents turned
rods into serpents, water into blood, and other matter into frogs: al
which might be done naturally in longer time, and by the devil in short time.
Many things above the devils natural power. The devils power is much
restrained.
But many things are wholly above the devils power: as to destroy the world,
to change the general order thereof: to create of nothing: to raise the dead to
life; to give sight to the borne blind; and the like, which are only in Gods
power. In things also devils naturally can do, they are much restrained by Gods
goodness, lest they should deceive, or hurt mankind at their pleasure. So these
Enchanters failed in the fourth attempt, not able to make more sciniphes, *nor
any more such prodiges: and were only permitted to produce such serpents, as
were devoured by Aarons serpent: and to change water into blood: and to
increase the number of frogs, for the greater plague, and no profit of the
Egyptians. Neither could they remove any plague. Nay themselves were so
plagued with boyles, that for pain, or for shame, they could not stand before
Moses.

It is further to be observed, that whenever any have attempted to work
False prophets ever fail, when they pretend by miracles to prove their
doctrine. Simon Magus confounded.
miracles to prove false doctrine, they have failed, and by Gods providence been
3. Reg. ^9. lib. 1.
confounded. As when Baals false prophets, crying to their false gods from
morning til noone, could not bring fire for their sacrifice: and yet the devil
brought fire to burn Jobs sheep and servants: God permitting the one, and not
the other. God also for a time suffered Simon Magus to make show of miracles,
and at last (as Egesippus li. 3. de excid. Hierosol. c. 2. and many others
testify) to fly into the air, as though he would have ascended into heaven,
but S Peter praying to God, the magician, notwithstanding his wings wherewith he
presumed to fly, fell down and broke his legs, that he could not go. To
omit many examples, Gregorius Turonensis li. 2. hist. Franc. c. 3.
witnesses, that one Cyrola an Arian Patriarch, pretending to obtain of God
Cyrola an Arian Bishop detected.
sight to a man, that feaned him self blind, the man was presently blind in
deed, and exclaming cried: Take here thy money which thou gave me, to
deceive the world, restore me my sight, which I had even now, and by thy
persuasion, and for this money, I feaned to want. It happened worse to one
Bruley a poor man in Geneua, whom Calvin with words and money persuaded
Caluins attempt misproued and he de^^iued
to feane him self dead, and so pretending to raise him to life, the man was
found dead in deed, and not he but his wife (having consented to the devise)
lamented in earnest, enuehing against that false Apostle, calling him a secret
these, and a wicked murderer, that had killed her husband. So writes M. Ierom
Bolseck in vita Caluini. And besides the woman's unexpected outcrie, and
asseue^ation, that her husband was not dead before, but that, through Caluins
persuasions, and promises to releue them with alms, they so feaned, al Geneua
did know, that Calvin endeavored to raise the man, and could not. These and
many others have attempted and could do nothing, but against them selves.

All the danger is when in deed wonders are done that may seem to be miracles.
Gods providence in most danger. 1 His special warning not to credit preachers
of a new Religion, though they pretend to be prophets, or to work wonders. 2
Most dangerous seducers reign but short time. 3 Notes to know Antichrist. 4
Against most dangerous assaltes God sends most forcible resista^ce.
Against such therefore Gods providence more particularly assisteth his
servants diverse ways. First he warns al to stand fast when such tentations
happen. Deuteronomy. 13. If there rise among you a prophet, or one that says, he
has seen a dream, and fortelleth a sign, and a wonder, and it comes to
pass which he spoke, and he say to thee: Let us go and follow strange gods,
whom thou know not, and let us serve them, thou shall not hear the words
of that prophet, or dreamer. In like manner our Savior foretelling that false
christ's, Mat. 24.
and false-prophetes, shall by great signs and wonders seduce many, warns al
saying: Lo I have fortold you. If therefore they shall say unto you: He is in
the desert, go not out. Behold in the closets, believe it not. Secondly God
suffered not the Enchanters of Egypt, nor Simon Magus long: and for the elect,
the days of Antichrists dangerous persecution shall be shortened. Thirdly holy
Scripture so describes Antichrist, and his acts, as when he comes he may
Joan 5. 2. These. 2. Apoc. 13.
be sooner known. Our Savior says: The Jews will receive him. S. Paul
calls him the man of sin, importing one singular man, and the same replete
with all wickedness* extolled above all that is called God, or is worshipped.
Neither worshipping true God, nor other false God above him self. He shall be
deadly wonded and cured. Not only he shall show strange wonders, but also one of
his prophets shall bring fire from the firmament, and his image shall speak.
Fourtly as our Lord gave power and authority to his great Prophet Moses,
against the Egyptian Enchanters, in the end of the law of nature, before the
written law: and to his first chief vicar S. Peter, in the beginning of the law
of grace, to control and confound Simon Magus: so he will send his two reserved
great Prophets Enoch and Elias nere the end of the world, to resist
Antichrist, and to teach, testify, and confirm with their blood the doctrine
of Christ. For they Apoc. 11 A^oc. 20.
shall be slain, and rise again after three days, and ascend into heaven.
Then See. page 19.
Antichrist holding him self most secure, shall sudainly be destroyed. 2. These.
2.

CHAP. VIII. The second plague is of frogs. 7. the enchanters make the like.
8. Pharao promises to let the Israelites go and sacrifice, so the frogs be
taken away 13 which being done he breaks promise. 16. The third plague is of
sciniphes. 18. which the enchanters can not make. 21. The fourth is of flies.
29. Pharao again promises to dismiss the people of God, but does it not.
OUR Lord also said to Moses: Go in to Pharo, and If Pharao had not freewil
threatening of punishment were unjust. Origin. li. 3. Per^ar. c. de. lib a^b^it.
He that can not do otherwise does not sin, as both learned and unlearned
confess. S Aug. de ver^ Relig. c. 14.
if thou will not The 2. plague Multitude of frogs.
frogs upon the Land of Egypt. And Aaron stretched The Encha^ters could
bring more frogs, but not take these away.
Pray ye to the Lord to take away the frogs from me and from my people: and I
will dismiss the people to sacrifice unto the Lord. And Moses said to Pharao:
Appoint me the promise, concerning the frogs, which he had agreed to Pharao
And our Lord did according to the word of Moses: Pharaos induration ascribed
to himself
he hardened his own heart; and heard them not, as our Lord had commanded. And
The 3. plague Sciniphes, small flying beasts, especially molesting men's eyes*
Philo l. 1. de vita Moysi.
Sciniphes in the whole Lord of Egypt. And they did so. And The devils power*
limited by God Job* 1. 2
they could not: and there were sciniphes as well on men as on beasts And the
The enchanters convinced in their understanding, confessed the power of God,
but not changed in affection, persisted in malice against the truth.
This is the finger of God. And Pharaoes heart was indurate, and he heard them
not as our Lord had commanded. Our Lord also said to Moses: Arise The 4 plague
Abundance of al sorts of flies.
flies: and the houses of Egypt shall be filled with flies of diverse kinds,
and the whole land wherein they shall be. And I will make the Land of Gessen
merueilous in that day, Egyptians worshipping beasts thought it intolerable
abomination to kill, or eat, or burn t^em in sacrifice ^^n. 43. v. 32* 46. v.
34.
we kill those things which the Egyptians do worship before them: they will
beat us down with stones. We will go forth three days journey into the
wilderness: and we will sacrifice unto the Lord our God, as he has commanded us.
And Pharao said: In the Hebrew: Pharao hardened his o^^n^ heart, also this time.
was hardened, so that neither this time would he dismiss the people.

CHAP. IX. The fifth plague is pestilence among the Egyptians cattle. 8. The
sixth boyles in men and beasts. 18. the seventh, hail. 27. Pharao confessing
God to be just, and himself and his people impious, promises again to
dismiss the people, 34. but fails to do it.
AND our Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao, and The 5. plague Pestilence
amongst cattle.
a very sore pestilence. And our Not all the beasts died, for some died in the
7 and 10. plagues but all that died pertaine^ to the Egyptians.
all the beasts of the Egyptians dyed, but of the beasts of the children of
Israel nothing at al perished. And Pharao sent to see: neither was there
anything In Hebr. ^an^^bad ^^b Parhaoh Phara^es heart hardened it self.
was hardened, and he did not dismiss the people. And our Lord said to Moses,
and Aaron: Take ^our dust upon all the Land of Egypt: for there shall be in men,
and beasts The 6 plague Boyles in men and beasts.
boyles, and swelling bladders in the whole land of Egypt. And they took
ashes out of the chimney, and Poor Enchanters, that could neither escape, nor
cure this plague.
neither could the enchanters stand before In Hebrew I have made thee stand, in
the 70* and chalde paraphrasis I have kept thee alive. In the Latin. I have put
or set thee, that in thee, through thyn own malice indurate, I may make known
my power to mankind. S. Aug. de Predest. et Great. c. 6. The 7. plague Terrible
hail, thunders and lightnings.
have I set thee, that in thee I may Romans 5.
hail exceeding much: such as was not in Egypt from the day that it was
founded, until this present time. Send therefore now presently, and gather
together thy cattle, things that were in the fields, from man even unto
beast: and every herb of the field did the hail strike, and every tree of
the country it did break. Only in the Land of In Hebrew. Vaiachbed libb^ hu
vahabadaf. And he hardened his own heart, he and his servants.
and his heart was aggrauated, and

CHAP. X. The eight plague, of Locustes. 21. the ninth darkness: Pharao yeldeth
that al men and children should go to the desert, but not the cattle. 28. At
last commands Moses to come no more in his sight, which Moses forecelleth
shall so be.
AND our Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao: for By Gods patience over
Pharao and his servants, in not destroying them, their wicked mind became more
obstinate. S. Aug. q. 30. and 36. in Exodus
I subject to me? dismiss mv people, to sacrifice unto me. But if thou resist,
and wilt not dismiss them: behold I will The 8. Plague Innumerable locustes,
little flying beasts with long hinder legs that destroy grain, grass and
fruict. Plinius. li. 11. c. 29. S. Greg li. 31. c. 20. Moral.
the locust into thy coasts: which Because Gods servants may not temporize in
religion, politiques unjustly charge them to have bad intentions.
you intend very wickedly? It shall not so be: but go ye men only, And Moses
going forth from Pharaoes sight, prayed to The 9. plague Horrible darkness three
days together.
darkness upon the Land of Egypt so thick, that it be palpable. And Moses
stretched forth his hand toward Gods people must be resolute in Religion.
not a hoof remain of them: the which are necessary unto the service of the
Lord our God: especially whereas we know not what must be offered, til we come
to the very place. And our Lord did indurate Pharaoes heart, and he

CHAP. XI. God bids Moses cause the people of Israel to borow silver and
gold vessels of the Egyptians. 4. Fortelleth one other plague, the death of
the first borne. 9. and that Pharao will still be obdurate.
AND our Lord said to Moses: Yet with one plague Egypt, in the sight of
Pharaoes servants, and of all the people. And he said: This says our Lord: At
midnight I will enter The to plague Death of the firstborne in men and beasts
of the Egyptians.
the Egyptians shall dye, from the first begotten of Pharao who sits in his
throne, even to the first-begotten of the handmaid that is at the mil, and all the first-begotten of beasts. And there shall be a great cry in the whole Land
of Egypt, ^^ As before c ^. v. 3. c. 9. v. 16. c. 10. v. 1.
Pharaoes heart, neither did he dismiss the children of Israel out of his Land.

CHAP. XII. The manner of preparing, and eating the Paschal lamb, sprinckling
the dore-postes with blood thereof: 15. eating no leuened bread seven days
together. 29. The first borne of men and beasts among the Egyptians are
slain. 35. The Israelites go away spoiling Egypt. 43. Incircumcised me^ may
not eat the Phase.
AND our Lord said to Moses, and Aaron in the Land The Epistle in the office
on good friday. And the 9. prophecy before Mas^e on Easter eve.
of Egypt: This month, shall be to you the beginning Such as had not means to
take a lamb, took a kidde using all the same Rites.
a kidde. And you shall keep him until the fourtenth day of this month: and the
whole multitude of the children of Israel shall Shachatu, immolabunt, shall offer
or sacrfice: not only kill, as protestants translate.
sacrifice him at even. And Passage in killing the firstborne of Egypt, and
not of Israel. S. Hiero. in Mat. 26.
eat him: you shall gird your reins, and you shall have shoes on your feet,
holding staves in your hands, and you shall eat speedely: for it is the::
Phase (that is the Passage) of the Lord. And I will pass through the Land of
Egypt that The idols of Egypt were overthrown, as Dagon was in Azotum. 1.
Reg. 5. S. Hierom Epist. ad Fabiol. extradit. Hebr.
in all the gods of Egypt I will do judgments, I the Lord. And the blood
Christ observing this precept, had no leuened bread at his last supper: and so
instituted the Eucharist in unleavened.
azymes until the one and twentieth day of the same month at even. Seven days
there shall not be found leauened in your called all the Ancients of the children
of Isael, and said to them: Go take a lamb by your families, and sacrifice
the Phase. And Sprinckling of blood with ^yslop here and ^euit. 14 Number. 19
prescribed signifies ma^s delivery by Christ's blood working in Baptism and
other Sacraments. Heb. 9.
dippe a bunche of hyssope in the blould that Punishment conform to their
sin, for persecuting Gods ^i^st begotten son Israel. Exodus 4. v. 22.
Theodor. q. 32. in Exodus
every first-begotten in the Land of Egypt, from the first-begotten of
Pharao, who sat in his throne, unto the first-begotten of the captive woman
that was in the prison, and every first begotten of beasts. And Pharao arose
in ^awful spoil by the warrant of God, Lord of al.
they spoiled the Egyptians. And the But also the common people of al sorts
innumerable went From the promise made to Abraham (Gen 12. v 7.) and his first
going into Egypt (v. 10) to this time were 4^0. years. Gal. 3. of which they
were in great persecution above 80. years, before that in servitude about 60.
more, before that also they were strangers partly in Egypt, partly in Chanaan
the rest of this time, See. Genesis 15. v. 13. The 70. read in Egypt and in
Chanaan, for explication, as S. Augustine no teth li. 16. c. 10. ciuit.
in Egypt, was four hundred thirty years. The which being expired, the same
day all the army of our

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XII.
3. The tenth day] Our Savior Christ instituting the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, Christ's action shows that the Paschal lamb was a figure of the
Eucharist.
after the celebration of the Paschal lamb, whiles they were at supper, the
night before his death, thereby sufficiently declared, that this old Pasch was a
figure, not only of his Passion and Sacrifice on the Cross, but also of that
he then did so solemnly with his Apostles. whom also in that action he made
Priests, commanding them, and their successors, to do the same in commemo^ation
of him, til the end of the world. Other circumstances likewise, and conference
of the one with the other make it more clear, that as in some respects it more
resembled Christ's Passion, and Sacrifice on the Cross, so in others it Some
things in the Paschal lamb prefigured Christ both on the Cross and at his
last supper.
more expressed the Eucharist, and mystical commemoration of his death, though
also in many it profigured Christ in both places. For example, The preparing
of the lamb the tenth day signified our Saviors coming into Jerusalem, the
same tenth day of the first moon, now represented in the Church on
Palmesunday. Also the choice qualities of the lamb, without spotte, a male,
of the first year, foreshewed in general the purity, fortitude, meeknes, and
al perfection of the true Lamb of God, that ta^eth away the sin of the
world. Joan ^.
More particularly the killing and bereuing the Paschal Lamb of natural life,
Some more expressly signified his Passion Others immediately the Eucharist.
the sprinkling of his blood on the dore-postes, the ^^st^^^ at the ^ire, and
not breaking Ioa. 19.
any b^ne thereof, most specially expressed Christ's death on the Cross. But
the fourtenth day, and the euining agree only with the Eucharist, instituted
the night before our Lords Passion, which he suffered the fiftenth (being the
full moore) and at midday, as ancient S. Dionyse of Ariopagite (in two Episties,
to Polic^rpus, and to Appollophanes) testifies, admiring the miracle of the
suns Eclip^e, that happened the same time. Neither did the ^ating of the Lamb
directly prefigurate the oblation on the Cross, for Christ was not crucified
to be eaten but the Sacrament in forms and bread and wine was expressly
figured by eating the lamb with unleavened bread, and drinking the cup
thereto idioyned (Luc. 2^. v 17.) In like sort the Lamb immolated in
commemoration of the delivery of Israel from death, and from servitude, when
the-first-borne of Egypt were slain, most aptly prefigured the Eucharist,
which is a perpetuat commemoration of man's redemption, and delivery from
eternal death, and from bondage of the devil and sin, by Christ's death on
the Cross, which death in deed was the very redemption and delivery of
mankind, and not a commemoration thereof. Finally the immolating of the Lamb
within the house with precise commandment to carry nothing thereof forth,
perteined particularly to the Eucharist, which our Lord celebrated within the
house, whereby S. Cyprian ( lib. de unit. Eccles.) proves, that the B.
Sacrament must not be given to any ou^ of the Catholic Church, though
Christ's Passion be extended to all the world, as well to bring such as are
without, into the Church, as to save those that are Ancient writers expound
this figure of the Eucharist.
already entered in. In this sort the most ancient and best expositors of holy
Scripture, explicate this special figure of the Paschal Lamb. As we shalhere
produce some witnesses in confirmation of this truth.

Tertulian lib. 4. contra Marcionem, expounding our Saviors words: With Luc.
2^.
desire I have desired to eat this Pasch with you before I suffer says,
Christ coueted not veruecinam Iudaeorum, the mutton of the Jews, but
professing that with Tertullian proves, by this figure fulfilled in the
Eucharist* that Christ has a true and not a fantastical body.
desire he desired to eat the Pasch, as his own (for it was unmeet that God
should couete any thing not his own) the bread which he toooke, and gave to
his disciples, he made his own body, saying: This is my body, that is, a
figure of my body Figura autem nonsuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. But it
had not been a figure (says he) onles it vv^re a bodies of verity, or, a
very body, to wit, not fantastical as the heretic Marcion imagined; because
the figures in the old Testament were not figures, except a true body answered
unto them. So the Sacramentaries sense, that Tertullian should call the
Eucharist a figure, is quite against his meaning, and makes him conclude
nothing against Marcion; whereas his whole drift is, by the figures of the old
Testament to prove, that in the Eucharist Hiere. (...). v. 19.
is the true and real body of Christ, and that consequently Christ has a true
and real body Origin ( in 26. Mat.) teaches that in the great parlar. (where
Christ did ea^e the Paschal Lamb) he also made his new Pasch.

S. Cyprian. ( de Caena Dom.) says: In the supper of sacramental banquets,
old and new Institutions met together. The lamb being consumed, which old
tradition proposed, the Master sets inconsumptible meat to his disciples.
S. Gregory Nazianzen ( Orat 2. de Pascha) says, God commanded the Paschal
Lamb should be eaten in the evening, because Christ in the evening gave the
Sac^ment of his own body to his disciples. S. Hierom ( in 26 Mat.) After that
the figurative Pasch was complete, and Christ had eaten the flesh of the lamb
with his Apostles, he takes bread, which confirms the heart of man, and
pasieth Psalm. 103.
over to the tru^ Sacrament of Pasch. Likewise S. Chrisostom ( Ho. de prodit.
Iudae) says, In the same table both the Pasches, of the figure, and of the
verity were celebrated. S. Ambrose ( in Lucae. 1.) expressly applies this
figurative The same Sacrifice offered by Priests.
lamb to the Eucharist, as it is celebrated in the Church, by him self and
other Priesis, saying: When we sacrifice, Christ is present, Christ is
sacrified* for Christ 1. Cor. 5.
our P^^^^ is ^^molated. The like affirms S. Augustine ( li. 2. cont. lit. Pet
il. c. 27.) It is an other Pasch that the Jews celebrated of a sheep, an other
which we receive in the body and blould of ou^ Lord. S. Leo ( ser. 7. de
Pass.) To the end shadows might give place to the body, and figures might
cease in presence of the verity, the old observation is taken away by the new
Sacrament, host passes into hosie, blood excludes blood, and when the legal
festiuitie is changed, it is fulfilled.

S Gregory ( ^o 22 in Euang:) proves by these words, You shall not eat
thereof S. Gregory's moralization of this figure, applied to the B Sracrament.
any thing raw, that besides the letter there is a spiritual sense. Behold
(says he) the very words of the history drive us from the historical
understanding. For did the Israelitical people in Egypt use to eat a lamb
raw, that the law should need to say: you shall not eat it raw? And so in that
homily this great Doctor explicateth how we ought to celebrate, and receive
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by the figure of this Paschal lamb. This blood
(says he) is sprinkled on both post^es, when the Sacrament of his Passion is
received with mouth; to redemption, and mediated with intentive mind to
imitation, and in the transome over the door, when pure intention directs the
exterior act, also when we carry the Cross of his passion in our forhead. The
flesh of the lamb is eaten at night, because we now receive our Lords body in
the Sacrament, when yet we see not each others consciences, roasted at the fire,
when we join to our belief good works of fervent charity; with unleavened
bread, and with lettice, that is, in sincerity, without corruption of
vaineglorie, and with bitter penance for sins; not raw, nor sodde in water,
to wit, neither esteeming Christ a mere man, nor considering of him, with
humane vvisdome or private spirit of heretics, called stolen water (prou
9.) To devour the head with the feet and entra^s, is by faith to believe the
Divinity of Christ, and to imitate by love the steps of his humanity, and
greedely to learn al Christian mysteries. Nothing is left til morning, when we
endeavor in this life before the resurrection to know every point of
christian doctrine, so far as to ^s pertains. But if any thing be left, it
must be burned in the fire, because those hard and hieghest mysteries, which we
can not understand, we must remitte to the Holy Ghost, lest any proudly
presume either to contemn, or to proclaim that he understands not. He
further describes also what manner of persons are to What persons are to
receive the B. Sacrament.
eat this new Pasch. Their loins must be gyrded, that is, al carnal pleasures
tamed. They must have shoes on their feet, by the good examples of former
Saints dead before, must strengthen their fle^pes, to fly from vice, and
follow virtue: holding staves in their hands, to rule and stay themselves and
others from sliding, by the staff of authority. They must eat the Pasch
speedely, that is without delay or procrastination must learn the mysteries of
man's redemption, and heavenly life, and so perform Gods will and precepts, in
this life with speed. To this effect S. Gregory discourses at large in the
moral sense, which we have abridge, and otherwise (though holy Scripture be
full hereof) seldom touch.

Returning therefore to our particular purpose, in all these testimonies we
specially urge, that the paschal lamb was a figure, not only of Christ's
Passion, but also of the Eucharist. VVhereupon, besides the often express
mention of our B. Saviors body and blood in the same, which Protestants would
wrest (as they do also the same terms in holy Scripture) to figurative sense,
it necessarily The thing figured far excellleth the figure.
follows, that there be far more excellent contents in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, then natural bread and wine. For S. Paul teaches, ( Colloss. 2.)
that as the body excels the shadovv, so the verity, or thing figured
excels the figure. VVheras the substance of bread and wine does not excel,
much less so far excel the Paschal Lamb, as by S. Paul's doctrine is
required. Again seeing the Paschal lamb was a Sacrifice, as appears in this
Chap. v. 6 and. 27 also Number. 9. v. 7. and. 13. and Mar. 14. v. 12: and as it
was immolated The Eucharist is also a Sacrifice.
was a figure of the Eucharist, as before appears by conference of the one
with the other, in respect of the time, place, manner of offering, and eating
it, and by testimony of the Doctors above cited, it follows also that the
Holy Euchaiust is a Sacrifice far excelling the figure.

CHAP. XIII. God commands to remember their delivery from Egypt, by the
solemnity of Pasch 2. and by consecrating to him the firstborn. 17. And so
leads them through the desert toward the red sea (Moses taking with him
Joseph's bones) by a pillar of fire in the night; and a cloud in the day.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saing: Sanctify unto ^ The first lesson at
Mattins on Candlemasse day.
children of Israel, as well of men as of beasts: for they are al mine. And
Moses said to the people: Remember this day The old Testament proposed
commonly temporal rewards. S Hierom* l^p. ad Dardanum.
flows with milk and honey, thou shall celebrate this manner of sacred rites
in this month. Seven days shall thou eat azimes: and in the seventh me when
I came forth out of Egypt. And it shall be as a In the Hebrew. when Pharao had
indurated himself.
when Pharaoes heart was indurate, and would not Gods prevention to avoid
tentations shows free wilin man
lest perhaps it would repent them, if they should see wars arise against
them, and would return into Egypt. But he led them about by the way By this
appears how much Moses esteemed Joseph's charge concerning translation of his
bones. Also S. Paul commends it. Heb. 11.
took Iosephes bones with him: because he had adjured the children of Israel,
saying: God shall visit you, carry out my bones from hence with you. And
marching from

CHAP. XIIII. Iharao persecuting the children of Israel with a great army. 10.
they murmur against Moses, 13. but are encoureged by him, and pass through
the red sea dry foot. 23. Pharao and his host Wilfully following are drowned.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to Although the Hebrew Greek and
Latin have, And he, yet Protestants corruptly thrust in the text, that he shall,
to make it sound to their sense, that God did not only permit, but work
Pharaoes induration.
and he will pursew more see for ever. Our Lord will fight for you, and you shall
A sorrowful heart, lamentably mourning for the people is called crying to God. S.
Hierom. in Gal. 4.
Why ^. Reg. 6.
I will be glorified in Pharao, and in all his host, and in his chariottes and
in his horsemen. And the Egyptians shall know Protection of Angels.
the Angel of God, The fourth prophecy in the office before Mass on Easter
^u^. And the second on whitsuneue
mids of the sea. And now the morning watch was come, So in Baptism al
sins are destroyed. S ^yp. ^^p. 76. in fine S. Aug. Tract. 12. and 13. in
Joan.
neither did there so much as one of them remain. But the and the waters were
unto them as instead of a wall on the right hand and on the left: and our Lord
delivered Israel in that The same credit is given to God speaking by Moses,
as if he had spoken immediately by himself. S. Hiero. in Epist. ad Philem.
and Moses his servant.

CHAP. XV. Moses with the people sing a Canticle of thanks-geuing, for their
delivery. 22. The people being three days in the desert without water, then
finding that is bitter, do murmr. 25. It is made sweet. 27. Coming to Elim
they find twelve fountains, and seventy palmetrees.
THEN The first of al Canticles, sacred or profane. Origin. ho. 6. in Exodus
sang Moses and the children of Israel this song God only suffered them to go
into the sea. For they went of their own accord supposing they might follow
where the Israelites went before. S. Aug. ser. 89. de temp.
he has cast into

Thou have in thy mercy been a guide to the people carried them unto thy holy
habitation. Nations rose

For Pharao on horsebake entered in with his chariottes Musical instruments used
before the law of Moses in the service of God.
a tymbrel in her hand:

And Moses removed Israel from These things chanced to them in figure 1. Cor.
10.
the red sea, and they went forth into the desert Sur: and they walked three
days through the wilderness, and found not water. And they The wholesome wood
of the Cross made the bitter sea of gentiles, sweet. Theodoret. q. 26. in Exodus
a piece of wood: which when he had cast into the waters, they were turned
into sweetness. There he appointed him precepts, and judgments, and there he
proved him, saying: If thou will hear the voice of the Lord thy

The end of the third age.
THE CONTIN VANCE OF THE CHVRCH AND RELIGION IN THE THIRD AGE, from Abraham's
going forth of Chaldea, to the parting of Israel out of Egypt. The space of
430. years.
ONE and the same Church and Religion begun in the first age of the The same
Church and Religion in this age as in the former.
world, and continued in the second, became more and more conspicuous in the
third. For in this age not only the same principal and particular points of
faith, were believed and professed, but also the number of professors increased
and partly by separation of place and abode, and specially by diversity of
manners, outward rites, and conversation were more distinct from infidels then
before: as we shall now show by the sacred history of that time. Which
begins with Abraham's going forth of his country of Chaldea, about 2024.
years from the beginning of the world, in the 75. year of his age.

From which time forward God often appeared to him, and after him to Belief in
one God.
Isaac and Jacob, in the title of EL SADDAI, that is, God Almighty: Creator of
al things, Lord, God, most high, Possessor of heaven and earth (Genesis 14.) To
Moses more familiarly (Exodus 3.) in his most proper name, HE WHICH IS. In the
name of four letters, which the Iewescount ineffable. And in diverse other
names, al showing One, Eternal, Omnipotent, infinite Majesty, Of whom al other
things depend, and have their being, himself independent of any other thing.

This one divine nature, and indivisible substance is (above al reach of
reason) three in Persons: represented to Abraham (Genesis 18) by three Three
divine Persons.
Angels, in form of men, whom, by special instinct of God, he adored as one:
and first spoke unto them as to one: Lord if I have found grace in thy sight,
go not past thy servant; and by and by as to many: VVash ye your feet. In
like manner Moses sometimes speaks plurally as of many; There appeared to
him three men, they said: Where is Sara? sometimes singularly; He said: I will
come. So Lot (Genesis 19.) spoke to two Angels representing the Son of God, and
the Holy Ghost, one God with the Father, first as to many, I beseech you my
Lords, turn into the house of your servant; after as to one: I beseech thee my
Lord, because thy servant has found grace before thee. Who likewise answered
as one only: I have heard thy prayer. Again Moses shows distinction of
Persons in God, saying (v. 24.) Our Lord rained from our Lord. Io^ also (who
lived in this age) and his friends professed and served the same one God,
auouching him to be the only God and Lord, that gives and takes away (Chap.
1. 2.) He the maker and peculiar Keeper of men. He that takes away sin, and
iniquity (c. 7.) He that does great things, incomprehensible, and marvelous,
whereof there is no number, (c. 9.) And that with terms appropriated to the
three divine Persons (c. 26.) In his strength suddenly the seas are Strength
(or power) the Father, vvisdome the Son, Spirit the Holy Ghost.
gathered together, and with his wisdom he stroke the proud man. His Spirit
has adorned the heavens. The same Mystery of plurality of Persons in one God
is more clear by the Hebrew text chap. 30. v. 11. and 35. v. 10. where the
same actions are ascribed to God, as to one, and as to many.

But most evident are the promises, figures, and prophecies of Christ our
Christ promised to Abraham.
Redemer. For besides present abundance of riches, promise of great progeny,
and that the same should possess the fruitful L^ad of Chanaan (three special
blessings of the old Testament) God promised Abraham a far greater thing
(Genesis 12.) that in his seed al nations and kindreds of the earth should be
blessed. In confirmation whereof, God also changed his name Abram (high or
noble father) into Abraham (Father of many nations, Genesis 17. And so he was
natural father of four great Kingdoms, Ismaelites, Madianites, Idumeans, and
Israelites: but spiritual father of many more, to wit, of all that believe in
Christ, Jews and Romans 9.
Gentiles, from that time to the worlds end. The same promises of possessing To
Isaac. And to Jacob.
Chaanan and of Christ were renewed and confirmed to Isaac. (Genesis 26.) in
like sort to Jacob (28.) for they pertained not to Ismael, nor to the other
Christ prefigured by Abraham.
sons of Abraham, nor to Esau. Moreover Christ, our Redemer and deliverer
from sin, and captivity of the devil, was prefigured by Abraham, at last
delivering those from captivity, who otherwise endeavoring to shake of the yoke
of Cordorlahomor, fell further into subjection and bondage (Genesis 14.) Also
Melchisedech, King and Priest, of unknown generation, extraordinary By
Melchisedech.
vocation, without predecessor, or successor, prefigured Christ King and Priest
for ever, who not by successors, but by Priests his vicars, perpetually
exercises al Priestlie functions. Likewise Isaac borne above the common course
of nature By Isaac.
(Genesis 21) singularly beloved of his father, carrying wood on his back for the
sacrificing of himself (22.) Jacob flying his brother Esau (27.) hardly Jacob.
treated by Laban, (31.) yet always invincible against his adversaries, (32.)
Joseph hated of his brethren, sold and delivered to Gentiles, (37.) By them
Joseph.
also persecuted, (39.) but afterward advanced, and called the Savior of the
world, (41.) Just Job vehemently afflicted; Moses hidden for a Job. Moses.
while, then exposed to danger, and thence delivered: afterward manifesting
him self to his brethren, by them rejected, bewrayed, and flying from Pharao
(Exo. 2.) returning again (Exodus 3. 4. etc.) and at last delivering the
Israelites from bondage of Egypt (Exo 14) And many other things, as And many
other things.
the ram sacrificed in place of Isaac (Genesis 22.) the ladder of Jacob (Gen
28.) Joseph's scepter (47.) Aarons rod (Exo. 7.) Paschal lamb (12.)
prefigured Christ, borne of a Virgin; the only Son of God; sometimes hidden,
other times conversant with men, hated, persecuted, sold, betrayed; who carried
his own cross, was sacrificed, vanquished al his enemies, advanced, and
acknowledged the true Savior of the world, Redemer and deliverer of mankind,
from servitude, slavery, thraldom, and bondage of sin, death, and the
devil. Prophecy of Christ.
Again Abraham prophesied that of his seed Christ our Savior should be
borne, when he said to his servant (Genesis 24.) Put thy hand under my thigh,
that I may adjure thee by our Lord God of heaven and earth, that is, by Christ,
who should come of his loins, as S. Hierom (Tradit Heb. in Genesis et explic.
Psalm. 44.) S. Ambrose (li. 1. c. 9. de Abraham) and S. Augustine (q. 62. in Genesis
et li. 16. c. 33. ciuit.) expound it. More evidently Jacob (Genesis 49.) The
scepter shall not be taken away from Judas, and a duke of his thigh, til he do
come that is to be sent, and the same shall be the expectation of the Gentiles.
Job as planely: I know Job. 19.
that my redemer lives. Moses foreknowing that Christ the true Redemer, and
chief Lawgiuer should be sent, prayed God to hasten his mission, saying: I
beseech thee Lord, send whom thou will send. (Exodus 4.) Sacrifice. Altares.
Churces, dedicated.


External Sacrifice was frequent and solemn, as the sovereign homage to God.
And many Altares erected by Abraham for that purpose (Genesis 12. 13. 15. 22.)
Unbloody, in bread and wine by Melchisdech (Genesis 14.) other liquide sacrifices
(Genesis 35. v. 14) offered by Jacob, with dedication of the place called Bethel:
the house of God: which he also before hand promised by Vows.
vow (Gen 28.) Diverse other Sacrifices offered by Isaac, and Jacob (Gen 26. 31.
33. 36.) By Job and his friends (Job. 1. and 42.) by Moses, Aaron, and other
ancients of Israel. (Exodus 12.) Al which consequently show Priesthood,
Priesthood.
whose proper office is to offer Sacrifice, though amongst all the above named,
only Melchisedech was called a Priest. And among the gentiles we find that
Putiphar (Genesis 41.) and Iethro (Ex. 3.) whose daughters Joseph and Moses
Privilege of Priests.
married) were called Priests, or as the word Cohenim does also signify,
Princes, for they were great and eminent men in their countries. At least those
that by special privilege were exempted from selling their lands to Pharao,
and had not withstanding provision of mantenance in time of dearth (Genesis 47.)
were properly called Priests, for such function as they had in serving their
idols. For where was true and right Sacrifice, there were also right Where
is no sacrifice no priest is required.
Priests, and where Idololatrical sacrifice there were like Priests, and
where no external sacrifice at al (as amongst Protestants) there are no
Priests, but ministers only.

In this age also (long before Moses) the Sacrament of Circumcision was
Circumcision.
given to Abraham, for distinction of Gods selected and peculiar people, and
for remedy of original sin, in the male sex of Abraham's seed, and others of
his community. In the other sex, and other generations, former remedies of
sacrifice, or other profession of faith were auailable. For other sins, not
only internal repentance was necessary, which was ever principally required
Penance.
(and therefore Joseph dealt so seuerly with his brethren, til they had hartis
sorrow Genesis 44
and contrition for their sins) but also certain external purifications, as
Marriage.
washing and changing garments, were ordained, (Genesis 35.) Marriage though not
then a Sacrament, yet was religiously regarded, with special care of faith and
religion in the choice of persons, (Genesis 24. 27, v. 46. c. 28. v. 1.) and of
Degrees of co^sanguinitie.
certain degrees of consanguinitie and affinity. Adultery was punishable by
death (Genesis 38.) and in no wise counted lawful, no not among the heathen. (Genesis
12. 20. 24. 26. 29. 34. 39.) Plurality of vviues in some persons and
Plurality of wives lawful sometimes, never of husbands. Blessings.
cases, lawful in the law of nature (Genesis 16. 25. 29.) as also afterward in
the law of Moses, not in the law of grace, nor ever plurality of husbands.

Spiritual blessing, a preeminence of greater persons, so Melchisedech blessed
Abraham (Genesis 14.) Isaac blessed Jacob (c. 27.) and Jacob his sons (c. 49.)
and the sons of Joseph, with imposition of hands, and framing the form of a
cross (48.) Other Ceremonies of oil and wine (Genesis 28. 35.) Sign of the
Cross. Ceremonies. Musical instruments.
sprinkling the blood of the Paschal lamb, eating the lamb standing with
their loins gyrded, shoes on their feet, staves in their hands, and with
speed (Exo. 12). Musical instruments in Divine service. (Exodus 15.)

Christ's Baptism prefigured by Circumcision, (Genesis 17.) for Christians are
Baptism prefigured.
circumcised (says S. Paul) in the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in
Baptism. Also by the cloud which stood between the Egyptians and
Israelites, lightning the night on the one side (toward Gods people) dark on
the other (toward their enemies) and by the red sea, which saved the
children of Israel, and drowned the Egyptians (Exo. 14.) Al were baptized in
the cloud, and in the sea. So the bread and wine 1. Cor. 10.
offered by Melchisedech, the Paschal lamb, and unleavened bread prefigured
The B. Sacrament.
the B. Sacrament, and Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, in forms of bread
and wine. Jacob also prophesied of this most excellent Mystery (Genesis 49.) He
shall wash his stole in wine, and his cloak in the blood of the grape. In like
sort Melchisedechs Priesthood was a plain figure of Christ's Priesthood of the
new Testament.
Priesthood, who first by himself consecrated and offered his own body and
blood, and still does the same by his Priests hands of the new Testament.

Diverse other Rites were known and observed by Tradition. So Abraham
Traditions. Tithes.
paid Tithes to his spiritual Superior (Genesis 1^.) taught his children and
family to keep the way of our Lord. and do judgment and justice, (Genesis 18.
v. 19.) Isaac and Jacob kept and taught the Ordinances, Precepts Form of
justice. Precepts. Raising seed to the brother Abstinence.
and Ceremonies of their ancesters, without Laws or precepts written (Genesis
26.) Judas commanded his second son to take the widovv of his brother
deceased without children (Genesis 38.) The children of Israel abstained from
eating the sinevv of the thigh, in remembrance that the sinew of Jacobs thigh
was shrunk (Genesis 32.).

Freewil in men proved, by that Joseph's brethren in selling him thought Freewil.
evil, not moved nor inclined thereto by God, who had no part in their evil
thought, but turned it to good. (Genesis 50.) by Gods threatening Pharao (Exo. 8)
If thou will not dismiss Israel Which were unjust if Pharao could not do
otherwise. Likewise by that Pharao often changed his mind, sometimes promising
to dismiss the Hebrews, and again refusing to do it, which shows (says
Theodoret) freewil of the mind: and by Gods prevention of rentations, leading
the Israelites not the nearest way, but by the desert, lest perhaps it would
repent them; and they would return into Egypt (Exodus 13) Man's consent
therefore is free notwithstanding Man's industry necessary.
Gods will, direction, and commandment. And so his industry is required in his
daily affairs, and then to rely on Gods providence, otherwise only to expect
Gods will, operation, or protection, man himself endeavoring nothing is to tempt
God. Therefore Abraham (Genesis 12.) Isaac (c. 26.) Jacob (ca. 32.) and the parents
of Moses (Exo. 2) being in fear and distress used al prudence to avoid
imminent dangers, albeit they had special God tempts nor to evil.
revelations of safety and happy success. Neither does God ever tempt any
man to sin, but proves his servants and makes them known to the world for
example of others, and their own merit. Genesis 22. Job. 1. 2. etc.

Only faith does not justify, nor works without says, but both together
Faith and good works together justify, and are meritorious, but neither of
them alone.
do justify, and are meritorious: so Abraham believed God because he is
omnipotent and truth it self, and it was reputed to him unto justice (Genesis
15.) but this faith was not sole, for it had hope, love, obedience, and other
virtues adjoined, and so his believing was an act of justice. In like manner
Abraham was justified by works, offering Isaac his son Iet. 2.
upon the Altar (Genesis 22.) but this work presupposed faith, that God Heb. 11.
is able to raise even from the dead. So by works faith is consummate. By
hospitality Abraham and Let unawares received Angels Heb. 1^.
Perfection in this life. Four principal merits of Abraham. 1. Prompt
obedience. 2. Faith without staggering. 3. Propagation of faith and religion.
to harbor. (Genesis 18. 19.) Abraham was perfect according to perfection of this
life. (Genesis 17.) most highly commended for four more notorious acts proceeding
of two special virtues faith and obedience. The first was his promot obedience,
in leaving his country and kindred, going he knew not whither, nor how far^^
simply and cherfully expecting Gods further direction, when to go, and where
to abide, (Genesis 12.) The second was his excellent faith presently believing
Gods promise (which by all humane reason seemed impossible) that he should have
innumerable progeny (Genesis 15.) The third was, that he did not only most
sincerly and religiously serve God, but also taught his posterity so to do, as
God himself testifies of him, saying: I know that he will command his children,
and his house after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and do judgment
and justice. 4. Perfect obedience.
(Genesis 18.) The fourth was that most heroical act of obedience, admirable to al
ages, being ready to kill, and sacrifice his own most dearly beloved son
Isaac. For which God swear by himself, that he would many ways bless him,
because (sateth God) thou have obeyed my voice (Genesis 22.) He prayed for Sodom,
and had prevailed, if ten just persons Other just men.
had benne found in that city (Genesis 18.) And Lot was delivered from Isaac.
thence for Abraham's sake (Genesis 19.) Isaac was also of most sincere mind,
devout to God, exercised himself in meditation or mental prayer (Genesis 24.)
Jacob.
obtained by prayer his desire of issue. (Genesis 25.) Likewise Jacob is described
in the holy text a plain (or sincere and innocent) man. (Genesis 25. v. 27.)
patient and constant in tribulations. (Genesis 29. 31. 32. 33.) He lawfully
purchased Esaus consent of the firstbirthright. (Gen 25. v. 31.) He neither He
spoke truth in mystical sense.
lied, nor otherwise sinned, when he answered his father that he was Esau his
first begotten son (Genesis 27.) but spoke truth in mystical sense, agreeable to
Gods will and ordinance, who so transposed Isaacs blessing from Esau to Jacob.
Which Isaac at length understanding, conformed him self thereto, and confirmed
the same (v. 33. and chapter 28.) giving Esau such contentment as he could of
temporal blessings. Joseph is renowned for all virtues, Joseph. Job.
even from his youth to his death (Genesis 37. 39. 50.) Job Was simple and right,
fearing God and departing from evil, a just and innocent man, both before and
in his tribulations, not sinning with his lips: neither spoke he any foolish
thing against God (chapter 1.) yea more afflicted retained innocence (chapter 2.) and
finally God received his prayer for others, and restored al his losses duble.
(chapter 42.) Moses a most special Moses.
selected Prophet, the meekest man on the earth, of singular Zeal seuerly Nu.
12.
punished sin, but withal most charitably prayed God to forgive the people
Exo. 32.
and conserve his Church.

God of his mere mercy electeth al those, whom he will justify and save,
Election is of Gods mercy. Predestination excludes not ordinary means.
offering al sufficient grace, justly leaves some obstinate sinners in state
of damnation, (Genesis 25. Exo. 7.) His predestination, foreknowledge and promise,
do not exclude but include the means, whereby his will is done in the just (Genesis
25. 37. 45 50.) Neither is Gods reprobation the cause of any man's damnation,
but man's own sin the proper cause, both of reprobation and damnation. For
example, Pharao and his people envying, vainly fearing Sin is the cause of
reprobation. Pharao and other Egyptians hardened their own hearts.
and for their religion hating, and persecuting the children of Israel, by
oppressing them with unsupportable labors, by commanding secretly to kill
their infants, and that not succeding, by a new decree to drown them (Exo. 1.)
were mercifully after long conniuence, admonished by Gods legates in his name
quietly to permit his people to serve him; but they wilfully contemned this
gentle admonition, Pharao proudly and insolently answering: Who is the Lord,
that I should hear his voice, and dismiss Israel? I know not the Lord, and
Israel I will not dismiss. (Exo. 5.) So they hardened their own hearts, and
more grievously afflicted the faithful God did only permit them to obdurate
themselves.
God permitting the wicked to live, and prosper for a time in this world, not
punishing them so much as they deserved, nor mollifying their hearts, not
illuminating their understanding unto effectual conversion, but justly
permitting them to persist in obstinacy (Ex. 7. 8. 9. 10. etc.). Protection
and Invocation of Angels and Patriarchs.


Protection of Angels and invocation is proved, (Genesis 24. 32. 48.) Patriarchs
names also inuocated (c. 48. v. 16.) Isaac was blessed and prospered for
Abraham's sak^, because Abraham obeyed Gods voice, kept his precepts S. Aug* li
16 c. 36. (...).
and commandments, observed his ceremonies and his laws. (Genesis 26.) Adoration
of creatures.
Joseph's rod adored by Jacob. (Genesis 47.) Moses commanded to put of his
shoes, because the place was holy (Exodus 3.) Swearing by creatures Swearing
by creatures. Ominous speech. Dreams. Images. Relics. Devotion to holy
places. Figure of Christ cross.
lawful, and some times more convenient, then immediately by God him self (Genesis
42.) Likewise Ominous speech. (Genesis 24.) and Dreams. (Gen 37. 40 41) are
sometimes lawfully observed, and are from God. Idols always unlawful, but not
al Images (Genesis 31. 35.) Relics to be reverently used, as Joseph's body
conserved in a coffin in Egypt, (Gen vlt.) translated by Moses (Exo. 13.) and
so brought into Chanaan, and laid Iosue 24.
with other Patriarchs in Sichem. Going bare foot to holy places an act of
religious reverence, and devotion. (Ex. 3.) The sign of the cross used by
Jacob. (Gen 48.) a figure of Christ's cross. The wood cast by Moses into the
bitter water, and making it sweet (Exo. 15.) an other figure thereof.

Funeral obsequies were observed by Abraham for his wife Sara Funeral offices
(Genesis 23.) with mourning and weeping for her, according to the quality of so
holy a person, who it is like needed not other satisfactorie works as Saul
and Ionathas, and others slain in battle, for whom David and his 2. Reg. ^.
court did not only mourn and weep, but also fasted til even. He also bought
Place dedicated for burial
a field with a duble cave, where he buried her, dedicating it for this
peculiar use, and both himself, and Isaac, Jacob, Rebecca, and Lia were there
buried. (Genesis 49. v. 31.) Joseph with all his brethren mourned for their father
Jacob, Mourning 40 days. Exequies of seven days.
first forty days in Egypt, then carrying him into Chanaan, celebrated the
exequies other seven days (Genesis 50.) His particular digging of his own grave
(v. 5.) and both his and Joseph's special charge to be buried amongst their
ancesters, and the translation of all the twelve sons of Special place of
burial rightely desired. No soul before Christ entered into heaven Diverse
places in hell.
Act. 7. v. 16.
Jacob, into Sichem, confirm the desire of burial in one place rather then in
an other, to be agreeable to nature, and holy Scriptures.

Touching the souls departed, even the most perfect, went into the lower
parts, generally called Hell. But some were in rest, others in pains,
according to their deserts, none in heaven before Christ. As S. Hierom
(comment* in Osee. 13. et Eccles. 3.) proves by Jacobs words (Genesis 37.) I
will descend unto my son into hell. by Jobs lamentation (chapter 7. et 17.) that al
(good and bad) were retained in hell, saying! If I shall expect, hell is my house,
and in darkness I have made my bed. Which place or receptacle of such Saints,
as Jacob and Job, was doubtless far distant from hell of the damned, for
between Lazarus in Abraham's bosom and Luc. 16.
the glutton intorments, is a great chaos (or large space) and yet the highest
of these places is called hell.

In respect of Resurrection, the same Jacob called his life in this world
Resurrection
a pilgrimage (Genesis 47.) and Job, (chapter 7.) a warfare upon earth: professing
expressly (chapter 19.) In the last day I shall rise out of the earth. And I shall be
compassed again with my skin, and in my flesh I shall see God. Our B. Savior
also proves the Resurrection, because the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
(Exo. 3.) is God of them, not Mat. 22
as they are dead, but as they are living, and to return again to life in
body and soul together. Of general Judgment Job says (chapter 31.) What shall
General Judgment.
I do when God shall rise to judge? and when he shall ask, what shall I answer
him? And Eliu (chapter 34.) says: The omnipotent will render a man his work, and
according to the ways of every one, he will reeompence them. Sodom and Gomorra
(Genesis 19.) were example ^. Pet. 2. ^p. Iud.
Eternal punishment of the wicked: and joy of the blessed.
(says S. Peter. and S. Jude) of eternal punishment in hell fire.

Of eternal life Jacob professed his hope (Genesis 49.) saying: I will expect thy
salvation o Lord. And Moses (as S. Paul testifies) denied him self to be the
son of Pharaoes daughter, esteming the reproach of Christ greater riches, then
the treasure of the Egyptians. For Heb. 11.
he looked unto the reward. Thus much touching particular points of
Continuance of the Church notwithstanding breathes from it.
Religion. It rests to see the visible known members of the Church, with the
heads and governors thereof, succeding without interruption in the same age,
notwithstanding some brake and departed from them, and other innumerable Sects
of Infidels still multiplied in the world.

To begin therefore with Abraham, before the former age was ended, Abraham
never contaminate in Religion.
(at which time he was 75. years old) holy Scriptures still speak of him, as
always undefiled, and a true servant of God, though his father Their and his
brother Nachor sometimes served strange gods, (Iosue. 24.) but were reclamed,
and the whole family, (as S. Augustine proves, lib. 16. c. Their and Nachor
reduced from idolatry.
13. de ciuit) was persecuted by the Chaldees. Whereupon Their leaving Chaldea
brought Abraham, Lot, and Sarai, so far as Haran in Mesopotamia (Genesis 11.)
whither also Nachor repaired afterward, and there made his habitation, as
appears (Genesis 24.) But Abraham was sooner, and more specially persecuted in
Chaldea, as Josephus testifies (li. 1. Antiq.) for his Abraham publikly
professed his faith.
clear and public profession of one God, Creator of al things, and that by
his only goodness, and not by men's own power, happiness is attained. Further
Suidas (vocab. Abraham) vvriteth, that at the age of 14. years, he admonished
his father, not for lucre sake, to seduce men by worshipping images of false
gods, auouching that there is no other, but the celestical God, maker of the
whole world. In which sincere profession how he alvvaies perseuered is often
testified, and needles here to be repeted. Also Sem, Sale, and Heber Sem. Sale.
Heber.
his proper ancesters (the ninth, seventh, and sixth in right line before him)
were al holy men, and lived al Abraham's time, much of Isaachs, and part of
Jacobs days. Likewise Melchisedech King and Priest (a distinct person, of
Melchisedech.
an other lineage, as we suppose, from Sem) lived in the beginning of this
age. Al which being renowned men had great troops, or rather countries, which
Many professors of true Religion.
with them served the only true God. VVherof we have example, in that Abraham
(being but a stranger in Chanaan) upon a sudden exploite, (Genesis 14.) made
ready of the servants borne in his house, three hundredth and eighteen well
appointed, men of arms, al of the same religion; for shortly after they were
al circumcised (Genesis 17.) yet was king Melchisedech of more power and authority
then he. And the other here mentioned, except his elder brother Nachor, and his
nephew Lot, were his own direct progenitors, and by likelihood more potent.
Again from Abraham the succession held on right to Aaron and Moses, and the
whole people of Israel, which with them passed out of Egypt through the red sea.

But in the mean time, diverse also of Abraham's kindred and seed, brake
Breaches from the Church.
of from this community: and fell to idolatry. For albeit Lot, his brothers
son perseuered in the true service of God, yet Lots sons, Moab and Ammon,
at least the Moabites and Ammonites, two nations that came of them Moabites and
Ammonites. Nachors progeny.
(Genesis 19.) were infidels and idolaters. Likewise though Nachor, and Bathuel
(Nachors son) continued henceforth in true faith and religion, yet Laban (the
same Bathuels son) had false gods, which Rachel took away (Gen 31) But
true religion being not wholly extinguished in these families, both Isaachs
wife Rebecca, and Jacobs wives Lia and Rachel, with their handmaides Bala and
Zelpha, either believed rightly, or were more easily brought Ismaelites.
to true belief, and service of God. Ismael Abraham's first son was in his
youth euel disposed (Genesis 21.) and for endeavoring to corrupt Isaac (which S.
Paul calls persecution) was together with his mother Agar, Gal. 4.
cast out of Abraham's house, yet prospered in the desert; had twelve sons
dukes, sometimes visited his father, and together with Isaac buried him (Genesis
25.) And at the age of 137. years died and was 2. Paral. 12 16. and, 28.
put to his people, that is, to others like himself good or evil. Abraham also
separated his other sons begotten of Cetura (v. 6.) from Isaac, to whom only
and not to any other, the promised land of Chanaan, and other Madianites.
more special blessings pertained. Of these last sons came the people of
Madianites, who kept some resemblance with the people of God in religion, and
therein prefigured heretics, that descend from Catholic race, but falling to
schism and heresy, do not participate eternal enheritance, with the
spiritual children of God as S. Augustine teaceth (q. 70. in Gen.) In like sort
of the two sons of Isaac, only Jacob had the spiritual blessing, and
Idumeans.
enheritance thereto belonging (Genesis 27.) Esau though profane in manners selling
his birthright (Genesis 25. v. 32) which wa^ asp^ritual turisdiction Heb. 12.
wherein he was a figure of the reprobate, yet it seems he kept the true faith
(Genesis 35. v. vlt.) But whether he did or no, sure it is, Job, (who is probably
thought to be of his race (Genesis 36.) was a most holy man and a rare example of
virtue. But the posterities of them both, and all the progentes of Ismael, and
of Abraham's other sons by Cetura, sooner or later ^^l to infidelity
Idolatry still increasing yet the Church continued, yea also increased.
and idolatry. In other nations of the world, still new gods and goddeses
were multiplied upon every occasion, As S. Augustine (li. 18. de ciuit.)
recounteth diverse. Al which notwithstanding, the true Church and city of God
continued most visible and notorious, yea with marvelous increase, especially
after they were more hated and afflicted in Egypt (Exo. 1.) VVhither they were
brought by the strange and special providence of God, more strangely preserved,
and most miraculously delivered from thence.

Much more the Church of Christ (whereof this was a shadow, and The Church of
Christ in the new Testament always visible and great.
figure) has benne and shall be ever most visible, from the first foundation
thereof to the worlds end For besides the promises and predictions in the new
Testament, all the Scriptures also of the old, which fortel Christ, do withal
forshew his Church. Totum quod annunciatur de Christo (says S. Augustine de
vnitate Eccles. c. 2.) caput and corpus est. All that is The same Scriptures
forshew Christ and his Church.
spoken of Christ is (of) the head and the body; The head is the only
begotten Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God: he the Savior of the
body. His body the Church. Again (c. 4.) Totus Christus caput and corpus
est. Whole Christ is the head and the body. The head, the only begotten
Son of God, and the body his Church: the bridgrome and bride, two in one
flesh. Yea for no other cause (says he li. de catech. rud. c. 3.) were al
those things written, before the coming of our Lord, which we read in holy
Scriptures, but that his coming might be commended, and the future Church
prefigured, that is, the people of God through out al nations, which is his
body. The same does S. Paul teach us, not only saying (Gal. 3.) The law was
our pedagogue (or conductor) to Christ, but also (1. Cor. 12.) that as the
(natural) body is one and has many members, and all the members of the body,
whereas they be many, yet are one body; so also Christ. And (Coloss. 1.) that
Christ's body is the Church. As therefore the great blessing of Multitude of
progeny promised to Abraham pertains to the Church of Christ.
redemption and salvation was promised in Christ (Genesis 12. etc.) so it was
withal expressed, that al nations, and kindreds of the earth should be Genesis 13.
(...). 17. and. 22.
partakers thereof, yea so innumerable as the dust of the earth, the stars of
heaven, and sands of the sea. Which S. Paul says (Romans 9.) is not meant of
Abraham's natural children, but of the children of promise, such as the Roman
Christians, and others, Jews and Gentiles. So S. John Apoc. 7.
saw in a vision as a certain number of twelve thousand signed of every tribe
of Israel, but after these a great multitude which no man could number of al
nations, tribes, peoples, and tongues. To say Very absurd to say, the Church
of Christ was at any time obscure.
therefore, as some old and new heretics do, that the Church of Christ some
times consists of fevv, or, invisible persons, were to say God kept not
promise with Abraham (Genesis 17.) and to make the body and thing figured, more
obscure then the shadovv and figure; seeing in the whole time of the Law of
nature, that is in these three first ages of the world, the Church being but a
figure of that which is now, yet was alvvayes visible and notorious, as has
benne declared. And that with perpetual succession of supreme Succession of
spiritual gouernets during the law of nature.
heads, rulers and gouerners. As is before noted in the first age from Adam
Job. 19.
to Noe: in the second from Noe to Abraham: so in this third, by the right line
of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Leui, Caath, and Amram, to Aaron and Moses, (Exo.
6.) the Holy Ghost not there reciting more genealogies being come to the
origin of the Pristlie Tribe, that is to these two whom his divine goodness
selected and ordained, as well to speak to Pharao in behalf of the children of
Israel, and to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, as afterward by one of
them to give his people a written Law, Priesthood Moses law established in
Aarons seed.
and in the other a perpetual provision of spiritual pastors. For in Aaron the
Ex. 28. Nu. ^.
elder brother God established an ordinary succession of Priesthood, from that
time to Christ, which before pertained to the firstborne in every family:
^dioyning the rest of Levites tribe to assist them, in administration of sacred
things. But Moses the younger brother was extraordinarily called (which
Moses chief in spiritual and temporal government.
God therefore showed and confirmed by special miracles) not only to
Priesthood, but also to be as the God of Pharao, Superior of Aaron, chief
mediator between God and his people, as well in delivering them from the
servitude of Egypt, and in receiving the Law, and delivering it to them, as in all other supreme government spiritual and temporal during his life.

CHAP. XVI. The people murmuring for meat, and that they had left the flesh
pottes of Egypt, The beginning of the fourth age.
4 God gives them quails, and Manna. 16. VVherof they are commanded to gather
for every day, 22. but the sixth day duble for the Sabbath, The second part
of this book How the Israelites were sustained in the desert, and prepared to
receive the Law.
32. and to keep a measure of it in the tabernacle for a memory.
AND they set forward from Elim, and all the multitude which is between Elim
and Sinay: the fiftenth day of the second month, after they came forth out of
the Land of Egypt. And all the assembly of the children of Israel murmured God
least it in their will to be content with enough, or to couere more, yet
suffered them not to have more, when it came to measurin^g, v. 18. and 2. Cor.
8.
that I may prove them whether they will walk in my law, or no. But the sixth
day let them provide for to bring in: and let it These birds by Gods
providence came from other places to the children of Israel Nu. 11. v. 31.
the quail rose, and the bread, which our Lord has given you to eat. This is
By their wo^dering at the duble quantity, it appears they intended not to
gather so much.
came, and told Moses. Who said to By anticipation Moses writes here the
commadment given when the Tabernacle and Arck were finished. Exo. (...).
Fill a gomor of it, and let it be kept unto the generations to come hereafter:
that they may know the bread, wherewith I fed you in the wilderness, when you
were brought forth out of the Land of Aehypt. And Moses said to Aaron: Take
This Relic was put in a golden vessel* Heb 9. though it was infinitely
inferior to Christ's flesh ^^ 6 yea inferior to the flesh^^ any glorified
Saint.
one vessel, and put Manna into it, so much as a gomor can hold: and lay it up
before our Lord to keep unto your generations: as our Lord commanded Moses.
And Aaron

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI.
15. Man hu! what is this! When the people of Israel in the desert had spent
Manna so called of Man-hu.
their provision of meat brought from Egypt, and according to Gods promise
had received store of quails; going forth in the morning they saw a strange
thing lie upon the ground like to hoare frost, whereat merueling they said one
to an other: What is this! in their language Man hu! Whereupon says Theodoret
(q. 30. in Exodus) their demand was turned into the name, and it was called
Manna. Which as the same and other ancient Doctors gather by the holy It was
a figure of the Eucharist.
Scriptures, was a wonderful and miraculous meat, and withal a figure of a
more excellent thing, long after promised, and given by our B. Savior, in the
holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. As witness S. Gregory Nys^en ( ^nar. vit^
Moysi, ^ir^a m^dium) S. Ambrose ( li. de ijs qui Mist. in^^^ant cap. 8.) S. li.
3. c 37. ^o 45 T^^ ^26. Joan. 6. v. 25. 41. 49. 51. 55.
Cyril Alexandrinus, S Chry^ostom, S. Augustine, Theophilact and others, upon
the sixth of S. John. Where also the text of our Saviors long discourse with
the Capharnaites, shows evidently that he promised to give a far better
meat then Manna, to those that believed in him Iam, says our Lord, the bread
of life, which desended from heaven; your fathers did eat Manna in the
desert, and died The bread which I vvil give is my flesh, for the life of the
world. My flesh (...) meat in deed, and my blood is drinck^ indeed etc. S.
Paul likewise teaches (1. Cor 10) that this Manna, and the water issuing out
of the rock, were figures of the same B Sacrament, as is noted in those places.

Here only we commend to the Christian readers remembrance that the thing
Twelve miracles in Manna.
figured, does ever excede the figure (according to S Paul's doctrine (Collos 2.)
wishing him therefore to consider, that in Manna were at least twelve clear
miracles. Fir^^, it was made by Angels, whereof it is called, the bread of
Angels. Psalm 77. v 25 (...). li. 1. c 12 cont Occol^m^. ^. (...). li. ^ c 12
par^^m.
1.
Secondly, it was not produced from the earth, nor water, as ordinary meats 2.
are* but came from the air. Thirdly, how fast or slowly soever any man did 3.
gather it, in the end each one had the same measure full, called a gomor, and no
more nor less Fourthly, the sixth* day (which was next before the Sabbath, 4.
that which they gathered, was found to be duble portions to other days, that
is, two gomors for every one Fifthly, there fell none at al on the Sabbath 5. 6.
day Sixthly, if in the rest of the weke any part was left al night, it
putrified* and was corrupt in the morning, but the night before the Sabbath
day, it remained sound and good. Seuently, notwithstanding diversity of
stomakes, 7.
in so great a multitude, the same measure was sufficient and no more, to
every one young and old, and of middle age Eighthly the heat of the sun
melted 8.
and consumed that which remained in the field, though otherwise it indu^ed
heat of the fire, seething in water, grinding in milles, and beating in
motters. 9. 10.
Ninthly, it tasted to every one, what they desired. Tenthly, it seemed
nevertheless to the evil minded, loathsome and light meat, but pleasant to
the 11. 12.
good. Eleuently, part of it was kept in the Arc by Gods commandment, and was
not corrupted in many hundredth pears. Twelftly, this strange and
extraordinary provision, continued forty years, that is, til the children
of Israel came to the promised land and then ceased.

You see then so miraculous a figure far excelled Zuinglius, or Caluins No
miracle in Protestants Communion.
communion bread, which contains no miracle at al, only signifying Christ's
body. But, as our Saviors own words importe, and ancient fathers teach us,
by Manna was prefigured Christ's very body and blood, with his soul and
Divinity under the form of bread.

For this indeed infinitely excels Manna, containing all the foresaid, or
rather All the said miracles are more eminent in the B. Sacrament.
much more eminent miracles For (first) it was consecrated by the marvelous
power of Christ's word, and ever since the same is done, by the like power
communicated to Priests, (2) in his Church militant, (3) one and the very
same, and not many, in innumerable places, and in every les^e or greater
form, yea in the least particle of the accidents that may be, Christ is whole
1. 2. 3.
and entire (4). It gives abundance of grace in this life, signified by the
day 4.
before the Sabbath, for the glory of the next li^e in eternal ^est. (5) where
is 5.
no more use of Sacraments, but everlasting fruition of glory (6) Whoso 6.
ever therefore would make temporal commodity of this heavenly food, as it
were reserving Manna for other days of the weke, it perishes to him, and
turns to his ignominy, but being reserved in the faithful soul, for the
life to come, which is the true Sabbath, it remains an heavenly treasure.
(7) 7.
And so it avails to every one, as their soul, which is the spiritual
stomach of supernatural meat, is less or more disposed. (8) Though heat of
persecution, 8.
and other adverse power take away this Sacrament and Sacrifice, abroad in the
field of this world, yet no power extinguisheth it within the Church, 9.
where it is in due manner prepared and ministered to the children of God. (9).
where it yeldeth al comfort, strength and contentment to good spiritual
desires, (10) but to the incredulous Capharnaitessemeth impossible, and to
carnal 10. 11.
conceits loathsome (11) Being worthily received into our mortal bodies, our
arc or temporal tabernacle, it remains in incorruptible effect, whereby the
body shall be raised again from death, and together with the soul be eternally
glorified. (12) In the mean time of this pilagrimage of mankind, 12.
it is our wayfaring special provision, daily and supersubstantial bread, til
we shall possess the promised land, the kingdom of heaven in eternal bliss.

CHAP. XVII. The people murmuring again in Raphidim for want of drinck, our
Lord gives them water out of arock. 8. Amalech fights with them And
Moyseslifting up his hand in prayer, Israel ouercometh, otherwise Amalech
pr^^a^leth.
THEREFORE all the multitude of the children of Israel according to the word of
our Lord, camped in Raphidim, where there was no water for the people to
drink. Who If this ceremony of holding up his hands was of such importance
in the law of nature, why do Heretics deride the same, and the like in the
Catholic Church? VVheras also our Savior lifting up his hands blessed his
disciples. Luc. 24 S Damascen also teaches ( li 4. c. 12 Oxthox.) that this
exten^ion of his hands prefigured the Cross of Christ. And now it
represents the same.
if he did let them down a little, Amalec overcame. And the hands

CHAP. XVIII. Iethro Moses father in law brings to him his wise and
childrens, 8. And hearing the great works of God. 12. offers Sacrifice. 13
and Wisely advised Moses to appoint subordinate officers to judge less
causes, reserving the greater to him self.
AND when Iethro the Cohen in Hebrew signifies Pri^^e o^ P^^^st which offices
in the law of nature were often joined in one person.
priest of Madian, the allied of until night. Which thing when his allied had
seen, to Manifold wisdom, whereof Daniel prophecieth (c. 12. v. 4) in
Christian gentiles, was here prefigured in Iethio a gentil
hear my words and counseils, and God To whom Moses willingly yielded.
Origin. in hunc locum. Morally Superiors are admonished by Moses example to
learn of a^^e man, that which is good. 5. Chrysostom. ^o. de fer^nd^s
reprehensio^^b^. ^.
he did al things that he had suggested unto him. And choosing substantial men
out of

CHAP. XIX. Nere to mount sinai, with commemoration of their delivery from
Aegypt^ the people are commanded to be sanctified. ^6. and so our Lord coming
in thunders and lightnings speaks with Movses.
IN the third month of the depature of Israel out of the To this place (which
was their 12 mansion) they came the 47. day after they parted from Egypt. And
the third day folowi^g which was the ^o, the law was given in mount Sinay S.
Hierom. Epist 1. ad Fabiolam.
the wildernesle of Sinai, For departing out of Raphidim, and coming God would
have their free consent, else it were not a perfect covenant Theodoret. q 35 in
Exodus
This shall thou say to the house of Jacob, and shall tell the children of
Israel: Your selves have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, In this
covenant God promises particular love; Priestlie function, whereby they might
better serve him; and effectual grace and sanctity.
my peculiar of al peoples: for all the earth is mine. And you shall be unto The
people promise loyalty to God; and to keep his commandments.
a priestlie kingdom, and So Angels and Saints offer our prayers and other
good works to God, though he know al things before hand.
a holy nation: these are the words that thou shall speak to the children of
Israel. Moses came: and calling together the nations of the and lightenings to
flash, and a very thick cloud to covet the mount, and the noise of the
trumpet sounded exceedingly: and the people, that was in the camp, feared. And
The people and al inferior clergy also, are to keep their limits and to learn
Gods will of their superiors
the priests and the people let them not pass the limittes nor ascend to the
Lord, lest perhaps he kill them. And Moses went

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XIX.
1. This day.] The first day of the third month the children of Israel came
into the desert of Sinai so counting 16 days remaining of the first month
when they parted from Egypt, all the second month of (...) days, this first
day of the third month, and three days more, in which they were sanctified
Agreement of old and new mysteries.
by washing and other ceremonies (v. 10.) the Law was given the fifteth day, in
figure of the Law of Christ, promulgated on whitsunday, the fifteth day after
our Redemption. VVherby we see marvelous correspondence of divine Mysteries, in
the old and new Testament. S. Augustine Epist. 119 c. 16. The third part of this
book: (...) Divine Laws: M(...)l: and Judicial.


CHAP. XX. Moses receives the D cologue or ten commandments of God, for all
the people. 23. with rep^^tion that they ^^al not make ^a^^ gods, nor make
Altares but of earth, or vnbe^ved stone, and without slippes.
AND our Lord spoke al these words: I am the Lord In Hebrew (...) in Greek
(...), in (...), in English a (...) (...) This com(...) and (...)e one of the
nine following Catech. To. p 3 q. 9.
graven thing, no^ any similitude that is in heaven above, and that is in the
earth beneth, neither of those things that are in the waters under the earth.
Thou shall not adore The Epistle on wenesday in the third week of Lent
heaven I have spoken to you. You shall not make gods This and other
ceremonial precepts are determinate laws, for observing the co^mandments of
the first table pertaining to God.
of earth you shall make to me, and you shall offer upon it vour holocastes and
pacifiques, your sheep and oxen in every place where the memory of my name
shall be: I will come to thee, and will bless thee. And if thou make

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XX.
3. Strange goddes] Protestants pretend here to prove, that al Catholics are
Protestants charge al Catholics to be Idolaters.
Idolaters, for honoring Saints, and their Relics and Images. And they have
so defamed Catholic Religion in this behalf, that the vulgar sort of
deceived people, otherwise knowing Catholics to be ordinarily of moderate
conversation in life, of just dealing toward their neighbors, addicted to
prayer, fasting, alms, and many good works, more wanting They abuse their
folowers
among them selves: yet supposing them, notwitstanding these laudable
qualities, to be Idolaters, are thereby auerted from Catholic Religion. And
surely it were a just cause, if it were true. As well therefore to purge our
selves of so heinous an imputed crime, as to remove this dangerous block of
erroneous conceit, we shall here note some of the Protestants egregious lies,
against the whole Church militant, and blasphemous reproaches against the the
glorious Saints: then briefly declare the true and sincere doctrine, and They
belie the Church militant.
practice of the Catholic Church in this point. Luther in his posul upon the
Gospel of our Lords Incarnation, says: Papist^ Virginem Mariam Deum
constituunt: Omnipotentiam ^i in caelo, and in terra tribuunt. The Papists
(says he) make the Virgin Marie God: they attribute to her omnipotency in
heaven and in earth. In Papistrie al expected more favor and grace from her,
then from Christ himself. His scholar Melancton ( in locis comm^^^) postilling
the first Precept, says: Papists invoke Saints, and worship Images in
heathnish manner. Calvin ( li. de necess. refor Eccles.) says: those of the
Emperors religion (meaning al Catholics) so divide Gods offices among
Saints, that they join them to the Sovereign God, as colleagues; in which
multitude God lies hidden. Against the most glorious virgin mother the same
Luther ( ser. de natali virg. Mar.) feared not to say, that he esteemed no more
of the Blaspheme the triumphant.
prayer of S* Marie, then of any one of the people And his reason is worse
then his wicked assertion, for that, says he, all that believe in Christ are as
just, and as holy as the virgin Mar^e, or any other Saint how great soever.
The Magdeburgian Centuriators (li. 1. Cent. 1.) affirm that the virgin Marie
sinned grievously, yea compare her imagined faults with the sin of Eve in
paradise. (li. 2.) They charge S. Peter and S* Paul (also after their
conuersions) with diverse great crimes. Calvin (li. 3. Inst. c* 2. parag. 31.)
condemns Sara and Rebecca of great sins (c. 4.) reprehendeth Judas
Machabeus for superstitious, and preposterous zeal, in causing Sacrifice to be
offered for the dead. In his commentary (in 32. Exodi) he accuses most holy
and meke Moses of arrogancy and pride And (li. 3 Instit. c. 20. pa. 27.) he
scuruely scoffeth at al Saints in general, saying; If they hear mortal men's
prayers, they must have ears so long, as from heaven to earth. And calls
them not only homines mortuos, dead men, (which S. Hierom reproved in
Vigilantius) but also Al modest me^ will condemn these blasphemies. Catholic
doctrine and practice convince their lies. The true Catholic doctrine Honor
due to excellency
vmbras, laruas, colluuiem: shadows, night goblins, stinking silth. yet
more, ( li. de vera refor. Eccles. rat.) he calls them Monstra, carnifices,
bestias, monsters, hangmen, beasts. These and like blasphemies modest men can
not but abhore and detest. Their lies also are convinced by S. Hierom, handling
this matter of purpose against Vigilantius, by S. Augustine touching it by
occasion ( li. 20. c. 21.) against Faustus the Manachey, Thomas Waldensis (
To. 3. tit. 13 de Sacramentalibus) against wiclif. by all Catechismes and
Christian Instructions, teaching nothing like, but quite contrary to these
men's reports. In sum they al teach, that Saints are to be honored with
religious honor, which is greater then civil, but infinitely inferior to
divine, as the excellency of God surmounteth al excellency created.

For better declaration whereof, it is to be considered, that seeing by the law
of God and nature, honor is due to excellency, there must be so many
distinct kinds of honor, as there be general kinds of excellency, which are
three. The first of God, infinite, and incomparably above al: the second is
supernatural Three kinds of excellency
but created, as of grace and glory: the third is humane or natural,
consisting in natural gifts, or worldly power and dignity, al three as
distinct as God, heaven, and earth. To these three general kinds of
excellency perteine Therefore three kinds of honor.
therefore other three as distinct kinds of honor; to wit, Divine due to God
only, called by use and appropriation of a greek world Latria: the second
Dulia, belonging to Saints, and other holy things, elevated by God above the
course of nature, in diverse degrees, but within the rank of creatures: the
third is civil honor, due to humane and worldly excellency, according to
diverse states and qualities of men. The first of these which is divine, may in
no case be given to any creature, how excellent soever. The third which is
civil, as both Catholics and Protestants hold for certain, is not competent
nor agreeable to Saints, but to mortal worldly men in respect of temporal
excellency. All the controversy therefore is about the second. Which Calvin
Protestants deny any honor to be due to Saints. Their objection. First
answer.
( li. 1. Instit. c 11. and 12.) and al protestant writers deny and reject,
and so would have no honor at al given to Saints. Obiecting as old heretics
did, that Catholics do all the same external acts, as standing bare head,
bowing, kneeling, praying, and the like to Saints, as to God himself. We
answer, that the distinction of honor consists not always in the external
action, but in the intention of the mind. For when we do such external acts of
honor to God, we intend thereby to honor the Creator and Lord of al, and so it
is divine honor, but doing the same external acts to a Saint, we conceive of
him, as a glorious servant of God, and so we honor him as a sanctified and
glorified Example of this necessary distinction.
creature, Gods subject and servant. Without this diversity of intentions in
your mind, you can not show difference, between the honor you do to God, and
that you do to the King, by bowing, kneeling, and the like. For it is the same
external action: yet no Christian doubts but he honoreth God with Second
answer.
divine honor, and the King with civil. Again we answer, that we do not all the external actions of honor to Saints, which we do to God. For Sacrifice
is done only to God, and to no Saint; and because Altares perteine to
Sacrifice, they are erected to God only, though oftentimes in memory of
Saints.

Both which answers S. Augustine gave long since, to Faustus the Manachie, S
Augustine declares this doctrine: and gives both the former answers.
arguing that Catholics by doing the same external acts, worshipped Martyrs
with divine honor, and so turned them into Idols, as that heretic inferred.
Whereupon S. Augustine declares, that Christian people celebrate li. 20. c. 21.
together the memories of Martyrs with Religious solemnity, to styr up
imitation, to be partakers of their merits, and to be helped by their prayers.
Yet so that we erect not Altares (because they are for Sacrifice) to any
Martyr, though in Three causes of celebrating Saints memories.
memory of Martyrs, but to God of Martyrs. For who ever standing at the Altar,
in places of Saints bodies, said: We offer to thee Peter, or Paul, or
Cyprian, but that which is offered, is offered to God, who crowned the Martyrs,
at their memories, whom he crowned, that by commonition of the very places,
greater affection may arise, to inkindle charity, both toward them, whom we
may imitate, and toward him, by whose help we may We honor Martyrs with
that worship of love and society, wherewith holy men are worshipped in this
life. Whose heart we perceive is prepared to like sufferance for the
Euangelical verity: but Martyrs more devoutly, by how much more securly, after
al uncertainties are overcome, and with how much more confident praise, we
preach them now victours in a more happy life, then others yet fighting in
this But with that worship, which in greek is called Latria, Latria is honor
proper to God. Sacrifice only to God.
a eru^e property due to God, which in Latin can not be expressed by one word,
we neither worship, nor teach to be worshipped but one God. And for so much as
offering of Sacrifice pertains to this worship (whereof they are called
Idolaters, that offer sacrifice to any Idols) we by no means offer any such
thing, nor te^ch to be offered, either to any Martyr, or blessed soul, or
holy Angel. Thus far S. Augustine The same teaches Theodoret ( li. 8. ad
Grecos) Our Lord has deprived false gods of the honor, they had in Temples,
and in place of them caused his Martyrs to be honored: yet not in the same
manner, for we neither bring hosts, nor libaments to Martyrs, but honor them,
as holy men, and most dear friends of God. It would be to long to cite many
ancient Fathers, testifying and teaching that Saints are to be honored.

More compendiously we will take our adversaries confession, the Magdeburgian
Protestants confess that the ancient Fathers honored Saints, and their
Relics.
Centuriators. Who ( Prof Cent. 6.) holding that the Church was only pure from
idolatry the first hundred years of Christ, and that it begane to fail in
the second and third age, more in the fourth and fifth, and was utterly
perished in the sixth, impute the cause of her ruin, that the very chief men
taught and practiced the honor of Saints First of al (say they) these
horrible and pernicious darkness, as certain black clouds covering the whole
firmament. rose up in the ver^e assembly of teachers. For that partly the very
Doctors of the Church, partly other supersticious men, augmented ceremonies and
humane worshippes in the Temples. For sacred houses began to be:: Manna was put
in a golden vessel. Heb. 9.
built in all places, with great cost, altogether in heathnish manner: not
principally to the end, Gods word might there be taught, but that some honor
might be exhibited to the Relics of Saints, and that foolish people might
there worship dead men. And how pleasant eloquent is that Gregory, called How
saucie are heretics to scoff at so renowned a Doctor!
the great, how fervent, when, as from his three footed stool, he preached the
manner of consecrating these houses? And a little after By this occasion dead
creatures, and bloudles half wormeaten bones began to be honored, inuocated,
and worshipped with divine honor. Al which The Doctors o^ the Church not only
wincked at, but also set forvvard. Thus the reader sees, notwithstanding
standing their lies, scoffs, and blasphemies, Protestants do confess, that
the Church and her chief pillars, straight after the first hundred years of
Christ, five hundred next following, honored Saints and their Relics. Neither
want there autentical examples of holy Scriptures, whereby the same is proved.
As. Genesis 32 48. Exodi. 3. 32. Number. 22. Iosue 5. 3. Reg. 18. 4. Reg. 2. Psalm.
98. and else where.

4. A graven thing] Here the same falsi^iers of Christian doctrine, do not
Protestants have corrupted the text in all their English Bibles.
only pervert the sense of holy Scripture, wresting that against Images, which
is spoken against Idols, but also shamfully corrupt the text, by translating
graven image, neither following the Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin. For the Hebrew
word. pes^l, is the very same that sculp^i^e in Latin, that is a graven or
carved thing. The Greek has (...), an idol. So al Protestants English Bibles
are false.

In the mean time til they correct their books, they may please to remember,
that God shortly after this ( Exodus 25.) commanded to make Images God commanded
to make Images.
of Angels, to wit Cherubins. Likewise a brazen serpent ( Number. 21.) Also oxen
and Lions (3. Reg. 6. and 7.) Neither are Puritanes so precise, but that they
engraue, carue, print, paint, cast, sow, embrother, and otherwise make, and
keep Images, pu^tractes, and pictures of men, and other things. As for
worshipping of sacred Images the second concel of Nice ( Act. 4.) The concel of
Trent ( sess. 25.) S. Gregory the great ( li. 7. ^p. 5. and 53.) S. Damascen
in diverse Christ, and Saints are honored in their Images.
whole books, and many others, and al Catholic Catechismes and Christian
Instructions teach, that the honor is not done to the Image for it self, but
at the presence of the Image, to Christ, or Saint, whose Image it is.

An other controversy Calvin here makes, that from these words, Thou shall
not make, begins the second precept, so counting four precepts in the first
table, and six in the second. But being no matter of faith, how they The first
table contains three precepts the second seven.
are divided, so all the words, and the number of ten commandemens be
acknowledged (for holy Scripture calls them ten, Exo 34. v. 28. Deuteronomy. 4.
v. 13. and 10. v. 4) we will not contend: but only as more reasonable we follow
the common manner of dividing the first table into three precepts, directing us
to God, the second into seven, belonging to our neighbor, approved for the
better by S. Augustine ( q 71 in Exodum) and generally received of al
Catholics; grounded upon this reason, among others, because to make or have a
The first can not well be divided.
picture, or similitude of any creature, to the end to adore it as God, were
in deed to have a strange God, which is forbid in the first words* and so all that follows to the comination and promise, forbids false gods, and
appears to be but one precept in substance. But the desire and internal
consent The ninth and tenth are as distict, as the sixth and seventh.
to adultrie, and to theift, differ altogether as much, as the external acts
of the same sins; and therefore seeing adultrie and theift are forbidden to be
committed, by two distinct precepts, the prohibition of the internal desire,
with mental consent to the same, does also require two precepts.

CHAP. XXI. Judicial precepts concerning bondmen and bondvvemen. 12.
Manslaughter and striking: killing and cursing of parents. 23. The law of like
pain for a hurt, 28. of an ox striking with his horn.
THESE are the Judicial laws do instruct in particular, ^^w to keep the
commandments of the second table, pertaining to our neighbors.
judgments which thou shall propose Paying nothing.
With what raiment he entered in, with the like let him go The Judges authorized
by God.
the gods, child, and she in deed aborte, but her self live: he shall be
subject to so much damage as the woman's husband shall require, and as arbiters
shall award. But if her death do ensue

CHAP. XXII. The punishment of theift, 5. and other trespasses, 7. if a thing
committed to custody or lent does perish, 16. of deflovvring a virgin, 18. of
enchanting, bestialitie, and idolatry, 21. of hurting strangers, widow,
and orphans. 25. The law of lending without usury, 26. of taking pleadge,
28. of reverence to superiors, and of paying tithes.
IF any man steal an ox or a sheep, and kill or sell it: he Where great
faults are committed, punishment is inflicted according to the enormitie of the
sin, above the proportion of the injury. Theodoret. q. 50. in Exodus Deuteronomy.
25. Mystically, He that takes from the Church a daily laborer in Gods field,
sins more grievously and deserves more punishment, then he that takes a
private man of Christ's flock, Rabanus.
five oxen for one ox, and Judges called gods for their eminent authority.
Exo. 7. v. 1.
four sheep for one sheep. If the thief be found breaking up the will not
give her, he shall give money according to the manner of the dowry, which
virgins are wont to receive. Inchanters The law of nature requires to do to
others as we would they should do to us. For which cause (besides others) God
suffered his people to be strangers in Egypt, to move them to compassion
toward others in like case, Rabanus.
for your selves also were strangers in the Land of Egypt. A widow and an
orphane Oppression of the poor cries to God for renenge.
the gods, and

CHAP. XXIII. Laws are appointed to Judges, (the enemies ox, or ass to be
saved) 8. namely not to take bribes. 10. The seventh year, and day al must
rest. 14. Three principal feasts must be solemnized every year 20.
Conduction and protection of an Agel is promised. 24. the people is agane
commanded to destroy Idols. 29. Why their enemies shall be destroyed by little
and little.
THOU shall not admit a lying voice: neither shall Al virtues being ^^^ded in
justice, cease to be true virtues, when justice is not first observed. S.
^ierom in Psalm. 32. et in Prou. 31.
poor man also thou shall not pity in judgment. If thou meet thy Three
principal feasts besides the Sabbath, and some others.
al things that I have said to you. And by the name of foren gods you shall
not swear, neither shall it be heard out of your mouth. Three times every
year you shall celebrate Pasch in memory of their delivery from Egypt.
the solemnity of Pentecost, when they received the Law.
of the first fruits of thy work, whatsoever thou did sow in the field. The
solemnity also in the end of the year, Tabernacles in memory of Gods
protection forty years in the desert.
when thou have gathered al thy corn out of the field. Thrice a year shall al
thy male sex appear before my name is in him. But i^ thou will hear his
voice, and Peace with infidels forbidden to Gods people.
not enter league with them,

CHAP. XXIIII. Moses with others are commanded to ascend, he to the Lord, the
rest a far of 4. They offer Sacrifice. 8. Moses sprinckleth the blood of the
Testament upon the people. 15. Then ascending to the mountain, God covers it
with a fiery cloud.
TO Moses also he said: Go up to the Lord, thou, and and told the people all the words of our Lord, and the judgments: and all the people answered with
one voice: All the words of our Lord, which he has spoken we will do. And
Moses wrote all the words of our Lord: and rising in As when Moses had
brought the Israentes from bondage, and received the law for them he built an
Altar for Sacrifice: so Christ having redeemed us, and given us a Law, for
application of the fruict thereof Altares are erected, and Sacrifice offered.
builded an Altar at the foot of the mount, and twelve titles according the
twelve tribes of Israel. And This was done corporally to the Jews. In
Christians* Christ's blood applied by Sacrifice and Sacraments sanctifies their
souls. Heb. 9.
sprinkled it upon the people, and said: * This is the blood of the Covenant
which our Lord has made with you upon al these words. And there The lesson in
Mass on Imber wenesday in Lent.
Moses ascending into the mount of God, said to the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXIIII.
8. This is the blood of the covenant.] Our Savior in the institution of the A
figure of Christ's blood in the B. Sacrament.
Eucharist, by using the same words, applying them to him self, This is my
Mat. 26.
blood of the new Testament, signifies that be fulfilled this figure at his
last supper Which proves both a Sacrifice of blood then offered by him, as
this blood of the old Testament was already shed, when Moses pronounced those
words; and the real presence of Christ's blood. For else, if it were but wine,
it were not better in substance then the figure, which was real blood.
Isychius. li. 1. c 4. in Leuit.

CHAP. XXV. Oblations of first fruictes, and freegiftes for making the
Tabernacle, and things perteyning th^r^o 10. The Arck. 17. The Propitiatory,
and Cherubims. 23. A table, and thereon the Lo^ues of proposition. 31. A
candlestick, 37. and seven lamps, with snuffers of gold.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to As the Israelites were prompt
to offer these external things in the old law, so Christians must offer the
like for Gods service: but specially al sorts of virtues, Faith, hope,
charity, penance, devotion, prayer alms, fasting. etc.
Gold, and silver, and brass, hyacinth and purple, and setim, and shall cover
them with gold. And thou shall put If Images were unlawful God would not have
commanded to make Cherubims. (...). (...). 2.
Cherubims For the perpetual v^e and sanctity of these loaves, which none
might eat but such as were pure (1. Reg. 21.) they prefigured ^he holy
Eucharist S. ^ur in T^^. 1. S Damna ^^n de oxtho. li. 4 c. 14. S. Cyril. ^^the^
4. And consequently Christ is really present in the ^. Sacrament. For if there
were bread in substance, it should not excel the figure; which is required it,
every thing prefigured. Colless. 2.
loaves of proposition in my sight always. Thou shall make also a candlestick
beaten of most pure a boule withal, and a lilie. This shall be the work of the
six branches, that are to be drawn forth from the shaft: and

CHAP. XXVI. The form of the Tabernacle, with the appertinances, and of what
matter number, and qualities al things shall be.
AND the tabernacle thou shall make thus: Ten Christ's members by their union
and community assist each other, and adorn his tabernacle, the Church.
joined one curtine, that it may be joined with the other: and fifty loupes in
the edge of the other curtine, that it may be coupled with his fellow. Thou
shall make also fifty buckles gold. And thou shall erect the tabernacle
according to The chie^^est part of the Tabernacle, called Sancta sanctorum
Holy of holies.
Sancta sanctorum: and the table without the veil: and over against

CHAP. XXVII. An Altar must be made with things belonging thereto. 9. Also the
court of the tabernacle with hangings and pillars. 20. And provision of oil
for lamps.
THOU shall make also an Altar of the wood setim, hollow in the inside shall
thou make it, as it was showed thee in the Mount. Thou shall make also the
court of God would not have darkness in his tabernacle by day nor night,
signifying that his people ought always to shine in good works. S. Beda li. 3
c. 1. de tabernac.
always in the tabernacle

CHAP. XXVIII. God commands Moses to make diverse sorts of vestures for
Aaron and his sons, prescribing the matter, manner, and ornaments thereof.
TAKE unto thee also Aaron thy brother with his sons, Vocation necessary to
spiritual function. Heb. 5.
that they may do the function of priesthood unto me: Aaron, Nadab, and Abiu,
Eleazar, and Ithamar. And thou shall make an holy These vestments sign fie
that Bishopes and Priests must have special virtues, discretion* purity of
life, sincere intention, contemplatio^ of God, supportation of the peoples
infirmity* solicitude of their good, exampla^ life, sound doctrine, and band of
union. S. Hiero. ad Fabi^l. de vestitu Sacerdotum. to. 3.
these shall be the vestments that they shall make: Rationale and an Ephod, a
tunike and a strait linen garment, a mitre and a girdle. They shall make the
holy vestments for thy brother Aaron and his sons, that they may do the
function of priesthood unto me. And they shall take gold, and in the third a
ligurius, an achates, an amethyst: in the fourth Knowledge of the cause, and
sincere proceeding therein, are the two keys of right judgment.
Doctrine, and Verity, which shall be on Aarons breast, when he shall go in
before the Lord: and he shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel on
his breast, in the sight of the Lord always. And thou shall make the tunike of
the of the Lord, and that he die not. Thou shall make also

CHAP. XXIX. The manner of consecrating Aaron and other Priests: with burnt
offerings, 26. and pacifiques, whereof Aaron and his sons shall participate.
38. The institution of the daily sacrifice of two lambs, one in the morning,
the other at even.
BUT this also shall thou do, Special preparation before Bishops and Priests
be consecrated.
that they may be consecrated The first preparation in the p(...) to b^^^^^e
^^a^^d is cl^^^^ng from (...)* then to ^e adorned with the virtues above
mentioned page 234.
when thou have washed the father with his sons in water, thou shall vest
Aaron with his vestments, when thou have taken of the blood that is upon the
Altar, and of the oil of unction, thou shall sprinkle Aaron and his vesture,
his sons and their vestmentes. And after they and their vestmentes are
consecrated, thou shall take their hands: and thou shall offer a calfe for
sin every

This is it which thou shall do upon the Altar: Two Diverse things were offered
at diverse times, and al signified Christ's Sacrifice in his Church s. Aug li. 1.
c* 18. co^ aduers. leg. and prophet. yet none daily but a lamb: more
particularly signifiing the daily offering of the lamb of God and perpetual
effect thereof. Origin. ^n. Joan. 1.
every day continually, one lamb

CHAP. XXX. How, and of what matter, the Altar of incense shall be made: 12.
What money shall be gathered for the use of the Tabernacle. 18. A brazen lauer
is also to be made, 25. and holy oil of unction.
THOU shall make also an Altar to burn incense, of the be put into them, and
the Altar may be carried. The bars That is, 7. d ob English. For a sicle of
the Sanctuary is about 15. d
half a sicle according to the measure of the temple. A sicle has twentee
Obolus, 3. farthings.
aboles. The half part of a sicle shall be offered to the Lord. He that is
hundred fifty sicles, of calamus in like manner two hundred fifty, and of
casia five hundred sicles after the weight of the

CHAP. XXXI. Beseleel and Ooliab are deputed by our Lord to make the
Tabernacle, and the things belonging thereto. 12. The observation of the
sabbath day is again commanded. 18 And our Lord delivers to Moses two
tables written with the singer of God.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Behold, I son of Hur of the tribe of
Judah, and I have replenished Not by Movses, but by an Angel, at Gods
appointment. Gal. 3. v. 19.
with the finger of God.

CHAP. XXXII. The people (Aaron consenting) make and adore the image of a
calfe. 7. which God reue^ling to Moses, 11. be prays our Lord, for Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacobs sake to spare the people, and perform his promise. 14.
VVherwith God is pacified. 15. Yet Moses coming from the Mount, and seeing the
calfe, and idolatry, throws down the tables and breaks them. 20.
destroys the idol, 21. blames Aaron, 27. causes many Idolaters to be
slain, 31. and again prays for the people.
AND the people seeing that Moses made tariance ere Aaron knew what gods
they meant, to wit, such as they had senne worshipped in Egypt, and therefore he
made them a molten calfe. v. 4.
gods, that may go before us: for what has chanced to this Moses the man
that brought us out of the Land of Egypt, we know not. And Aaron said to them:
Take the golden Excess in play called foolish mirth, is the daughter of
gluttony, and mother of Idolatry. S. Greg. li. 31. c. 31. Moral.
to play. And our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Go, To the molten calfe, which
they had made.
it, have said: These are thy gods Israel, that have brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt And again our Lord said to Moses: I see that God saying,
suffer me, signifies that he could be hindered S. Hierom. in Ion^. 1.
suffer me, that my fury may be angry against them, and that I may destroy
them, and I will make thee into a great nation. But" Moses besought Not only
Gods promise. but also his servants merits are here proposed for procuring
mercy to the people. See the Annotation.
thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, saying: I will
multiply your seed as the stars of heaven: and this whole land, whereof I
have spoken, I will give to your seed, and you shall possess it always. And our
Lord was pacified from doing Moses the meekest manon earth. (Nu. 12.) in Gods
cause was most zealous against sin. ^. Aug. q. 144. in Exodus
very wrath, he threw the tables out of his hand, and brake them at the foot
of the mount. and catching the Aaron confessed the fault briefly, not intending
a frivolous excuse: for he could not think, but Moses knew the truth. ^. Aug.
q. 145 in Exodus
this calfe came forth. Moses therefore seeing the people Their zeal used with
authority and order is here rewarded: which otherwise wanting, when Simeon and
Leui slew the Sichemites, was blamed by Jacob. Genesis 34. and 49.
the sons of Leui did according And when the next day was come, Moses spoke
to the Moses not content with his own salvation, would rather perish with the
people, then they should al be destroyed: and therefore at his instance God
pardoned them. S. Hicr^. E^. 12 ad Ga^d. and in Ione. 1. S. Aug q. 147. in Exodus
strike me out

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXII.
4. A molten calfe] No other reason can be imagined, why the people This people
thought the calfe to be the true God.
falling to Idolatry, required the image of a calfe, rather then of any other
thing, but for that they thought the black calfe with white spots, called
Apis, or Serapis, whom they saw the Egyptians esteemed most of al their S.
Aug. li. 18. c ^. ciuit.
gods, to be the chief, or only God. And therefore to this famous Idol, they
ascribed the benefit of their delivery from bondage, saying: These are thy
gods, o Israel, that have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. So they
meant not They adored that which the image represented.
to worship our Lord, the true God, in that image, as Calvin would have it, li.
1. c. 11. para. 9. Instit.
but the very calfe whose image it was, for adoring immediately the calves
image, and immolating hosts to it (v. 8.) they protested that to be their God,
which the image represented. This appears also, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 18. God that
begat thee thou have forsaken: and have forgotten our Lord thy creator. And
Psalm. 105. v. 21. They forgot God, which saved them.

11. Moses besought.] Albeit Moses with most humble submission prayed Calvin
charge Moses with arrogancy. Moses charity concurred with Gods providence.
for the people, which God so accepted, that he was thereby pacified, (v. 14.)
yet Calvin here condemns him of arrogancy, and pride, as though he
imperiously In hunc locum.
prescribed law to God, spoiling him of his justice. Much otherwise S. Hierom (
Epist. 12. ad Gaudent.) commending his fervent charity, doubts not to say.
Dei potentiam serui preces impediebant. The servants prayers hindered Gods
power, because God himself saying, suffer me, that my fury may be angry
against them, and that I may destroy them: showed his divine providence to be
such, as he might be stayed, from doing that which be threatened.

13. Remember Abraham,] It much trubled Calvin, that for obtaining pardon S.
Aug. q. 149. in Exodus S. Chrysostom* ho. 42. in Genesis The^d. q 67. in Exo.
God shows mercy for the merits of his servants.
for the people, the Patriarchs are mentioned, for whose sake and merits,
mercy, and protection was promised by God (Genesis 18. 22. 26.) *prophesied by
Jacob, (Genesis 48.) performed here, and in many other places. And it is a vain
evasion to say; God showed his mercy for his promise sake only; for he
promised the same for their merits; as appears in the places alleged. Grace
goes before merits.
Though al merits proceed from Gods grace, first given without merite^. 1.
Cor. 4. v. 7. S. Aug. degrat. and lib. arb. c. 6.

CHAP. XXXIII. Gods wrath being mitigated by Moses, the people mourn for
their sin, 7. Moses pitcheth the tabernacle without the camp, and therein
conuerseth familiarly with God. 18. desiring to see his glory.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Go, get thee God would not in this
passage work such miracles, as he did, bringing them forth of Egypt. So it is
a comination because they werest ubborne and stiff necked.
I will not go up with thee, because thou art a stiffenecked people: lest
perhaps I destroy thee in the way. And the people hearing this

Moses also taking the tabernacle, pitched it without the lead forth this
people: and do not show me whom thou will send with me, especially whereas
thou have said: I know thee by name, and thou have found grace in my sight. If
The vision of God in gloric, is algo^d.
al good, and God by his grace makes his servants to call upon his name. S.
Aug. q 154. in Exodus
will call in the name of the Lord before thee: and I will have mercy on whom I
will, and I will be merciful to whom it shall please me. And again None in this
life can see God as Saints do in glory. 1. Joan. 3.
for man shall not see me, and live. And again: Behold, quoth he, there is Rom
9.
rock, and protect thee with my right hand, until I pass: and I will take away
my hand, and thou shall see Moses saw more glorious works and effects of
God, then other Prophets, yet not his substance and divine nature. Theodoret.
q. 68. in Exodus S Hier. de verb. Isa. vidi. Dom. S. Chrysostom. ho. 4. de in
copy, Dei natura.
my

CHAP. XXXIIII. Moses goes again into Mount Sinai, with new tables, praying
for the people. 10. to whom God promises to give possession of the Land. 12.
Prohibiteth al association with the Gentiles, for fear of Idolatry, 18.
gives precepts concerning the first borne, the Sabbath, and other feasts. 28.
After forty days fast, Moses returns to the people with the
commandments, and his face appearing horned, he covers it, whenever he
speaks to the people.
AND after this he said: The first tables being broken, yet others are made: so
though the first grace given in Baptism be lost, Yet there remains penance,
as the second table of saftie after shipwrake S. Hiero. Epis ad Demedriad.
Cut thee two tables of stone also and the sheep let them not feed over
against. He chief ruler.
Dominatour Lord God, merciful and clement, patient and of much compassion, and
true, Which keep mercy unto thousands: which take away Notwithstanding
his former commination chap. 33. v 3 God here promises new benefits.
I will make a covenant in the sight of al, I will do signs that were never seen
upon the earth, nor in any nations: that this people may see, in the mids of
whom thou art, the terrible work of the Lord which I will do. Observe al thou
shall redeem with a sheep: but if thou will not give a price for it, it shall
be slain. The firstborne of thy sons thou shall redeem: neither shall thou
appear empty in my sight. Six days shall thou work, the seventh day thou
God by an angel not Moses. supra v 1. and Deuteronomy. 10. v. 2. and 4.
he wrote in the tables the words of the covenant, How soever the commandments
are divided in both tables, here it is certain, that there be no more nor
fewer then ten in all.
ten And when Moses So his face appeared to the beholders, by reason of the
glistering beams of his countenance shining gloriously, after his conversation
with God forty days: which signifies that much more that which abides (in all eternity) is in glory. 2. Cor. 3.
horned by the conversation of the talk of our Lord. And Aaron The same veil
(says S. Paul) remaneth upon the heart of the Jews, that they can not see
Christ, til by his special grace they shall be illuminated: 2 Cor 3. The like is
upon the heart of Heretics that can not see the Church. S. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
con 2.
a veil. upon his face. Which going in

CHAP. XXXV. The precept of the Sabbath is yet renewed. 4. First fruits, and
other gifts are required, and duly offered, for the making of the tabernacle
and other things thereto belonging, which are here recited. 30. Beseleel and
Oo. iab are appointed workmen for this purpose.
THEREFORE After the fall of the people to Idolatry, their punishment, and
repentance, their reconciliation to God and new tables of the commandments made
and written, Moses repeteth the former precept, of keeping the Sabbath, and
provides al necessaries to the making of the Tabernacle, whereto the Princes
and people most promptly and liberally contribute S. Aug. q. 172. in Exo.
all the multitude of the children of Israel Priest, and of his sons, to do
the function of Priesthood unto me. And all the multitude of the children of
Israel

And Moses said to the children of Israel: Behold, As matter alone is not
sufficient for a building without artificers, to whom God gives special skill:
so for expounding holy Scripture God gives particular knowledge to Pastors
and Doctors, to the consummation of Saints, to the work of the ministry,
to the edifying of the body of Christ. (the Church. Ephesians. 4.
called by name Beseleel the son of Vri the son of Hur of the tribe of
Judah. And has filled

CHAP. XXXVI. More being given then was needeful. 6. Moses made to be
proclaimed that no more should be offered. 8. So the curtines, 13. ringes, 18.
buckles, 19. the cover, 20. bordes, 21. bars, 35. a veil, 36. pillars, and a
hanging are made ready.
BESEL^EL therefore, and Ooliab, and every wise man, As the people abounded in
devotion, so the workmen of modesty and religion would have no more then
necessary ^. Augustine q. ^71. in Exodus
the arstificers being also the bordes of the tabernacle of the wood setim
standing. The length of one board was ten cubits: and the breadth

CHAP. XXXVII. Beseleel makes the Arc. 6. the Propitiatory, with Cherubimes,
10. the Table, with vessel belonging thereto, 17. the Candlestick with bowls
and branches 23. seven lamps with snuffers, 25. the Altar of incense, 29. and
compoundeth the incense.
AND Beseleel made also the arc of the wood setim, The Cherubins covering al
upon and within the arc signify (says S Gregory Nyssen) that the Scriptures
have a hiegher sense then the literal. de vita Moyseos post medium.
covering the Propitiatory, three places, which together make six branches
proceeding from one shaft. both the boules therefore, and the branches

CHAP. XXXVIII. The same Beseleel makes the Altar of Holocauste. 8. the brazen
lauer. 9. the court with pillars and hanginges. 21. The gifts that were
offered are recited.
HE MADE also the Altar of Holocauste of the wood These women watched there for
devotion, and it seems the same custom continued til Christ's time. For Anna
the widow observed this state of life. Luc. ^^
that watched in the door of the tabernacle. He made also the court, in the
the heads of the pillars, and the whole grauing of the work, of silver. In
like manner at the north side the hanginges, the velle hangs. An hundred feet
were made of an

CHAP. XXXIX. All the ornaments of Aaron and his sons are made. 31. and the
whole work of the Tabernacle is perfited.
MOREOVER of hyacinth and purple, scarlet and silk rewes. And the twelve
stones them selves, were graven Alexander the great seeing Iaddus the hiegh
Priest, bearing this venerable plate on his forehead, with great reverence went
unto him, and adored the name of God written in the pla^e. Josephus. li. 11. c.
8. Antiq.
sacred veneration of most pure gold, and they wrote in it with the work of a
lapidarie: The Holy of our Lord: and they tied it to the mitre with a lace of
hyacinth, as the altar of gold, and the ointment, and the incense of

CHAP. XL. According to Gods commandment Moses erecteth the Tabernacle, with
al things appertayning, the first day of the second year after their
delivery from Egypt. 32. God replenisheth the same with his Majesty, a
cloud remaining over it by day, and a pillar of fire by night, but when they
shall march, the same passes before them.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: The The Tabernacle, prepared in the
first year and erected the first day of the second year, signifies the
Church of Christ prepared in the old Testament, and established, exalted, and
confirmed in the new.
first More holy then any thing without the Sanctuary, but the Sancta
Sanctorum it self was then most holy of al places in this world.
most Holy. And thou shall bring Aaron and his sons to the door that they
may minister to me, and the unction of them may prosper to an everlasting
priesthood. And Moses A gomor of Manna was now put in the arc mentioned
before. chap. 16.
the arc, thrusting bars underneath, and the oracle above. And when he had
brought the arc Without al doubt (s^^th S. Augustine. q. 173. in Exodus.) Moses
prefigured other persons when he entered into the cloud on mount Sinai, and
others now when he could not enter into the tabernacle reple nished with the
glory of God. In Sinai he signified those that penetrate the profound
mysteries of Christ, here the Jews who understand not the same.
Neither could Moses enter the roof of covenant,

THE ARGUMENT OF LEVITICUS.
WHEN the Tabernacle was erected, nere to Mount Sinai, Exodus vlt.
So soon as the Tabernacle was erected God declared the offices of the
Levites, written in this book: whereof it is called Leuiticus.
the first day of the second year, after the children of Israel parted from
Egypt, and was so replenished with Gods Majesty, that none, no not Moses him
self could enter in, our Lord speaking from thence, called Moses, and declared
to him the offices of the Levites; whom only, and no others, he deputed for the
administration, and charge Nu. 1.
of sacred things: whereof this book (wherein they are written) is called
Leuiticus. In which says S. Hierom, al and every Sacrifice, yea almost Epist.
ad Paulinum. Leuit. 1. 8.
every syllable, and Aarons vestments, and the whole Leuical order breath
forth heavenly sacraments, or mysteries. For first God here prescribes what
sacrifices he will have, in what manner, and to The contents of this book.
what purposes. Then what parts and qualities he requires in Priests; how
they shall be vested and consecrated, seuerly punishing some that transgressed:
with commandment neither to offer in sacrifice, nor to eat things reputed 11.
12. 18.
unclean, and the manner of purifying such things, and persons, as by diverse
occasions were polluted: Interposing also some moral, and judicial precepts;
appoints certain solemn feasts, times of rest, and Jubilee year. Finally
promises rewards, and threatens pu^ishments to those that keep or break 23.
26. 27.
his commandments: with particular admonition touching vows and tithes. So
this book may be divided into five special parts. The first, of diverse
Divided into five parts.
sorts of Sacrifices: in the seven first chapters. The second, of consecrating
Priests, and their v^stments, with punishment for offering strange fire. in the
three next chapters. The third, of distinction between clean and unclean, with
the manner of purifying certain legal uncleanness, and other precepts moral and
judicial. from the 11. chap. to the 23. The fourth, of feasts, times of rest,
and Jubilee with privileges, rewards, and punishments, from the 23. chap. to
the 27. The fifth, of vows, and tithes. in the last chapter.

THE BOOK LEVITICUS, IN HEBREW VAICRA.
CHAP. I. Diverse rites in offering holocaustes, as well of cattle, 14. as of
birds.
AND OUR LORD called Moses, and The first part of this book. Of diverse sorts
of Sacrifices.
spoke to him out of the tabernacle of testimony, saying: Speak to the
children The best and perfectest of every kind is to be offered to God, not
the blind, lame, or weak. Genesis 4. Malach. 1.
a male, without spotte, at the door of the tabernacle of testimony, to
propitiate our Lord unto him: and he shall put his hands upon the head of to
the North, before our Lord: but the blood thereof the sons of Aaron shall pour
upon the altar round about: and they shall divide the joints, the head, and all that

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. I.
2. The man that shall offer] Sacrifice being the most special external service,
Sacrifice presupposed to be necessary, God prescribes the rites to be observed
therein.
whereby man acknowledges the supreme dominion of God, and his own subjection
and homage to his divine Majesty, was so well known to be necessary (as being
in most frequent use in the law of nature, and in all nations) that here neded
not any new precept in general, that the people of God should offer sacrifice,
though for special purposes, certain particular sacrifices were some times
appointed, but this duty and obligation presupposed, our Lord first
admonishing to offer the best, and perfectest things in every kind,
prescribes with what rites, and ceremonies it shall be done. As in offering an
holocaust of the heard, it must be a male without spotte; and be offered at
the door of the tabernacle, the offerer putting his hands upon the head of the
host; the priests must offer the blood, povvring it in the circuit of the
altar; pluck of the skin; cut the joints in pieces; lay them in order; the
entrales and feet being vvashed, burn al upon the Altar; And the like in
other sacrifices, al for just and reasonable causes, without which the wisdom
of God does nothing. Sap. 7. and Psalm. 103. v 24.

3. An holocaust] In respect of diverse things offered, the diverse manner, and
Three kinds of Sacrifice.
causes of offering, there were many sorts of Sacrifices: but al are reduced
to three kinds. The first was Holocaust, in which al was burned in the honor
of God, and resolved into vapor, which ascends upwards in sign that al
Holocauste.
we have is of God. The second was Sacrifice for sin, and that of diverse
sorts, Sacrifice for sin. Pacifique Sacrifice.
for the variety of sins and persons; and part of this sacrifice was burned,
the other part belonged to the Priests. The third was Pacifique sacrifice,
whereof one part was burnt, an other pertayned to the Priests, and an other to
them, that gave the oblation. And of this kind there were two sorts, one of
thanksgeuing for benefits received: the other to procure favor in any good
For benefits received: or desired.
enterprise, or desire. All the which did prefigure and forshew one only
Sacrifice of Chtists body and blood, offered by him in two manners; bloody on
the Cross once for ever, whereof S. Paul expressy speaks (Heb. 9.) unbloody
in forms of bread and wine, whereof the same S. Paul speaks (Heb. 13. v. 10.)
showing that Christians have an Altar, and consequently a Sacrifice far
excelling Al sacrifices of the old Testament prefigured Christ's Sacrifice on
the Cross, and in the Eucharist.
those of the Tabernacle; and our Savior him self ( Math. 26. v. 25.)
speaking of the contents in the chalice, said: it was his blood of the new
Testament, which he then instituted and dedicated, as is there noted. And the
ancient Fathers (by Caluins confession in Heb. 9.) generally use this
distinction of the same Sacrifice offered in bloody, and in unbloody manner.
They likewise teach that al lawful Sacrifices of the Law of nature, and of
Moses did end, and were complete in this one, which is our daily Sacrifice,
our immaculate l^m^e, our manna, our libament, our holocaust, our Sacrifice for
sin, our Pacifique Sacrifice for all purposes, and in steed of al old
Sacrifices. So S. Augustine lib 8. c. 27. lib. 17. c. 20. de ciuit. lib. 3 de
Bapis. c. 19. lib. 1. cont. a^u^rs l^g and ptophet. c. 18. and 20. S. Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 95. S. Leo. ser. 8. de Pass. and other fathers teach.

9. Svvetesauour.] Not that the savor of corporal things (though it were Not
the external work for it self but sincere devotion pleases God. External
sacrifices were ordained: 1. to keep the people from Idolatry. 2. To induce
them to internal virtues.
sweter then of burnt flesh and bones) delights Gods most pure substance: but
for that man's frailty in some good sort performing his duty, is very
acceptable to his divine goodness. For otherwise he required not these
Sacrifices, nor other external Rites for him felf, but he would have his people
for their own good to be exercised therein: especially for three causes. First
to keep them from Idolatry, whereto they were very prone, as appears by their
often falling, notwithstanding continual admonitions to the contrary. For
being as it were burdened with many ceremonies, pertaining to Gods true
service, they might have less mind, leisure, and occasion to serve Idols
Secondly, for so much as man consists of soul and Io. 4. v 24. Romans 6. v. 19.
body, as the soul must interiorly worship God in spirit and verity; so
the body must also honor him exteriorly, serving justice unto sanctification:
that is by external good works to increase justice, and sanctity, when by
them the mind is instructed and invited to know and honor God. For otherwise
says S Dionyse ( c. 1. ^alest* Hi^rer.) unless man's understanding use the
help of corporal things, divine verity can not be attained. And S. Augustine (
lib. 10. c. 5 ciuit.) teaches that God commanded external Sacrifices, thereby
Psalm. 5^.
to lead his servants unto mortified spirits, contrite and humbled hearts, to
mercy and compassion toward others. In brief ( c. 3. Enchir) to the true and
perfect serving of his Divine power by faith, hope, and charity. Thirdly, that
3. To signify greater Mysteries of the new Testament.
these external Sacrifices and Rites might prefigure and signify greater, more
excellent, and more effectual Mysteries of the new Testament. For as S. Paul
speaks ( Heb. 10.) the law (of Moses) having a shadovv of good things to
come, not the very image of the things, brought not to perfection; nor took
away sins by the blood of oxen or goa^es, but being (asis^^id) a shadovv,
rather shaded then perfectly showed the great benefits, which the new law as a
perfect image lively represents: especially Christ's passion, which is the
very fountain of grace and mercy. And whereas the old law could not justify
( Gal. 3.) the law of Christ does in deed justify, as the Gospel witnesses,
saying: (Joan 1 v. 17.) The law was given by Moses, grace and verity vva^
made by Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II. How to offer flovvre, 4. loaves, wafers, with oil and incense,
without leaven or honey, 12. also first fruictes. 13. And salt in every
oblation.
WHEN a soul shall offer an oblation of sacrifice These oblations were
specially for the poorest sort. So God tempered his law to the ability of
every one. Theod. q. 1. in Leuit.
fine flower shall be his oblation. and he shall pour oil upon it, and put
franckincense, and As literally no leaven, not honey might be offered in
sacrifice: so al sin and carnal delectatio^ must be excluded in christian
life.
honey be burned in the sacrifice of our Lord. The first fruits only That salt
signifies discretion, appears by S Paul exhorting to seasonal our talk with
salt Collos. 4. v. 6.
salt. But if

CHAP. III. How the pacifique hosts must be offered of beeues, 6. sheep, 7.
lambs, 12. and goats.
AND if his oblation be an host of pacifiques, and he In holocaust only the
male was offered, c^ap. 1. in other sacrifices both sexes were acceptable.
female, without spot shall he offer them before our Lord. And he shall lay his
hand upon These parts and the fatt: were burned as an Holocaust, the rest of
the oblation being pacifique.
holocaust, putting fire under the wood: for an oblation of most sweet savor
to our Lord. But if his oblation, and the host of pacifiques be of burn them
upon the altar, to the food of the fire, and of a most sweet savor. All the
fatt shall be our Lords by a

CHAP. IIII. How a Priest, 13. the multitud^, 22. a Prince, 27. or any one of
the people, sinning of ignarance, must offer hosts.
AND our Lord spoke to moses, saying: Speak to Ignorance of that we are bond
to know is sin: and more in Priests then in others.
ignorance, and does any thing of all the commandmentes of our Lord, which he
commanded not to be done. If the We see here and in many other places that
numbers are mystical, not always supersticious.
seven times before our Lord, against the veil of the Sanctuary. and of the
same blood he shall put afterward understand their sin, they shall offer for
their sin A Priest, and the whole multitude offered the same sacrifice of a
calfe, for their sines: the Prince offered a male goat, a private person a
femal. See Theod* ret. q* 1. in Le^^ versus finem.
a calfe, and shall bring it to the door of the tabernacle. And Though in
ordinary sacrifices for sin, one part was allotted to the Priests (by whose
ministry God remitted sins) yet of the sacrifice for a priests sins, or
for the sins of the multitude, the priests had no part, lest they should save
cost, or reap commodity by sacrifice for their own or the whole peoples
sins* but al was burned as in a holocaust. Theodoret q. 3. in Leuit. S. Tho
1* 2. q. ^02. 2. 3. ad. 8.
because it is for the sin of the multitude. If a a victime, for his sin,
to wit, an ewe without spotte; he

CHAP. V. Of hosts, for the sin of concealing an others periur^e. 2. for
uncleanness 4. for vain svvearinge 14. for rrour in exercising holy rites, 17.
and for any sin committed by ignorance.
IF a soul sin, and hear the voice of one swearing, and When perjury does
prejudice an others cause, he that knows the truth is bond to reueil it to
the Judge; but with discretion to avoid scandal.
unless he utter it, he shall bear his iniquity. The Swearing to do that is
evil, or not doing that is lawfally sworn, is sin.
either il; or well, and binds the same with an oathe, and his word, and
having forgotten afterward understands his offense, let him do penance for
his sin, and And the other he shall burn for an holocauste, as is wount For
remission of sin restitution is first required if ^niu^^e was done.
the damage it self which Besides restitution satisfaction is also necessary
for the offense to God. Theodoret. q. 2. in (...).
offering the ram, and it shall be forgeuen him. If a soul sin

CHAP. VI. Oblation for sin vvittingly committed. 8. The manner of offering
holocaust. 12. Continual fire to be kept in the Altar. 14. The sacrifices
which Priests shall offer at their Consecration. 24. In general of hosts for
sin, and who shall eat of the same and where.
OUR Lord spoke to Moses, saying: The soul fraud, he would have obtained,
whole, and the fifth part besides to the owner unto whom he did the damage. But
Such examples of penance or satifaction for sin besides restitution of that
was wrong fully taken, are frequent in Moses Law.
for his sin he shall offer a ram without spott out of the flock, and shall
give it to the priest, according to the estimation, and measure of the offense:
who shall pray for This fire was first sent miraculously from God. ( in^ra. c.
9. v. 24.) and according to this commandment, was perperpetually conserved:
from which al fire was to be taken that was used in the tabernacle S. Aug. q.
31. and Theod. q 9. in Leuiticum. Mystically it signified, that the fire of
charity being first kindled in man's heart by Gods grace, must be continually
nourished and kept burning, from which al other good works are derived.
shall always burn, which the that by right succeeds his father, shall offer
it hot, for a most sweet odor to the Lord, and it shall wholly be burnt on the
altar. For every sacrifice of the priest shall be consumed By slesh of penance
is under stood, fasting, watchig, haircloth, tears, prayers, a^mes which
whosoever duly touches shall be sanctified. He sych^us Hierosol. li. 2. in
Leuit. c. 6.
Whatsoever shall touch:: the flesh thereof, shall be sanctified.

CHAP. VII. The manner of offering hosts for offenses. 11. and of pacifique
victimes. for thanksgeuing. 22. No fat, 26. nor blood is to be eaten.
THIS also is the law of an host for an offense, the This text shows there
is difference in the nature of a fault committed, commonly called sin, and of
duty omitted here called offense. in latin peccatu^ and delictum. Yet both are
alike offencife to God, in matter of equal importance. As appears, for that
the same sacrifice was offered for both. S. A^^. q. 20. in Leuit.
offense: the law of both hosts shall be one: to the priest that offers it,
it shall pertain. The priest that offers the victime of holocaust, shall have
whom it is offered. Whether they be tempered with oil, Given or presented to
our Lord, not offered upon the Altar. for no leaven could be offered in
sacrifice. cap. 2. v. 15
offered to our Lord, and shall be the priests that shall pour out the blood of
the host. the flesh whereof and the breast: and when he has offered and
consecrated both to our Lord, he shall deliver them to the priest, who

CHAP. VIII. Moses consecrateth Aaron high Priest. 13. and his sons Priests,
33. continuing The second part. Of consecrating Priests, and their vestme^ts:
with punishment of some that transgressed.
in the tabernacle seven days and nights.
AND Our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Take Aaron Washing signified purity
required in Priests.
washed them, " he Precious vestiments their dignity: and holy oil their
authority.
reuested the high priest, with the sttait linen When the high Priest at any
time put the Ephod to the Rationale, God gave answers to his demandes, in
matters of doctrine and verity which king David willed Abiathar to do 1. Reg.
23. v. 9. Never could any woman weue doctrine and verity. but divine wisdom
did make such garments. S. Cyril. lib. 6. in Leuit.
Doctrine and Verity, with the as our Lord had commanded him. He " took also
the oil As well by the function of co^secrating Priests, as of offering
Sacrifice it appears that Moses was a Priest* Yea the chief and hieghest
Priest ( says S. Augustine) for his more excellent ministry and
extraordinary calling: Aaron was hiegh priest for his Pontifical inuesture,
and ordinary vocation, which should continue in his successors. q. 23. in
Leuit.
Moses had immolated, of azymes, which was before our Lord, a loaf without
leaven, and a manchet tempered with oil, and a wafer he put them upon the
fat, and the right shoulder, delivering

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VIII.
6. Offered Aaron] By this manner of taking, offering, and consecrating Aaron
Particular calling and consecration necessary to priestlie offices, and
authority in spiritual causes.
Hiegh Priest, S. Paul shows that none may challenge to them selves, nor
presume to exercise priestlie offices, or any authority in spiritual causes,
but such as be orderly called thereto. Yea that Christ him self would not have
exercised this function, but that he was also called of God unto it, saying:
Every Heb. 5.
Hiegh Priest taken from among men, is appointed for men, in those things that
pertain to God. Neither does any man take the honor to himself, but he that
is called of God, as Aaron. So Christ also did not glorify himself, that he
might be made a Hiegh Priest: but he that spoke to him: Thou art a Priest for
Psalm. 109.
ever, according to the order of Melchisedech. Aarons sons were also called,
but to lower offices, dignity, and authority. And both he and they were
ordained Ordering of Priests was a Sacrament in the law of Moses.
and consecrated by a peculiar Sacrament, to wit, by certain determinate
external ceremonies and rites, signifying grace given them by God, for the due
performing of their function. For first they were taken from the common state
of men, whereby is designed their ordinary vocation; then purified by certain
washings and sacrifice for sin, signifying special purity required in them,
afterward invested with holy and precious garments, which signified their
sacred function, and great dignity, excelling al temporal dominion and
principality; finally consecrated in solemn manner with holy ointment, and
blood of pacifique sacrifice offered for this purpose; other sacrifice of
holocaust also offered in the same solemnity.

7. Reuested] The hiegh Priest had seven special ornaments in his vesture.
Seven precious vestments for the high Priest signifiing: 1. Purity. 2
Discretion. 3. Good works of edification.
First, a straict linen white garment; signifying purity of life most
specially required in Priests. Secondly a girdle, or Bavvdrike, of twisted
silk and gold, embrodered work, in colors yelow, blew, purple, and scarlet;
signifying discrete moderation of his acts, to the spiritual profit of al
sorts of people. Thirdly a Tunike, or long robe down to the foot, of
hyacinth; or blew silk, at the skirt thereof like pomegranates wrought of
twisted silk, blew, purple and scarlet, and little belles of purest (yelow)
gold interposed one by the other rownd about; of each sort seventy two;
signifying heavenly conversation S. Hierom. Epist ad Fabiol
upon earth, also union and concord in faith and manners, with edification 4.
Toleration of others infirmities
by good works. Fourthly, an ornament upon his shoulders, called an Ephod, of
gold and twisted silk, embrodered of the former colors, reaching before to
the girdle, with two precious Onyx stones closed in gold, one having engraven
six names of the tribes of Israel, set on one shoulder, the other having the
other six names on the other shoulder; for a remembrance that he must supporte,
and meekly bear the infirmities of the people. Fifthly, a breast 5. Knowledge
and sincerity.
plate called Rationale, of the same precious matter, the measure of a palm,
four square, embrodered with the same four colors, with four rewes of
twelve precious stones, and therein engraven the names of the twelve tribes.
Besides which were engraven also VRIM and THVMMIM, Illuminations and
Perfections, or Doctrine and Verity, because the hiegh Priest must have
knowledge of the truth, and sincere intention. Likewise in the Ephod and
Rationale were ringes, hooks, and chains of purest gold, to join them fast
together. Al signifying the perpetual solicitude and care which he ought to
have in his heart, to know and teach the truth, that the people may truly serve
God, to his 6. Intention directed to God 7. Contemplation of God and his works.
honor and their own salvation. Sixthly, a Mitre of twisted silk, with little
crowns embrodered work, set on his head, to signify that he must direct al
his actions to Gods glory, that sits above al. Seventhly, A plate of sacred
veneration, made of the finest gold, with the most holy name of God engraven,
set on his forhead; to put him still in remembrance to contemplate God and his
works.

13. His sonnes] The other Priests had three special ornaments: a linen white
Other Priests had also three ornaments.
garment, a Bavvdrike, and a Mitre, for glory and beauty; to signify the
qualities above mentioned, purity, discretion, and direct intention also
required in them.

10. Took oile] A third thing that Moses was bid to take, besides the men and
vestiments, was the holy oil of unction, which he poured only upon the Aaron
anointed high Priest
hiegh Priests head, not on other Priests; to signify that power descended
from him to the rest. But both he and they, and their holy vestiments were
sprinkled with this oil, and with blood taken from the altar; their right
ears also His sons also consecrated
were touched with the blood of a ram, sacrificed, and their right thumbes,
and great toes of their right hands, and feet; to signify prompt obedience,
and right intention, in offering sacrifice, according to Gods ordinance, and
not after the manner of infidels, or humane invention, nor to any sinister
intent or purpose.

14. He offered the calfe] Other things which Moses was here commanded Al
three kinds of sacrifice offered at the consecration of Priests.
to take, at the consecration of Priests, were a calfe, to be offered in
sacrifice for sin; two rams, the one in holocaust, the other in pacifique
sacrifice, for the consecration of Priests; and a basket of unleavened bread, to
be offered with the two rams. Al for the greater solemnity of this Sacrament
of Orders. By which Aaron and his sons were made the lawful and ordinary
Number. ^.
Priests of the law newly delivered by Moses. And so Priesthood was changed
Priestood and Law changed together.
from the first borne of every family, and established only in Aaron and his
sons, and their issue male, to be in like sort consecrated. And the rest of
the Levites to assist them. By this also was prefigured the Sacrament of holy
Orders in the Church of Christ, with an other change of Priesthood from the
family and order of Aaron, to Priests of the new Testament, of what family
or The Sacrament of holy Orders prefigured. and the new Law.
nation soever. And withal an other change of the law. For the Priesthood being
translated, it is necessary (says S. Paul) that a translation of the Law be
also Heb. 7.
made. And this Sacrament in deed gives grace (as by the other it was only
signified) to those that are rightly ordered. As the same Apostle testifies,
willing Timothy to resuscitate the grace given him by imposition of hands 2.
Timot. 1. S Ambrose in 1. Timot. 4. S. August. lib. de bono coniugals: c. 24.
and. lib: 2. contra Epsti Parmen Theodoret. q. 48. in lib. Number.

CHAP. IX. Sacrifices for sin, 12. and of holocauste, 18. and pacifiques are
offered: 22. and Aaron stretching forth his hand blesses the people.
AND when the eight day was come, Moses called The people before worshipped a
calfe for God. Exodus 32. Now therefore they offer a calfe in sacrifice to God,
for their sin, and to keep them from idolatry* S. Hieron* in Hierem. 7.
a calfe for sin, and a God appeared in his work by sending fire to burn
the sacrifice, without man's industry v. 24.
and his glory will appear to you. And he said to Aaron: Approach to the altar,
and immolate for his finger, he touched the hotnes of the altar, and poured the
rest at the foot thereof. And the fat, and the little This did signify that
Christ, in who^ al nations are blessed, should be stretched on the Cross where
he redeemed us, in memory where of we now make the sign of the Cross.
stretching The Priests were commanded to nourish and keep this fire
petpetually* that it should not be extinguished. cha. 6. v. 12.
a fire coming forth from

CHAP. X. Nadab and Abiu the sons of Aaron, for offering strange fire, are
burnt to death, and cast out of the camp. 6. for whom the people mourn, but
not the Priests. 8. Priests are forbid to drink wine, when they enter into the
tabernacle, 12. and are commanded to eat the residew of oblations in the holy
place. 16. which this timein part they omitted, and are excused, being sorrowful
for that which happened to Nadab and Abiu.
AND Nadab, and Abiu the sons of Aaron catching Such as received more at Gods
hand, are more seuerly punished if they transgress. S. Aug. q. 21. in Leuit.
By this also al are warned to be content with the doctrine of the Holy Ghost,
to abhor heresies, the fautors whereof add falsehood to Gods word, and
prefer their own wicked inventions be fore the true sense of holy
Scripture. Theod. q 9. in Leuit.
devoured Abstinence from wine commanded to Priests when they served in the
tabernacle not at other times* for they served at certain times by turns.
Theod. q. 10 in Leuit. As for drunkenness it is forbid to al men, and at al
times.
when you enter into the tabernacle of testimony, lest you die: because it is
an everlasting precept through your generations. And that you may have
knowledge to discern between the breast, and the fat that is burnt on the
altar, they have elevated before our Lord, and they pertain to thee, and to
thy sonues by a perpetual law, as our Lord has commanded. Among these
things, when Moses sought for the Natural gri^e of mind made Aaron both
unwilling to eat and less apt to co^plete all the ceremonies: so without sin
he omitted that pertained to his commodity, offering it to God.
a sorrowful heart? Which when

CHAP. XI. The distinction of clean and unclean in beasts, fish, birds, and
other things. The third part Of things clean and unclean, with the manner of
purifying: and other precepts moral and judicial.
43. With commandment to be holy, and impolluted.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses and Hitherto God reveled his Law to Moses only,
and by him to the people. Now also to Aaron after he was consecrated high
Priest: yet not always, for Moses was still superior. chap. 12. 14. 16. 17.
etc.
Aaron, saying: and their carcasses you shall avoid. All that have not If in
deed this vnclea^nes were a sin, it should be cleansed by contritio^, and
neither necessarily remain til night, nor the^ be taken away without other
means.
until even: and if it be necessary that he carry meat, which you shall eat,
if the water be poured upon it, shall be unclean; and al liquor that is drunk
of al vessel, shall be unclean. And upon whatsoever ought of such carcasses

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XI.
4. Unclean you shall repute it.] In the first age of the world, before Noes
Genesis 7. (...). 8.
Some things connted unclean in the law of nature and of Moses. Three causes
of this observance. 1. For instruction. 2. For exercise of obedience.
flood, and so forward by tradition; and after by the written Law, some living
creatures were reputed unclean, and forbid to be eaten or offered in
sacrifice. Not as euel of themselves, for every creature of God is good, by
nature 1. Tim. 4.
and creation: but this distinction and prohibition was made in the old
Testament, for just causes, as the ancient fathers note specially three. First,
for instruction of the people much inclined to idolatry, God distinguished al
beasts, birds, and fishes into clean and unclean, whereby al men might know,
that none of them is God. For how can any man of reason (says learned
Theodoret. q. 11. in Leuit.) thinck that to be God, which either he abhors
as unclean, or offers in sacrifice to the true God, and eats thereof
himself? Secondly, God commanded this observance to exercise his people in
obedience, with precepts not otherwise necessary, but because he so commanded.
As at first he commanded Adam not to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and
euel. The transgression whereof brought al mankind into misery. From which
again Christ by his Romans 5. 2. Match. 6. and 7.
obedience redeemed us. For observation of this law old Eleazarus, and the seven
brethren with their mother, did give their lives, rather then they would eat
swines flesh, and for the same are glorious Martyrs, as testify S. Cyprian
Epist 56. ad Thibaritanos. and li. de exhort. Mart. c 11. S. Gregory
Nazianzen, orat. 20. de Machab. S. Chrysostom. de natiuitate septem Machab. S.
Ambrose. li. 1. de officijs. c. 4. and li. 2. de Jacob. c. 10. and 11. and the
whole Church 3. For signification.
celebrating their feast, the first day of August. Thirdly and most specially
these observations were commanded for signification of virtues to be embraced,
and of vices or sins to be avoided. Such beasts therefore were holden for
clean, and allowed for man's food, as divide the hoof, and ruminate, or chew
the cudde, signifying discretion betwixt good and euel; and diligent The things
holden for clean signified virtues.
consideration, or meditation of Gods law: and the beasts which lack those two
properties of dividing the hoof, and chewing the cudde, or either of them,
were reputed unclean, signifying such men as care not whether they do well or
euel, or do not ruminate, and meditate good things, which they hear or read,
forgetting or neglecting, what is taught them. Likewise the The unclean
signified vices.
fishes that have finnes and scales, which signify eleuating of the mind, and
austeritie of life, were counted clean: but these that want either of the same
were unclean and prohibited. Also certain birds were esteemed clean and
allowed to be eaten: others unclean and forbid As the Eagle, signifying pride:
the griffon, tyranny; the osprey, oppression; the kire, fraud; the vultare,
sedition; al kinds of ravens, carnal voluptousnes; the ostrich, worldly
cares; the owl, sloth, or dulnes in spiritual things; the stern, duble
dealing; al kinds of hawks, cruelty; the schritch owl, luxnrie; the diuer,
gluttony; the storke, envy; the swanne, hypocrisy; the onocratal, avarice;
the porphirion, self will; the herodian, a bloody mind; the caladrion, much
babbling; the lapwing, desolation of mind, or desperation; the batte, earthly
policy; and the like in other birds, beasts, and fishes. Al agreeable to that
time, in which (says S. Augustine. li. 6 c 7. cont. Faust.) those things were
to be foreshewed, not Christians are not bound to the obseruances of the old
law, but to that which they signified.
only in words, but also in factes, which should be reveled in latter time;
and being now reveled by Christ, and in Christ, the burdenous obseruances are
not imposed to the faithful gentiles, to whom yet the authority of the
prophecy is commended. To the same effect. li. cont. Adimant, c. 15. and li
50. homil. ho. 45. S Hicrom. in Matt. 15 Origenes, ho. 7. S. Cyril. li. 7. in
Leuit. S. Gregory, in Cant. 7. Procopius in Leuit. 11. Out of whom and others
S. Thomas explicateth at large, that which we have here briefly noted. 1. 2. q.
102. 2. 6.

CHAP. XII. The law of wemens purification that bear children. The second and
third Lessons on Candlemas day.

AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to The most pure virgin mother,
was not subject to this law For she conceived not by the seed of man, yet
observed the custom of other women Luc. 2. as Christ also would be baptized by
S. John Baptist. Mat. 3. to give example of humility. S. Cyril. li. 8. in
Leuit. S Bernard Ser. 3. de Purific.
receiving seed she bear a man child, shall be unclean seven days, according
to the days of the separation of her flowers. And the eight day the little
infant shall be days in the blood of her purification: No holy thing shall she
touch, neither shall she enter into the Sanctuary, until the days of her
purification be expired. But if she bear a

CHAP. XIII. The law concerning leprosy in men, 47. and in garments.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, and Aaron, saying: It pertained to the Priests
to discern of leprosy, in figure of Priests authority to bind and loose
sins in the new Testament. S. Chrysostom. li. 3. de Sacerdotio.
to Aaron the priest, or any one of his sons. Who seeing the leprosy be in a
man, he shall be brought to the priest, and Leprosy making spots in the
skin of an other color, signifies heresy, that mixeth falsehood with truth.
^ Aug. li. 2. quest. Euangel. c. 4^.
a white color in the skin, and has changed the look of the hear, and the
flesh also it self appear quick: it shall be judged a very Sometimes that
seems leprosy, or herelie, which is not: whereof the priest is to judge. Deuteronomy.
17.
most clean leprosy: for that it is al turned into witness, and therefore
the man shall be clean. But when Man, or woman, in whose head or beard the
leprosy rises, that continues: he shall judge the garment polluted, and
every thing wherein it shall be found, and therefore it shall

CHAP. XIIII. Sacrifices for clensing leprosy in men, 33. the manner of viewing
whether leprosy be in a house or no, 40. and of clensing it.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: This is the This gift and sacrifice were
commanded (says S. Augustine) because the Sacrifice of Christ's body was not
yet ordained, which now serves for all other sacrifices. l^* 1. ca. 19. et. 20.
cont. aduersar. ^eg. et. prophet.
offer for him self two live sparowes, which it is lawful to eat, and cedar
wood, and scarlet and hyssope. and he shall command that one of the of well or
river, not of a cesterne poole, or marr^^^.
living water: but the other being alive with the cedar wood, and his beard and
eye brows, and the hear of his whole body. And having washed again his
clothes, and his body, the sprinckle it seven times before the Lord: and he
shall touch playstred again, he shall purify it being made whole again: and
for the purification thereof he shall take two sparowes,

CHAP. XV. The law of unclean issues in men, 19. and in women.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: If natural infirmities brought
vnclea^nes much more lasciuiousnes of the mind. Theod. q. 15. and 20. in Leuit.
unclean. And Every one, whom he touches that is such an one, having To
make, offer, and sacrifice an hoste^is al one.
make of testimony: who shall make one for sin, and the S. Hierom. ( ^s cap.
5 ad (...) at:) understands this place of the abominable sines that may not
be named.
uncleanness, and die not in their filthiness, when they shall pollute my
tabernacle that is among them. This is the law

CHAP. XVI. When and how the high Priest must enter into the Sanctuary. 14.
How he shall expiate (or reconcile) the same, 16. and the Tabernacle, 18. and
the Altar. 20. How he shall offer a ^^ue goat, and send him into the wilderness.
29. And al must celebrate the feast of expiation, or clensing from sins.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, after the death of the Only once in the year
the high priest, and no other, entered into Sancl^ (...) v. 34. signifying that
heaven was not open to any Saint, before Christ's passion: Heb. 9. v. 8.
enter not at al times into the Sanctuary, that is within the veil before the
propitiatory, wherewith the arc is covered, lest he die (for in a cloud will I
appear over the oracle) unless he do these things Praying that al their
sins may be remitted.
pour out prayers upon him, and dismiss him into the wilderness. After that
these things be duly celebtated, he shall offer the calfe, and praying for him
self and for his house, he shall immolate it: and taking the Sins do so defile
the soul that the very holiest of al places is accounnted as contaminate
thereby. Theodo. ^. 22. in Leuit. (...) sine.
expiate the Sanctuary God so remitteth sins to those that are truly
peninitent, as that which is carried into a wilderness and never returns.
when the goat has carried al their fat, that is offered for sins, he shall
burn upon the altar. but he, that has let go the goat of dismission, shall
wash Besides particular sacrifices for every oues sins, once in the year
was instituted a general expiatio^ of al.
seventh month, the tenth day of the month you shall afflict your souls, and
no work shall you do, whether he be of the same country, or a stranger that
soiourneth among you. Upon this day

CHAP. XVII. Al Sacrifices must be offered at the door of the Tabernacle. 7.
with special prohibitio^ of Idolatry. 10. None must eat blood. 15 whosoever
eats caraine flesh is contaminate, and must be washed.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to If any killed for sacrifice
he must offer it at the door of the tabernacle* that a priest might offer it on
the Altar, for no other man, nor place was allowed, without special
dispensation of God. And so Samuel offered sacrifice in an other place, 1. Reg.
^. Hlias ^. Reg. 18. and David also being no Priest. 2. Reg. 24 so S. Aug.
explicateth, this text. q. 56. in Leuit.
kill an ox or a sheep, or a goat in the camp or without the camp, and
offer it not at the door of the tabernacle an oblation to the Lord, shall be
guilty of blood: as if he had shed blood, so shall he perish out of the mids
of his people. Therefore shall the children of Israel bring may be sanctified to
our Lord before the door of the tabernacle of testimony, and they may immolate
them pacifique hosts to our Lord. And the priest shall pour the blood

CHAP. XVIII. Marriage prohibited in certain d^grees of consanguinitie and
affinity. 18. And diverse carnal, and execrable sins committed in other
nations, are strictly forbidden.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to Lord your God, according to
the custom of the Land of It is then turpitude when the act is unlawful. But
honest in lawful Marriage. S. Aug. li: 3. Locutionum. and li. de bono coniugali.
turpitude. I the Lord. The Sea chap. 20: the difference of punishments, for
violating these laws in the first and second degree. Also between
consanguinitie and affinity, in the same collateral degree.
thy fathers sister thou shall not discover: because she is the flesh of thy
father. The turpitude of thy mothers because it is abomination. With no beast
shall thou company,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVIII.
6 Next of his blood.] Marriage is forbid first and most strictly by the law of
Marriage forbid in all degrees in the right line, by the law of nature.
Secondarily in the first collateral degree of co^sanguinitie.
nature, in all degrees in the right line ascending and decending, both in
consanguinitie 1. Cor. ^. v. 1.
and affinity. S. Paul testifying that among the heat hen, no man could have
his fathers wise. And in the right line God him self (who only can) never
dispensed. Secondarily, the first collateral degree in consanguinitie, that is,
between brother and sister, by one parent, or by both, is also unlawful by the
law of nature, except in the beginning of the world, when Adams children must
needs marie together, God so ordayning that al mankind should be propagated
Act. 17. v. 26. ^. Aug. de bono co^i^g. c. 1.
by one man (for of him also the first woman was made) but after this beginning
it was never allowed, nor perhaps can be dispensed withal, at least never was
by any man. Though Beza ( li. de repudijs and diuo^tijs) and some English
Bezites charge Pope Martin the fifth, to have dispensed with one, that Beza
belieth Pope Martin.
had married his own natural sister: which is a false report. For it was with
one, who having committed fornication with one sister, afterward married the
other, from whom he could not be separated without great scandal, the pretended
marriage being public, and the impediment secret: as S. Antoninus writes.
par. 3. sum. Theol. tit. 1. c. 11. But besides the right line, and the Al other
degrees depend on positive laws: which have been and may be altered Proved by
Scriptures, and reasons.
first collateral degree in consanguinitie, no other collateral degrees are
prohibited by the law of nature, but by positive only. So this present law,
written by Moses, forbade to marie in the first collateral degree of
affinity, but the same law commanded ( Deuteronomy. 25.) that in case a married man
died without issue, his brother should marie the widow. VVherby is clear that
this degree, and others more remote, were not prohibited by the law of nature.
For then God would not have made a contrary general law, in any case, for the
whole nation of the Jews, his people; and that under penalty to be observed,
which is contrary to the quality of indulgence or dispensation, and no such
necessity, as in the beginning of the world. Wherefore al protestants that
say, the whole law written by Moses concerning degrees of consanguinitie and
First proof.
affinity, is the law of nature, and so pertains to Christians, must
necessarily say also, that if now a married man die without issue, his brother
must marie his wife. Which specially they deny. It is also proved that this
and some other 2 proof.
degrees expressed in this place, were not against the law of nature (which is
common to al nations, commonly or easily known to al men by discourse of
reason) because no common wealth among the Gentiles did punish, nor Aristot.
li. 2. Pol.
modest men forbear, or reprehend such marriages: as appears by Laban, who
after he had deceived Jacob by giving him one sister for an other, offered him
also the former promised, whom without difficulty of conscience he accepted
(Genesis 29.) neither did that holy Patriareh think it unlawful to keep them
both. And when Judas matched his second son, and promised the third to the
wife of his first son, he did it according to the custom of that place and
time. Genesis 38. And Noemi spoke according to the same custom. Ruth. 1. v. 11.
Again where this law forbids a man to marie, or company with his wives 3
proof.
sister, it adds, vvhiles she is living, not prohibiting marriage, when his
first wife is dead. Yet his wives sister is as nere in affinity, as his
brothers wife. Likewise the diversity of punishments ( chap. 20.) for
transgression of this 4 proof.
law, either in the right line, or in the first collateral degree of
consanguinitie, who were punished by death; and for transgressing in the first
collateral degree of affinity, or in the second either of consanguinitie or
affinity, who had less punishments, shows that the former degrees are
prohibited by the law of nature, and not the other: for then the violation
should be like sin, and punished alike. Finally it is evident, that certain
of these degrees are not against 5 proof.
the law of nature, by the example of holy Abraham, who in, and according, to
the law of nature, married his brothers daughter called Sarai, otherwise Iescha,
Genesis 11. which marriage God approved by many blessings. Also Jacob S. ^^ero.
quest. Heb. in Genesis
married two sisters together. Two sons of Judas married the same woman
successively. And Amram (Moses father) married his aunt, his fathers sister.
Exodus 6. v. 20. Number. 26. v. 59. Wherefore seeing neither the first collateral
degree in affinity, nor the second collateral in consanguinitie or affinity,
is forbid by the law of nature but by positive only, and that both ceremonial
and judicial laws of the old Testament ceased in the New, and are abrogated
by Ceremonial and judicial laws of Moses are abrogated by Christ.
Christ, it rests proved that the same bind not Christians, but as they are
renewed and established by the Church, or Christian commonwelthes. And as this
is done in temporal causes by temporal States, partly by renewing and
establishing the same, which was in the law of Moses, as by punishing wilful
murder by death; Exodus 21. v. 12. partly with alteration, as by punishing
theift in some countries with death, but not adultrie, which were contrary in
the old Testament, Genesis 38. v. 24. 44. 17. Exodus 22. v. 1. Leuit. 20. v. 10: in
like sort the And new are establshed.
Church of Christ ordains laws, alters, and upon just occasions
dispenceth, in all degrees of consanguinitie and affinity, not forbid by the
law of nature

CHAP. XIX. Diverse Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial precepts are briefly recited.
OUR Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to all the The Epistle on VVenesday in
Passion weke.
assembly of the children of Israel, and thou shall say to them: Be ye holy,
because I the Lord your God am holy. Let every one fear his father, and
mother. Keep my Sabbathes. These diversities are not prohibited for them
selves, for the ornaments of the tabernacle and of Priests were made of diverse
things; but schism, and al participation with heretics, and other infidels is
forbid. 2. Cor. 6. Dravv not in yoke with i^si^^els. Theodoret. q. 27. in
Leutt.
that is wouen of two sorts, thou shall not put on. If a man lie with a woman
by carnal copulation, that is a bondwoman also mariable, and yet not redeemed
with a price, nor made free, both shall be beaten, and they shall not die,
because she was not free. And for his See Genesis 40. v. 8.
nor observe dreams. Neither shall you cut your hear roundwise: nor shave

CHAP. XX. Whosoever gives of his seed to Moloch must be stoned to death. 6*
Althat decline to Magic, 9. eurse their parents, 10. commit ad^ltri^,
certain incest, or bestialitie shall die 19. Other incest is deprived of
children. 22. The Israelites also shall be cast out* of the Land* if they
commit such
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: These things Violating this law in any
degree in the rightline, either of consanguinitie, or affinity, or in the
first colla teral degree of co^sanguinitie, was punished with death; but in the
first collateral of affinity, and in the second collateral degree as well of
co^sanguinitie, as affinity, with less punishment. Which shows greatter
obligation, and greatter sin, concerning the right line, then the collateral,
also in the first degree of consanguinitie then in the second; and more in
consanguinitie then in affinity.
marieth her mother, slain, in the sight of their people, because they have
revealed one an others turpitude, and they shall bear their iniquity. He rhat
compaineth* with a woman in her menstrual Not for every kind of sin (though
every one is punishable,) but for the more heinous, and for altogether the
Chananites were cast out of their land.
al these things have they done, and I have abhorred them. But to you I
speak:

CHAP. XXI. At what funerals Priests may not be present. 7. What women they
may not marie, 9. a priests daughter committing fornication must be burned. 10.
The high Priest shall not uncover his head, nor rent his garment, nor be present
at any funeral, nor at al go forth of the holy place. 13. when he marieth he
must take a virgin. 16. None that has a blemish in his body (though he be of
Aarons stock) shall minister in the Sanctuary, nor approach to the Altar.
OUR Lord said also to Moses: Speak to the priests By the prince 5. Paul*
understood the high Priest. Act. 23.
the prince of his people Caiphas re^t his garments ( Mat. 26.) contrary to
this law, malice making him neglect his own dignity
not rent his garments: and to no dead person shall If such deformities and
defectes made men irregular, and unmeet to exercise priest lie function in the
old testament, how
a blemish, shall not offer breades to his God, neither shall he blemish of the
seed of Aaron the priest, shall not approach to offer the hosts to the Lord,
nor the breades to his God. He shall eat notwithstanding of the breades, that
are

CHAP. XXII. Who may eat of sanctified things. 17. And what things may be
offered.
OUR Lord also spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to By these accidental
uncleanness, was prefigured the censure of susspension in clergy men.
shall not eat of those things that are sanctified to me until he be healed.
He that touches a thing unclean by occasion of that is dead, and he from whom
issues seed as it were of copulation, and he that touches a creeping first
fruits she shall not eat. But if she be a widow, or put same day you shall eat
it, there shall not ought remain until the morning of the next day. I the Lord.
Keep my commandementes,

CHAP. XXIII. The solemnities of the Sabbath, 5. of Pasch and first fruits.
15. of Pentecost, The fourth part. Of feasts, times of rest, and Jubilee. with
priuilegies, rewards and punishments.
23. of Trumpettes, 26. of Expiations, 33. of Tabernacles; and with what rites
the same shall be celebrated.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to the There were eight several,
feasts commanded by this law (besides the daily sacrifice) mentioned. Number.
28. and 29. of which only seven are here expressed.
the seventh day, because it The Sabbath in memory that God created al things
in six days and rested the seventh.
the Sabbath of the Lord in all your habitations. These therefore are the holy
festiuities of the Pasch in memory of their delivery from Egypt.
Phase of the Lord: and the fiftenth day of this month 1.
day shall be more solemn, and more holy: and you shall do no servile work in
it. And our Lord spoke to 2.
the priest: who shall eleuate the bundle before the Lord, eat of the corn,
until the day that you offer thereof to your God. It is a precept for ever in
your generations, and al your habitations. You shall number therefore from the
morrow 3.
seventh week be expired, that is to say Pentecost in remembrance of receiving
the law.
fifty days, and so you shall offer a new sacrifice to the Lord. out of al
your See chap. 7. v. 14.
leauened, the which you shall bake for the first fruits of the Lord. And you
shall offer with the breades seven Feast of trumpets, in memory that a ra^me
sticking by the horns was offered by Abraham in stead of Isaac.
the first day of the month, shall be a Sabbath, 4.
a memorial, by sounding of trumpettes, and shall be called holy: no servile
work shall you do in it, and you shall Feast of Expiation i^ memory of the
^^nne in worshipping the calfe, and for all sins forgotten, or unknown.
expiations most solemn, and it shall be called holy: and you shall afflict
your souls in it, and shall offer holocaust to the Lord. No servile work shall
5.
you do the time of this day: because it is a day of propitiation, that the
Lord your God may become propitious unto you. Every soul, that is not
afflicted this day, shall perish month: from even until even you shall celebrate
your sabbathes. And our Lord spoke to Moses, saing: Speak Feast of
Tabernacles, to remember Gods protection in the wilderness, where they dwelled
in tabernacles 40* years.
tabernacles seven 6.
days to the Lord. The first day shall be called most solemn Feast of
Assembly and collection in memory of peace given in the land of promise.
assembly and collection: no servile work shall you do in it. These are 7.
holocausts and libaments according to the rite of every day: beside the
sabbathes of the Lord, and your gifts* and those These feasts were everlasting
to the Jews in their generations, that is, never to be altered by them, nor
during their state. S. Aug. q. 43* in Exodus
everlasting ordinance in your generations. The seventh mo^^^h shall you
celebrate the festiuitie, and shall dwell in bowres seven days. every one, that
is of

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXIII.
2. The festiuities] As other laws written by Moses concerning Sacrifices,
Sacraments, Degrees hindering marriage, punishments of sins, and the Festiual
days perteine to the service of God.
like, are partly moral, pertaining to the law of nature, partly ceremonial, or
judicial, which may be altered: so this law of festiuities is partly moral, for
that al men are bound to keep some festiual days in honor of God, partly
ceremonial, and so the Sabbath day was kept holy in the old Testament, the
seventh day of the weke, and other feasts, the days here prescribed. But
these particular feasts and times* are abrogated by Christ* whom they
prefigured. In so much that now it is not lawful to keep them, for it would
signify that Christ were not come, as S. Paul teaches ( Romans 14. Galat. 4.
Colloss. 2. and in other places) and it were plain Iudaisme, and Heresy It is
heresy to keep the Sabbath holy day.
condemned by the Council of Laodicia cap. 29. accursing them that Iudaize
abstayning that day from works. S. Gregory also resuteth this heresy, li.
11. Epist. 3 showing that Antichrist will embrace it favoring the Jews: In
place whereof the next day (which we call sunday) is made a perpetual holy day,
by authority of the Church, and called dies Dominica our Lords day (Apoc. 1.)
In place thereof we keep Sunday.
And this change the Protestants confess to be lawful and necessary, though
we have no other express scripture, when, or by whom it was done, but only
that S. John had his revelation in our Lords day, but by perpetual tradition al
Christians know, that the day after the sabbath is our wekelie holy day, in
memory of Christ's Resurrection the same day, and in figure of the general
resurrection of al men, and of life everlasting to the blessed. S. Aug. li. 22.
c. 30. ciuit. and Epist. 119. c. 15. and S. Hierome Epist. ad Hedib. The same
reason and authority do also warrant the change of other feasts, and
institution of new, in honor of God, our Savior Jesus Christ, his Mother, and
Other feasts also changed, and new instituted by the same authority.
other Saints, and in memory of benefits received, as here we see in the
old Testament diverse were commanded by God, some also instituted long after
Moses, as by Mardocheus and other Jews, Ester. 9. and the restoration with
new dedication of the altar 1. Machab. 4. observed by our savior Joan. 10. v.
22.

CHAP. XXIIII. Provision of oil for lamps in the Tabernacle. 5. The making,
and disposing the loaves of proposition, 10. The punishment of blasphemy, and
man slaughter. 18. And the pain of equal revenge.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Command Two tenthes of an ephi, that is,
two gomors A gomor of Manna, which is the tenth part of an ephi, sufficied one
man for a day. Exodus 16. v. 16. and 36. so that one of these loaves was as much
as all the meat which two do ordinarily eat in one day.
two tenthes: which by a perpetual righr. And behold there went forth the This
Law de signing equality, was to put a limite, not to enforce to revenge, for
the party damaged, if he would, might remitte al or part. S. Aug. li. 19. c.
25. cont. Faustum.
as he did, so shall it be done to him: fracture for fracture, eye for eye,
tooth

CHAP. XXV. The law of the seventh year, 8. and fiftith year, which is the
Jubilee. 13. when al enheritance sold returns to the former owner. (24. as
also it may in the mean time be redeemed) 35. Usury prohibited, 39. and
servitude among the Israelites, only they may be hired til the Jubilee year.
47. and may be redeemed from servitude of strangers: 54. at least they shall be
free in the year of Jubilee.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses in the mount Sinai, I will give you, thou shall
sabbatize the sabbath to the Lord. Six years thou shall sow thy field, and
six years Of sounding with tru^pets, which is pleasant and joyful, comes the
name of Jubilee: the effect of it is remission of al bonds, restoration of
former liberty, and recovery of enherita^ce. In the old Testament of temporal
things in the new of spiritual, praefigured thereby: as remission of sin;
delivery from bondage thereof; recovery of grace; and preparation to eternal
glory.
shall sound with the trumpet the seventh eat the seventh year, if we sow
not, nor gather our fruits? I will give you my benediction the sixth year, and
it shall Jews for their advantage hold it lawful, to take usury of strangers,
not observing that it is also commanded often in scripture, not to afflict, but
to love strangers. Exodus 22. 23. Leuit. 19
of him, nor more then thou gave. until the year of Iubilee he shall work
with thee, and

CHAP. XXVI. With new prohibition of Idolatry, and commandment to keep the
Sabbath 3. rewards are promised to all that observe Gods precepts. 14. And
many miserable punishments are threatened to al transgressors.
I THE Lord your God: you shall not make to your selves Heretics holding their
corrupt course, will needs have an image of Christ, or Saint, to be the graven
thing, which is forbidden in holy Scriptures: and therefore falsely translate,
Pesel a graven image where indede it signifies an image, picture or purtrature
of an idol. that is, a graven idol. So here as in other places, it is forbid to
make an idol, or similitude of any idol.
thing graven, neither shall you erect titles, nor set a notorious stone in your
land, for to adore it. for I am the Lord your God. Keep my sabbathes, and to
me, and will not hear me, I will increase your plagues until seven fould for
your sins: and I will send in upon you This extreme famine fell upon some of
them in Samaria. 4. Reg. 6. upon others in Jerusalem 4. Reg. 25. most
specially when they were besiged by Titus. Josephus li. 7. ^. 6. dc b^llo
lu^^^^^.
eat the flesh of your their fathers, and their own they shall be afflicted:
until Jacob is first here named, because he had no other children but this
people, for Isaac was also father of the ^dun e^^s, and Abrah^ m^^eoue^ of the
Ismaelites and Mad^^^tes, and because the great promises made to Abraham and
Isarc pertained only to the Israel^tes* Theoderet. q. 36. in ^euit.
Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham. Of the land also I will be mindful: which when
it shall be left of them, shall take The church never wholly decays.
I did not cast them of altogether, neither did I so despise them, that they
should be consumed, and I should make my covenant with them frustrate. For I am
the Lord their God, and I will remember

CHAP. XXVII. How some vows of diverse persons may be redeemed, but some may
not be The fifth part. Of vows and Tithes.
changed. 28. Al, one way or other, must be discharged. 30. Tithes also must be
paid, either the same that are due or more.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to Because ^o other but the tribe
of Leui could serve about the tabernacle, and yet others might desire to serve
there, they might in steed thereof give a price^ and have the reward of their
good will.
bound his soul to God, by estimation he shall give the price. If it be a man
can not be changed, that is to say, The thing that is vowed, if it may be
performed, pleases God better, then a change.
neither a better for a bad, nor a worse for a good. and if he change it: both
it self that was changed, and that for the which it was changed, shall be
consecrated to the Lord. The unclean beast, A sicle was about 15. d obolus
three farthinges.
sicle of the sanctuary. for how much soever it was esteemed by thee. Any
thing A vow made approved and consecrated to God, can not be changed by any
man, The^^^t. q. vlt. ^n Leuit.
consecrated to the Lord, whether it be man, or beast, or field, shall not be
sold, neither can it be redeemed. Whatsoever is once consecrated, shall be holy
of holies to the Lord. And any consecration, that is offered of a man,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXVII.
26. The sirst borne.] God here forbids to vow the sirst borne, and gives
Vows are properly of things not commanded.
the reason, for that they are the Lords, showing that those things, whereto we
are already bound, are not properly matter of vow. But a vow properly is a
religious promise voluntarily made to God, of a good thing, unto which we were
not bound. And that the same is very gratful to God, appears not only in
Rmm. 6. 30. Deuteronomy. 23. Psalm. 21. 49. 75. 115. 131.
this chapter, and in many other places of Moses law, but also in the law of
And are gratful to God.
nature Genesis 28. Jacob vowed, and God accepted thereof. Genesis 31. v. 13. And the
royal Prophet in diverse Psalms pertaining to the new Testament commends
vows. It is certain also and manifest. 1. Tim. 5. that widows did lawfully
Also in the new Testament.
vow chastity in the primitive Church: and such as did afterward break the
same, did violate their promise to God. Innumerable also most learned and most
godly fathers, have ever from Christ's time both taught and practiced religious
vows, of obedience to superiors, who otherwise had no authority over them,
and of perpetual chastity, and voluntary poverty. It is likewise, and
continually has benne, a most common practice in the Church, to vow other good
works of piety, as to visit holy places, to build Churches, Collegies,
Hospitals, and the like, being no way bound thereto but of mere devotion. See
Annotations. 1. Tim. 5.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF NVMERI.
IN this book called Numeri, are contained (says S. Hierom) the Epist. ad
Paulin.
Mysteries of al Arithmetike, or numberiug, of the Prophecy of Mysteries
contained in these histories.
Balaam, and of the forty two Mansions of the Israelites, in the desert.
Which mystical sense the same great Doctor, as also S. Augustine and qq. in
Number. Exodus 40 Leuit. 1. Number. 1.
other Fathers do gather of the literal, written by Moses. Who here
prosecuteth the sacred history after Genesis and Exodus (Leuiticus also
containing one month) from the second month of the second year, after the
delivery of The contents according to the letter.
the Israelites out of Egypt, nere 39. years, to the last of Moses life.
First therefore Chap. 1. 26.
he reportet^ how all the men of twelve tribes, of the age of twenty years and
upward, were numbered. Likewise the tribe of Leui was numbered and ^. 4. 18. 2.
1^.
employed parth in priestlie function, the rest to assist the priests. He
describes also the oraer of marching and encamping, the Levites always next
and round about the Tabernacle: the other twelve tribes in circuit of them on
al sides. He moreover records certain notable murmurings, tumults, schisms,
and 11. 12. 13. 14.
rebellions with the events thereof, and miserable ends of chief seducers.
Whose great injuries Moses mekely sustained with singular patience, still
executing 16. 20. 5. 6. 15.
his own function with heroical fortitude. Among which, diverse precepts and
laws are partly repeated partly added, as well concerning Religion and 17. 19.
27. 28. 29. 30. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 31. 32. 33.
Gods service, as godly policy and civil government of the people, with
chastisment of offenders. How also their enemies endeavored to annoy them,
Bala^ king of Moab procuring Balaam the sorcerer, so much as in him lay, to
curse them, but al in vain Yet by carnal fornication many were drawn to
spiritual. Wicked life draws to Idolatry.
Both which being punished God again prospered his people, in diverse
encounters and battles against Infidels. Finally the promised Land of Chanaan
on both sides lordaine is described by limits, which they shall part amongst
34. 35.
them by lo^t, the Levites mingled in every tribe, with their appointed cities
and commodities for habitation, and the tithes, first fruits, oblations 18. 35.
and abundant provision for their maintenance. Cities also of refuge are
designed for casual manslayers: and a law established that al shall marie 36.
within their own tribes, to avoid confusion of inheritances. So this book
Three parts (...) this book.
may be divided into three parts. In the first the principal and most perfect
sort of the people are numbered, and disposed in order according to diverse
states and offices, before they depart from the desert of Sinai* in the nine
first chapters. Then are related sundry things, which happened unto them in
the rest of their journey, especially many and great impediments, through al
which God punishing some, brought the residue to enjoy the promised land* from
the 10. chap. to the end of the 33. Lastly the country of Chanaan is again
promised, with order so to poss^sse and enjoy it, that every tribe may have
and keep their several parts, in the three last chapters.

THE BOOK NVMERI (OR NVMBERS) IN HEBREW VAIED ABBER.
CHAP. I. All the men of twelve tribes of Israel, of the age of twenty years
and vpwardes The first part. Of those which are ^^^bred of the 12. Tribes sit
for war, and of the Levites designed to serve the Tabernacle.
(but not under, nor women,) are numbered: 20. and are sound in all six hundred
thirty thousand five hundred fifty. 47. The Levites not yet numbered, are
designed to serve about the Tabernacle.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses in the and the heads of the host of Israel:
whom Moses and and families and houses of their kinredes were reckened by
names of every one from the twentieth year and upward, all that could go forth
to war, thirty five Coming into Egypt they were but 70. Exo. 1. increased
in 216. years unto 603550. not counting the tribe of Leui, nor women, nor any
under 20. years, nor old men unable to go to war.
six hundred three thousand Al other tribes were in respect of serving about
the tabernacle called strangers. 3. Aug. q. 3. in Number.
stranger soever comes to it, he shall be slain. And the

CHAP. II. At the east side of the Tabernacle the tribe of Judah as chief, with
Issachar and Zabulon do pitch their tents, and march first: 10. on the south
Ruben, with Simeon and Gad (17. the Tabernacle is carried, and erected by the
Levites, who lodge and march round about it) 18. on the weast side, Ephraim
with Manasses and Benjamin: 25. on the north, Dan with Aser and Nephthali.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron saying: whole host of his warriers,
that were numbered, forty thousand five hundred. And with them the tribes of
the

CHAP. III. The Levites are assumed to the service of the Tabernacle, 14.
numbered by their several families, and their offices distinguished, 45. They
are taken to God in place of the first borne of the children of Israel. The
residue of the first borne, above the number of Levites, are redeemed with price.
THESE are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the These are the names of
the sons of Aaron the priests that As none but Levites might serve in the
tabernacle: so none but of Aarons stock might do the office of Priest hood.
The stranger, that approaches to minister, shall die. And our to the rite of
the altar, the cords of the tabernacle, and all the furniture thereof. The
kindred of Caath shall One chief Monarch in the Church to whom al other
Superiors are subordinate.
the prince of the princes of the Levites, Eliazar, Moses is still counted, and
has chief place and office among the Priests, which were absurd, says S.
Augustine ( in Psalm 98.) if he were not a priest.
court round about with their feet, and the pinnes with the cords. Before the
tabernacle of covenant, that is to say, on The sons of Moses were with him
so long as he lived, but after his death they served the Priests, as other
Levites did, and were numbered with the Caathites. 1. Paral. 23. v. 12.
their sons, having the custody of the Sanctuary, in the mids of the
children of Israel. what stranger soever comes thereto, shall die. All the
Levites, that Moses and Aaron numbered cattle, and the Levites shall be mine. I
am the Lord. But for This number exceeds the (...) the (...) the (...).
thou shall take five sicles for every head, after the measure

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. III.
39. Twenty two thousand.] Immediately before were numbered of Gersonites ^hy
300 are (...) in the (...) sum o^ the Levites.
( v. 22.) 7500. of Caathites ( v. 28.) 8600 and of Merarites ( v. 34.) 6200.
which make in all 22300. Why then are 300. left out of the total sum?
especially seeing by and by ( v. 43.) a smaler, and other odd numbers of 273.
are expressed, and thereupon inferred ( v. 46.) that the first borne of the
Israelites did so much exceed the Levites. VVheras if the whole number of
Levites had been also expressed in the general sum, as it is contained in the
three particular sums, the Levites should exceed the first borne of
Israelites by the number of 27. For answer to this difficulty, some suppose
that the first borne of the Levites were just 300. and therefore so many
supplying only their own places, there remained just twenty two thousand to
supply the places of the first borne of other Israelites, and so the Levites
were sewer then those for whom they were taken unto Gods service, by the number
of 273. But that the first borne of Levites were neither more nor sewer then
300. is not evident by the text. Howsoever therefore this doubt Perfect numbers
signify perfection.
be solued, sure it is, by S. Hieroms judgment ( cited in the argument) that
these numbers are mystical. And the just number of 22. thousand Levites may
signify ( (...) Or^ ^n, homil. 4. in Number.) perfection, required in those that
are designed to the particular service of God; as there be also just 22. Hebrew
letters; and 22. Patriarchs from Adam to Jacob, from whom the Israelites
descended.

CHAP. IIII. Distinct offices are assigned to the families of Aaron, 15. of the
other sons of Caath, 21. of Gerson, 29. and of Merari, 34. who are al numbered
from the age of thirty years to fifty, and so employed to their offices and
burdens.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, and Aaron, saying: In this case it was
necessary for the priests to enter in, where otherwise none entered but the
high Priest, and that but once in the year. And al being foulded up, others
also entered to carry it away. v. 15.
Sanctum sanctorum, and shall take down the veil that hangs before the door,
and shall wrappe in it the arc of testimony, and shall the priest, to whose
charge perteyneth the oil to dress the lamps, and the incense of
composition, and the sacrifice, that is always offered, and the oil of
unction, and whatsoever perteyneth to the service of the tabernacle, and of all the vessel, that are in the Sanctuary. And our Lord spoke See that by your
negligence those that are next unto you incur not offense, for so none shall
be excused.
Destroy not the people Moses therefore and Aaron and the princes of the
synagogue

CHAP. V. Lepers and al polluted persons must be cast out of the camp. 5.
Confession of sin, and satisfaction for trespass. 9. First fruits and
oblations pertain to the Priests. 11. The law of ielosie.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Command Still by the less (says
Theodoret) God instructs in the greatter. q 8. in Nu^. If therefore lepers
were cast out of the camp, how much more justly are heretics cast out of the
Church?
every leper, and whosoever has a flux of seed, and is polluted upon the
dead: as well man as woman cast ye contaminate it. And the children of Israel
did so, and God ordained this law, and miraculously concurred therein, to avoid
wiuesslaughter, upon vehement ^elosie. Theod. q. 10. in Number.
if the spirit of about the eight part of our pe^k.
tenth part of a satum of barley meal: he shall not power oil thereon, not put
frankincense upon it: because it is a sacrifice of jealousy, and an oblation
searching out adultery. The Water sanctified by special rites is called holy
water, and serves to holy use. chap. 8. v. 7. c. 19. v. 9.
holy water in an earthen vessel, and he shall cast a little grauel of the
pauement of the tabernacle into it. And when the woman shall stand in the sight
of the Lord, malediction, and an example of al among his people: make he thy
thigh to rotte, and belly swelling burst asunder. the The water whereon the
priest laid curses to light on the woman if she were guilty.
cursed water enter into thy belly, and thy womb being swollen let thy thigh
rotte. And the woman shall answer, Amen, amen. And the priest shall write these
curses in a

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. V.
7. Shall confess their sin.] General confession (such as Protestants make)
Particular confession of sins, and satisfaction, required by the law of God.
sufficed not here for purging sins: but whosoever transgressed any of Gods
commandments, were bound by this divine positive law, to confess expressly and
distinctly their sin, which in particular they had committed. Also to make
restitution, if wrong were done to any other, with a fifth part above the
principal. And for further satisfaction to God they must offer sacrifice. Al
which did plainly prefigure and foreshew the necessity of particular
confession of sins, and satifaction, in the Sacrament of Penance, instituted
by Christ. Joan. 20.

CHAP. VI. Consecration, 14. and oblation of Nazareites. 22. Asette form how
the Priest shall bless the people.
AND our Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Speak to When Samson was deprived of
these hairs he lost his streingth ^^d^c. 16.
whiles the bush of hair on his head does grow. All the time of his
consecration he shall offering withal the baskette of azymes, and the libamentes
that by custom are dew. Then shall the Nazareite be shaven A special and
determinate form of blessing.
Thus shall you When the priest utters the words God gives the effect.
they

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VI.
2. VVil consecrate themselues] To such as of their own accord, would bind God
prescribed the rule of Nazareites, and the rites of their consecration.
themselves by vow to certain things not commanded, God prescribes a Rule
containing three special observations; not to drink wine, or any thing that
may make drunck; not to cut their hair; and not to touch a dead corpse. He
appoints likewise rites in making this profession, and calls the professed
Nazareites, that is, segregated or separated from the ordinary state of
people; though it was, for most part, but for a time, to be limited by the
parties them selves, and in some perpetual, as in Samson. Iudic. 13. Now what
do Nazareites ^. Aug. q. 52. in lib. Iudic.
The same was a figure of vows both temporal and perpetual.
signify, says S. Gregory ( li. 33. c. 23. Moral.) but those that abstain,
and contain voluntarily from things oshervvise lavvful? As from eating flesh,
either for certain days and times, or altogether; from Marriage; from
propriety in worldly goods; and the like.

CHAP. VII. In dedication of the Tabernacle, the princes of the twelve tribes
offer jointly six waines, and twelve oxen. 11. Then every prince several days
make other oblations. 89. And God speaks to Moses from the Propitiatory.
AND it came to pass in the day that Moses finished Of great reverence they
cariod the arc, and propitiatory, and the holy vessel ordinarily upon their
shoulders, yet the same were sometimes carried on waines. 2. Reg. 6.
upon their own shoulders. The second day offered Nathanael the son of Suar,
prince of the tribe of Issachar, a plate of silver weying an hundred The sixth
day the prince of the sons of Gad, Eliasaph day the prince of the sons of
Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammisaddai offered a plate of silver weighing an
hundred and their libamentes: twelve bucke goats for sin. For

CHAP. VIII. Seven lamps are so placed on the golden candlestucke, that they
may shine toward the breades of proposition. 5. the ordination of the
Levites. 24. And at what age they shall serve in the tabernacle.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to This water was mixed with
ashes of a red. ow sacrificed without the camp. chap. ^9.
the water of lustration, and shave all the hairs of their flesh. And when they
have washed their garments, and are cleansed, they shall take an ox out of the
heardes, the Levites in the sight of Aaron and of his sons, and being offered
shall consecrate them to the Lord, and shall separate Aaron having received the
Levites, presented them to God, and so addicted them to their designed offices.
elevated them in the sight of our Lord, and prayed for them, that being
purified

CHAP. IX. The percept of Pasch to be made the fourtenth day of the first
moon, is renewed. 6. But the unclean, and trauelers in a journey the fourtenth
day of the second month. 15. The camp must rest or march, as the cloud or
pillar of fire, remains over the tabernacle, or departs.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, in the desert of Sinai Egypt, the first month
saying: Let the children of Israel By touching the dead. ^. ^^. q. 15. in Number.
upon the soul of man, which could not make the Phase on that day, coming to
Moses and Aaron, said to them: We are unclean upon the soul of man. God
answered by a voice framed by an Angel from the propitiatory. chap. 7. ^. 89.
spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to the children cloud stood over the
tabernacle, they remained in the same place: and if it chanced that it did
continue over

CHAP. X. The second part. Of diverse impediments, which happened to the
Israelites, and renouation of sundry precepts, in their journey from the desert
of Sinai to the camp of Moab.
Trumpets are sounded by the priests, diue^sly for diverse purposes. 11. The
camp marches from the desert of Sinai. 29. Moses entreats Hobab the
Madianite to remain with them. 35. His prayer when the arc is taken up, and
set down.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Make thee Before the whole multitude,
plain and necessary points of doctrine must only be uttered, but before the
learned and wiser sort*
shall not make a broken sound. And the sons that fight against you, you shall
sound with trumpettes in ^^ghe^ mysteries may be treated and taught. Theod. ^.
(...). in Number.
l^ngth, and there shall be a remembrance of you before the Lord your God, that
you may be delivered out of the hands of your enemies. If at any time you
shall have a banquet, Either this Hobab was otherwise called Raguel, (...) 2. and
also I^^^^o, Exo. 3. and was father in law to Moses, or else he was son of
the same Raguel, and brother in law to Moses.
his cognat^ vel aff^n^*
allied: We march toward the place, which our Lord will give us: come with us,
that we may do thee good: for our Lord has promised good things to Israel. To
whom he answered: I will not go with thee, Moses means, that when by the
cloud and pillar of fire (their special guides) the people should come to new
places, this Madianite his allied might direct them where to find best
pasture, water and like commodities, nere to them.
thou shall be our guide. And when thou come with us, whatsoever Besides
general prayers for all purposes, some are composed, and applied for special
times and occasions.
Arise Lord, and be thine enemies dispersed, and let them flee that hate thee,
from thy face. And when it was set down, he said: Return Lord

CHAP. XI. The people murmuring are punished with fire. 7. Manna is again
described. 10. Moses being afflicted with solicitude of trublesome people, 16.
God adioyneth seventy Ancients to sustain part of his burden. 18. promises
to give all the people flesh. 25. The ancients do prophecy. 31. The people have
their sil of flesh. 33. but forthwith many die of the plague. Whereof the place
is called, The sepulcher* of concupiscence.
IN the mean time there arose a murmuring of the people, These were Egyptians
that parted out of their country with the Israelites, and now murmuring draw
others by example to the same sin.
the common it in a milne, or braied it in a mortar, boiling it in a pot, and
making cakes thereof of the taist as it were of oyled bread. And when the dew
fell in the night upon the camp, the Prayers of holy men are with submission
of their wills to Gods will, either expressed or implied.
if God imperted of the same spirit to these Ancientes, whereof he had given to
Moses, that they might have so much help of grace as pleased God, and Moses
have never thelesse. S. Aug. q. 1^. in Number.
I will take of thy spirit, and will deliver to them, that they may sustain with
thee, the burden of the people, and thou only be not burdened. To is the hand
of the Lord unable? Now presently thou shall see whether my word shall be
accomplished in deed. Moses Gods grace sometimes preuenteth the ordinary
means Theodoret. q. 21. in Number.
for they also had been enrolled, and were not gone forth to the tabernacle.
And when they prophesied in the camp, By this example and figure S. Paul
shows that al shall not be saved, which are baptized, and communicate in the
same faith and Sacraments, but those only which also please God in their
works. 1. Cor. 10.
The Sepulchers of concupiscence: for there they buried the people that had
lusted. And departing from the Sepulchers of concupiscence, they came unto
Haseroth, and tarried there.

CHAP. XII. Marie and Aaron murmur against Moses. 6. whom God praises above
other prophets. 10. Marie being stricken with leprosy, Aaron confesses his
fault. 13. Moses prays for her, and after seven days separation from the
camp, she is restored.
AND Marie and Aaron spoke against Moses, for his Exodus 2.
wife the Madianites were also called Aethiopipians. S. Aug. q. 20. in Number.
Ethiopian, and they said: has our Lord spoken by Moses only? has he not
spoken to us also in like manner? Which when our Lord had heard, ( The Holy
Ghost forced Moses to utter his own praise, which of him self, he desired not.
For Aaron was not publikly punished, lest thereby he had been made co^^emptible
to the people, but was otherwise chatised.
when Aaron had looked on her, and saw her wholly covered with leprosy, he said
to Moses: I beseech

CHAP. XIII. From the desert of Pharan Moses sends twelve men (of every
tribe one) to view the Land of Chanaan. 17. changes Osee his name into Iosue,
18. instructs them which way to go, and what to note in the land: 22. which
they perform: 26. and after forty days return, bringing with them fruits,
in token of the lands fertility. 29. but in other respects (the rest besides
Caleb and Iosue) discoureging the people make them to murmur.
AND the people marched from Haseroth pitching their Changing of his name
literally imported the great office of chief Duke unto which he was designed.
mystically prefigured our Lord JESUS, for it is the same name in Hebrew, and
signifies SAVIOVR Theod. q. 25. in Number.
Iosue. Moses therefore sent them to view carried a cluster. And the discouerers
of the Land returning Pretending falsely that the Land had an unwholesome air,
devouring the inhabita^tes, and not possible to be obtained by reason of the
giants, covertly they detracted from Gods power, or his good will toward them,
who had promised the same. And therefore he gave it to their children, but not
to these seducers and murmurers. chap. 14. v. 23, 29.
deuoureth her inhabitants: the people, that we beheld, is of a tall stature.
There we saw certain monsters of the sons

CHAP. XIIII. The mutinous murmuring people being unplacable, 11. God
expostulateth their ingratitude, threatens to destroy them. 13. Yet Moses
pacifieth his wrath, 22. but so that al which were numbered coming from Egypt,
except C^leb and Iosue, shall die in the wilderness. 31. and their children shall
possess the promised land. 40. Then fighting contrary to Moses admonition
are beaten, and many slain by their enemies.
THEREFORE all the multitude crying out wept that These murmurers had their wish,
to their own punishment. chap. 14. v. 29. 26. v. 64.
in this vaste wilderness would God we might die, and that our Lord would not
bring us into this Land, lest we fall by the sword, and our wives and children
be led captive. Is it not better to return into Egypt? And one It is so
absolutely necessary in every community to have one Superior^ fall, that very
^u^^e^s themselves do ever choose such a one, and call him, the Electo.
Let us appoint a captain, and let us return into Egypt. Which Moses and
Aaron hearing fell flat upon the ground before all the multitude of the
children o^ Israel. But Iosue the son of Nun, and Caleb the After the sin
is forgeuen, yet punishment remains to be inflicted.
But yet all the not see the Land for the which I swear to their fathers,
neither shall any of them that has detracted me, behold it. My servant Caleb,
who Although grace be first given without desert: yet good works done by grace
do merit reward. S. Aug. de ^^at. and lib. arb. c. 6.
being full of an other spirit has Temporal punishment laid upon the children
for their fathers sins, is for their own spiritual good. S. Aug. Epist.
(...). ad. A^^tum.
shall bear your fornication, until the carcasses of their fathers be consumed
in the desert, according to the number of the forty days, wherein
prosperousely with you? Go not up, for our Lord is

CHAP. XV. Certain precepts concerning Sacrifices, 17. and first fruits, are
repeted, 22. also touching different punishment of sin committed by ignorance
and by set wilfulnes. 32. and accordingly one is stoned to death, for gathering
sticks on the Sabbath day. 37. Al are commanded to carry a sign in their
garments, thereby to remember the commandments of God.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to There shall be al one precept
and judgment as well to your Though sins wittingly committed, procedi^g of
pride and contempt of Gods commandment, could not be pardoned by the law: yet
such may also be remitted through true repentance. S. Aug. q. 25. in Number.
through pride commits any thing, Severity is used toward those that
knowi^g Gods will do contrary. Luc. 12. v. ^7.
dying him, and he died as our Lord had commanded. Our Lord The Jews in
Christ's time hypochritically enlarged these fringes, for vain show of holiness.
Mat. 23.
fringes in the corners of their garments, putting in them ribandes of
hyacinth: which when they shall see, they may remember

CHAP. XVI. Core and his accomplices, making schism against Moses and Aaron,
31. some are swalowed in the earth, with their families and substance; 35.
other two hundred and fifty offering incense, 41. and fourtene thousand seven
hundred of the common people, murmuring in behalf of the sedicious, are
consumed with fire from heaven.
AND behold Core the son of Isaar, the son of So Luther ( li. de abrog.
Missa) and other enemies of Ecclesiastical Hiererchy, will have no proper
Priesthood in the Church of Christ because al Christians are called a holy
priestbood. 1: Pet. 2 and Priests. Apoc. 1.
all the multitude consists of holy ones, and our Lord is among them: Why
lift you up your selves above the people of our Lord? Which stand before the
full assembly of the people, and should minister to him? did he therefore make
thee and al thy brethren Those that touch things perteining to impiety, or
depart not from the tabernacles of schismatikes are inwrapped in their sins:
much more to go unto bcretical Synagogues is condemned. See ^ Cyprian. li. de
la^^^s. ^a ag. ^.
lest you be wrapped in their sins. And when they were departed from their
tents round about, Moses pro^ed before* by miracles, ( Exodus 4.) that he was
sent of God: and now he proves again by miracle, that he and Aaron, and not
these schismatikes were called and sent by God to govern his people.
In this you shall know that I have not forged them of my own mind: If they die
Aaron being already established high Priest, God again confirms in ^le^zar
the progeny of priestlie succession, in Aarons stock, and no^ in other
Levites. S. Aug, q. 30. in ^um.
El^zar the son of Aaron This multitude did only in words favor
schisma^^kes, what judgment then remains to those which (...) external ac^^^
participat^ (...) hereti^^^*
even now will I destroy them. upon it, going quickly to the people to pray for
them: for even now is the wrath come forth from our Lord, and the plague
rages. Which when Aaron had done, and had

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI.
2. Rose against Moses.] By this most famous Schism and terrible punishment
This history ^others others were written for our admonition. 1. Cor. 10. Core
and his c^plices were not heretics, but only schismatikes.
thereof, al are warned to keep order, unity, and peace within the Church of
God; and in nowise to communicate with heretics, or schismatikes in the act of
heresy or schism. A necessary admonition especially in such times and places
as we live in, and see greater breaches made from ordinary and lawful Pastors,
then this was. For as S. Ignatius well notes ( Epist. 3. ad Magnatianos) Core
Dathan and Abiron impugned not directly the law, but resisted Moses and Aaron:
Yet were they and many thousands with them, seuerly punished for their
conspiracy. S. Cyprian ( lib. 1. Epist. 6.) observes the same, saying: Core
Dathan and Abiron acknowledged the same God with Aaron and Moses, living under
the same law and religion, and inuocated one true God, yet because, passing the
appointed ministry of their own place, opposite to Aaron (who by Gods favor
and ordinance had received lawful Priesthood) they took upon them to
sacrifice, they were forthwith punished by God for their God accepts not
sacrifice done against his ordinance.
unlawful attempts: neither could their sacrifices irreligiously and unlawfully
offered against Gods ordinance be ratified, nor profit them at al. thus
teaches S. Cyprian the glorious Martyr. And the text is clear, that they were
neither Idolaters nor Heretics, but the chief of them being Levites, of the
family of Caath, (who were nerestin kindred, and in office to the priests) and
other principal men of diuets tribes, envying the superiority of Moses and
Aaron, and that priesthood was established only in Aarons progeny, arrogated
to themselves the office of priests and offered incense, further pretending,
for upholding their schism, that there should be no Superior at al above the
holy people of God, which albeit they did not believe, yet thereby they drew the
multitude to favor and follow them. But God deciding this debate, to take God
by ^pre(...)hme^t pre^^nted heres^^, whereto al (...) tends.
away the contradiction, made the earth to open, and swallow up those that
first refused to obey Moses, with their tabernacles and substance; and fire
from heaven to consume two hundred and fifty which offered incense; and
fourtene thousand seven hundred of the common people, for imputing to their
Superiors the destruction of the sedicious, were also consumed with fire,
raging amongst the whole multitude, til Aaron sent by Moses, and offering
incense appeased Gods wrath, and saved the rest. And will any Christians, (that
know Not only the authors of wickedness, bu^ all that con ^nt, much more that
cooperate, ar^ vvorthie of death. Romans ^.
they have immoital souls, and that God is a just Judge) think to escape
with less damnation, who for any worldly game, favor, or fear, yield their
bodily and personal presence at service or sermon of heretics, oranic way
communicate with heretics in practice of heresy?

CHAP. XVII. Moses taking of the princes of twelve tribes twelve rods, and
one of Aaron for the tribe of Leui, lays them al in the tabernacle al night,
8. where Aarons rod (and none of the rest) buddeth, bloometh, and brings
forth fruit, 9. And al being showed to the people, Aarons is carried back, and
kept for a monument in the tabernacle.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Speak to For more satisfaction to the
whole people God confirms Aarons authority by a new miracle. v. 10.
take a rod of every one of their kinredes, of all the princes of their
tribes, twelve rods, and the name of every one thou shall write upon his
rod. and the name of Aaron shall be in the tribe of Leui, The rod signified
the B. Virgin mother; and the
rod in the house of Leui was budded: and the buddes thereof swelling, the
blossoms were shot forth, which spredding the leaves, were desormat^ fully
formed.
fashioned into almondes Christ, to wit, the v^te^ pill his humanity, the shel
his cross, the kernel his divinity: Who pacified by the blood of his cross,
al things in earth and in heaven. Collos. 1. S. Aug. ser. 3. de temp.
almondes. Moses therefore brought forth all the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVII.
8. Aarons rod.] This rod without root, neither it self planted, nor any
live branch ingraffed therein, al dry without juice or moisture, bringing
Example of one miracle proves the possibility of an other.
forth buddes, flowers, and fruit, was a figure that our B. Lady should bear
a son, and remain a Virgin. And this example evidently demonstrateth that
she could so do, it being no more contrary to nature, that a virgin should
conceive, and bear a child without loss of virginity, then that the dry
rod should bud and bear fruit, without ordinary concourse of nature. S.
Aug. ser. 3. de temp. S. Greg. Nisse^. de natiuit. Dom. S. Bernard. ho. 2. in
Euang. Missus est.

CHAP. XVIII. The charge and burden of Priests within the tabernacle, and of
Levites about the same. 8. First fruits, and oblations are due to the
Priests; 21. the tithes to the Levites; 26. who of the same pay tithes to the
Priests.
AND our Lord said to Aaron: Thou, and thy sons, Oz^ was slain for touching
the arck ^. Reg. 6.
he shall be slain. And our Lord spoke to Aaron, behold I have ordinances.
These things therefore shall thou take of This covenant of firstfruites and
other rights given to the Priests shall be perpetual, as salt is in every
sacrifice. Leuit. 2.
A covenant of salt is it for ever before the Lord, to thee and to thy sons.
And our Lord said to Aaron: Punishable with death.
deadly sin, only your generations. No other thing shall they possess,
being

CHAP. XIX. A red cow is offered in burnt victime for sin: 9. whose ashes
are mingled in water, for expiation of diverse legal uncleanness, 11. as by
touching the dead, 14. by entering into the tent of the dead, also the vessel
that is therein, and the vessel that lacks a cover, 22. and whatsoever the
unclean touches.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: The same things says S
August. ( q. 33.) and Theodoret ( q. 36. in Number) which were shadow ed and
prefigured in the old Testament, are reveled and manifested in the New. And
this special sacrifice prefigured diverse particular things in Christ's Passion.
the victime, which the His body of Adam signifying red earth
a red cow of At the age of 33. years
full age, wherein is Always most pure from sin.
no blemish, and that has Free from al bondage.
not carried yoke: and you shall deliver Crucified without the gate of Jerusalem.
without the camp, shall immolate her in the sight of al: and Al Sacraments
have their virtue of Christ's blood.
blood, shall sprinkle it against the doors of the tabernacle seven times, and
shall burn her From the sole of his feet to the top of his head al wounded,
with the whippes, crown, nails. etc.
as well her skin and the flesh as the blood, and the dong to the fire. VVood
of the cross brought life to the world.
Wood also of the Lively heat of so infinite charity dissolueth the coldness
of death.
hyssope, and scarlet Christ's suffering an example that we must also sustain
afflictions.
twice died shall the priest cast into the flame, that wastes the cow. And then
at Those that procured, o^ cooperated to Christ's death were polluted with sin.
shall be polluted until even. But he Joseph and Nicodemus buried Christ;
a man that is clean His sepulcher was glorious.
a most clean place, that they may be reserved for the multitude of the
children of Israel, and for water of aspersion: because the cow was burnt for
sin. And when he that carried the ashes of the cow, has washed Those also
that buried him, neded cloansing by his Passion, not for that work. but for
their sins.
he shall be unclean The old law did not remitte sins but the new.
until even. The children of Israel, and the strangers that dwell among them,
shall have this for a holy thing by a perpetual ordinance. He that Baptism in
the name of the B. Trinity
this water the third day, Without which no other Sacrament avails.
the seventh day he can not be cleansed. Every one that touches the dead corpse
of man's soul, and Every one that touches the waters of expiation, shall be
unclean until even. Whatsoever he touches that is unclean,

CHAP. XX. ari^ the sister of Moses dies. 2. The people murmr for lack of
water, 7. Moys^s and Aaron being commanded to draw some out of a rock, do it
doutfully: 12. and for the same are foretold that they shall die in the desert.
14. Not obtaining license to pass through Edom, 22. they come into Mount Hor,
where Eleazar is ordained hiegh Priest, Aaron dies, and is mourned by the
people thirty day.
AND the children of Israel, and all the multitude came The Epistle on friday in
the third weke of Lent.
together against Moses and Aaron: and being turned The ^ock signified Christ,
the rod his Cross. s. Aug. ^ 35 in Number
the rock before them, and it shall give waters. And when thou have brought
forth water out of the rock, all the multitude shall drink and their cattle.
Moses therefore took the rod, By this the cross is more evidently
signified, which was made of two pieces of wood. s. Aug. (...).
twice with the rod, there came forth great plenty of water, so that the
people drunk and their cattle. And our Lord said to Not doubting of Gods
power, but supposing it unmeet, that God should still work miracles for so ^^b
borne a people, they did not speak to the rock, asthey were commanded, but
chiding the incredulous multitude, spoke to them ambiguously, and so by
occasion of others sin, also offended, and for the same were punished. (...).
P^ut. 1, v (...) ^, v. 16. and 4, ^, 2^. s. Aug q. 19. The^^. q 38, in Xu^.
you have not believed me, to sanctify me before the children of Israel, you
shall not bring in these peoples into the land, which I will give them. This did
as our Lord had commanded: and they went up into the mountain Hor before all the multitude. And when he Mourning the dead was long before this observed by
tradition. G^^. 23. 50.
mourned upon him thirty days throughout al their families.

CHAP. XXI. Israelites at the first encounter with the Chananeites having the
worse, after their vow kill the King of Arad, and destroy his cities. 4. The
people again murmuring are stricken with fiery serpents, 7. but confessing
their fault, Moses by Gods commandment sets up a brazen serpent for a
remedy. 10. They march through diverse places. 17. and sing a Canticle at a well
which God gave them. 21. They kill Sehon King of the Amorreites, and conquer his
land. 33. Likewise Og King of Basan.
WHICH when the Chananeite king of Arad, who God forbidding images of idols,
yet commands to make an image for a good purpose.
Make a brazen Christ expounds this erecting of the brazen serpent, of him
self to be cru^^fied. Joan. 3.
A BRAZEN were stricken, looked on, they were healed. And the children As the
Egyptians were drowned in the sea; so the Amorrheites were oppressed by the
rocks falling upon them, and the waters carried their carcases into the valley
of Moab.
As he did in the Red sea, so will he do in the streams of Arnon. The rocks
of the torrentes devoured Ar of the Moabites, and the inhabitants of the high
places of Arnon. Woe to thee Moab, thou art undone

CHAP. XXII. Balac King of Moab fearing the Israelites, sends for Balaam a
souths^^^r to curse them. 8. Who consulting his false god, is forbid by God
almighty to go, and so excuses him self. 15. Balac sends again offering
greater reward, 19. he again consulteth, and God bidd^th him go. (...). but
sends an Angel to meet him in the way, whom his ass seeing, hu^neth three
times, and so often he beats her, 28. then she speaks, expostulating his
hard usage. 31. he also sees the Angel. 35. and is chargeg. ^ speak nothing
but that the Angel shall suggest.
AND marching forward they camped in the champion face of the earth, sitting
against me. Come therefore, and He consulted his false god, whom he served, and
called him the Lord, not knowing our Lord God almighty. Theodoret. q. 40.
Pr^copius. in Number.
the Lord shall say to me. And whiles they stayed with Balaam, God our Lord
answered him, not suffering the devil to speak in this case.
God came, and said to him: What would Being sufficiently informed before, for
worldly lucre he demands again, and God for his punishment lets him go:
but suffers him not to curse, no^ speak evil of the Israelites, but
contrariwise to prophecy much good, which should come unto them.
once more. God therefore came stood in the streicttes of two walls, wherewith
vineyardes were enclosed. Whom the ass seeing, joined her self Nothing is
here to be more merueled ( says S. Augustine) then that he was not afraid
when he heard his ass speak unto him. But being accustomed to such monstrous
things he replied familiarly, nothing therewith astoonished.
answered: Because thou have deserved, and have Yet seeing an Angel, he fell
down terrified, and adored him. ^. 48. in Number.
saw the Angel standing in the way with a drawn sword, and he Balaam knowing
him to be an Angel that appeared, neither adored him with divine honor as God,
nor with civil, as a mortal man, but with religious honor, less then divine,
and more then civil. See Exodus 20.
adored him flat to the ground. To whom the God sometimes makes false
prophets to utter a truth, because preiudicate minds do rather give ear to
such, the^ to true prophets. Theod. q. 45. in Number.
Go with these men, and see thou speak no other thing then I shall command
thee. He went therefore with the princes. Which when Balac heard, he came forth

CHAP. XXIII. Balaam endeavors to curse Israel, but God forces him to bless
them. 11. Again he urges him to curse them, but he still prophecieth good
things of them. 26. Yet Balac insisteth willing him to curse, or not to bless
them.
AND Balaam said to Balac: Before the devil would curse Gods people he required
sacrifice* which being offered yet he could not work his malice. For by Gods
commandme^s ( says S. Hierom. de man's. 42.) Israel is blessed, cursing turned
into praise and Gods voice is heard sounding from a profaine mouth.
Build me here seven altares, Heretics, and other infidels desire sometimes to
die in state of Catholics, though they will not live as they do. S. Greg. li.
33. c. 27. Moral.
My soul die the death of the Return to Balac and thus thou shall speak to
him. Returning ^ikne^ of id^l.
simulachre to be seen in Israel. The Lord his God is with him, and the sound
of the victory of the king in him. God has brought him out When Infidels can
not draw others to false worship, or cursing, they are content that men
profess no God, nor religion at al.
neither curse, nor bless him. And he

CHAP. XXIIII. Balaam forced by the evidence of truth (though not converted in
will to serve God, whom he confesses to be omnipotent) prophecieth still more
good of Israel: 10. wherefore Balac interrupteth him, and he answers plainly
that God almighty will have it so. 15. And so proceeding he prophecieth of
CHRIST. 20. Also of Amalacheites, Cineites, and Italians.
AND when Balaam had seen that it pleased our Lord God coming The spirit of
prophecy came more upon him, but not grace justifying: M(...) do prophecy,
and cast out devils, and work other miracles, and yet be damned Mat. 7. v. 22.
vehemently upon him, taking up his parable In some ^o^ this prophecy was
fulfilled in King David. 2. Reg. 5. 8. and seq. but perfectly in Christ the
bright, and morni^g star* Apoc. 22. To whom not any one, or many, but in
general al nations are given for inheritance, and the ends of the world, in
possession. Psalm. 2. Act. ^. v. 8.
A STAR SHALL RISE out of Jacob, and a rod shall arise from Israel: and shall
strike the dukes of Moab, and shall waist all the children of Seth. And Idumea
shall be his possession: the inheritance destroy the remains of the city. And
when he had seen Not to his country, but to his place of abode among the
Madianites: for there he was slain shortly after. chap. 31. v. 8.
his place: Balac also returned the way that he came.

CHAP. XXV. By carnal fornication many are drawn to spiritual. For which
twenty four thousand are slain. 10. Phinees his Zele in stabbing to death
two fornicators, is commended by God, and rewarded.
AND Israel at that time abode in Settim, and the people Balaam gave this
devilish counsel to allure men by bellichere and lechery unto idolatry. chap.
31. v. 16. And even so Heretics draw many in these days to heresy. Sea
Apoc. 2. v. 14.
fornicated with the daughters of Moab, who called By assistance of the princes
hang the idolaters. v. 5.
them up against the sun on gibbettes: that my fury may be auerted from
Israel. And Either Phinees was one of the Judges* and so an example for such
Magistrates to do justice; or he had a particular inspiration, which is no
warrant for private men, to do the like. For by Catholic doctrine, killing of
men is neither allowed, nor excused but when it is done by public authority,
or by mere casualitie, against the killers will. Catechis. Romans p. 3. c. 6. q.
5. D. T^^. 2. 2. q. 60 a. 6.
has auerted my wrath from the children of Israel: because he was moved with
my zele against them, that my self might not destroy the children of Israel in
mine own zele. Therefore speak to him: Behold I give him the peace of

CHAP. XXVI. All the men of twelve tribes being again numbered, from the age of
twenty years and upward, are found to be six hundred one thousand seven
hundred and thirty. 57. Of the tribe of Leui also, numbered of the male sex
from the age of one month and upward, are found twenty three thousand. 64. al
being dead in the desert, which were numbered before, except Caleb and Iosue.
AFTER Gods wrath being pacified by extirpation of the old bad people, the new
progeny is numbered which shall possess the promised land S. Hierom. de Man's.
42. to. 3.
the blood of the offenders was shed, our Lord Abiron the princes of the
people, that rose against Moses and Aaron in the sedition of Core, when they
rebelled against our Lord: and the earth opening her mouth devoured They were
retained in the air, til the earth broken under them was closed again.
his sons perished not. The family of the Machirites. Machir begat Galaad,
of whom is the family of the Galaadites. Galaad had sons: Iezer, whom is the
family of the Iesielites: Guni, of whom is the family of the Gunites, Ieser,
of whom is the family of Amram married his aunt: which shows that the second
degree in consanguinitie is not forbid by the law of nature; though it was
after prohibited by a positive law. Leuit. 18.
the daughter of

CHAP. XXVII. Salphaads daughters succeed to their fathers inheritance. 8. And
the law is established that for lack of sons daughters shall inherit, and for
lack also of daughters the next of kin. 12. God commands Moses to ascend
into Mount Abarim, and thence view the promised Land, but fortelleth him that
he shall die, and not go into it. 15. He then prays God to provide an other
to lead the people, 18, and Iosue is designed in presence of Eleazar and the
people.
AND there came the daughters of Salphaad, the son For the general murmuring,
whereof all the people were guilty. cha. 14. ^. 29.
his own sin: he had no men children. Why is his name taken away out of his
family, because he has not a son? Give us possession among the kin of our
father. And Moses referred their Cades of the desert Sin. To whom Moses
answered: Temporal Princes are also pastors, or shepherds of the people: but
this made not Iosue supreme in spiritual causes. For it is clear in the next
lines that he had but part of Moses his glory, or office* and that was to be
temporal prince, Eleazar being chief in causes spiritual, before whom and the
multitude he was ordained Duke, but Eleazar consulted God for him, and directed
his principal actions, called here his going out, and going in.
pastor. And our Lord said to him: Take Iosue the son of Nun, a

CHAP. XXVIII. Special sacrifices are appointed for every day in the morning
and evening. 9. Likewise for every Sabbath day, 11. for the first day of
every month, 16. for Pasch, 26. and for Penticost.
OUR Lord also said to Moses: Command the children Variety of Sacrifices for
diverse times.
in their times. These are the sacrifices which you Every day twice.
the everlasting holocaust: one you shall offer in the 1.
morning, and the other at even: the tenth part of an ephi 2.
day of On the Sabbath day.
the Sabbath, you shall offer two lambs of a year old without blemish, and two
tenthes of flower tempered with oil in sacrifice, and the libamentes which are
ritely 3.
in The Neomenia, or new moon.
the Calendes you shall offer an holocauste to the Lord, two calves of the
heard, one ram, seven lambs of a year old without blemish, and three
tenthes of flower tempered Pasch, or Phase.
the fourtenth day of the month shall be the 4.
Phase of the Lord, and the fiftenth day the solemnity: 5.
work shall you do therein. The day also of Pentecost*
first fruits two, every lamb the tenth part of a tenth, which together

CHAP. XXIX. In the seventh month are celebrated with particular sacrifices
the feasts of Trumpets, 7. of Expiation, 12. of Tabernacles, 35. and of
Assembly and Collection. 6.

THE Feast of Trumpets.
first day also of the seventh month shall be venerable 7.
most sweet odor to the Lord. The Feast of Expiation.
tenth day also of For remission of sins the penitents did cooperate by penal
works of fasting and abstinence, from even until even* Leuit. 23. (...). ^2.
S. Aug. q. 57. in Number. Theod. q. 32. in Leuit.
afflict your souls: no servile work shall you do therein. And you shall offer
an holocaust to the Lord Feast of Tabernacles.
fiftenth 8.
shall celebrate the solemnity to the Lord seven days. and of flower tempered
with oil three tenthes to every calfe, which are together thirtene calves:
and two tenthes to every ram, that is, together to two rams, and the 9.
shall ritely celebrate: and a bucke goat for sin, beside Feast of Assembly,
and Collection.
eight (...) is most solemn, no servile you do therein, offering an holocauste
for a most sweet

CHAP. XXX. Voluntary vows or oaths of men; 14. of maids in their fathers
houses, 7. or newly married; 10. of widows, or wives divorced, 11. and of wives
in their husbands houses: and how they bind, or are made frustrate.
AND Moses told the children of Israel al things that He that voweth
abstinence from a thing lawful, makes it unlawful to him self by his vow. S.
Aug. q. 56. in Number.
make In this case God will not impute it to her for a si^ne. S. Aug. q. 58.
propitious to her. The widow, and she that is deuorced whatsoever gaynesay
the promise, she shall render whatsoever she had promissed. but if forthwith he
gaynesay it, she shall not be By afflicting of the soule^ here understood,
restraining sensual delectation. S. Aug. q. 57. in Number.
afflict her soul by fasting, or abstinence from other things, it shall be in
the arbitrament of her husband, whether she shall do it, or not do it. and if
the husband hearing it hold his peace, and differ The husband reuoking his
consent, once given by word, or by silence to his wives vow, sinned, but the
wife was bound to obey him, and so was excused.
him self shall bear her iniquity. These are

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXX.
6. Shall be frustrate] Vows, which fathers and husbands could frustrate'
Vows of things not commanded.
in their daughters and wives, must needs be meant of things not commanded by
God. For it was not in their power to dispense in Gods precepts. As for
example, touching the feast of Expiration, it was not in the arbitrament of
fathers and husbands (as here it was v. 14) whether their daughters and wives
should fast or no: but was absolutely said: ( Leuit. 23. v. 29.) ^uerie soul
that is not afflicted (that is, which fasteth not) this day, shall perish out of
his people. And so in S. Aug, q. 57. in Number.
other precepts were necessary obligations. Besides which it is gratful also
to God, that his servants bind them selves to other good works, whereto they
are not otherwise bound.

CHAP. XXXI. The Madianites are slain in battle, for that they had drawn the
people of Israel to sin. 11. The pray is brought to Moses, 14. Who being
angry that the women (which were the occasion of sin) are saved alive,
commands to k^lal the male children, and all the women saving only virgins.
19. The souldiars are purified, as also the pray, 26. and then divided among
the victours, and other people, taking out portions for the Levites. 48. The
princes of the host give free offerings to our Lord.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Revenge revenge of our Lord on the
Madianites. Let a thousand With who^ he sinned, with them he was also justly
punished.
Balaam also the son of Beor they killed with the sword. And they took their
wives, and little ones, and al These women bringing imagies of Beelphogot,
caused the Israelites to offer sacrifice to him, before they should commit
fornication with them.
the sin of Phogor, whereupon also the people was stricken? Therefore kill al
whatsoever is of the male sex, among In more detestation of the parents sin,
God commanded to kill these children and so they were prevented, from committing
the like crimes. But ordinarily, women and children ought not to be slain
after the victory. Deuteronomy. 20. v. 14.
the abide the fire, shall be sanctified with the water of expiation: and you
shall wash your garments the seventh day, and of the host were come to Moses,
and the tribunes, and centurions, they said: We thy servants have reckened the

CHAP. XXXII. The children of Ruben and Gad, demanding to have inheritance on
that side Jordan, where they yet are, 7. Moses justly rebukes them; 16. yet
upon condition that they will march first over Jordan, and remain the first in
battle, til the land be subdued to the children of Israel, 28. he grants to
them, and the half tribe of Manasses, that which they request.
AND the children of Ruben and Gad had much cattle, A right figure of those
that would possess heaven without labor or danger. But none shall be crowned
unless he strive lavvfully. 2. Tim. 2.
make us not pass over Jordan To coasts, which our Lord gave them. Who being
wrath the son of Nun, and the princes of the families by the tribes of
Israel, and he said to them: If the children of Gad,

CHAP. XXXIII. The 42. mansions of The children of Israel between Aegype and the
Land of promise are recited. 50. they are commanded to kill all the inhabitents,
to purge the land of idolatry, and divide it among them.
THESE are These remonings, and camping places signify by what degrees
christians leaving sins, and following Christ (our guide) may come to perfect
piety. S. Hierom. de man's. 42. ad Fahiol.
the mansions of the children of Israel, that from Ramesses the first month,
the fiftenth day of the first month, the morrow after they made the Phase, in a
mighty hand, all the Egyptians seeing them, and burying their from Hebrona,
they camped in Asiongaber. Thence departing, Danger to those that destroy not
infidelity, and al enormious sins, which dwelt in their souls before their
conversion.
if you will not kill the inhabitants of the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXIII.
1 Moses and Aaron.] Moses by whom the Law was given, and Aaron in Two hands
which work salvation.
whom Priesthood was established, signified good works, and the right worship
of God. Of which (says S. Hierom) each one needs the other. For neither
does it profit thee to exercise virtues unless thou know thy Creator: nor
the worshipping of God avails thee to salvation, unless thou sulfil the
precepts of thy Maker. By these two hands, as with two Seraphims we break out
into confession of the holy Trinity, saying: Holy, holy, holy Lord God of
^oastes. Epist. ad Fabiol de 42. Man's.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The situation and limits of Chanaan, toward the South, the
VVeast, the North, and the East. 13. which must be divided by lotte among nine
tribes and a half (the other two and a half having their parts over Jordan)
16. with the names of the persons that shall make the division.
AND our Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Command Otherwise called the dead sea,
where Sodom and Gomort had stood.
the most salt sea for the limits. The which shall compass A mountain so
called of the multitude of scorpions, which were in it.
the Scorpion, so that they shall pass into Senna, and reach toward the South
as far as Cadesbarne, from whence the frontiers shall go forth to the town
named Adar, and shall reach as far as Asemona. And the border shall go round
about from Mediterraneal sea, called great in respect of the lakes in the holy
Land.
great sea. And the west side shall begin from the Mount of Libanus.
most high mountain, from he which they shall come unto Emath as far as the
reach as far as Jordan, and at the last shall be closed in by the most salt
sea. This you shall have for your Land by the bounds thereof round about. And
Moses commanded

CHAP. XXXV. Cities and suburbs are appointed for the Levites, among the other
tribes. 6. Of which six shall be for refuge of such as unwittingly kill any man,
22. where, keeping them selves til the death of the high Priest, they shall be
safe. 30. Willful murderers convicted (so it be by more then one witness) must
die forthwith.
THESE things also spoke our Lord to Moses in the round about, shall reach the
space of a thousand paces. Toward the East shall be two thousand cubits: and
toward Yet not before sentenc^ of death. ^. 12. and 24. S. Aug. q. 65. in Number.
as sown as he apprehends him, he shall kill him. If through hatred from the
hand of the revenger, and by sentence shall be brought back into the city, to
which he had fled, and he shall tarry there, Mystically this signified, that the
way to true life was not open before Christ's death Theodor. q. 51. in Number. S.
Grig. ho. 6. in Ezechielem.
until the High priest, that is anointed with the holy oil, do die. If the
murderer be found without the limits

CHAP. XXXVI. That the inheritances may not be alienated from one tribe to an
other, al must marry within their own tribes.
AND the princes also of the families of Galaad, the son touching the
daughters of Salphaad: Let them marry to whom they will, only that it be to
the men of their own tribe: lest the possession of the children of Israel be
mingled Al were not bound by this law to marie; but all that would marry must
contract within their own tribe.
al men shall marry wives of their own tribe and kindred: and al women shall
take husbands

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXVI.
4. Distribution of lottes] By reason of two former laws, the one ( Leuit.
25.) providing that inheritance of lands should not be sold, nor otherwise
alienated, but until the Iubilee year, and then return to him, or his heirs,
to Restrant in Marriages also for a temporal* cause.
whom it pertained before; the other ( Number. 27.) ordaining that for lack of a
son, daughters should enherite; this difficulty did rise; in case an
enheretrixe did marry a man of an other tribe, her lands by that means
should pass from tribe to tribe, and not be restored in the Iubilee year. For
avoiding of which inconvenience a further law is made, that none shall marry
out of their own tribe.

Nevertheless the tribe of Leui made marriages with the tribe of Judah: as ^^^.
^. ^. (...).
appears by that Zachary the priest married Elizabeth cousin to our B. Lady
of the tribe of Judah; though in the old Testament there is no such express
dispensation, Tradition
nor explication of the law, but by tradition was holden for lawful and
practiced by so holy a man as Zachary. And not without mystery (as S.
Augustine notes li. 2. c. 2. d^ consen. Euang.) for that Christ the Anointed
of God, Christ a King and a Priest.
was prefigured by the anointing of Kings, and Priests, and borne of the royal
and priestlie tribes, being both a King and a Priest.

THE ARGUMENT OF DEVTERONOMIE.
DEVTERONOMI, in English The second law, so called not that there be two laws
of Moses, but because the same which was first This book is a repetition,
explication, and suplement of the Law.
S. Aug. q. 49. in Deutero^.
given in Mount Sinai, fifty days after the children of Israel parted from
Egypt, is here repeted, in the eleventh month of the fourtith year of their
abode in the desert. In which repetition albeit Moses explicateth the same
law, adding also diverse things not expressed before: yet is it but an
Abbridgement conceived and uttered in fewer words. VVhereupon S. Bode (in
princ. Leuit.) compares this book with the four precedent, as one made It
presigured the Gospel.
et princ. Leutero.
of them al. For whereas the former four prefigured the four Gospels, this
signified the whole Gospel, contained in all four. Likewise S. Hierom calls
it A prefiguration of the Euangelical law: so iterating former things, that al
become new of old. (Epist ad Paulin. Man's. vlt.
ca. 7. and de Man's. 42.) But touching the literal sense, Moses here
compriseth four general things: unto which after his death the fifth is added;
and so the whole contains five parts. First, he briefly recites Gods
special benefits Contains five parts.
Chap. 1.
bestowed on this people, and their ingratitude, incredulity, murmurings, and
punishments. in the three first chapters. Secondly he repeteth and 4. 12.
explicateth Gods precepts, moral, ceremonial, and judicial, with the functions
and offices of Priests, and Levites. from the 4. chap. to the 27. Thirdly 27.
he denounces Gods promises of many blessings, and thretes of punishments,
for keeping or breaking his commandments. from the 27. chap. to 31 Fourthly 31.
he exhorts them to serve and love God, but withal fortelleth, that they will
often fall to great sins, and for the same shall be punished, and at last
forsaking Christ, shall be forsaken: yet finally blesses their tribes, in
figure of the Gentiles, that shall be called in their place. chap. 31. 32. and
33. Fifthly, in 34.
the last chapter, losue writes the death, burial, and singular commendation
of Moses.

THE BOOK OF DEVTERONOMIE, IN HEBREW ELLE HADDEBARIM.
CHAP. I. Moses begins, the first day of the eleventh month and fourtith
year after the children of Israel parted from Egypt, to repete and explicate
the Law; 6. first putting them in mind of Gods munisicence, his own and other
superiors care over them, their ingratitude, incredultie, murmuring, 34. The
first part. A repetition of Gods benefits, the peoples ingratitude, and
punishment.
and punishment for the same.
THESE are the words, which Moses your fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
that he would give it to them, and to their seed after them. And I said to
tabernacles, and said: Our Lord hates us, and therefore has brought us out of
the Land of Egypt, that he might deliver us into the hand of the Amorrheite,
and destroy us. Whither God so helps his servants, that they also must
cooperate. S. Aug. q. 1. in Deuteronomy.
Fear not, neither be ye afraid of them: Our Lord God, Difference of sins.
his indignation against the God is also angry with his good servants, and
punishes the^ temporally, for small sins. S. Aug. q. 1. in Iosue.
angry with me also for you, said: Neither shall thou enter in thither. But
Iosue the son of Nun thy minister, he shall enter for Amorrheite that dwelt in
the mountains issuing forth, and coming to meet you, pursewed you, as bees
are wont to pursew: and smote you from Seir as far as Horma. And

CHAP. II. With commemoration of Gods continual protection of the Israelites,
they are forbid to fight against the Idumeans, 9. the Moabites, or Ammonites*
24. But against Sehon King of Hesebon they should fight, kill him and al his,
and possess his land.
AND departing thence we came into the wilderness, These were men of very
great stature, but not equal to the giantes before the should.
they were thought, as it were giantes, of the Enacims stock, and were it, as
Israel did in the land of his possession, which our Lord gave him. Rising up
therefore to pass the Torrent By this we are instructed to fight aga^st
in^ideles, but not without special cause against christians, signified by the
children of Lot and Esau.
make war against him. This day will I begin to send thy The I dumeans once
denied them passage Number. 20. v. 20. but afterward granted thereto.
the children of Esau have done, that dwell in Seir, and And Sehon the king of
Hesebon would not give us passage: God permitted him for his former sins, to
indurate him self. See Exodus 7. v. 3.
indurated his spirit, and hardened his heart, that he might be delivered into
thy hands, as now thou see. And our Lord said to me: Behold

CHAP. III. The victory against Og king of Basan of the giants stock is
repeted, 12. Ruben Gad and half tribe of Manasses have possession on the other
side Jordan from their brethren. 23. Moses praying that he may go over
Jordan, for the sins of the people is denied.
THEREFORE turning we went up by the way of Basan: and children: but the cattle,
and the spoils of the cities Longer sort of cubits are a foot and 9,
inches: so this bed was 15. foot and nine inches long, and 7. foot broad.
Vitruuius Agricola.
the cubite of a man's hand. And we possessed the Land at that time from Esdras
adding these words, and often times the like, did not against the law, because
such additions are agreeable and not contrary to that which was written before.
until this present day To Machir also I gave Galaad. And to the tribes shall
pass. Fear them not: for the Lord your God will fight See Number. (...). ^. 12.
for you, and heard me not, but said to me: It suffices thee: speak no more
to me of this matter. Go up to the top of Phasga, and cast thine

CHAP. IIII. Moses exhorts the people to keep Gods commandments. 15. Namely
that they make no similitude nor image of man, nor of beast, bird, fish, sun,
moon, nor of any creature to serve the same for the Creator. He fortelleth
The second part. A repetition and explication of the law.
his own death, 23. threatens them if they forsake God. 41. and appoints
three cities of refuge, on the same side Jordan.
AND now Israel hear the precepts and judgments, To keep Gods co^mandments
is counted by all nations the most excellent wisdom.
this is your wisdom, and understanding before peoples, that hearing al these
precepts, may say: Behold a people full of wisdom and understanding, a great
nation. Neither is there other nation so great, that has gods approaching
unto them, as our God is present at al our petitions. For what other Here and
in other places it is manifest that the commandments, called the Decalogue, are
just ten.
ten words, that he wrote in two tables of stone. And he commanded me at
that time that Venial and least sins pass not with out temporal punishment.
that I should not pass over Jordan, nor enter into the excellent Land, which
he will give you. Behold I die This was also a Mystery, that the old law,
signified by Moses, could not bring to heaven, the true land of promise, but
the law of Christ, signified by Iosue. Theodoret, q. 43. in Deuteronomy.
in this ground, covenant of the Lord thy God, which he has made with thee:
and make to thee a graven similitude of those things, which our Lord has
prohibited to be made: because the Conversion of the Jews in the end of the
world.
the latter time thou shall return to the Lord thy God, and shall hear his
voice. Because the thou at thy entering in, and to bring thee in, and give thee
their land in possession, as thou see this present day. Know

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IIII.
2. You shall not add.] Moses can not mean, that no more should be As other
Scriptures are included in the law, so also Traditions are contained in the
Scriptures.
written, nor commanded; for then the last chapter of this book, and the rest
of the Bible should not have benne written after his death; neither ought the
Priests or Prophets to have commanded any thing not expressed in the law.
And whereas Protestants say that al other Scriptures are included in the
Brentius Ke^nisius Calvin.
law, or pertain to the explication or performance thereof: we also answer
that unwritten Traditions both in the old and new Testament are likewise
implied, included, or perteine to the explication or performance of the law.
For even as the written doctrine of the Prophets, yea and of Christ, and his
Apostles, in general is contained in the law of Moses, so also are certain
fastes, feasts, rites, ceremonies and other traditions proved and confirmed by
general speeches and axioms written in holy Scriptures, as by our Saviors
words to his Apostles Luc. 10. He that hears you, hears me. S. Paul's to
other Christians (1. Cor. 10.) other things when I come I vvil dispose (2 Thessalonians 2.) Hold the traditions which you have learned: and the like. Whereupon
S. Augustine The Church, commended by Scriptures, approves Traditions.
Li. 1. cont Crescon. c. 33. gives this rule, that albeit an evident example
can not be produced of holy Scripture, yet the truth of the same Scriptures is
holden by us, when we do that pleases the whole Church, which the
authority of Scriptures commends. The same he teaches. Epist. 80. and in
many other places. So do S. Epiphanius in compend. sides Cathol. S Hierom.
Dialog. cont. Lucifer. c. 4. S. Chrysostom, ho. 4. in 1. Thessal 4. S. Basil. de
Spiritu Sancto, c. 39. S. Ireneus li. 3. c. 4.

CHAP. V. The ten commandments are repeted and explaned. 23. with
commemoration of their dread and fear, When they heard the voice from the
cloud, and saw the mountain burn.
AND Moses called al Israel, and said to them: Hear It is not enough to
believe only, or to know the commandments, but necessary also to fulfill them in
^vor^e.
fulfill them in work. The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. The
title of mediator lawfully ascribed to Gods lieu^enant in ^^rth.
mediator betwixt our Lord and you at that time, to show you his words, for
you feared the fire, and went not up into the mount, and he said: I the Lord
thy Sabbath, that is, the rest of the Lord thy God. Thou shall not do any
work therein, thou, and thy son and daughter, man servant and woman servant,
and ox, and ass, and al thy cattle, and the stranger that is within thy
gates: that thy man servant may rest, and thy woman servant, even as thy self.
Remember that thou also did serve in Egypt, Coveting as other man's wife,
and coveting his goods, differ as much, as the exterior acts of adultry and
of theft. And so these two commandments are as distinct as the former two.
Nor house, Go and say to them: Return into your tents. But

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. V.
8. Thou shall not make.] If our adversaries would quietly consider the
coherence of the holy text, they might easily see, that this prohibition of
making, and worshipping the similitude of any creature, perteyneth to the
Images of Idols forbid, but not of other things.
former sentence: Thou shall not have strange gods: more particularly
forbidding either to make Idols, or to worship such as others make; and that
with commination, because our Lord is a ielous God, and will not suffer his
honor to be given to any creature. But other Images were made in the old
Testament, by Gods commandment, and likewise Images of Christ and his Saints
are lawful and profitable among Christians. as before is noted. Exodus 20.

CHAP. VI. God is diligently to be served, and loved with thy whole heart, thy
whole soul, and whole strength. Al his precepts, ceremonies and judgments
must be carefully kept, and commended to posterity.
THESE are the precepts, and ceremonies, and judgments, strength. And these
words, which I command thee Some adoration agrees to creatures, but service
of Latria to God only S. Aug. q 61. in Genesis
him only shall thou serve, and by his name shall thou swear. You shall not
go after the strange all the days of our life, as it is at this day. And he
will be

CHAP. VII. No league nor fellowship to be had with the Gentiles: 5. but their
altares, groves, and al their idols to be destroyed. 17. God promises
victories to his people, willing them to trust in him, and serve him.
WHEN the Lord thy God shall have brought thee Not withstanding this
commination, God ofrentimes differreth punishment, expecting the sinners
repentance.
that the Lord thy God, he is a strong and faith full God, keeping his covenant
and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his precepts, unto a
thousand generations: and thee this day to do them. Gods promises co^ditional,
if his people serve him.
If after thou have heard these

CHAP. VIII. The people is put in mind of afflictions which happened in the
deserte, and of benefits as well past, as promised* 11. to the end they love
and serve God more effectually.
EVERY commandment, that I command thee this God is able to make food of
what he please, or to sustain men without ^^cate.
not in bread only a man live, but in every word that proceeds from the
mouth of God. Thy raiment, wherewith thy God, that brought thee out of the Land
of Egypt, out of the house of servitude: and was thy conductor in the A
serpent less then a scorpion, making those whom he byteth to die of thirst
Sol^^us in polyhist. cap. de Africa.
the dipsas, and no waters at al: who brought forth rivers out of the hardest
rock, and fed thee with Manna in the wilderness, which

CHAP. IX. Lest they should impute the victories (which they shall have) to them
selves, 6. they are put in mind of their often provoking Gods wrath, 12. by
idolatry, 22. by murmuring, by concupiscence, by contempt, and other sins.
25 for which they should have been destroyed, but God spared them for his
prou^^se made to Abraham Isaeac and Jacob.
HEAR Israel: Thou shall go over Jordan this day; Holy Scripture uses the
figure Hyperbola, following the vulgar manner of speaki^g as well to help the
understanding, as to move affection in great and extraordinary things.
even unto heaven, a great entering in they are destroyed: and that our Lord
might accomplish his word, which by oath he promised to thy fathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. Know therefore that not for The similitude of a calfe and
called it their god. Exed. 32.
a molten idol. And again pray. And your sin that you had committed, that
is, the

CHAP. X. Moses receiving the second tables of the ten commandments, and
making an arc put them therein. 6. with mention of certain places where the
children of Israel had camped, of Aarons death, and to the Levites offices, and
possesstons, 12. be inculcateth the fear and love of God, and the keeping of
his precepts. 16. namely to circumcise the heart. 19. to love strangers 20. and
not to serve, nor swear by false gods.
AT that time our Lord said to me: Hew thee two tables he wrote in the tables,
according as he had written before, the ten words, which our Lord spoke to you
in the mount from the mids of the fire, when the people was gathered: and he
gave them to me. And returning from the mount, This Mosera where Aaron died, is
more commonly called Hor. Number. 20. and. 33.
Mosera, where Aaron died and was buried, for whom, Eleazar his soon did the
function of priesthood. Thence they came into shall cleave, and When just
cause requires an oath, it must be made in the name of God, not of false
gods.
shall swear in his name. He is thy praise,

CHAP. XI. For the benefits of God (whereof some are repeted, and others
promised) the Israelites are bound to love him. 16. but if they forsake him he
threatens punishments, 26. proposing benediction and malediction as they shall
deserve.
LOVE therefore the Lord thy God, and observe his precepts with all your heart,
and with all your soul: he will give rain Rain after seeding and before
harvest signifies Gods grace first stirring up the soul, and assisting the
same to the end.
the timely and the lateward, that you may gather your corn, and wine, and
oil, and hay out of the The second lesson in Mass on Imber Saturday in Lent
you, and do them, that you love the Lord your God, and walk in all his ways,
cleaving to him, our Lord will destroy God works, and we cooperate, for he
takes not away, but helps free will. S. Aug. q. 15. in Deuteronomy.
benediction beside the valle that reaches and enters far. For you

CHAP. XII. Al idolatry, and whatsoever apperteineth thereto must be destroyed.
5. Sacrifices, tithes, and donaries must be offered in the special place, 15.
Eating flesh they must not eat the blood. 29. In no case to imitate the
idolatry of gentiles.
THESE are the precepts and judgments, that you Peculiar place appropriate
to Gods service.
to the place, which In the dese^^ they could not observe the ceremonies of the
Law: but coming to rest they were bound to keep al one set form of holy
rites.
every man that which seems good to him self. For shall you feast before the
Lord your God, you and your sons and daughters, men servants and women
servants, and the Leuite, that dwells in your cities* for he has no other
part and possession among you. Beware thou offer our Lord shall choose: and
shall offer thy oblations the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XII.
32 That only do to our Lord.] VVheras the Gentiles offered their sons and No
hosts lawful in sacrifice but such as the law appointed
daughters (v. 31.) and other abominable sacrifices to Idols, God commands
his people to offer those things only, which are prescribed by the law, and
neither to imolate any other thing, nor exclude any thing appointed by the
same law for sacrifice. As for other precepts, it is likewise forbid to add
or diminish any thing that may corrupt the law: but was ever lawful for
Superiors, New precepts may be added, not contrary to the former.
to add more precepts agreeable, and not contrary to the former. So King
David established a new law that such as stayed with the baggage, should have
like portion of the pray, with those that fought in battle. 1. Reg. 30. And
our Savior by his presence (Joan 10*) approved the feast of dedication,
instituted long after Moses law. 1. Machab, 4.

CHAP. XIII. False Prophets must be slain, 6. how nere soever they be in
kindred, or freindshipe. 12. The whole city that shall permite false doctrine
must be utterly destroyed, men, beasts, and al moueables, and never be built
again.
IF there rise in the mids of thee a prophet, or one that Novelty in
Religion is a mark of idolatry or heresy.
Let us go, and follow strange gods, which thou know not, and let us serve
them: thou shall not hear the words of that prophet or dreamer: for the Lord
your God tempts you, that it may appear whether you love him or no, with all
your heart, and with all your soul. Follow the Every private man is not
commanded, nor warrented by this to kill: but every one is bound to inform the
Magistrate, and so by order of justice to proceed against the wicked.:: Such as
will not endure discipline are called children of Be^lial, that is, without
yoke.
forthwith thou shall kill him* let thy:: that our Lord may be turned from the
wrath of his fury, and may have mercy on thee, and multiply thee as he swear
to thy fathers, when thou shall hear the voice of the Lord

CHAP. XIIII. Gentiles manner of mourning for the dead is prohibited. 3.
Likewise to eat things unclean, with mention of certain clean and unclean
beasts, 9. fishes, 11. and birds. 21. Also precepts of piety, clemency,
paying tithes, first fruits, 27. nourishing of Levites, strangers, orphans,
and widows.
BE YE the children of the Lord your God: you shall not is dead of it self,
eat not thereof. If these things were unclean by nature they were not lawful
for any nation to eat, but being only forbid to the Jews shows, that this
prohibition was ceremonial, only for that time and people.
To the stranger, that is within thy gates, give it to eat, or sell it to him:
because thou art the holy people of our Lord thy God. Thou shall Al show of
cruelty to be avoided. Mystically this presigured, that Christ (for the
similitude of sinful flesh signified by a kidde) should not be slain in his
infancy. ^. Tho. 1. 2. q. 102. ^. 6. ad 4.
not boil a kidde in the milk of his damme. The

CHAP. XV. Remission of dibtes in the seventh year to the israelites, but not
to strangers. 4. Albeit there will always be some poor, yet they must so lend
to their needy brethren, that none be forced to beg. 12. Abought servant
that is an hebrew must be set free in the seventh year, 16. except he desire
to serve still. 19. The firstborne in all cattle must be consecrated to God,
without making private profit thereof.
IN the seventh year thou shall make a remission, which country man and
neighbor thou shall not have power to require it. And The Israelites were
bound to do their endeavor that none should be needy among them:
notwithstanding for exercise of love and charity Gods providence suffered some
to be poor. ^. 7. and. 11.
needy person and beggar there shall be He that can and will not feed his
neighbor in extremity, kills him. S. Amb. li. 2. de Offic. c. 7.
it become a sin unto thee. But thou shall give to him: neither shall thou
hireling: that our Lord thy God may bless thee in all the works that thou
do. Of the first borne, that come

CHAP. XVI. Three more solemn feasts to be kept every year, Pasch, 9.
Pentecost, 13. and The rest of the feasts are mentioned Leuit. 23. Number. 28.
and. 29.
the feast of tabernacles, 18. Just Judges to be appointed in every city. 21*
Al occasions of Idolatry to be avoided.
OBSERVE the month of new corn, and Here only three of the principal.
the first 1.
the Phase to our Lord thy God, of sheep, and of:: Pasch.
oxen in the place, which our Lord thy God shall choose, that his name may dwell
there. Thou shall not eat in it leuened days shall thou eat azymes: and in
the seventh day, because it is the collection of our Lord thy God, thou shall
do no work. Seven weeks shall thou number thee from that 2. Pentecost.
day wherein thou did put the sickle to the corn, and 3. Feast of
Tabernacles.
thou shall celebrate seven days, when thou have gathered thy fruit of the
barn floor and the press: and thou shall It is not enough to do that is
just except it be done justly, to a good end, for love of justice.
Justly shall thou pursew that which is just: that

CHAP. XVII. Perfect hosts, not mamed nor defective, must be offered to God,
Idolaters stoned to death. 8. When inferior judges differ, the cause must be
decided, by the High Priest in consistory. Who is warranted not to err
therein, and al are bound to obey his sentence. 14. The duty also of a king
(Whom in future time God will condescend to give them) is described, with
special charge to receive the law of God at the Priests hands.
THOU shall not immolate to our Lord thy God a In the council of Priests one
supreme Judge, which was the High Priest. v. 12.
the judge, that shall be at that time: and thou shall ask of them, " who shall
show thee the truth of the judgment. And thou shall do whatsoever they, that
are There were not many presidentes at once, but in succession, one after an
other.
presidentes of the place, which our Lord shall choose, shall say and teach thee,
according to his law; and thou shall follow ministers to our Lord thy God, and
the decree of the judge, that man shall die, and thou shall take away the evil
out of Israel: and the whole people hearing shall fear, that none Plurality of
wiue is not here forbid; for king David transgressed not this precept having
more then one or two: but Solomon offended in multiplying many wives. S. Aug.
q. 27. in Deuteronomy.
shall not Temporal good Princes take the law, and word of God, at the Priests
hands.
taking the copy of the priests of the Leuitical tribe, and he shall have it

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVII.
8. If the judgment be hard.] For a full and assured decision of al
controversies, Supreme Judge of controversies.
God here instituted to his people a supreme Tribunal, that in case inferior
Judges varied in judgment, recourse might be had to the Council of Priests,
where one chief Judge, the High Priest, was appointed to give sentence, and al
others commanded to receive and obey the same.

9. who shall show the truth.] God so assisted this consistory with his
spirit of truth, that their sentence was infallible: though otherwise they
might err, Sentence of the Jews consistory infallible.
either in life, or in private opinion. Wherefore, our Savior distinguishing
between their public doctrine, and their works, taught the people, that for
so much as the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses chair, and yet transgressed
Gods commandmentes, every one should observe and do as they said: but not
do according to their works. Mat. 23. And S. John ascribes the true
sentence given by Caiphas in the council, to his office of High Priest, saying:
The high priest was chief Judge.
(Joan. 11.) He said not this of him self, but being the high priest of that
year, he prophesied that JESUS should die for the nation and to gather into
one the children of God. Where the high priest by virtue and privilege of his
office, uttered the truth, which him self neither meant nor understood. And
this happened when the Law and Priesthood of the Jews was to decline and give
place to Christ's new ordinance, and therefore no doubt God ever directed the
sentence of the high Priest: and most specially now Christ preserves the
Apostolic See from error Protestants frivolous evasion.
in faith, and in general decrees touching manners: yea though the chief
visible Judge were as wicked as Caiphas. And therefore the Protestants evasion
is frivolous, limiting the priests sentence to bind the subjects, so long as
he is English Bible. 1603.
the true minister of God, and pronounces according to his word. For except
God assisted him, that he should pronounce according to his word, and so al men
rest satisfied, submitting them selves to his sentence, the controversy should
be endless, and this consistory nothing worth: but still be new examinations,
and new judgments, whether the former were according to Gods word or no.

12. He that shall be proud.] This also conuinceth, that al were bound to Pride
in private opinion punished with death.
accept of the high priests sentence, the law condemning him of pride, that
refused to obey the commandment of the Priest, which at that time ministered to
our Lord; and for his disobedience punishing him with death.

CHAP. XVIII. In steed of other inheritance Priesies and Levites have provision
by Sacrifices and oblations. 9. Al superstition to be avoided. 15. Perpetuity
of prophets, and finally one special PROPHET (towit, CHRIST) is promised. 20.
False prophets must be slain.
THE priests and Levites, and all that are of the same thou be not willing to
imitate the abominations of those nations. Neither let there be found in thee
any that shall This sort of false prophets signified Heretics, that preach
false things in Christ's name.
that I did not command him to say, These prefigured Apostataes, which
renouncing Christ, expressly profess false gods.
or in the name of strange gods, shall be slain. And if in secret cogitation
thou answer:

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVIII.
15. A PROPHET of thy nation.] Amongst other places this plainly proves The
same words may have diverse literal senses.
that the same words in holy Scripture may have diverse literal senses. For
first the coherence of the text shows, that God here promised to give his
people an other extraordinary prophet, after Moses death, of their own
nation: as well to take away occasion of seeking to southsayers, diuiners, and
other profane prophets of false gods, strictly forbidden in the words
going immediately before; as in approbation of their convenient desire,
mentioned in the words following, to hear Gods will, not by himself, nor by an
Angel, but by Moses, who was now shortly to be taken from them. And so this
promise was first performed in Iosue, succeding next after Moses in
government. And as need required God ceased not to send more prophets
besides their ordinary Priests Again this place is also understood of Christ
our Savior, chief Prophet, and master of al prophets; S Peter so expounding
it; Act. 3. v. 22. and 23.

CHAP. XIX. Certain cities of refuge must be assigned for casual manslaughter.
11. wilful murder punished by death without remission, 15. so it be convinced
by two or three witnesses. 16. False witnesses punished with the pain, which
the crime objected deserves.
WHEN our Lord thy God has destroyed the nations, The way to the cities of
refuge were paued, and marks set for direction, that he which fled might not
err in his way.
preparing diligently the way: and thou shall divide the blood be not shed in
the mids of the Land, which our Lord thy God will give thee to possess, lest
thou be guilty of blood. But if any man hating his neighbor, lie in wait
This was said to the whole people who must not entreat for the murderers
pardon: but the kinsmen of him that was slain, might remitte the punishment.
Thou shall not pity him, and thou This pertained to the Judge: who without
partiality must do justice.
Thou shall not pity him, but life for life, eye for eye,

CHAP. XX. Lawful wars are to be undertaken with corege and confidence. 5.
Such as for special causes may be discoreged, must be dismissed from the field,
10. What to be observed toward the enemy. 19. What trees may not be cut
down, and what sort may be, for the use of wars.
IF thou go forth to war against thine enemies, and see affrayd, retire not,
neither dread them: because our Lord Men possessed with such desires have not
like valor to good souldiars. And by word or example often discorege others.
So in spiritual warfare, we must not be addicted to worldly profits, or
pleasures.
what man is there, that has built a new house, and has not dedicated it? let
him go, and return into his house, lest perhaps he die in the battle, and an
other dedicate it. What man is there that has planted a vineyard, besieged a
city a long time, and have compassed it with munition to win it, thou shall
not cut down the trees, that may be eaten of, neither shall thou spoil the
country round about with axes: because it is a tree, and not a man, neither
can it increase the number of warryers against thee. But if

CHAP. XXI. How to seek out a secret murderer. 10. women taken in battle may
be married, and afterward can not be sold nor made bond women. 15. The eldest
son may not be deprived of his birthright for hatred of his mother. 18. A
stubburne son must be stoned to death. 22. When one is hanged on a gibbet,
he must be taken down the same day, and buried.
WHEN there shall be found in the Land, which By this ceremony and abiuration
they purged them selves, that they were not negligent in doing justice.
nor our eyes seee it. be merciful to thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed
the number of the captives a beautiful woman, and love her, and wilt have her
to wife, thou shall bring her into Mystically, he is cursed that persisteth in
sin, as it were hanging on the tree, by which our first parents sinned
accursed of God that hangs on a tree: and thou shall not contaminate thy
Land, which our Lord thy God gives thee in possession.

CHAP. XXII. Piety toward neighbors. 5. neither sex may use the apparel
of the other* 6. cruelty to be avoided even toward birds, 8. batlement
about the roof af a house. 9. Things of diverse kinds not to be mixed. 12.
cords in the hemes of a cloak. 13. Trial and punishment of adultery and of
deflowring virgins. 30. the son may not marie his stepmother.
THOU shall not see thy brothers ox, or sheep straying, Their houses had flat
roofes as many of our churches, palaces, and castles, where battlements are
necessary for danger of falling when, any walk thereon.
a batlement to the roof round about: lest blood be shed in thy house, and
thou be guilty an other slipping, and falling headlong. Thou shall not For
correction of so covetous a mind the whole fruicte must be offered to pious
uses. Theodoret. q. 23. in Deuteronomy.
be sanctisied rogether. Thou shall not plough the wenches father, because he
has infamousely spread a very il name upon a virgin of Israel: and he shall
have her to wife, and can not put her away all the days of his life. But if it
be true which he objected, and virginity be not

CHAP. XXIII. Eunuchs, bastardes, Moabites, and Ammonites may not enter into
the Church. 7. Idumeans, and Egyptians may be admitted. 9. Observation of
spiritual and corporal cleannes. 15. other precepts concerning fugitives, 17.
fornication, 19. usury. 21. vows, 24. and eating other men's grapes or corn.
AN Such as are barre^ in good works can not enter into Gods house. Theod. q.
25. in Deuteronomy.
eunuch that has his stones broken, or cut of, These nations not able to
hurt the children of Israel, neither by denying ordinary courtesies, nor by
force, nor by hyring Balaa^ to curse them, yet inuegling them with carnal
sins, signified obstinate perverse sinners, that nouer amending can never be
rightly received into the Church of God.
Ammonite, and the Moabite yea after the tenth generation shall not enter into
the church of our Lord, for ever: because they would not Only lawful enemies
are here called strangers: where therefore is just cause of war, there only it
is lawful to exercise usury. S. Amb. li. de Tobia. c. 15.
to the stranger. And to and if thou delay, it shall be reputed to thee for
sin. Vows bind where otherwise was no obligation.
If

CHAP. XXIIII. Divorce permitted to avoid greater evil. 5. The newly married
must not go to war. 7. He that traterously sells a man must be slain, 8.
disobedience to Priests incurreth leprosy* 10. Such things may not be taken
to pledge, as can not be well spared. 14. Poor laborers must be presently
paid. 16. not one punished for an others fault, but right judgment to al, 18.
and liberalalmes to the poor.
IF a man take a wife, and have her, and she find not grace This hebrew phrase
signifies, that pledging the thing wherein the means of life consists is as
if he pledged his life.
he has pledged his life to thee. If any man be God did to Marie, in the way
when you came out of Egypt. When thou shall require of thy neighbor any
thing, that In case the laborer susteyneth his life by his daily wages, then
not to pay him is in effect to kill him. and such sin cries to God for
revenge.
because he is poor, and there withal susteyneth his life: lest he cry
against thee to our Lord, and it be reputed to thee for a sin. The fathers
shall not be slain for the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXIIII.
1. Dimisse her.] Whether this divorce was tolerated as a less sin, to
avoid a greater, as S. Hierom. ( li. 1. in Mat. c. 5. and li 3. in c. 19.) S.
Chrysostom. ( ho. 12. in Mat. 5.) and others teach; or dispensed withal, and so
made lawful to the Jews, which is also probabtle, for hat none of the holy
Prophets Whether the band of marriage could be ^oosed or no in the old law,
amongst Christians it can not be dissolved.
did ever reprehend it; sure it is, that Christ either by correcting a fault,
or by recalling a former dispensation, restored the insolubilitie of marriage to
the first institution, saying: (Mat. 19.) That which God has joined together,
let not man separate. Further answering the Phareses, concerning this law: that
Moses for the hardness of your heart permitted you to dimisse your vviues: but
from the beginning it was not so. And albeit he allows separation of man and
wife for fornication, yet for no cause neither of them can marie again, so
long as the other lives. As S. Augustine ( li. 1. de adulter. coningijs. c. 11.
and 12.) by conference of three Evangelists words touching this point,
plainly shows, concluding No not for adultrie.
that for so much as holy Scripture calls him (that takes a woman so
dimissed) not a husband, but an adulterer, she is still his wife, by whom for
fornication she was dimissed. Likewise he proves by S. Paul's doctrine. ( Romans
7. and 1. Cor. 7.) that though divorce be made for adultrie, yet neither the
guilty nor innocent party can marie an other, for the Apostle says: a
woman is under the law of her husband, so long as he lives, if her husband
be dead, she is loosed from his law. Therefore her husband living, she shall be
called an aduoutresse, if she be with an other man. If she part let her
remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. A woman is bond to the law
so long time, as her husband lies, etc. These words of the Apostle (says
he, li. 2. c. 4.) so often repeted, so often incultated, are true, are liuclie,
are sound, are plain. A woman begins not to be the wife of a later hushand,
except she cease to be the wife of the former And she caeseth to be the wife of
the former, if he die, not if he (or she) commit adultrie. Therefore a wife is
lawfully dimissed Only before consummatio^ Marriage is dissolved by solemn vow
in Religion.
for fornication, but the bond of the former remains, for which cause he is
guilty of adultrie, that marieth her that is dimissed, yea though it be for
fornication. Thus and much more says. S. Augustine in the same, and in other
books. And all the ancient fathers, and learned schoolmen teach uniformly, that
nothing but bodily death can loose the band of Marriage consummate; nor of
vnconsummate, but death, or solemn vow in an approved rule of religion.

CHAP. XXV. Punishment afflicted according to the fault, but so that he which
is beaten have not above forty stripes. 4. The oxes mouth not be mooseled
that treads corn. 5. A married man dying without issue, his brother must
marie the widow. 11. The wife that takes her husbands adversary by priuities
must lose her hand. 13. no false weightes, nor measures to be kept. 17.
Amelicites must be utterly destroyed.
IF there be a controversy between some, and they call upon S. Paul expounds
this of the spiritual laborer in Gods Church that he must have his main tena^ce
for his travel. 1. Cor. 9. and 1. Tim. 5 It was also meant of oxen, so it has
two literalse^ses. Theod. q 31. in Deuteronomy.
not moosel the mouth of the ox that treads out thy corn in the flore. When
brethren shall dwell together, and one of them die without He that disdaineth to
honor his brother is justly despised.
spitte in his face, and say: So shall it be done to the man, that builds not
his brothers house. And his name shall be called in Israel A lasie family and
unprofitable to the co^mo^wealth. Mystically, Pastors and Doctors must beget
spiritual children to Christ, not to themselves; and so they are called
Christians, not Paulians, whom S. Paul converted. And he that is elected by the
church to spiritual function, and neglects his duty, is worthy of reproach
and in famie. S. Aug. li. 32. c. 10. cont. Faust. Manich.
The house of the Amalec first impugned Israel after they had passed the
redsea. Exo. 17.
Amalec did to thee in the way when thou came out of Egypt: how he met
thee: and stroke the hindemost

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXV.
5. His brother shall take her.] This proves evidently that the prohibition,
not to marie the brothers wife ( Leuit. 18.) was a positive law, binding only
when the first brother dying left issue. For dying without issue, his brother
Marriage with the brothers wife, he dying without issue.
was bound by this law to marie the widow. In default of the brother, the next
of kin was to marie her: and for default of nearer, the more remote. so Booz
married Ruth. Neither was it contrary, but agreeable to the law of nature, to
Rut^. 3. and. 4.
marie the brothers wife when he was dead without issue, as is before noted.
Genesis 38.

CHAP. XXVI. First fruits must be offered in special place assigned to Gods
service, professing of gratitude for the land possessed according to Gods
promise. 12. Likewise tithes of the third year, 16. with conclusion, that the
people promise to observe all the precepts of God, and so doing he will protect
and prosper them.
AND when thou art entered into the Land, which our The third lesson in Mass on
Imber Saturday in whit funweke.
Lord thy God will give thee to possess, and have obtained it, and dwell in
it: thou shall take first of al thy Laban pursued Jacob, when he parted from
Mesopothamia of Syria. Genesis 27.
The Syrian persecuted my father, who descended into Egypt, and seiourned
there in a very small number and grew into a nation great and strong and of
an infinite multitude. And the Egyptians afflicted us, The first lesson in
Mass on Imber Saturday in Lent.
things, which our Lord thy God has given to thee, and thy house, thou and
the Leuite, and the stranger that is with thee When thou have finished the
tithe of al thy fruits, in The people paid every year two ^^thes: first to
the Levites: the second for entertaining trauelers to and from Jerusalem and
every third year, a third tith for relief of the poor inhabitants.
the stranger, and the pupil, and the widow, that they may eat within thy
gates, and be filled: and thou shall speak in Mutual pact between God and his
peoples that they serving him, he will reward them.
Thou have chosen

CHAP. XXVII. Gods commandmentes must be written in plastred stones. An Altar
erected, and Sacrifices offered. 12. Obseruers of the commandments must be The
third part Gods promises and threats, for keeping or breaking his commandments.
blessed, and transgressors cursed. 14. with the form of cursing idolaters,
and diverse other enormious sinners.
AND Moses and the ancientes of Israel commanded fathers. When therefore you
are passed Jordan, erect the The ancientes of every tribe.
These shall stand to bless the people, The Levites proper office was to bless.
Leui, Judas, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin. And over But by occasion of sin
their office was also to pronounce curses.
Levites shall pronounce, and say to all the men Though the sins were secret,
yet the offenders were cursed: public sins were also publicly punished.
in secret. and all the people shall answer, and say: Amen. Cursed be he that
honors not his father and mother. Amen. Cursed be he that obydeth not in the
words of

CHAP. XXVIII. Diverse blessings are promised to the obseruers of Gods
commandmentes. 15. and curses threatened to transgressors.
BUT if thou will hear the voice of our Lord thy God, Temporal blessings
belonged to sensual people of the old testament: now the poor in spirit are
blessed, that mourn, and suffer persecution for truth and justice.
al these The poor being relieved of thy superfluity shall bless thee.
thy remains. Thou shall rule over others and none over thee.
the head, Yet always with this condition: if thou serve God.
yet so, if thou will hear the commandmentes of our Lord thy God which I
command thec rhis day, and keep and do them, and decline not from them
neither to the serve them. But if thou will not hear the voice of our Thus
most commonly sinners were cursed in the old Testament, but such as now serve
not God rightly, and yet prosper in this world, shall in a moment descend into
hell. Job. 21.
al these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou thy
hand. The fruits of thy land, and al thy labors let After many other
plagues and punishments, at last the Jews refusing and persecuti^g Christ,
were rejected, and Gentiles called into the Church, and advanced above them.
Theod q. 34. in Deuteronomy.
The stranger that lives with the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruits of thy
Land: until thou perish, and will not leave thee wheat, wine, and oil, heardes
of oxen, and flocks of sheep: until it destroy thee, and consume thee in all
thy cities, and thy strong and high parts of the earth to the ends thereof:
and there thou shall serve strange gods, which thou art ignorant of and thy
fathers, wood and stone. In those nations also thou

CHAP. XXIX. A covenant and oath is made between God and his people (with
commemoration of sundry benefits by them received) that keeping his law they
shall be more blessed: and breaking the same shall sustain the threatened
punishments.
THESE are the words of the covenant which our Lord For sins past God
lets some run into reprobate sense, permitting them to their own freewil,
who being void of grace wilfully obdurate them selves. Theod. q. 37. in Deuteronomy.
has not given you a heart to understand, the words of this covenant, and
fulfill them: that you may understand al things that you do. You stand this A
mind secretly infected with idolatric.
a root bringing forth gal and bitterness. And when he shall hear the words
The appetite drunken with pleasures thirsts still more.
drunken take to her the thirsty, and our Lord forgive him not: shall answer:
Because they forsook the covenant of the Lord, which he made with their
fathers, when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt: and they have served
strange Secret things are known to God, manifest things to men Theod. 9.
38. in Deuteronomy.
to our Lord

CHAP. XXX. If the children of Israel, offending and falling into the forsaide
curses shall repent, God wilrestore them to his blessings again. 11. leaving it
in their power to serve him if they will, 17. and therefore warns them that the
impenitent shall assuredly perish, because having life and death, blessing and
cursing proposed, they choose the worse.
THEREFORE when al these words shall be come upon Some sinners through great
repentance become more virtuous, and are more rewarded then some that offended
less.
of a greater number, then were thy fathers. Our Lord thy* God will circumcile
the works of thy hands, in the issue of thy womb, and in the fruit of thy
cattle, in the fertility of thy ground, and in the plenty of al things. For
our Lord will return to rejoice upon thee in all riches, as he reioysed in thy
fathers: yet so, God gave man liberty to choose, what he would follow. S. A^b.
in Psalm. 40. v. 10
Choose therefore life, that both thou may live, and thy seed: and may
love

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXX.
6. God vvil circumcise thy bart.] Most true it is, that of our selves, without
By grace men are made able to keep Gods co^mandments
Gods grace none can keep or fulfill the commandmentes. But he, whose heart God
does circumcise, is thereby made able to love God with all his heart, and with all
his soul. And except some hearts were thus circumcised, and so made able to
love God above al, and consequently their neighbors, God should not perform
his promise, that he will circumcise the heart of some.

11. Is not above thee.] When thou art stirred up, assisted, and endued with
So the commandmentes are not impossible.
S. Aug. denat. et great. c. 69. et q. 54. in Deuteronomy. rheod q. ^8. in Deuteronomy. S.
Cypri. li. 3. c. 52. ad Quir. S. Amb. in Psalm. 40.
Gods grace, the commandment of God is not (then) above thee, nor fair of from
thee, but very nere thee, in thy mouth (to confess God, and his truth) and in
thy heart, to do it. But you will ask: How then comes it to pass, that many
having received sufficient grace, yet do not keep Gods commandmentes? God him
self answers:

15. That he has set before thee life and good, and contrrivvise death and
evil; he inuiteth and helps, yet forces thee not he geueth^thee power and
ability, helping Freew^^.
and not destroying thy freewil, that thou may love our Lord thy God, walk
in his ways, and keep his commandments. But if thy heart be auerted and ( v.
17.) thou vrilt not hear, thou shall perish. Again God inculcateth:

19. I call for vvitnesses heaven and earth, that I have proposed to you life
and death, blessing and cursing. Choose therefore life etc. What Doctor can
teach more plainly the possibility of keeping Gods commandmentes; and frewil
in man, then this text of holy Scripture?

CHAP. XXXI. Moses substituteth Iosue his successor in temporal government.
9. delivers The fourth part. An exhortation to serve God, with predictio^ of
their often sins and punishments.
the law to the Priests. 16. God fortelleth that the people will often forsake
him, and that he will punish them. 19. commands Moses to write a canticle,
(an abrigement of the Law) easy to be remembered. 25. and in further testimony
against them, the Levites must put this book in the arc of covenant.
MOSES therefore went, and spoke al these words He means that he ca^ not
exercise the office of a captain general, and bring the people into the
promised land.
go out and come in any longer, especially whereas our Lord also has said to
me: Thou shall not pass over this Jordan. Our Lord therefore will be with thee:
he will not leave, nor forsake thee: fear not, neither dread thou. Moses
therefore wrote this law, M^^ter is more easily kept in memory then prose.
this canticle, and teach the children of Israel: that they know it by heart,
and sing it by mouth, and this song be unto me for And so by this Canticle they
are convinced that they were abundantly for warned, not to break covenant with
God.
a testimony among the children of Israel. For I will bring them into the Land,
for the which from me, and make my covenant of none effect. After The eleventh
prophecy in the office before Mas^e on Easter eve. And the third on whitsuneue.
and taught it the children of Israel. And our Lord commanded

CHAP. XXXII. A Canticle of the Law, wherein the people are exhorted to serve
God, for his The canticle at Lauds on Saturday.
perfect goodness, for his singular benefits, for their former ingratitude, and
for his mercy still mixed with his punishments. 44. Al which being a Al
things in heaven and in cart^ testify, that God deals well with his people.
earnestly commended to them to remember and teach their children, 48. Moses
is commanded to go into a mountain, whence he shall see the promised land, but
not enter into it.


Doctrine does fructify in good souls as rain and dew in the ground.
doctrine grow together as rain, my speech flow as the dew, as it were a
shower upon the herb, and as it were drops upon the grass.

Man's first duty is to praise God.
Because I will invoke the name of our Lord: give magnificence to our God.



The next, to acknowledge his own sins and defectes
have sinned to him, and not his children in filthiness: a froward and perverse
generation.





At the tower of Babel.
divided the nations: when he separated the sons of Adam, he appointed the
limits of people according to Israel being but one people possessed the
inheritance of seven other nations.
the number of the children of Israel.



God choice Israel to be his peculiar people of mere grace and protected them.
found him in a desert land, in a place of horror, and of wast wilderness: he
led him about, and taught him: and kept him as the apple of his eye.





Bees without men's industry made honey in the rocks.
honey out of the rock, and Olive trees prospered in stony places.
oil out of the hardest stone.



Temporal prosperity occasion of the Jews reuolting from God
beloved was made gross, and spurned: made gross, fatted, dilated, he left
God his maker, and departed from God his salvation.



Novelty allureth carnal people to idolatry and heresy.
new and fresh ones, whom their fathers worshipped not.

God that begatte thee thou have forsaken, and have "forgotten our Lord thy
creator.



For their perverseness God withdrew his help from them.
I will hide my face from them, and will confider their last: for it is a
perverse generation, and unfaithful children.

God first loves, before any man loves him, but men first for* sake God,
before he forsake them.
have prouokedme in that, which was no God, and have angered me in their
vanities: and I will provoke them in that, which is no people, and in The Jews
reputed most Gentiles foolish yet now they are inferior to al.
a foolish nation will I anger them.











For just causes God some times differreth punishment.
for the wrath of the enemies I have differred: lest perhaps their enemies
might be proud, and would say: Our mighty hand, and not the Lord, has done
al these things.

A nation without counselis it, and without wisdom.

True wisdom considers things past, understands things present, and
provides for things to come.
wise, and understood, and would provide for their last.



Al infideles confess more Majesty in the true God and in his Religion* then
in their own.
our enemies also are judges.





Are not these things laid up with me, and signed in my treasures?



Even such offenders as thinck them selves secure, escape not.
the shut up also have failed, and the residew be consumed.



It is impossible that false gods should help theirfolowers in necessity.
Let them arise, and help you, and protect you in necessity.







The vain counsel of the wicked being detected shall be punished.
the bare head of the enemies.

You gentiles" praise his people, because he will revenge the the children of
Israel to obtain, and die thou in the mount. Which going up unto thou shall be
joined to thy peoples,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXII.
18. Forgotten our Lord.] Calvin ( li. 1. Instit. c. 11. parag. 9.) contending
that Calvin contradicts the holy Scripture.
it is idolatry, to worship Christ in his picture, says the idolatry
committed about the molten calfe ( Exodus 32.) consisted in worshipping the true
God in that image of a calfe: affirming that the Jews were not so
inconsiderate, as not to remember, that it was God which had brought them out
of the Land of Egypt. Quite contrary to this text, which says: God that
begat thee thou have forsaken, and have forgotten our Lord thy creator. Calvin
therefore was either ignorant or forgetful, that the Holy Ghost here charge
them, to have forsaken and forgotten God the Creator; or else (which is worse)
Knowing and remembering it, he was most impudent in auouching the contrary.

43. Praise his people.] In the people of the Jews were always some good,
Always some good in the Church of the old Testament.
and worthy of praise, that served God; and sometimes suffered persecution for
justice; whose blood God promised here to revenge, and for their sakes to be
merciful to others. Al which we see was performed, in that God reduced them
from captivity, and conserved them after in their country til Christ's time,
for so he was propitious to the land of his people.

CHAP. XXXIII. Moses blessing the tribes of Israel (Simeon omitted)
prophecyeth particularly of every one. 26. Again exhorts them, that as God
has chosen them his peculiar people, so they love and honor him their only
God.
The ancient fathers expound these blessings rather of the Church of Christ,
then of the Jews Synagogue. s. Aug. q. 56. Theod. q. 44. in Deuteronomy.
the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel,
before his death.







He shall be king with the most right, the princes of the people being assembled
with the tribes of Israel.

Live Ruben, and die he not, and be he little in number.



To Leui also he said: Thy perfection, and thy doctrine The priestlie tribe
must especially prefer Gods service before their nearest kindred.
said

The Temple was built in the tribe of Benjamin, which God more specially
protected, and so they dwelt more securely. Theod. q. 45. in Deuteronomy.
shall dwell confidently in him: as in a bride chamber all the day shall he abide,
and between his shoulders shall he rest.

To Joseph also he said: Of the blessing of our Lord be Epthaim is preferred
before his elder brother, agreeable to their granfathers prophetical blessing.
Genesis 48.
Ephraim, and these the thousands of Manasses.

And to Zabulon he said: Rejoice Zabulon in thy going

And to Gad he said: Blessed be Gad in breadth: as a and did the justices of
our Lord, and his judgment with Israel.





To Aser also he said: Blessed be Aser in children, be he

There is no other God as the God of the rightest: the

The sin of Za^bri a prince of Simeons tribe, in fresh memory ( Nu. 25.)
seems to be the cause, why this tribe is not partilarly blessed, but only in
general with all Israel.
Israel shall dwell confidently, and alone. The eye of Jacob in the land of corn
and wine, and the heavens shall be mistie with dew.



ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXIII.
2. Came from Sinai.] According to the history Moses recounteth here three
benefits. First that God gave the Law in Sinai. ( Exodus 20.) Secondly, he
cured those which were bitten with serpents nere to Seir. ( Number. 21.) Thirdly
in mount Pharan he appointed Seventy ancientes to assist Moses in judgments
The prophetical sense of these blessi^ges is more certain, and more evident,
then the historical.
( Number. 11.) But according to the Mystery, which specially is intended, S.
Augustine ( q. 56. in Deuteronomy.) says this prophecy is not to be negligently
passed over. For it evidently appears that this benediction pertains to a
new people, whom Christ our Lord has sanctified, in whose person Moses spoke
and not in his own. So in this prophetical and proper sense (says this
Doctor) our Lord and Savior comes from Sinai, which is interpreted tentation,
when he passed the tentation of his passion and death, Heb. 2. v. 18. Christ
rises from Seir, interpreted hearie, for that in the similitude of the flesh
of sin, even of sin, he damned sin in the flesh. Romans 8. v. 3. He
appears from mount Pharan interpreted fruitful mountain, in that he gives
abundance of grace in his Church of the new Testament; which is a city set
upon a hill. Mat. 5.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Moses sees the promised land, but is not suffered to go into
it, 5. He dies at the age of 120. years. God burieth his body secretly, and
al Israel The fifth part. The death, burial and singular praise of Moses.
mourn for him thirty days. 9. Iosue replenished (by imposition of Moses
hands) with the spirit of God succedeth. 10. But Moses for his special
familiarity with God, and for most wonderful miracles is commended above al
other Prophets.
MOSES therefore went up from the champion of God elevated his visiue power
above nature to see so far.
all the land of Galaad as far as Dan, and al Nephthali, and the land of Only
Angels (whose ministry God used herein) knew the place of his burial: lest
the Jews prone to idolatry might have honored him for God.
no man has known his sepulcher until this present day.

Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he

The end of the five books of Moses, containing the Law.
THE SECOND PART OF THE OLD TESTAMENT: CONTAINING HISTORICAL BOOKS.
The argument of the book of Iosue.
WHETHER Iosue himself writ this book (which is the common Histor: Scholast.
Whosoever was author, the authority of this book is certain.
opinion) or some other, it was ever held undoubtedly by all, for Canonical
Scripture: and according to the distribution of the whole Bible into Legal,
Historical, Sapiential, and Prophetical Books, this is the first of the
historical sort. But as the five procedent called Legal, besides the Law,
comprehend also the history of the Church, from the beginning of Books of
holy Scripture principally treating of several arguments, yet in the same
participat each sort with others.
the world nere 2500. years, and withal contain much divine Wisdom, and
Prediction of things to come: so these books now following called Historical,
and likewise the Sapiential and Prophetical ensuing after, participate each
with others in their several arguments: every one more or less inducing Gods
servants to keep his Law; recording things done; teaching what is most
meet to be done; and foreshewing before hand, things done afterward, or
which yet shall come to pass. So this book does not only set forth the Acts
of Iosue, who succeeded Moses in temporal government of Gods The cotentes of
this books.
people, commanding and directing them by law and wisdom; but also S. Hiero.
Epist. ad Paulin. S. Amb. in Psalm. 47 S. Aug. li. 12 c. 31. and li. 16. c. 19.
contra. Faust. Manich.
the same things done by him, and his very name (as S. Hierom, and other
Fathers teach) prefigure our Lord JESUS Christ. For in Hebrew IEHOSVA is the
name both of this Captain General, the leader of The Israelites over Jordan
into the Land of promise, and of our Lord and SAVIOVR, who by his Baptism, and
other Sacraments brings his people of al Nations, into the true Land of the
living, where is life and felicity everlasting. Touching th^fore the history,
these four special things are here described. Divided into four parts.
First, the passage of the Israelites over Jordan. In the five first chapters.
Secondly, their conquest of the promised Land. In the seven chapters following.
Thirdly, the partition of the same Land amongst nine Tribes and a half. from
the. 13. chap. to the 22. Fourthly, In the three last chapters, the return of
the other two Tribes and a half to their possessions, on the east side of
Jordan; with Iosues last admonition to them al, to serve God sincerly; and his,
and Eleazars death.

THE BOOK OF IOSVE, IN HEBREW IEHOSVA.
CHAP. I. Iosue encoreged by our Lord, 10. admonishes the people to prepare
themselves to pass over Jordan; 12. and all the able men of the tribes of
Ruben, Gad, and half* Manasses to march armed before the rest. 16. Al promise
to do whatsoever he commands. The first part. Of the passage of Israel over
Jordan.

AND it came to pass after the death thou may keep and do al things that
be written in it: then shall thou direct thy way, and understand it. Behold
Besides Man na, which ye^ c^assed not, they might (...) they would* provide
other meat: prefiguring that in the primitive Church, it should be lawful to
use legal ceremonies, with euangelical rites for a time, til the old law were
buried with honor.
victuals: for after the third day you shall pass over Jordan, and shall enter
to possess the Land, which our Lord your God will give you. To the Rubenites
also

CHAP. II. Two discoueres sent into Hiericho are hid, and concealed by Rahab:
8. and upon promise of like safety to her whole samilie, 21. she helps them
secretly away.
THEREFORE Iosue the son of Nun sent from Setim of Israel, to spy the Land.
And the king of Jericho sent to Notwithstanding this officious lie, (which is a
venial sin) S. Paul, Heb. 11. and S. James (c. 2.) testify, that she was
justified by her faith in God, and by good works toward these men. S. Aug.
cont. M^udac. ^. 17. See Annot. Iac. 2. v. 25.
I knew not whence they were: and when the gate was a shutting in of the door
of thy house, his blood shall be upon his head, and we shall be quitte. But the
blood of al, that shall be with thee in the house, shall redound upon our head,
if any man touch them. But if thou will betray us, and utter this talk

CHAP. III. After three days abode by the banks of Jordan, 3. the Priests
with the Ark of God entering first into the river, 15. the upper part
miraculously stands and swells, the lower running away, they go into the
midde chanel, and there stay, whiles all the people pass over dry foot.
IOSVE therefore rising up in the night, removed the In place of the cloud, and
pillar of fire, the arc is now carried for their guide and direction.
When you shall see the arc of covenant of our Lord your God, and It perteined
to the Levites office to carry the arc. Number. 4 but in this special service and
miraculous passage the Priests did carry it: so the greater may do the office
of the less, not contrariwise.
the priests of the Leuitical stock carrying it, rise you also, and follow them
going before: and let there God showed by this miracle, that Iosue had special
commission from him, and that under his government the people should prosper.
that they may know as I was with Moses, so am I with thee also. And do thou"
command the priests, that carry the arc of the testament, and say to them:
When you shall be entered into part of the water of Jordan, stand in it. And
Iosue said to the children

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. III.
8. Command the priests.] Because Iosue commanded the priests to take An
objection for laiheadship of the Church.
the arc, and stand with it in Jordan; for that also ( chap. 5) he ministered,
or appointed others to minister, the Sacrament of Circumcision; Likewise (
chap. 8.) blessed the people; and ( chap. 24.) renewed Gods covenant with them;
English Protestants infer, that he was chief superior in spiritual causes;
and therefore lay princes are supreme heads, and gouerners of the Church
immediately under God. But none of these actions, nor al put together do prove
their purpose. Answer.
For notwithstanding he very lawfully did these, and other like things, yet he
had a spiritual superior in earth, which was Eleazar the high priest For Moses
Moses chief both in spiritual and temporal authority* which was after divided
between the high Priest and temporal Prince. The high priest superior. Iosue
executed Gods will, not by spiritual jurisdiction, but with subordination to the
high priest.
being extraordinary superior of al, both in spiritual and temporal causes,
the ordinary priesthood, and spiritual supremacy was established in Aaron and
his sons, as appears Leuit. 8. Number. 20. and other places: and the temporal
government after Moses was given to Iosue, succeding to him ( Number. 27.) Exodus
4. 5. 6. etc. Deuteronomy. 17.
not in all, but in part of his glory (or authority) his whole honor (or
power) being distributed between the high Priest, and the temporal Prince, as
learned Theodoret ( q. 48 in Number.) notes upon the sacred text; expressly
distinguishing their offices ( v. 21.) that Eleazar the priest should consult
our Lord for him (and so receive answer in doctrine and verity, Exodus 28.
Leuit. 8.) and that Io^ue should go out and go in, and all the children of
Israel with him (that is, lead and govern the people) at Eleazars word.
Where it is manifest that Iosue was not set over Eleazar, but Eleazar over
him. That therefore which Iosue did in spiritual affairs, was in subordination
to the high priest; by whose direction, approbation, or ratihabition, he
commanded some of the priests to carry the arc, and with it to go into
Jordan, and coming into the m^dde chanel to stand there, whiles all the army
and people passed over: also gave order that al should be Chap. 5. 8. 22. 23.
24.
circumcised; blessed the people; read the law; and after godly exhortations,
renewed the covenant between God and them; al in way of execution of Gods will
and co^mandementes, not by any pretended jurisdiction in spiritual things.

In like sort many other good temporal Princes, as well in the old as the new
Testament, have disposed and executed diverse things perteining to Gods
service: their office requiring that they should set forward, maintain and
defend Other good princes have also much advanced religion, but not taken
supramacie in spiritual causes.
true faith and religion. Especially Christian Princes, of whom Esai
propheciced ( chap. 49.) that Kings should be softer fathers, and Queens the
nources of the Church.

Conformably whereto S Augustine teaches ( li. 3 c. 51. cont. Crescon) that
Kings, in that they are Kings, serve God by commanding good things, and
forbidding euel, not only perteining to human society, but also belonging to
Gods religion. To this effect Constantin the great did many religious acts:
yea even those things which our adversaries wrest to their own sense, show
evidently his due submission to his spiritual pastors. As when urged by the
Donatistes perverse importunity, and being desirous (as S. Augustine
testifies, Epist 166.) to bridle so great impudency, he heard and judged
Bishop Cecilians cause, after other Bishops sentence for him against the
heretics; where he both gave judgment agreeable to the Bishops, and yet
pleading parden, excused himself for this fact. Which had not neded, if he had
been the ordinary Veniam ^etiturus
For maintaining Catholic religion against heretics, the kings of Spain
have the title Catholic. The French Kings, most. Christian. Kings of
England, Defenders of the says.
or competent judge. Optatus also writes ( li. 1. cont. Parmen.) that the same
Emperor Constantin exclamed against the appellantes in these words: O ra^ida
furoris audacia! sicut in causis Gentilium s^^ri solet, appellationem
interposuerunt. O outrageous boldness of fury! like as in causes of Gentiles is
wont, they have interposed an appeal. The like good offices did Justinian, and
Charles the great, and many other Christian Emperors and Kings; for which
they are much renowned in the whole Church; and some have benne honored for
their religious zele, with glorious titles given to them and their successors.
To the Kings of Spain, from the time of Al^onsus King of Castil, above eight
hundred years agone, for expelling the Arians, was given the title of Cathoque
as Michael Ritins a Neapolit^n writes. To the French Kings the title of most
Christian, from the time of Philip the Emperor, about 400. years since, for
expelling the Albigenses, as records Nicholaus Gillius. To our King Henry
the eight of England, for his book of the Sacraments against Luther, ^n. Do.
1521.
Pope Leo the tenth gave the title: Defender of the says.

CHAP. IIII. In memory of their miraculous passage, twelve chief men, of the
twelve tribes, ^uke so many great stones from the mids of Jordan, 9. and put
other twelve, where the priests stood with the arc. 18. The waters return to
their former course. And the twelve stones are erected for a monument.
Who being passed over, our Lord said to Iosue: Is not the form of a cross
as convenient a sign, to put christians in mind, how our Savior redeemed us,
as these stones were to the Jews, how God brought their fathers over Jordan?
a sign among you: and when your children marched through the plain and
champion country of the city of Jericho. In that day our Lord magnified Iosue
before

CHAP. V. The kings of Chanaan are sore, frighted with the news of Isreal's
passage over Jordan. 2. Circumcision is again commanded, and observed, which
had been ommitted in the desert forty years. 10 They make their Pasch. 12.
Manna cease. 13. And an Angel appears to Iosue.
THEREFORE after that all the kings of the Ammorrheites, See annotations.
annotations. c. 3. v. 8.
to Iosue: Make thee knives of stone, and circumcise Circumcision had been
omitted sourtie years, whiles they were in the deserte, always uncertain
when to march, and so it is now commanded the second time.
the second time the children of Israel. He did came out of Egypt of the
malekinde, all the fighting men, died in the desert by the long circuites of the
way, who Fu^men^ie.
pole^t of the same year. And Manna failed after they did eat of the corn of
Not God, but of Gods host.
prince of the host of our Lord, and now I come. Iosue fell flat on the
ground. And" adoring he said: What

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. V.
15. Adoring.] Iosue knowing that the person which appeared, was an Angel and
not God, nor a man, neither adored him with godly honor, for that had been
idolatry, nor with civil, for that pertains to wordlie and temporal
excellency. Religious honor due to Angels.
and is not competent to sacred things, especialy to immortal and See Annot.
Ex^. 20.
glorious spirits; and therefore the honor he did to this Angel, was religious
honor infinitely inferior to divine, and yet much greater then civil.

16. Loose thy shoe.] The Angel did not only accept of the honor done Holy
places.
unto him, but also required more, showing that the very place was holy for
his presence, being otherwise the common field of Jericho.

CHAP. VI. Some priests carrying the arc, others sounding Iubilee trumpetes,
^r^ed m^^ going before, and the rest of the people following, go every day
once, six The second part. Of conque^ing the Land of promise.
days together, and the seventh day, seven times, round about Jericho. 16. at
last al making a great shoot, the walls fall down, and they entering (...)
kill and destroy al (22. saving Rahab and her kindred.) The gold, silver, brass,
and iron are brought into the treasury. 26. And he is cursed that shall build
the city again.
AND Jericho was shut and ^ensed, for fear of the children God appointed this
long and solemn procession to the end it might appear, that the walls of
Jericho ^el not by chance, no^ by force of man's industry, but by the mighty
hand of God.
Go round about the city al you that be men of war went before them, and
the rest of the common people followed the arc, and they sounded with
trumpettes. And Many are held guilty of sin, and are justly punished for
the fact of one or few, either because they consented, or concealed, or
neglected to punish the offenders: or else they suffer temporal affliction for
their warning to abhor sin, and for increase of their merit. ^. Aug. q. 8.
and 9. in Iosue.
all the camp of Israel be under sin, and be trubled. But whatsoever gold or
silver there shall Hi^l fell into this curse for reparing Jericho. 3. Reg. 16. v.
34.
Cursed be the man before our Lord, that

CHAP. VII. For the sin of Achan, reserving secretly to himself certain
money, and other precious things, the Israelites are beaten in battle. 13. But
the offender being found out, and stoned to death, Gods wrath is turned from
them.
BUT the children of Israel transgressed the commandment, So God tempered his
punishment that but few were slain, and afterward gave the town to the
Israelites without loss of any of their men.
six and thirty men: and the adversaries pursewed them from the gate as far
as Sabarim, and they stricke them flying away by the descent: and the heart of
the people was much afraid, and melted like unto water. But Iosue rent his
garments, and fell flat on the Prayer will not avail til justice be first
done.
why lie thou be no more with you, til you dispatch him, that is guilty of
this wicked fact. Arise, sanctify the people, and say to remains until this
present day. And the fury of our Lord was auerted from them. And the name of
that place was called, The valley of Achor, until this day.

CHAP. VIII. By stratageme of an ambushment the city of Hai is taken and
burned, and all the inhabitants slain. 29. the king hanged. 30. An Altar
built, Sacrifice offered, 32. the law written in stones, the people blessed,
and the blessings and cursinges read before them al.
AND our Lord said to Iosue: Fear not, neither do Deceiptes ^ stratagemes are
lawful in just war; but not falsehood, nor breach of promise. ^. Aug. q. 10.
(...) Iosue.
lay ambushmentes to the city behind it. And Iosue arose, and all the host of
the men of These five thousand were of the thirty thousand, which were first
sent. v. 3. The other 25000 joined with Iosues troop, and entered into the
city.
five thousand men had he chosen, and set in the embushmentes between Bethel
and Hai on the West side of the same city: but all the rest of the host went
in battle Not one fit to bear arms was left.
not one remained in the He life his shield upon a long pike or lance, that it
might be seen fit of.
Lift up the shield, that is in thy hand, against the city of Hai, for I will
deliver it to thee. And when he Iosue. Who burnt the city, and made it a heap
Deuteronomy. 27.
Hebal, as Moses the servant of our Lord had commanded. And first in deed he
Al superiors may bless their subjects, Princes their people; and parents
their children.
blessed the people of Israel. After

CHAP. IX. Other nations fearing Israel join their forces to fight against
them, 3. but the Gabaonites send ambassadors, feyning craftily to come far
of, 14. with whom Iosue and the ancientes of Israel make league binding it by
oath. 16. within three days they are detected to be nere inhabitants.
Whereupon the people murmur against their princes. Who yet for their oath, let
the Gabaonites live. 20. only making them and their progeny perpetual
servants, to cut wood, and carry water.
WHICH things being heard, all the kings beyond the Heueite, and the Iebus
eite, were gathered, to fight In such a case they ought to have consulted God,
to wirte, the high Priest putting on the Ephod and Rationale, should have
prayed at the door of the tabernacle, where our Lord appointed to speak unto
him. Exo. 29 v. 42 It was also ordained. Number. 27. v. 21. that Eleazar should
co^sult our Lord, when any thing was to be done by Iosue, which omitti^g to
do they were deceived by these Gabaonites.
asked not the mouth of our Lord. And Iosue made peace with them, and entering a
the princes of the multitude had sworn in the name of our Lord the God of
Israel. Therefore all the common people murmured against the princes. Who
answered them: We In these Gabaonites of Chanaans race was fulfilled Noes
prophecy. Geu. 9. that Chanaan should be a servant to his brethren.
they should be in

CHAP. X. ^iue kings of the Amorrheites besieging Gabaon, because it is
confederate with Israel, 6. Iosue with his army defeateth theirs, killing and
pursewing them. 11. many also are slain with hail stones. 12, At the prayer
of Iosue the sun and moon stand still the space of one day. 22. The five
kings are hanged on gibbetes. 28. He takes also and subdueth diverse cities.
40. and countries.
WHICH things when Adonisedec king of Jerusalem the kingly cities, and
greater then the town of Hai, and al their men of war most valiant. Therefore
Adonisedec Iosue did think if the moon moved the sun also must necessarily
move so he obtained the stay of both.
Moon against the valley of Aialon. And the Sun and Moon stood still, til
the people Til after the time this book was written.
after so long a God condescending to work so great a miracle at the instance
of his servant.
obeying the voice of a man, and fighting for Israel. And Iosue returned with all Israel into the camp of in a cave of the city of Maceda. And it was told
Iosue that God so disposed, that they should not co^quer al in one year: lest
the land had benne brought into a wilderness, and beasts increased against
them Exodus 23. v. 29* Morally it signifies, that the children of God must be
exercised in tribulations and mortification lest vices grow in them. Procop. in
Exodus
entered into fensed cities. And all the host they did to the king of Lebna, as
they had done to the king of Jericho. From Lebna he passed unto Lachis with all
Israel:

CHAP. XI. Iabin a more principal king somoneth other kings to join with him
against Israel. 6. Iosue animated with Gods promise of victory, 7.
overthrows them al. 16. Subdueth their countries 12. kills also many of
the giantes stock.
WHICH things when Iabin the king of Asor and in the plain against the south
side of Ceneroth, in the champaine also and countries of Dor by the sea side:
the Chananeite also on the East and West, and the Amorrheite country thereof:
and the part of the mountain, that goes These wars continued nere seven
years. as appears. chap. 14. v. 10.
A great time did Iosue fight against these kings. For their enormious sins
God left them in their own reprobate sense, not imposing necessity of
sinning, but permitting them to indurate their own hearts. See An not. Exodus 7.
the sentence of our Lord, that Hence forth they had not general wars but
diverse tribes had particular* as appears. chap. 15. etc.
the Land rested from battles.

CHAP. XII. Besides Sehon and Og kings of Hesebon and Basan slain by Moses,
7. are reckened thirty one kings slain by Iosue.
THESE are the kings, which the children of Israel Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 3.
upon the bank of the torrent Arnon, and of the middel part in the valley and
of half Galaad, as far as the torrent Iaboc, which is the border of the
children of Ammon. and from Moses the servant of our Lord, and the children of
Israel Moses slew two kings, and Iosue thirty one.
thirty one.

CHAP. XIII. God commands Iosue to divide the land (describing the limits
thereof) The third part. Partitio^ of the land among nine tribes and a half.
amongst nine tribes and a half. 8. with a recapitulation of the parts already
given, on the other side Jordan, to the other two tribes and a half. The tribe
of Leui (v. 14. and. 33.) has their provision in other manner.
IOSVE was old, and stricken in age, and our Lord said to Azotians, the
Ascalonites, the Getheites, and the Accaronites. But on the South side are the
Heueites, all the Land These parts are designed though not yet conquered.
Let it come therefore into a portion of the inheritance of Israel, as I have
commanded thee. And now divide the Land in possession to the Ma ian: the
Heueite, and Recem, and Sur, and Hur, and Rebe Dukes of Sehon inhabitants of
the Land. And Balaam This part the Amorreites had taken and possessed;
otherwise the Israelits were prohibited to take any thing from the Ammonites.
Deuteronomy 2.
the children of Ammon: as far as Aroer, which is against Rabba: and

CHAP. XIIII. Caleb of the tribe of Judah (s^ing some knew their lottes already,
and that the whole land was now to be divided) 6. demands, according to Gods
promise made by Moses (for his true and good report of the same land, when he
with others viewed it) that Hebron be given him, and his seed to inherit, 13.
which Iosue confirms unto him.
THIS is it, which the children of Israel possessed in the of Israel gave to
them: dividing al things by lotte, as our The Levites having their portions in
other manner, yet there were twelve tribes to receive portio^s by reason that
Jacob adopted Joseph's two sons. Genesis 48.
into their place succeeded the children of Joseph divided into two tribes, of
Manasses and Ephraim: neither did the Levites receive other portion in the
Land, but cities to inhabit, and their suburbs to feed their beasts and
cattle. As After the viewing of the land. Number. 1^. the Israelites remained in
the desert. 38. years: so they were nere seven years in wars.
forty and five years, since our Lord spoke this word to Moses, when
Israel walked through the wilderness: this day am I eighty and five years old
so ^ustie, as I was at that time when I was sent to view: Gods promise is ever
sure on his part, but because it is conditional, if we serve him sincerly, o^^
will being f^ee, he says: ^f perhaps our lord be with me.
if perhaps our Lord be with me, and I shall be able to destroy them, as he
promised me. And Iosue blessed him, and delivered to him Only the country of
Hebron was given to Caleb, for the city it self and suburbs belonged to the
Priests. chap. 21^ v. 11.
Hebron belonged See before. Chap. 11. v. 23.
the Land ceased from battles.

CHAP. XV. The borders of the lotte of Judah, 13. including Calebs particular
inheritance (16. out of which he gives Cariath Sepher, and his daughter to
Othoniel, for winning it:) 21. with the names of the cities thereof. 63. the
Iebuseite yet dwelling with Judah in Jerusalem.
THEREFORE the lotte of the children of Judas by their toward the North coast of
a part of Accaron at the side: and bends to Sechrona, and passes mount
Baala: and comes into Iebneel, and is shut up with the end of the great sea
toward the West. These are the borders of the children of Though it was
prohibited that the nephew should marie his ^unt, yet the uncle was not
expressly forbid to marie his niece by Moses law Leuit. 18. And albeit there is
the same degree of consanguinitie, yet not the same inconvenience, by reason
the same person remains subject, that was inferior before marriage.:: Because
ordinarily the south part of the world is more dry and barren then other
parts, a barren place is called a south land, in respect of more settile
ground.
Axa his daughter to wife Who going together, she villages. Labana and Either
and Asan, Iephtha and Esna The Iebuseites kept a strong castle in Jerusalem,
til king David took it from them. 2. Reg. 5.
could not destroy: and the Iebuseite dwelt with the children of Judas in
Jerusalem until this present day.

CHAP. XVI. The tribe of Ephraim, (younger son of Joseph) receive their
lotte. 10. The Chananeite yet dwells with them paying tribute.
THE lotte also of Ruben for the sin of incest losing the priuelegies of
birthright ( Genesis 49) Priesthood was given to Leui, the kingdom to Judah, and
duble portion to Joseph. Paraphr. Chald.
the children of Joseph fell from Jordan sea: but Machmethath looks to the
North, and it compasses the borders against the East into Thanath-selo: and
passes through on the East side to Ianoe. and it goes

CHAP. XVII. The half tribe of Manasses (eldest son of Joseph) receive their
lotte. 3. including the daughters of Salphaad. 14. with an enlargement of
inheritance to the same tribes of Ephraim and Manasses.
AND this lotte fell to the tribe of Manasses (for he is the which looks to
Sichem: and goes out on the right hand beside the inhabitants of the
Fountain of Taphua. For in the lotte of Manasses was fallen the Land of The
land or territory of Taphua fallig to the lotte of Manasses, yet Taphua (that
is the city it self) was the childrens of Ephraim.
which is beside the borders of Manasses, the childrens of Ephraim. And the
border of the The Chananeite remained in the Land of Manasses, for a time.
his Land. But after that the children of Israel grew to

CHAP. XVIII. From the camp of Israel in Silo surueyers are sent to divide the
rest of the Land into seven parts, for the seven tribes yet without portions.
10. Which being done, Iosue casts lottes for them, 11. and the first lotte
falls to Beniamim, 12. Whose part is described by the limits, 21. with the
names of the principal cities.
AND all the children of Israel were assembled in Silo, Not equal bu^
proportionable parts were assigned, for so it was commanded. Number. 26. v. 54.
To the greater number to give a greater portion, and to the fewer a less.
of every multitude: and report unto me that which they have marked out.
Divide After the portions were appointed by men's industry and discretion, God
confirmed the same by lotte, to take away al occasion of coffeehouse.
before our Lord your God I may cast the lotte for you: for the Levites part is
not among you, but the priesthood mountains, and reaching to the wilderness of
Bethauen, and passing through by Luza to the South, the same is Bethel:

CHAP. XIX. The second lotte falls to the tribe of Simeon, the situation of
whose inheritance is described, with the names of their principal cities. 10.
The third in like sort, to Zabulon. 17. The fourth to Issachar. 24. The fifth
to Aser. 32. The sixth to Nepthali 40. And the seventh to Dan. 49. All the Land
being distributed among the tribes, with common consent they give a special
city to Iosue, in the mids of them.
AND the second lotte came forth of the children of And the fifth lotte fell to
the tribe of the children of Aser an end of dividing the Land by lotte to
every one by their tribes, Of modesty Iosue would not assign to him selfanie
place, but the whole people freely granted his request.
the children of Israel gave possession to Iosue the son of Nun in the mids
of them, according to the

CHAP. XX. Six cities of refuge for such as commit casual manslaughter are
named, 6* in which remaining til the death of the high priest, they may then
return to their proper dwelling place, and be safe.
AND our Lord spoke to Iosue, saying: Speak to the At first entering it
sufficed to allege in general his innocence, but after he must be tried in
particular.
those things, that may prove him self innocent: and so they shall receive
him, and give him place to inhabit. And them: that he might flee to them which
unwittingly had stricken a soul, and might not die in the hand of the kinseman,
coue^ing to revenge the blood shed, until he might stand before the people to
declare his cause.

CHAP. XXI. Cities with suburbs are assigned to the tribe of Leui. 4. To the
sons of Caath by the line of Aaron being priests, thirtenne, 5. to the rest
of Caaths progeny, being Levites, ten. 6. To the sons of Gerson Levites
thirte^ne 7. To the sons of Merari Levites (34. of a lower degree) twelve. 9.
with the names of all the cities: 39. in all forty eight. 41. So Gods promise
is fully performed having given the whole Land to Israel in peaceable
possession.
AND the princes of the families of the Leui came to to Caleb the son of
Iephone to possess. He gave therefore Levites in the mids of the possession
of the children of Israel were forty eight with their suburbs, every one
God gave all the Land in due time, but not al at once* for the causes expressed.
Exo. 23. v. 29. Deuteronomy. 7. v. 22.
all the Land, that he had sworn he would give to their fathers: and they
possessed it, and dwelt in it. And peace

CHAP. XXII. The tribes of Ruben and Gad, and half Manasses return to their
possessions. The fourth part. Two tribes and a half return to their
possessions; Iosues godly admonitions; and his, and Eleazars death.
10. Who building an altar by the side of Jordan, the other tribes suspect
that they will make a schism, and therefore purpose to fight against them. 13.
But first sending an embassage to admonish them, 21. they answer that they made
not an altar, for sacrifice, but only for a monument, that notwithstanding they
dwell on the other side of Jordan, yet they are of the same people of God, 30.
wherewith al Israel is satisfied.
THE same time Iosue called the Rubenites, and Gadites, It pertains to al
magistrates, and other superiors to admonish their subjects of their duty
toward God. before al other things.
always so that you keep attentively, Al superior^ may impert blessing to
their subjects.
blessed In much substance and riches return to your seats, with silver and
gold, brass and iron, and variety of raiment: divide the pray of your
enemies with your brethren. And So it behooves all the servants of God to see
in time, that no schism be made. and therefore orderly to inquire of every
show of evil. 1. These. 5.
Which thing when Sins past are imputed to such as fall again as a grauating
their new sins by reason of more ingratitude.
you sinned in Beelphegor, and until this present day the spotte of this
abomination abides in us? and many of the people fell dead. And you to day have
forsaken As before chap. 7. so if these had been culpable al Israel might fear
to be punished, except justice were done upon the offenders.
against al Israel. But if you think the land of your possession to be
unclean, chap. 7.
wrath lay upon all the people of Israel? And he was one man, and I would he
alone had perished in his wicked fact. And with the mind of preuarication we
have erected this altar, let him not keep us, but punish us presently: and if
we did In the law of Moses was one only altar for sacrifice, for the whole
people of God, to avoid schism and idolatry. Now in the Church (being in all
nations) are many altares, and but one only Sacrifice prefigured by all the
former. as S. Augustine teaches li 17. c. 20* de ^iuit. S. ^^o. Se^. ^. (...)
P^ssione.
not for holocaustes, nor to offer victimes, but for a testimony between us and
you, and our issue

CHAP. XXIII. Iosue being old admonishes the people to keep* Gods
commandementes. 12. and to avoid marriages, and al society with gentiles, lest
falling to idolatry God as certainly punish them, as he has benne benificial,
and bountiful to them.
AND when much time was passed, after that our Lord God fought for the
Isiachtes three man of ways: sometimes alone, they not fighting at al; as when
the Egyptians were drowned in the read sea: sometimes they doing his
co^mandmentes he apparently assisted them, as in the siege of Jericho, the
walls miraculously fell down ( c. 6) and hail stones killed their enemies (
chap. 10.) but most times inu^sibly, as well by giving them courege, as by
striking their enemies with terror. And al these ways God also fights for
his servants in spiritual wars against the devil, the flesh, and the world.
how him self has fought for you: and now Therefore as he has fulfilled in
deed that which he promised,

CHAP. XXIIII. In consideration of diverse principal benefits here recited, 14.
Iosue exorteth the people to serve God sincerly, seeing it is in their choice to
do well or evil. 16. they promise al true service and obedience to God. 25.
Whereupon he renews the pact between God and them, writing it in the volume of
the law, and erecting a great stone in testimony. 29. He dies and is buried
in mount Ephraim. 32. Joseph's bones are buried in Sichem. 33. Eleazar the high
priest also dies and is buried in Ephraim.
AND Iosue gathered together all the tribes of Israel into The Israelites
descended also of Nachor, by Rebecca, his sons daughter, the wife of Isaac.
Genesis 24.
of Nachor: and" they served strange gods. I took into your hands, and you
possessed their Land, and slew them. And there rose Balac the son of Sephor
king of Iosue being a prophet saw some of their hearts inclined to idols,
though exteriorly they then had none among them. S. Aug. q. 29. in Iosue.
take away the gods, which your fathers served in Mesopotamia and in Egypt,
and serve our Lord. But Now therefore, quoth he, take away strange gods our
This renouation of the same covenant presigured the law of the new Testament.
S. Aug. q. 30. in Iosue.
made a covenant, and proposed to the people precepts and judgments in
Sichem. He wrote To the more confusion of reasonable creatures wilfully
offending, insensible things are made witnesses, because they ever obey Gods
will, which is the best manner of hearing. Theod. q. 19. in Iosue.
it has heard all the words of our Lord, which he has spoken to you: lest
perhaps hereafter you will deny, and lie to our Lord your God. And he dismissed
the people, every one into their If Iosue writ the rest of this book, then
Samuel added these last verses. Hist. S^hol.
And after these things Iosue the son of Joseph's Mausoleum (o^ famous
sepulcher) remained in Sichem in S. Hieroms time. as he wit nesseth. Tradit.
Hebra. in Genesis prope sinem.
bones also of Joseph which the children of Israel had taken Genesis 5^. ^xo. 13.
out of Egypt, they buried in Sichem, in part of the field, which Jacob had
bought of the sons of Hemor the father of Sichem, for a hundred young ewes,
and it was in the possession of the sons of Joseph. Eleazar also the son of

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXIIII.
2. They served false gods.] It is evident by this place, that Their, and
some Their sometime served false gods, but Abraham never.
other progenitors of Israel sometimes served false gods, from which they
were reduced: but Abraham was ever preserved in true religion; and the whole
family of Their was therefore persecuted in Chaldea* as S. Augustine shows li.
16. c. 13. de ciuit. Likewise Theodoret, q. 18. in Iosue, and other both ancient
and late writers teach the same as is already noted. page 203.

30. They buried.] In that no mention is made of mourning for Iosue, S. Hierom
Before Christ none entered into heaven.
notes a mystery, and a special point of Chistian doctrine: It seems to me
(says he Epist. de 42. Maus. man's. 33.) that in Marie prophecy is dead, in
Moses and Aaron, an end is put to the law and priesthood of the Jews. For so
much as they could neither pass into the land of promise, nor bring the
believing people out of the wilderness of this world. And ( Man's 34.) Aaron
(says he) was mourned, (and so was Moses) Jesus is not mourned that is, in
the law was descentinto hell ( called limbus) in the Gospel is passage to
paradise.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
SAINT Hierom giving this general rule (Epist. ad Eustoch. virg.) that A rule
for reading historical books.
in reading historical books of holy Scripture, the history, as fundation of
verity, is to be loved, but the spiritual understanding rather to be followed:
agreably thereto teaches (Epist ad Paulin.) that in this book of Judges there
be as many figures, as princes of the people. Neither does he mean that there
were no more, but for example sake affirms that these Judges, raised up after
Iosue, and sent of God The Judges of Israel figures of Christ's Apostles*
to deliver the people fallen for their sins into afflictions, were types and
figures of the Apostles and Apostolical men, sent by Christ to propagate and
defend his Church of the new Testament. For albeit diverse of these Judges were
sometimes great offenders, yet they were reclamed by Gods special grace, and so
amending their errors did great things, to the singular honor of God: and are
renowned among the holy Patriarces and Prophets, particularly praised in
bolie Scipture, saying: And the Judges, every one by his name, They were al
finally holy men.
E^^li. 4^.
whose heart was not corrupt: Who were not auerted from our Lord, that their
memory may be blessed, and their bones spring out from their place, and their
name remain for ever, the glory of holy men remaining to their children.
After Iosue therefore, who it seems guided and ruled the people 32. years,
this book, written (as is The Contents of this book.
most probable) by Samuel, showing the famous Acts of these Judges of Israel,
prosecuteth the history of the Church the space of 288. years more. And may
be divided into three parts. First, is described in general the state of the
people, Divided into three parts.
sometimes well and sincerly serving God, other times falling to great sins.
in the two first chapters. Secondly, their offenses, afflictions, repentance,
and delivery from their enemies are more particularly reported from the third
chap. to the 17. Thirdly, other special accidents, which happened within the
same time, are recorded* in the last five chapters.

THE BOOK OF IVDGES, IN HEBREW SOPHETIM.
CHAP. I. Under a general captain of the tribe of Judah, assisted by the tribe
of Simeon, The first part. A gene^al recapitulation of the peoples state.
Israel subdueth diverse cities of the gentiles (12. Othoniel taking Cariath
sepher possesses it, and marieth Calebs daughter, obtainig also addition of
her dowry) 21. Iebuseites yet dwell in Jerusalem with Benjamin, 27. and the
Chananeites with diverse of the tribes.
AFTER the death of Iosue the children of Israel The manner of consulting our
Lord was by the High priest praying in the tabernacle. Exo. 29. v. 42.
consulted our Lord, saying: Who shall go up before us against the Chananeite,
and shall be captain of the war? And our Lord said: The first general
captain after Iosue, and diverse of the Judges, were of the tribe of Judah, but
not al, as appears in this book.
Judas shall go up: behold I have delivered the Land into his hands, And Judas
said to Simeon his brother: that shall strike Cariath Sepher, and spoil it, I
will give him Axa my daughter to wife. And when Othoniel the son of Cenez, the
younger brother of Caleb had taken it, he gave him Axa his daughter to wife.
Whom going on her Strong weapons crooked like sickles made fast to the
chariottes which cut in pieces, men, horses, and other chariottes that came in
their way.
hooked chariotes. And inhabitants of Cetron, and Naalol: but the Chananeite
dwelt in the mids of him, and was made tributarie to him. Aser

CHAP. II. An Angel reciting many benefits of God toward Israel, and their
ingratitude, 4. they weep for their faults. 10. After the death of Iosue and
other antientes of his time, the people often fall, and repenting are delivered
from afflictions. 19. but still fall again worse and worse.
AND the An Angel taking the form of a man as before to Iosue, ( chapter 5.) so
now appearing to the people, spoke to them in the name of God, whose messenger
he was.
Angel of our Lord went up from Galgal to By special dispensation sacrifice was
sometimes lawfully offered in other places though the Tabernacle (and afterward
the Temple) was the only place commanded. Deuteronomy. 12. Iosue. 22. S. Aug. q. 36.
in Iudic.
there they immolated hosts to our Lord. Iosue therefore dismissed the he had
done with Israel. And Iosue the son of Nun, the These Judges were
extraordinarily raised up to deliver the people repenting, when they were
fallen into afflictions for their sins.
raised up Judges,

CHAP. III. The people associating them selves with Gentiles, against whom they
ought to The second part. Of the common peoples often falling to idolatry,
their repentance, and deliuetie.
fight. 8. are invaded by foreign kings: 9. but repenting are delivered by
Othoniel. 12. Falling again, afflicted, and repenting, 15. are delivered by
Aod, 21. secretly killing Eglon their enemy. 31. After him Samgar defends
Israel against the Philisthimes.
THESE are the Nations, which our Lord left, that in In many places we see the
word savior, and like titles given to men, as the servants and officers of
God, who is the proper and principal Savior of al. S. Aug. q. 18. in Iudic.
a savior, and delivered them, to wit, Othoniel the son of Cenez, the
younger brother of Caleb: and the In these 40. years are included the eight
years of their servitude, v. 8. and so in the rest of this history. otherwise
the number of years agrees not with the count. 3. Reg. 6. v. 1.
forty years, and Othoniel the hands for the right. And the children of
Israel sent by him presents to Eglon the king of Moab. Who made him self Aod
having special inspiration from God to do this fact, (as S. Augustine notes
upon these words. q 20. in Iudic.) is not to be imitated by private men. See
Number. 25. v. 11.
A word from God I have to thee. Who forthwith rose out of his throne. And Aod
put forth

CHAP. IIII. Again the people sinning are oppressed, and crying to God, 4. by
direction of Debbora a prophetess, Barac fights against Sisara their enemy.
15. who stricken with fear, and fleeing away, 17. Iahel pretending his saftie
kills him in her house.
AND the children of Israel added to do evil in the sight Being a prophetess
she resolved hard and obscure things, but exercised no jurisdiction in any
causes, for that belonged to the council of Priests and of seventy ancientes,
where the high priest was the chief Judge. Number. 11. Deuteronomy. 17. Spiritually
Debbora signified the Church and Barac christian Princes, who are directed in
their wars, and other actions by spiritual superiors. as Origin, and other
ancient writers expouud this history.
judged the people at that time. And she sat under a palm tree, which was to
the torrent Cison. And Debbora said to Barac: Arise, for Who is this woman full
of confidence, piercing the temples of the enemies head with a nail, but the
faith of the Church destroying the devils kingdoms with the cross of christ?
S. Aug. li. 12. ^. 32. cont. Iaust. Manich. Iabel also prefigured our B. Lady
who crushed the serpents head.
Iahel therefore

CHAP. V. The Canticle of Debbora and Barac giving thanks after their victory.


The greater bless the less by imparting spiritual benefits, so God, and
superiors bless their subjects. Men bless God, and the less their betters,
by giving thanks, and praises.
bless our Lord.

Hear you kings, and give ear ye princes: I am, She inculcateth that she
must so much more praise God for this victory, because he forshewed it by her,
and by her directed the general captain Barac, lest it might be ascribed
either to wisdom or valor of any man.
I am she, that will sing to our Lord, I will chaunte to our Lord the God of
Israel.













Those that subdew their bodies to the spirit ride upon fair asses Origin,
hom. 6. in c. 5. Iudic.
fair asses, and sit in judgment, and walk in the way, speak.











divided against it self, there was found contention of courageous men.















Iahel the figure was blessed amongst women: much more the most holy virgin
mother of God is blessed above alwemen.
Blessed among women be Iahel the wife of Haber the Cineite, and blessed be she
in her tabernacle.















And the Land rested for forty years.

CHAP.

CHAP. VI. The people falling again to sin, are oppressed by the Madianites.
12. An Angel appearing to Gedeon, sends him to deliver Israel, 17. confirming
his mission by miracle. 25. So he first destroys Baals altar. 34. then
gathers an army against Idolaters. 36. and is assured again of Gods
protection by two miracles in a fleec^ of woolle.
AND the children of Israel did evil in the sight of our S. Augustine ( q 31. in
Iudic.) supposes that this messenger sent from God called a man and a prophet
(for the form, wherein he appeared) was the same Angel which sat under the oak
and sent Gedeon to deliver Israel. v. 11. 12. etc.
a man that was a prophet, and he spoke: Thus says our Lord the God of
Israel: I made you to come up out of Egypt, and brought you out of the house
of servitude, and delivered to ward him, and said: Go in this thy strength,
and thou shall deliver Israel out of the hand of Madian: know that I have sent
thee. Who answering said: I beseech thee, my Lord, He meant not to offer
sacrifice to the Angel, but that either the Angel, or himself in presence of
the Angel, should offer it to God and so in deed the Angel partly directed him
what to do, partly executed the office himself, by touching the oblation with
his rod; and miraculously bringing fire to consume the sacrifice.
to thee. Who answered: I will tarry thy coming. Gedeon therefore An altar for a
monument, not for sacrifice.
an altar to our Lord, and called it, our Lords peace, until this present day.
And when he was yet in Ephra, which is of the family of Ezri, that night our
risen in the morning, they saw the altar of Baal destroyed, and the grove cut
down, and the other bullock laid upon the altar, which then was built, They
said one to an other: The strength of Baal, or stronger then Baal.
Ierobaal, Dew first in the fleece and after on the ground signified grace and
true religion first in one people, after in all nations. Saint Amb. Ser. 13. de
Natal Dom. Venr. Beda. qq) in Iudic. c. 4. Also Christ's Incarnation without
detriment of his mothers virginity, of whose grace al are replenished S.
Bernard. ho. 2. in Missus est.
dew in the fleece only, and on all the ground drienes, I shall know that by my
hand, as thou have spoken, thou will deliver Israel. And it came so to pass.
And rising in the night wringing

CHAP. VII. Gedeon marching with thirty two thousand men, all that are fearful,
and that drink water kneeling are dimissed, and only three hundred that
drink little remain, 9 By a Madianites dream Gedeonis encouraged. 16 By a
stratageme the enemy is frihgted and overthrown. 24. The Ephraites kill Oreb
and Zeb.
THEREFORE, Ierobaal, which is also Gedeon, rising in the valley on the North
side of the high hill. And our Observation of dreams is generally forbid.
Leuit. 19. v. 26. Deuteronomy. 18 v. 10. yet here, and in other places, it is evident,
God would have some observed. See Annot. Genesis 40.
a dream: and in this manner he reported that which he had seen: I ^aw a
dream, and there seemed to me as it were a harth loaf of barlie to roll, and
to come into the camp of Madian: and when it was come to the tabernacle, it
stroke it, and overthrew it, and beat it al flat with the earth. He to whom
he spoke, answered: This These things were ridiculous (says venerab. Beda c.
5. qq* in Iudic.) if they had not been terrible to the enemies.
empty pitchers, and lamps in the mids of their pitchers. And he said to
them: What you shall see me do, that do It is no derogation to God, that
honor is also given to his servants.
and to Gedeon. And Gedeon went in, and Trumpetes signified preachers of
Christ, pitchers the bodies of Martyrs, and lamps their virtues and miracles.
Vener. Beda. qq. in Iudic. c. 5.
trumpettes, and to clappe the pitchers one against an other. And when they

CHAP. VIII. The Ephr^imites quareling because they were not called to the
Wars, are pacified by Gedeon. 4. The men of Soccoth and Phanuil denying
victuals for the camp, Gedeon (in the mean time (10.) overthrowing the
enemy) 15. reuengeth their reprochful contempt. 18. kills Sebee and Salmana.
22. refuses dominion, 24. but receives as a gift, the Jewels taken in the
pray. 27. makes thereof an Ephod, which turns to the ruin of his family,
30. Having seventy sons by his wives, and one by a concubine, dies in good
old age. 33. and the people fall again to idolatry.
AND the men of Ephraim said to him: What is this that A soft answer breaks
anger: hard speech stirs up fury Prou. 15.
What could I have done like to that, which you have done. Is not the cluster
of Ephraim better then the vintages of Abiezer? Into your hands has our Lord
delivered the that dwelt in tabernacles, on the East side of Nobe, and Iegbaa,
stroke the camp of the enemies, which were secure, and suspected no mischance.
And Zebee and Salmana fled, Zebee and Salmana were not of any of the seven
nations, whom God commanded to destroy and therefore Gedeon might have spared
their lives, if he would.
I would not kill you. And he said Kings may do ante thing not contrary to the
law: but Judges and Dukes may only do according to the law. See. 1. Reg. 8.
Rule thou over us, and thy son, and thy sons son: because thou have
delivered us from the hand of Madian. To whom he said: I will not rule over you,
wont to use, and besides the golden chains of the camels, And Gedeon made
thereof an Ephod, and put it in his city His handmaide o^ servant not a
harlotte: to wit, such a one as had not the privilege of a wife. as Genesis 25.
v. 6.
concubine, which he had in Sichem,

CHAP. IX. Abimelech Gedeons concubins son kills his brethren, 7. only the
youngest escapes, and by aparable expostulateth the injury done to his
fathers house. 23. Shortly the Sichemites detest Abimelech. 26. Ga^l conspireth
against him, but is overcome. 50. Finally Abimalech is wounded to death by a
woman.
AND This son of Gedeon by his servant prefigured Antichrist who will
persecute the Church and reign for a while: but in the end shall be destroyed.
S. Beda c. 6. qq in Iudic.
Abimelech the son of Ierobaal went into seventy men, upon one stone: and
there remained Ioatham the youngest son of Ierobaal, and was hid. And all the True pastores in the time of Antichrist will still avouch the truth and the
right of the Church.
and stood in the top of mount Garizim: and lifting up his voice, he cried,
and said: Hear me ye men of Sichem, so as God may hear you. "The trees went
to Oil spiritually signifies the grace of the Holy Ghost, making peace of
conscience in men's souls toward God.
olive tree: Reign over us. Which answered: Can I forsake my fatnes, The
swetnes of Gods law producing good works.
fig tree: Come, and take the kingdom over us. Which Contemtible in outward
show, but bringing forth liquour of marvelous force; which sort of works God
is most delighted withal: and men most admire. Psalm. 85
vine: Come, and reign over The rhamnus signifies base and ambicious men.
the brierre bramble ^rthistle.
rhamnus: Come, and reign God does suggest only good cogitations* as remo^^e
of conscience in the seche^^tes, for their ingratitude toward Gedeon and for
so wicked and cruel a murder of his sons* whereupon they began to detest
Abimelec and, so hatred grew between him and them, which is a most evil spirit*
but their former sin, not God, was the cause thereof. S. Aug. q. 45. in Iudic.
a very evil spirit between Abimelech and the inhabitants of Sichem: Who began
to detest him, and to lay the wickedness of the murdering of that looks to the
oak. To whom Zebul said: Where is For more revenge he sowed the city with
salt, which makes ground barren, Theod. q. 17. in lib. Iudie.
sowed salt in it. Which when they had heard and approaching to the door,
endeavored to put fire under it: and behold one woman casting from above a
piece of a Euels shall betide the unjust man to destruction. Psalm. 139.
dashed it against the head of Abimelech, and brake his brain. Who called by
and by his esquire, and

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IX.
8. The trees went to anoint a king.] According to the history Ioatham
Gedeons Vngtatful people render injuries for benefits.
youngest son, by a parable justly expostulateth the injury done by the
Sichemites to his fathers house, in preferring a base bound woman's son, and
cruelly murdering the rest of his sons: who with much travel, and many
dangers of his own life, had delivered them from servitude. But in the
spiritual sense, which (as the ancient fathers note) is chiefly intended,
Idolaters and Heretics are reproved, who rather accept of unjust vsu^pe^s,
that will serve Infidels promote wicked men to authority.
their licentious appetites, and mantaine vice and wickedness, then to be ruled
by just and lawful Superiors, appointed by Gods ordinance, endued with grace of
the Holy Ghost (signified by the olive tree;) such as bring forth wholesome
sweet virtues (signified by the sigge tree;) and are replenished with admirable
fortitude (signified by the vine tree*) and in their places set up base,
ambitious, Abimelech a figure of Antichrist.
crnel, and crabbed spirits, signified by the bramble, or brere. Thus Nemrod,
Abimelech, Mahomet, and innumerable other tyrants have benne advanced, and
especially Antichrist shall be extolled above all that is called God, or is
worshipped, and 2 Thessalonians. 2.
shall most cruelly persecute al Chatholiques, that will not conform them selves
to his procedings. But in fine (as here is prefigured in Abimelech) sire shall
rise against this bramble Antichrist, and shall denoure him and al his together.
S. Beda. 99. in lib. Iudic. c. 6.

CHAP. X. Thola rules in Israel twenty three years. 3. lair twenty two. 6.
The people fall again to idolatry, are afflicted by the Philisthimes, and
Ammonites. 10. they* cry to God for help, who bids them call for help to
the gods whom they have served. 16. but crying still to God, and throwing away
their idols, he has compassion of them.
AFTER Abimelech there arose Ruler in Israel Thola the Israel three and twenty
years, and died and was buried in Samir. After him succeeded Iair the
Galaadite, who judged Not every one that says: Lord, Lord but he tha^ does
the will of God, etc. Mat. 7.
they threw away out of their

CHAP. XI. Iephte rejected by his brethrens, is entreated by the ancientes of
Galaad to return and fight for them against the Ammonites. 12. with whom he
first pleads the cause of Israel by just reasons, 26. and long prescription.
But they persisting obstinate, he (30. inconsideratly vowing) 32. overthrows
them, 34. and sacrifices his only daughter.
THERE was at that time Iephte the Galaadite a most valiant The hebrew word
Z^nah signifies also ^n ^n keeper.
an harlot, who was borne of Galaad. And Galaad had a If they had not concurred
to his expulsion, it might have sufficed to have sent for him, but in this case
the ancientes judged it meet to go in person, and to in treat him. So Christ
was rejected by the Jews, and returns not to them til in the end of the
world they shall seek unto him. ^. Aug. q. 49. in Iudic. post^e^iu^.
come to thee, that thou go forth with us, and fight against the children of
Ammon, and be the captain of all that dwell in Galaad. Iephte also said to
them: to the king of Ammon: Thus says Iephte: Israel did not Number. 20
me that I may pass through thy land. Who would not condescend to his
requests. He sent also to the king of Moab, who also him self contemned to
give passage. He abode therefore in Cades, and compassed the Land of Edom at the
In the opinion of infidels, it seemed that they possess^d countries by the help
of false gods, and so they thought them selves to have just title. Much more
just is the title when God almighty gives victory of conquest. S. Aug. q. 48.
in Iudie.
Chamos thy God possessed, He argues upon prescription of 300. years being
nere so much. for there wanted scarce thirty: being from the conquest made by
Moses ( Number. 21.) til the time of Iephte about 270. years.
three hundred years. Wherefore have you so long attempted nothing for
reclaim? Therefore I do not sin against thee, but thou Maspha also of
Galaad, and thence passing to the children of Ammon, he vowed a vow to our
Lord, saying: If thou This vow was unlawful, for the law forbids to offer
man or woman in sacrifice Exo. 34. v. 20. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 31.
whosoever shall first come forth out of the doors of my In the old testament
marriage was ordinarily preferred before single life but in the new, it is
better to keep virginity 1. Cor. ^. ^. 38.
bewail my virginity with my fellows. To whom he answered: Go. And he
dismissed her two

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XI.
^9. Did to her as he had vovved*] Whether Iephte did well or no in sacrificing
his daughter, having vowed to offer in sacrifice whosoever (or whatsoever)
should first mete him returning with victory, as it hapened she did, is a
great and hard question, says S. Augustine ( q. 49. in lib. Iudic) and not
easily decided, the holy Iephte offended in vowing indiscreetly. But not in
performing his vow as ancient fathers think more probable.
scripture neither approving nor reproving his fact* Nevertheless by conference
of other scriptures and discourse of reason, he judges it most probablo that
Iephte offended in vowing without special warrant from God, to sacrifice, that
which by the law was not sacrificable; yet ^inned not in performing his vow,
but rather pacified God thereby, whose will it seemed to be, that for punishment
of his sin he should sacrifice his daughter, because by his divine providence
she first met him: and the omission might rather have benne for his natural
love toward his only child, then for the unlawfulness of the sacrifice: seeing
it once pleased God to command Abraham to immolate his sonno Isaac, though when
it came to execution* he forbade the same, appointing an other host in place
of the child, which here he did not. Neither was it injurious to the daughter,
seeing she, as al mankind, must once die when God appoints. Yea further S.
Augustine.
she offered her self freely (which seemed to be by Gods instinct) willing her
father to do to her whatsoever he had promised to God. This is the sum of S.
Augustins large discourse. Likewise S. Ambrose ( li. 3. de Officiis c. 12.)
supposes assuredly that this prince Iephte offended in vowing vn^duisedly, for
S. Ambrose.
it also repented him, when his daughter first met him: yet that with godly
fear and dread he performed to his own bitter pain that which he had
promised: inst^^^ting an anniuersarie lamentation of his daughter, for a
warning to posteri^^^ of more circumspection in making vows. S. Hierom also (
li. 1. aduers. Io^i^^^^.) approves their opinion that say: It was Gods
ordinance Iephte S. Hierom.
should se^^e the error of his unadvised vow, by the death of his daughter,
for a document to others. The very same teaches S. Chrisostom, ( ^o. 14. ad
pop. Antioch.) that God would have this error to be thus punished, that others
S. Chrysostom.
might be warned from vowing the like. S. Gregoire Naziazen ( orat. de
^achab^^^) preferring the martyrdom of the seven brothers and their mother,
before this sacrifice of Iephte as more advised, and more honorable, yet
condemns S. Gregory Nazianzen.
not this, but recounteth it amongst other commendable acts. Theodoret ( q.
19. in Iudic.) and all the before said fathers do highly commend the daughters
Theodoret.
promptnes in offering her self to be sacrificed, which either much extenuated
he^ fathers fault, or wholly justified his fact. Thus the ancient fathers
moderate their censures. Yet a new glosser of the English Bible without scruple
Bible ^603.
Protestants censure.
says, that by his ^ash vow, and wicked performance his victory was
defaced; and again, that he was overcome with blind Zele, not considering
whether the vow was lawful or no.

CHAP. XII. Ephraites rising against Iephte, forty two thousand of them are
slain. 8. Abesan is Judge. 11. After him Abialon 13. Then Abdon.
BUT behold in Ephraim there arose a sedition. For they That, is expose^ my
self to danger trusting to Gods help and ^^y^ own hands, when others would
not assist me.
put my life in mine own hands, and passed to the children of Ammon, and our
Lord delivered them into my hands. What have I deserved, that you rise against
me in battle. Therefore all the men of Galaad being called to him, he fought
against Ephraim: and the men of Galaad stroke Ephraim, because he had said:
Iephte being of Manasses tribe the Ephraites envied his glory and calumniously
objected that he and his followers were fugitives so raised a tumulte to their
own ^^^^e.
Galaad is a fugitive of Ephraim, and dwells in the mids of Ephraim and
Manasses. And the Galaadites took the fordes of Jordan, by

CHAP. XIII. The people fall again to idolatry and are afflicted by the
Philisthims. 3. An Angel fortelleth Manue his wife, that she shall have a son,
and that he shall be a Nazareite from his birth. 11. confirms the same to
Manue. 16. They offer sacrifice to God. 24. The child is borne, called Samson,
and blessed of God.
AND again the children of Israel did evil in the sight of thou Abstinence not
only from things unclean by the law but also from wine and sider was a
preparation to the child, who should abstain from them al his life.
drink not wine and sicer, nor eat any unclean thing: because thou shall
conceive and bear a son, whose head Other Nazerites observed a prescripte
rule of abstinence for a time only Number. 6. but Samson al his life; as a more
perfect figure of Christ.
from his infancy, and from his mothers womb, and he shall begin to deliver
Israel from the hands of the Philistijmes. Who when she was come to her
husband, said to Manue taking the Angel for a holy prophet justly thought he
would not admit, not command any thing but that was lawful. And so did as
the Angel appointed him, though he was no priest, nor the place proper to
sacrifice, but by extraordinary dispensation.
make to thee a kidde of goats. To whom the Angel answered: If my name, which
is merueilous? Manue therefore took a Though Manue saw not God in his own
person, yet seeing him in his messenger feared death. S. Aug. q. 54. in Iudi^.
God. To whom his wife answered: If our Lord would have killed

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XIII.
10. The man has appeared.] Al ancient fathers and Catholic writers say,
this was an Angel, which appeared in the form of a man, and it is plain by
Protestants either contradict themselves, or teach Arrianisme.
the text. Yet some protestants will have this person to be Christ, the eternal
word of God. Who afterward became man. And nevertheless where by and by
Bible 1603.
(v. 16.) he admonishes Manue to offer sacrifice to God, they note that he
sought not his own honor but Gods, whose messenger he was: either plainly
contradicting themselves, or else teaching Arrianisme, as though the Son of
God were not God; or inferior to God the Father.

CHAP. XIIII. Samson desirous to marry a Philisthime woman 5. by the way
kills a lion. 8. In whose mouth after few days, finding honey, 12. he
proposes thereof a riddle to the Philisthiims for a wager: 15. which reueling
to his wife, she tells it to his adversaries. 19. He killeih and spoyleth
thirty men, so pays the wager: and his wife takes an other man.
SAMSON therefore went down into Thamnatha, and his father and mother said: It
was prohibited ( Deuteronomy. 7. v. 3. to make marriage with the Gentiles, but God some
times dispensed: as here it appears he did. v. 4.
Is there not a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, and in all my
people, that thou will take a wife of the Philisthijms, which are
uncircumcised? And Samson said to his father: Take this for me: because she
has pleased mine eyes. But his parents knew By threats they made he^ betray
her husband: and nevertheless destroyed both her and her father. cha. ^5. v. 6.
so persecuters of the Church deal with such, as traitorously or of frailty
serve their turn.
if thou will not do, we will burn thee, and thy fathers house: have you
therefore called us to the bridal that you might spoil us? Who shed tears
before Samson, and complained saying:

CHAP. XV. Samson tying firebrandes to foxes tails burns the Philisthi^m^
corn. 6. they burn his wife and her father. 8. he beats them and hides him
self. 10. His own countrymen to get peace with the Philisthimes, take and
bind him, so meaning to deliver him. 14. but he breaks the cords, and with
the iaw bone of an ass kills a thousand of his enemies. 18. Being exceeding
dry, is refreshed with water, from the tooth of the same iaw.
AND after a certain time, when the days of wheat Being Judge of the people
he had help of others to ^ake so many foxes with ^^^^es. or otherwise, being
great store in that country.
caught three hundred which being set on fire, both the corn now carried
together, and that which yet stood in the stalk, was alburnt, in so much,
that the flame consumed the vineyardes also and the oliuetes. And the
Philisthijmes said: Who has done A notorious miracle to kill so many with so
mean a weapon without other help of man. And by common reason as incredible,
as the great mysteries of Catholic Religion.
he slew therewith a thousand men, and said: In the iawe bone of an ass, in
the iawe of the lifting up of the iaw bone. And being very thirsty, he It was
a greater miracle to draw water out of a dry bone, then out of the earth or
stones: but al things are possible to God, which he pleases to do.
opened a great tooth in the

CHAP. XVI. Samson environed in a city takes away the gates, and carries them
on his shoulders into a mountain. 4. Is at last deceived by Dalila, 21. his
eyes put out, and scornfully abused. 26. But finally God restoring his
strength, he striking two pillars the house falls, and with himself, kills
three thousand Philisthiims.
HE went also into Gaza, and saw there a woman that or, an In^e^per.
an harlot, and went in unto her. Which when the Philisthiims had heard, and it
was bruted among them, that Samson was entered into the city, they compassed
him, keepers being set in the gate of the city: and there all the night
waiting with silence, that in the morning they might kill him going out. But
Samson slept until midnight, and For such admirable streingth the heth ^i^h
people thought Samson to be Hercules. S. Aug. li. 18. c. 19. ciuit. But he was
indeed far stronger then they feaned of Hercules, who they said, was not
able to fight against two: whereas Samson alone killed a thousand with the iaw
bone of an ass. c. 15. v. 15.
took both the leaves of the gate, with their posts and lock, and laying
them on his shoulders, carried them to the top of the mountain, which looks
toward Hebron. After these things he loved a woman, unto her seven cords, as
he had said: with the which she bound him, ambushementes lying secretly in
wait near Supernatural streingth, or grace departs when any leave the rule
of their profession.
my strength shall depart from me, and I shall fail, and shall be as other men.
And she seeing that he had confessed to her al his mind, from him: and she
said: The Philisthijms upon thee Samson. He desired to be revenged, not of
rancour of mind but of zele of justice. And so all the elect and glorified
Saints desire revenge. Luc. 18. v. 8. Apoc. 6. v. 10.
revenge me of mine enemies, and for the loss of two eyes may receive one
revenge. And taking both the pillars, on which the house

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI.
30. Let me die with the Philisthiims.] Many things do justify Samsons fact
Samson excused in killing himself wi^th his enemies.
in killing himself with the Philisthiims. First it appears by the miracle,
that God directly and extraordinarily concurred by restoring in that moment his
admirable streingth, that he could pull down two such pillars. And conformably
we may gather, that God inspired his mind to attempt this fact, and so he erred
not, but obeyed God herein: as S. Augustine notes. li. 1. c. 21. and 26. de
ciuit. Dei. Secondly he was moved with zele of Gods honor, hearing the
Idolaters praise their false god Dagon. Thirdly, he had a good and pure
intention to revenge him self for Gods more glory, praying to him for
restoration of streingth. Fourthy he did not directly desire to kill himself,
but to kill the Philisthims, Samson a figure of Christ.
though himself must also die with them. And in this act especially he was a
figure of Christ, who chiefly by his death conquered his enemies.

CHAP. XVII. Michas and his mother cause a graven, and a molten idol to be made
of silver. The third part. Of certain accidents which happened in the time of
the Judges.
5. He makes one of his sons priest for the idol, 10. and for the same
purpose hyreth also a Leuite.
THERE was at that time a certain man of mount In hebrew pesel vmassecah, in
Latin sculptile and constatile, a graven and molten thing an image or form
made in mettle for a god, and so called, v. 5. was in deed an idol of
Gentilitie, and nothing at al against sacred Images of Christ and his Saints
in the Catholic Church. whereof more is noted. Genesis 31. Exo. 20.
a graven and:: a molten (god) and now I deliver that to thee. He rendered
Anointed his hands with oil, as was prescribed. Exo. 29. Leu. 8: But such an
apish imitation was of no value, where was neither true vocation in the
anointed (for he descended not of A^ton, but of Moses, chap. 18. v. 30.) nor
authority in him that used this ceremony
filled the hand of one of his sons, and he became his priest. In those
Michas said: Abide with me, and be to me a father and a priest, and I will give
thee every year ten silver pieces, and duble liuerie, and the things that
be necessary for victual. He was content, and abode with the man, and was An
Apostata Leuite was accounted more sufficient then an idolatrical priest to
serve an idol. so he that is a Priest of a Deacon once catholikly consecrated,
is a sufficient (yea too sufficient) a minister with protestants.
having a priest of the Leuitical kind.

CHAP. XVIII. First sending spy to discover, 11 six hundred armed men of the
tribe of Dan go to seek possessions. 14. By the way they take the idol, and
idolatrical priest from Michas. 27. surprise the town of Lais, 30. and there
set up idolatry.
IN those days there was not a king in Israel, and the tribe Their whole
portion was assigned ( Ios 19) but through their own ^^outh they possessed
little of it, so that hitherto the greatest part was not received.
not received a lotte among the other tribes. Therefore the children of Dan sent
five They meant the false god which the apostata Leuite served.
the Lord, that The devil answered, as his manner is obscurly, sometimes truly
and sometimes falsely.
Who answered We shall enter unto them being secure, into a most large perish.
And so they went on their journey begone. But Pesel, eidolon, sculptile, the
graven thing, falsely called god. c. 17. v. 5.
graven idol, and Jonathan the son of Gerson the son of Moses, and his
sons priests in the tribe of Dan, until the day of their captivity. And

CHAP. XIX. A Leuite bringing homeward his reconciled wife, 15. at Gabaa in the
tribe of Benjamin hardly gets lodging. 25. his wife is there vilanously
abused by wicked men, and in the morning found dead. 29. whereupon her husband
cutteth her body, and sends pieces to every tribe of Israel, requiring them
to revenge the wicked fact.
THERE was a certain man a Leuite, dwelling on the woman said to his son in
law: I beseech thee that thou tarry here to day, and let us make merry together.
But he rising She was his lawful wife and so called. v. ^. ^ 9.) et also is
called concubine because she had no dawrie, nor as yet enjoyed the privileges
of a mistress in her husbands house.
concubine. And now they were come nigh to Iebus and will receive us under his
roof, having straw and hay for

CHAP. XX. All the other tribes fighting against Benjamin, 13. because they will
not punish the malefactors, 21. have the worse, 25. also the second time. 29.
but the third time the Beniamites are al slain saving six hundred men.
THEREFORE all the children of Israel went forth, and Omission and contemp^ to
punish heinous ^^imes is a (...) cause to make w^^^^ (...)*
that they may die, and the evil may be taken away out of Israel* Who would not
hear the commandment of their brethren the children of Israel: but o^^ of al
cities, which were of five and twenty thousand of Benjamin of them that drew
sword, beside the inhabitants of Gabaa, which were One of the tribe of Judah.
Judas be your captain. And forth with the children of Being far more in
number and having the just cause, yet had the worse, because they trusted in
their own streingth.
in their strength and number, set the army in array in the same place,
wherein they had fought before: yet so that God also punished al Israel by this
civil war, for suffering idolattie in the tribe of Dan. cha. 18. v. 30. which
they ought to have punished. Deuteronomy. 13. v. 12.
Go up to them, and enter battle. And when the children of Israel the next day
had proceeded By this it appears that this history happened not long after
the death of Eleazarus. Ios. 24. v. 33. to whom hissonne Phinees succeeded in
the spiritual Supremacy of the Church.
Phinees the son of Eleazarus the son of as once and twice, they brought
forth their army against Benjamin. But the children of Benjamin also issued
forth turned into flight, and began to go the way of the desert,

CHAP. XXI. The tribe of Benjamin is repaired, 8. by four hundred virgins
reserved in the slaughter of Iabes Galaad. 19. and by other virgins taken, that
come forth of Silo to dance.
THE children of Israel swear also in Maspha, and said: Lest either justice be
over sharp, or mercy too relaxe, with great art of discretion, governors
must observe mercy justly aduising, and discipline piously ch^sticings. S.
Greg. li, 1. Epist. 24.
moved with repentance upon their brother Benjamin, began to say: One tribe
is taken away out of Israel, whence shall they take wives? For we have al sworn
in come, and their brethren, and shall begin to complain against you, and to
chide, we will say to them: Have pity on them: for they took them not away by
the right of warryers and conquerours, but when they desired to receive them,
you gave them not, and on your part the fault was committed. And the children
of Benjamin did, as it had been In the time of the Judges the people presumed
more to do that seemed to them selves right, or good though it was naught; which
afterward the kings more restrained and punished.
which seemed right to him self.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF RVTH.
AMONGST other things that happened to the people of Israel, in the time of
the Judges, this history of Ruth, to wit, her coming from Moab, her
conversion to true Religion, godly conversation, and marriage with The history
of Ruth is regestred in holy Scripture, for the genealogy of David, and
especially of our Savior Christ.
Booz of the tribe of Judah, is recorded, as a more principal matter. For that
not only king David, but consequently also our SAVIOVR, the Redemer of mankind
descended from her. VVherby was fore signified, that as salvation thus proceeded
from the Gentiles together with the Jews: so the Gentiles are made partakers
of the same grace. More clerly prophesied, as S. Hierom notes, by Isai ( cap.
16.) saying: Send forth o Lord the lamb, the Ruler of the earth, from the
Rock of the desert to the mount of the daughter of Sion. That is, from Ruth
the gentile to Jerusalem, or rather Iudic. 12.
to the Church. This marriage of Ruth came to pass about the time of Abesan
Judge. The book was written, as is most probable, by Samuel: and is divided
into four chapters; whose contents follow in their places.

THE BOOK OF RVTH.
CHAP. I. By occasion of famine Elimelech of Bethleem going with his wife
Noemi, and two sons, into the Land of Moab, there dies. 4. His sons marry
wives of that country, and die without issue. 6. Noemi returning homewardes
hardly persuades one of her daughters in law, to part from her. 15. The other,
called Ruth, will needs go with her, professing the same God and Religion. 19.
So these two arrive in Betheleem.
IN the days of one Judge, when the Judges ruled, night, and bear children,
if you would expect til they Noemi persuaded not to idolatre, but in sinuated
that if Ruth would not return to her country, she must also leave the false
gods. And so she answered, that she would serve the same true God of Israel.
to her gods, go with her. Who answered: She had a husband and two sons,
and sufficient provision, but now was bereued of them al.
full,

CHAP. II. Ruth gathering ears of corn in Booz field, 8. he kindly bids
her tarry with his servants. 17. At night she returns carrying good quantit^e
of corn, and part of the meat, which they gave her, to her mother in law.
AND Elimelech her husband had a cousin, a mighty man, grace of the father of
the house favorable toward me. To whom she answered: Go my daughter. She
went therefore The Church uses this salutation in the holy sacrifice and other
divine office.
Our Lord be with you. Who answered him: Our Lord bless thee. And Booz said to
the yongman, that was ouerseer of the Booz doubted not but reward was due to
good works.
render unto thee for thy Yea a full reward, answe^able to Ru^h piety: Which
must be spiritual and eternal.
a full reward of our Lord the God of Israel, to whom thou art come, and under
whose wings thou art fled. Who said: I have found grace you, forbid her not:
and of your own handfuls also cast

CHAP. III. Ruth instructed by her mother in law sleeps at Booz feet, 8. and
signi^^ing that she perteyneth to him by the law of affinity, receives a good
answer, 14. and six measures of barley.
BUT after that she was returned to her motherinlaw, self down and lie there:
The event showed that Noemi was inspired by God to give such direction to Ruth,
and to foretell what Booz would do.
and he will tell thee what thou must do. Who answered: Whatsoever* thou shall
command, It was very commendable that she loved her first husband and mother in
law: but more virtue infleing occasion of sin with young men, and seeking to
marie according to the law of God with her former husbands kinsman. Deuteronomy. 25.
not followed young men either poor or rich. Fear not therefore, but whatsoever
thou shall say to me,

CHAP. IIII. Booz before the ancientes of the city (the nearer kinsman
refusing) possesses the inheritance of Elimelech, 10. and marieth Ruth. 13.
Has by her a son, the grandfather of David. 18. Whose genealogy by this
occasion is recited, from Phares the son of Judas the patriarch.
BOOZ therefore went up to the gate, and sat there. And Booz calls his
kinsman brother, as Abraham called Lot his brother. Genesis 13. being his Nephew.
our brother Elimelech. Which I would thee to understand, and See Deuteronomy. 25.
noting here withal, that the penalty was less, whch an other kinsman
undertaking the marriage, the woman was prevented from complaining before the
judge.
this in old time was the manner in Israel between kinsemen, that if at any time
one yielded to an other his right: that the grant might be sure, the man put of
his shoe, and gave it to his neighbor. this was a testimony of yelding in
Israel. Booz therefore said to his kinseman: Take of thy shoe. builded the house
of Israel: that she may be an example of virtue in Ephrata, and may have a
famous name in Bethlehem: and that thy house may be, as the house of Phares,
Here appears the final cause of writting this history, to show the
Genealogy of King David from Judas the Patriarch, of whom Christ should
descend, so prophesied: Genesis 49. and showed to be performed; Mat. 1.
the father of Isai, the father of David. These are the generations of Phares:
Phares begat Esron,

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOKS OF KINGS AND PARALIPPOMENON IN GENERAL.
AFTER the book of Judges (whereunto Ruth is annexed) rightly follow the books
of Kings: signifying that after the general Judgment comes the everlasting
Kingdom. As venerable Beda expounds this connection qq^. in 1. Reg. c. 1.
These histories are also expounded mystically by the ancient Fathers.
of books, wherein he also explicateth many other Mysteries of Christ and the
Church praefigured in these histories. Likewise S. Gregory teaches that
besides Prolog^ in 1. Reg. li. 17. c. 4. ciuit. Ep. ad Paulin.
the historical and moral sense expressed in the simplicity of the letter, an
other mystical understanding is to be sought the height of the Allegory. In
confirmation whereof he cites S. Augustine and S. Hierom; who say, that Elcana
his two wives signified the Synagogue of the Jews, and the Church of Christ:
and that the death of Heli and Saul, with translation of Priesthood to Samuel
and Sadoch, and of the Kingdom, to David and his Successors, praefigured the
new Priesthood, and new Kingdom of Christ the old ceasing which were shadows
thereof. So these two great Doctors S. Gregory and S. Beda, insisting in the
step of other learned holy Fathers, that had gone before them, expound these
histories not only historically but also mystically. The history first sets
forth the changing of the form of government The general contents of all the
books of Kings and Para lippomenon.
from Judges to Kings: and then at large what Kings did reign over the
Hebrew people, as well in one entire Realm, as over the same people divided
into two kingdoms; their more principal Acts; their good and evil behavior;
also the prosperity, declinations, and final captiuities of both the
Kingdoms. Al which is contained in four books of Kings, with other two
partly repeting that was said before, but especially supplying things omitted
in the whole sacred history from the beginning of the world, called
Paralippomenon. The two first are also called the Books of Samuel, though he
writ not Samuel writ the first part, but uncertain who writ the rest.
one of them wholly, for he died before the history of the former ended; but
they go both under his name, because he anointed the two first Kings, and
writ a great part of their Acts. Whereto the rest was added either by David and
Solomon, as some think, or by Nathan and Gad, as is probably gathered, 1.
Paralip. 29. v. 29. The authors also of the third and fourth books of Kings,
and of the two of Paralippomenon are uncertain; yet al have ever been received
and held for Canonical Scripture.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST BOOK OF KINGS.
THIS first book may be divided into four parts. First are recorded the
Co^tents of the first book, divided into four parts.
gouernme^tes of Heli and Samuel, with the occasions of changing the state of
that commonwealth into a Kingdom* in the eight first Chapters, Secondly, the
election and government of Saul their first King. from the 9. chap. to the 16.
Thirdly, David's anointing, his virtues, trubles, and persecutions. from the
16. chap. to the 28. Fourthly, the ruin of Saul and exaltation of David. in
the four last Chapters.

THE FIRST BOOK OF SAMVEL, WHICH WE CALL THE FIRST OF KINGS.
CHAP. I. Elcana having two wives, the one called Anna, is barren, and for the
same These books are read at Mattins from the feast of the B Trinity until
the first sundaie of August.
is repro^hed by the other, called Phenenna. 9. Anna voweth, and prays for a
man child, 19. conceiueth and bears a son, calls him Samuel: 24. and
presents him to the service of God in Silo.
THERE was a man of Ramathaimsophim, The first part. Of the governments of Heli
and Samuel: and of changing the state into a kingdom.
of Eliu, the son of Thohu, the son of Suph, an Ephraite: and he had ten
children? And Anna arose after she had eaten and This child being of the tribe
of Leui, though not of Aarons stock, was lawfully vowed to the service of the
tabernacle, by his parents during his childhood, but coming to years of
discretion he was at his own election to continue, or to depart. If he had
been of any other tribe, he must have been redeemed. Leuit. 27.
will give him to our Lord all the days of his life, and the rasour shall not
come upon his head. And it came to pass, when she multiplied prayers with her,
after she had weaned him, with three calves, and three bushels of meal, and a
flagon of wine, and she brought him to the house of our Lord in Silo. But the
child was yet a little infant: and they immolated a calfe, and offered the
child

CHAP. II. Anna gives thanks in a Canticle. 11. the sons of* Heli grievously
sinning are reprehended, but not duly corected, by their father. 21. Anna
bears three sons more, and two daughters. 27. Heli is threatened, 34. and
the death of his two sons fortold.
The Canticle at Lauds on wenesday.
exalted in my God: my mouth is dilated upon mine enemies: because I have ioyed
in thy salvation.



Leave of to praise idols, as ye have accustomed to do.
let old matters depart from your mouth: because our Lord is a God of al
knowledge, and to him cogitations are prepared.



The Church of Gentiles.
the barren woman bare very many: and The Synagogue of the Jews. S. Aug. li.
17. c. 4. cini^.
she that had many children, was weakened.







The feet of his Saints he will keep, and the impious not be strengthened. Our
Lord shall his adversaries fear: Neither David no^ Solomon, much l^ss^ an^^
other King, possened or ^udged the ends of the ta^th: but ^^^^ts enheritance
reaches to the ends of the earth. Psalm. 2. v. 18.
the Earth, and shall give empire to his king, and shall exalt the horn of his
Christ.

And Elcana went into Ramatha, unto his house: but the man, God may be pacified
toward him: but if a man shall sin against our Lord Sins directly against
God, and that hinder his service, are more hardly remitted: but none at al a^e
irremissible before death, because during life every one may truly repent, if
he will: and to al true penite^tes God promisseth remission of sins Ezech. 33.
who shall pray for him? And they heard not the voice of their father, Gods
determination to punish took not away their freewil, but for their obstinacy
he leift them to themselves, without his grace, and so justly punished them.
See S. Aug. li. 5. cont. Julian. c. 3.
because our Lord would kill them. But the child Samuel prospered, and grew,
and This was fulfilled as in the figure in Samuel, not wholly, for priesthood
still remained in the line of Aaron, as appears in Achias, Abiathar and Sadoc.
chapter 14. 22. and 2* Reg. 8. but perfectly in Christ 1. Reg. c. 2.
whom thou enuiest in the temple, in all prosperities of Israel and there shall
not be an old man in thy house for ever. Notwithstanding I will not altogether
take away a man of

CHAP. III. Samuel thrice called upon in sleep by vision from God, repaireth
to Heli, 10. the fourth time our Lord reueleth to him the evil, that shall fall
to Heli, and his house. 16. Which he, being requested, declateth to Heli.
AND the child Samuel ministered to our Lord before Rare things are called
precious, and so the gift of prophecy is here termed, which was then granted
to few.
precious in those days, there was no vision manifest. It came to pass
therefore This vision happened early in the morning, before the time of dressing
the lamps, when some were put out and others light.
before the lamp answering, said: Here I am. And he asked him: What is

CHAP. IIII. The Israelites are beaten in batle by the Philisthijms. 3. Who
for their better protection and comfort, fetch the Ark of God into the camp:
10. but are beaten again, the Arc taken, and with many others the two sons
of Heli are slain. 13. Al which Heli understanding falls from his seat, and
breaks his neck: 19. also his daughter in law presently traueling of child
is delivered of a son.
AND it came to pass in those days, the Philisthijms Their confidence of
help from God, by presence of the arc was good and commendable, but their
sins deserved to be punished.
Let us fetch unto us the arc of the covenant of our Lord from Silo, and let
it come into the mids of us, that it may save us from the hand of our
enemies. The people therefore sent into the Philisthims heard the voice of the
cry, and said: What is this voice of a great cry in the camp of the
Hebrews? And they knew that the arc of our Lord was come into the camp. And
the Philisthijms were afraid, saing: God is This zele of religion in Heli
toward the arc, is a great sign that he died in good state though he was
temporally punished for not correcting his sons.
named the ark of God, he fell because thou have borne a son. Who answered
them not, nor gave heed to it. And she called the child Ichabod,

CHAP. V. Dagon falls down twice in presence of the Arc, his head and
hands broken of. 6. The Philisthijms being sore plagued in all their cities
where the arc comes, 11. determine to send it back to the Israelites.
AND the Philistijms took the ark of God, and carried So sown as Christ's
Gospel or Testament came among the Gentiles, al false gods and idolatry fell
down. S. Beda. qq in 1. Reg. c. 3.
Dagon lay flat on the ground before the arc of our Lord: and they took
Dagon, and restored him into his place. And The arc being a holy thing, as
Relics are, was terrible to their false god, the devil, so the Relics of S.
Babilas overthrew the false god Apollo as ^. Chryso^^. testifies at large. li.
cont. Gentiles, (...). 5.
upon Dagon our God. And sending they gathered together all the princes in their
secret parts. And the Getheites took counseil, and made themselves stools
of skins. They sent therefore the

CHAP. VI. The Arc is sent back with sieve emeroids and five mise of gold,
upon a new wayne drawn by two milch kyne. 13. which coming directly to
Bethsames are sacrificed, the wayne serving for fire, the Levites keep the
Arc. 19. Many others are slain looking of curiosity into it.
THEREFORE the ark of God was in the country of Obstinate sinners do harden
their own hearts, not God, but by suffering them so to do. ^ee A^not. ^^^d. 7.
Egypt shall take the ark of the Lord, and put it in the wayne, and the
vessels of gold, which you have paid him for sin, you shall put into a little
casket at the side thereof: and dimisse it that it may go. And you shall look:
and if so be As the arc was terrible to the infideles, ( chap. 5.) so also to
those that believed right but used it not reverently.
seen the arc of our Lord: and he stroke of the people seventy men, and
fifty thousand of the common people. And the people mourned, because our Lord
had stricken the common people with a great plague. And the men our Lord God
this holy one? and to whom shall he go up from us? And they sent messengers to
the inhabitants of

CHAP. VII. The Arc is brought to the house of Abinadab in Gabaa, 3. By
Samuels exhortation, the people cast away the idols and serve only God. 10.
Samuel offering sacrifice and praying, Israel prevails against the
Philisthijms.
THEREFORE the men of Caria Thiarim came, and These men knowing that the
presence of the arc was good for them (though the Bethsamites had benne
punished for their irreuerence toward it) feared not to receive and keep it.
brought back the arc of our Lord, and carried it into the house of Abinadab
in Gaaba: And Eleazar his son they sanctified, that he might keep the arc
of our Lord. And the men of Israel issuing out of Masphath pursued the
Philisthijms, and stroke them unto the place, that was under Bethcar. And
Samuel took one stone, and laid it between That is (...) say, the Phili(...),
who were (...) o^ the seven nations of Chanaan, which God comm^nded his people
to destroy, (...) the Amorrheites.
Amorrheite. Samuel also ^udged Israel all the

CHAP. VIII. Samuel growing old, and his sons for bribes perverting
judgment, the people require to have a king. 7. ^o Whom by Gods commandment,
Samuel for^heneth the law of a king, to make them cease from their demand; 19.
but they persist therein.
AND it came to pass when Samuel waxed old, he appointed Heli his sons
g^ieuously offending in then office before ( chap 2.) and now Samuels sons
also perverting iudgem^t gave occasion to the people, to demand a l^ng to judge
their temporal causes rightly not declining to wrong for bribes.
Therefore all the ancientes of they have forsaken me, and served strange gods,
so do they also unto thee. Now therefore hear their voice: but yet Misphat
signifies manner, fashion, or proceeding.
right of the king, that shall reign over them. Samuel therefore spoke all the
words God always hears those that truly repent for their sins, but does
not always deliver them from afflictions, which are due for offenses, or
profitable for probation and merit of his children.
will not hear you in that day, because you desired unto your selves a king.
But the people would not hear the voice

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VIII.
7. Rejected me.] For so much as God had chosen Israel a peculiar people to
^^od. 19. Deuteronomy. 17. Iudi^. 2. v. 16.
him self, and hitherto ruled the same by his Priests established among them,
Why the peoples demand to have a king is disliked.
and by Judges extraordinarily raised up, and sent by him, to deliver them in
their distresses, their demand now to have a King, who (after the manner of
other nations) should be their Lord, and have more dignity, and authority
over them, then Dukes or Judges had, is interpreted, as in effect to reject
God* in that they disliked, and sought to change his form of government. And
therefore this request of the people justly displeased both Samuel and God
himself.

11. The right of the King.] Samuel here by Gods appointment, to diswade Kings
sometimes oppress their subjects by Gods sufferance, but unjustly.
the people from their desire of a king, at least to admonish them before hand,
what they are like to find by experience, recites such things, as Kings
abusing ^. Cyp. li. 3. ep. 9. sieve 65. ^. Hier^* in Osee 8. ^. Greg. li. 4. c.
2. in 1. Reg. 8.
their power do oftentimes practice, by reason of their high dignity, and
little fear of controlment, but unjustly and unlawfully; according to the
doctrine of ancient Fathers. Amongst others. S. Cyprian calls the exactions of
kings here recited, grievous injuries. S. Hierom dura imperia, and seruitutem.
rigorous or cruel gouernmentes, and servitude. S. Gregory proves the same by
two contrary examples. Seeing (says he) that which is here foretold, was
punished in Achab and Iesabel (3. Reg. 21.) it shows, that it was not right
by divine judgment, which they exacted. And when the elect King David was to
build an altar to our Lord (1. Paral. 21.) he would not take part of Ornans
field, except he paid a just price for it. Moreover the law prescribing the
duty of Kings ( Deuteronomy. 17. v. 16. etc.) commands them not to multiply
horses, not Kings have prerogatives above, but not cont^aric to the laws.
to heap riches, not to take high courage, that their hearts be not lifted up
into pride over their brethren. Nevertheless Kings have great prerogatives
(more then Dukes, and Judges) besides, and above, but never contrary to the
law; that albeit they can not take their subjects lands or goods, neither
for them selves, nor to give to their servants at their pleasure: yet in
diverse cases subjects are bound, to contribute of their private goods, to
supply the necessity of the King, or of the commonwealth, as by nature every
part must suffer damage, or danger in defense of the principal member, or whole
body. And if any refuse so to do, they may justly be compelled.

Furthermore in case Kings or other Princes commit excesses, and oppress Evil
princes may be deposed by God and the Church* but not by the people only.
their subjects, yet are they not by and by to be deposed by the people, nor
Council. Lateran c. 3. de heret.
commonwealth, but must be tolerated with patience, peace, and meeknes, til God
by his sovereign authority, left in his Church, dispose of them: which his
divine wisdom and goodness often differreth to do, as here he expressly
forewarneth, saying: ( v. 18) You shall cry in that day, from the face of your
King, and our lord vvil not ^eare you And the reason is, because he will punish
the sins of the people, by suffering evil princes to reign. Job. 34. v. 30.

Of which important difficulty, falling sometimes between Princes and their
Points observed in the constitution and deposition of King Saul.
subjects, who so desires, may search the judgment of ancient Fathers, and
see S. Thomas, and other schole Doctors, 2. 2. q. 12. a. 2. Here only for
better understanding of this present text, these brief points may be observed
First, the people of their own will desired to have a King. Secondly, they
requested the same at the hands of samuel their present Superior. Thirdly,
this demand 1. 2. 3. 4.
displeased both Samuel and God himself. Fourthly, yet God condescended to
grant their suite, but with an admonition, and forewarning of the
inconveniences, which they should find and feel. Fifthly, God himself designed
5.
the person that should be King, reveled him by vision, and commanded Samuel to
anoint him. Sixthly, God nevertheless by guiding the lotte, more manifestly 6. 7.
declared, and confirmed his election. Seuently, God deposed the same King, for
transgressing his law, chap. 13. v. 13. and disobeying his commandment. chap.
15. v. 23. appointing an other, by the ministry of Samuel. chap. 16. Eighthly,
notwithstanding his deposition, he remained in his dignity til his 8.
death, which happened by other means. chap. 31. By all which it appears,
that God constituted Saul the first King of the Jews, the people suing to have
a King; but deposed him for evil behavior, the people desiring no such thing,
and Samuel the Prophet much lamenting the same. Yet was he not actually be^iued
of the crown and kingdom during his life.

CHAP. IX. Saul by occasion of seeking his fathers asses comes to Samuel. 15.
Who had a revelation of his coming, and a commandment to anoint him. 22. He is
entertained and lodged with Samuel.
AND there was a man of Benjamin named Cis, the son The second part. The
election, anointing* and government of King Saul.
of Abiel, the son of Seor, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphia, the
son of a man of Iemini, valiantin strength. And he had a son called Saul,
chosen and good: One that by divine inspiration foreseeth things too* come.
a S^^r.) And Saul said to his servant: Thy word is very good, you shall find
him, before he go up into the excelse to eat. for the people will not eat til
he come: because he will bless the Host, and afterward they shall eat that are
invited. Now therefore go up, because this day you shall find him. And they
went up into the city. And when they Oppression of innocents cries to heaven.
their cry is come to me. And when Samuel had beheld Saul, our Lord said to
called Saul in the high chamber, saying: Arise that I may dismiss thee. And
Saul arose: and they went both forth: to wit, he and Samuel. And when they
came down in the uttermost

CHAP. X. Saul is anointed king, and confirmed by signs that his ordinance is
of God. 10. He prophecieth, which the people does admire. 17. Samuel calls
the people together, for appointing a king, the lotte falls on Saul. 25. and
the law of the king is again mentioned.
AND Samuel took ^. Gregory here notes, that such as are placed in height of
government, are anointed with oil, which signifies mercy, light, and
cu^ing of others.
a little vessel of But the little vessel foreshewed that Saul not perseuering in
grace, should be deposed from his kingdom. li. 4 c. 5. in 1. Reg. 10.
oil, and powered may offer oblation, and immolate pacifique victimes:
Samuel enioynet^ obedience to Saul to try his humility. S. Greg. li. 4 c. 5.
in 1* Reg 10.
seven days shall thou expect, til I come to thee, and I will show thee what
thou must do. Therefore when he had turned away God gave him peculiar grace for
executing the office of a king.
changed unto him another heart, and al these things came in that day. And By
and by also the gift of prophecy.
Spirit of our Lord seized upon him. and he prophesied in the mids of them.
And all that had Then superious.
their father? therefore it was turned into a proverb: What is Saul also among
the prophets? And he ceased By lotte the people were assured that the election
was of God. S. Greg. ^b^dem.
lotte fell on the tribe of Benjamin. And he brought the tribe of Benjamin and
there is not the like to him in all the people. And all the people cried, and
said: God save the King. And Samuel spoke to

CHAP. XI. Ammonites fighting against Iabes Galaad, and the city ready to
yield, 5. Saul gathers an army, 11. overthrows the enemy, 14. and is
established King.
AND it came to pass as it were a month after, Naas men, that are in Iabes
Galaad: To morrow, when the sun shall wax hot, you shall have relife. The
messengers therefore came, and told the men of Iabes: Who were glad. And As the
men of Iabes deluded their enemies by aequiuocation, so speaking that they were
otherwise understood then they meant: so the servants of God being tempted with
concupiscence of glutoni^ (signified by Naas) must deceive their carnal
appetite, by promising to satisfy the desire of the flesh, but in deed keep
such temperance, as they may kill the concupiscence, and not be killed by it. S.
Greg. li. 5. c. 1. in 1. Reg. 11.
we will come forth to you: and you shall do to us whatsoever shall please you.
And it came

CHAP. XII. Samuel being justified by the people for his good behavior, 6.
charge them with ingratitude toward God, 14. admonishing them, and showing
by a sign, that they offended in demanding a king. 20. Exhorts them now to
serve God, promises to pray for them, and forwarneth that they shall receive as
they deserve.
AND Samuel said to al Israel: Behold I have heard your The anointed king.
Christ in this day, that you have not found any thing in my hand. And they
said: Witness And Samuel said to the people: Our Lord (...) immediately by God,
but would have king to reign over them* imagening that so they should be
better protected, and defended from foreign enemies wherein they preferred
their own conceit and judgment before Gods disposition. and therefore this
sin is often here inculcated, and much reprehended. S. Greg li. 5. c. 2. in
1. ^^. 12.
Ierobaal, and mi^^tie Samson.
Badan, and Iepte, and Samuel, and delivered you from the hand of your enemies
round about, and you dwelt securely. But you seeing that Naas, king of the
children They ^ent that they would not be ruled and protected as hither to they
had been, by Dukes and Judges ordained
Not so, but a king shall reign over us: whereas our Lord your God did reign
among you. Now therefore your king is ready, (...) ^^ures. S. ^reg. thunder.
fathers. But They feared God so much the more*- because they feared al^o his
servant.:: For sinners to come before Gods face were presumption, not to come
to his back, or to depart from thence, were desperation. So Marie Magdalen with
fear and hope approached and tarried at Christ's back. Luc. 7. S. Greg. loco
citato.
back of our Lord, but serve our Lord in all your heart. And decline not after

CHAP. XIII. Saul and Ionathas prevail in battle against the Philisthijms. 5.
who increasing their forc^s, the Isra^lites for fea^e flee away and hid
themselves, 8. Samuel not coming to the camp, Saul presumes to offer
sacrifice, 11. for which Samuel reproves him, and declares that his kingdom
shall be translated to an other. 17. The Philisthijms oppress the Israelites.
and deprive them of armor.
A CHILD of Saul beginning to reign was innocent and humble as a child of one
year.
one year was Saul when he began to And in that state reigned the first two
years. S. Greg. in hunc locum.
two years he reigned over Israel. And Hebrews passed Jordan into the Land of
Gad and Galaad. And when Saul was yet in Galgal, all the people was sore afraid,
which followed him. And he expected seven days He offended in offering
sacrifice being neither a priest, nor extraordinarily allowed to do that
office, and for this and other faults was deposed.
done folishly, Gods foresight of sin, and perordination to punish it, takes
not away freewil, nor possibility of well doing, nor of reward. S. Aug. li. 3.
c. 4. de lib. arbit.
if thou had not done, even now had our Lord prepared thy kingdom over Israel
for ever, but thy kingdom shall no farther was to be mended. And when the day was
come to fight,

CHAP. XIIII. Ionathas trusting in God, accompained with one man, his father
not knowing, goes into the Philisthijms camp; kills twenty men and
trubleth their whole army. 16. Saul understanding the same, approaches with
his army, and they get a great victory. 24. But Saul having commanded under
pain of death, that none should eat til night, Ionathas for taisting a little
honey (though ignorant of the prohibition) is judged to die. 45. But the people
oppose themselves, and deliver him from death. 47. Saul prospers in his
kingdom, with his samilie.
AND it chanced on a certain day that Ionathas the you: let us stand in our
place, and not go up to them. But Ominous speeches are proved by this and some
other examples to be sometimes of God, though sometimes this kind of
observation is supersticious. As before is noted. Genesis 24.
this shall be a sign unto us. Both of them therefore appeared to the station
of Pray no more nor expectno longer* so they proceeded to battle withou sur^^er
warrant.
Draw together thy hand. Saul and the fight reached as far as Bethauen. And
the men of Ionathas was excused by ignorance, and by necessity; and therefore
was justly delivered by the people; and his father offended, in not excep^ing
the case of necessity, and through more e^g^e zele of reu^ge, then he had
warrant from, God, whose answer he would not expect v. 19
My father has trubled the land: your selves have seen that mine eyes are
illuminated, because I have tasted a little of this honey: how much more if the
people had VVherof followed also an other sin, that the people fainting for
lack of meat did eat flesh with the blood, contrary to the law.
with blood. And they told Saul saying that the of Israel? And Before, v. 19.
Saul would not expect Gods answer: now therefore God will not answer him.
he answered him not in that day. And Saul Ionathas was found to have
transgressed the unadvised commandment, but Saul him self was in a greatter
fault of rash proceeding, and indiscreet commanding.
Ionathas was taken. And Saul said to Ionathas: Tell me what thou have

CHAP. XV. Saul is commanded utterly to destroy the Amalecites. 8. but he
taking Agag their king spares his life, and chief of the pray. 10. For which
disobedience (20. though pretending that the best things were reserved for
sacrifice) he is deposed from his kingdom. 24. Then acknowledges his fault.
32. Samuel cutteth Agag in pieces 35. and mourns for Saul.
AND Samuel said to Saul: Our Lord sent me to annointe Amalec is stricken when
the flesh is chasticed by abstinence.
strike Amalec, and Destroyed when the mind is restrained from unclean
cogitations. S. Greg^ li. 6. c. 1. in ^. Reg. 15.
destroy which he had brought from Amalec. And when Samuel When Saul was
humble he was exalted, now being proud he is rejected.
was thou not made chief in the tribes of Israel? And our Lord anointed thee
to be king over Israel, and our Lord sent thee on the way, and said: By
ordinary sacrifices, we give our external goods to God, by obedience we give
our selves S Greg. li. 6 c. 2. in 1. Reg. 25.
BETTER is obedience then victimes: and to harken rather then to offer the
fat of rams. Because it is as it were the sin of kingdom of Israel from
thee this day, and has delivered it to thy neighbor better then thou.
Moreover the Triumpher God is said improperly to repent, when he alters the
thing, that he did before. S. Amb. li. de Nos ca. 4.
repented our Lord that he had appointed him king over Israel.

CHAP. XVI. Samuel by Gods commandment annointeth David King. 14. Gods spirit
parts from Saul, and a wicked spirit vexes him. 16. the vexation is The
third part. David's anointing, his virtues, and persecution.
mitigated by David's playing on a harp
AND our Lord said to Samuel: How long do thou because I have rejected him,
neither do I judge according to the look of man: for man sees those things
which appear, but our Lord "beholds the heart. And Isai called By Gods per
mission. S. Aug* li 2. q. ^. ad Sim^l^c^an S. ^eda. qq. ^n 1. Reg. c. 5.
from our Lord. And the servants of Saul said to him: Behold an evil spirit
Naturally (as these men truly judged) music helps some il disposition of
humores, and draws also the mind from so vehement apprehension of
afflictions: but here it seems more probable, that God supernaturally reliued
Saul by David's playing on the harp, together with his sincere devotion, for
more manifest condemnation of the one, and instification of the other Glos.
ordin. S. Greg.
play on the harp, that when the evil spirit of our Lord shall take thee, he
may play with his hand, and thou bear it more it more easily. And Saul said to
his servants: Prouid me

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI.
7. Beholds the heart.] It is proper to God to see the secret cogitations of
How Saints and Prophets know men's thoughts.
men's hearts, of himself and by his own power. And glorified Saints know
our cogitations by seeing God, in whom al things appear, that perteine to their
state, and for the profit of others. S. Aug. li. de cura promortuis, c. 15. S.
Greg. li. 12 c. 13. Moral. Prophets being yet mortal, by inspiration do also
see secret cogitations. 1. Reg. 9. 3. Reg. 14. etc.

CHAP. XVII. Goliath a Philistian chalengeth any one of Israel to combat. 12.
David being sent by his father to visit his brethren. 23. and hearing al Israel
so reprochfully provoked, offerech to undertake the challenge: 34. showing by
former acts that he dare accept it. 37. And so by Gods special help wherein
he trusts, 49. overthrows the chalenger with a stone of his s^ing, and
cutieth of his head with his own sword. 51. the Philistijms fleeing are
slain, and David brings the man's head to Saul.
AND the Philisthijms gathering together their companies This bold and impudent
chalenger signifies the devil, or any arch heretic, that provoke the
Church of God* but is overcome by the humble of heart and confident in God, and
slain with his own weapon.
Goliath, of Geth, in height six cubits and a palm: and a helmet with me, and
strike me, we will be servants to you: but if I shall prevail, and shall beat
him, you shall be servants, and shall serve us. And the Philistian said: I have
defied the Christ ouercoming the devil received the Church to his spouse. S.
Greg.
that shall strike him, the King will give him his daughter, and he will make his
fathers house without tribute in Israel. And David spoke to the or, for and. v.
36. 37.
or a bear, and took a ram out of the mids of the flock: and I pursued
them, and stroke He that has overcome the spirit of pride, and of carnalitie
(signified by a lion, and a bear) is able also to overcome the devil.
both the lion and the bear did I thy And David said to Saul: I can not go
so, because I am not used, and he laid them of. And he took his staff, which
Pride having impudency of the forhead, is overthrown by humility of Christ's
cross. whose sign therefore we carry in our forhead. S. Aug. li. 50. homil.
ho. 31.
the forehead, and he fell on his face upon the earth. And David prevailed
against the Philistian with Philistians, invaded their camp. And David taking
the:: Saul knew no^ David, being perhaps in a shep wards habue though he had
not long besore served and pleased him well. chapter 16. v. 21.
man descended, Abner? And Abner said: Thy soul lives o king, if I know. And
the king said: Ask thou, whose son

CHAP. XVIII. David and Ionathas enter league of friendship. 6. Saul hearing
David praised above himself is offended, 10. and vexed with an evil spirit,
attempteth twice to kill him: 17. premiseth to give him his eldest daughter in
marriage, but gives her to an other, 20. and gives him the younger, thereby to
one throw him: 25. putting him also in more danger, by requiring of him an
hundred prepuces of Philistijms. 27. David brings him two hundred, and his
fame increases.
AND it came to pass, when he had finished to speak This happened not
immediately after the victory against Go^ath but when David had dwelt some time
in Saul's house, and was very gratful to him and to all the court and people.
when David returned, after he stroke the When the praises of one importe
diminishing of an other, he that is proud, as Saul now was, is moved to envy
and malice, more and more as the vetrues of the other and his praises do
increase.
exceeding angry, and this word was displeasant in his eyes: and he said: They
have given David ten thousand, and to me they have given a thousand: what
remains for him but only the kingdom? Therefore Saul did not look enemies,
Moreover Saul thought to deliuet David into the hands of the Philistians. And
when his servants had reported

CHAP. XIX. Saul intending to kill David is pacified by Ionathas. 9. Nevertheless
attempteth again to kill him, and missing his purpose, 11. sends souldiars to
take and bring him back that he may be slain, but Michol his wife helps him
away, and excuses her self to her father, as if she had done it for fear. 18.
David and Samuel flee into Naioth. 20. Again Saul sends souldiars after them
three times, and they al do prophecy. 22. then himself pursues David, and
also prophecieth.
AND Saul spoke to Ionathas his son, and to al his servants, Saul had heard,
being pacified with the voice of Ionathas, he swear: Our Lord lives, he shall
not be slain. Ionathas This statua, or image can not importe an idol, as the
same word teraphim does. Gen 31 for here no idolatry at al was committed, but
a right office done by the wife toward her husband. The same word also
signifies religious things belonging to Gods service. ^^ee. 3.
a statua, far as the great cesterne, which is in Socho, and asked, and said:
In what place are Samuel and David? And it was told him: Lo they are in Naioth
in Ramatha. And he went Saul and his messengers had not the gift of prophecy,
as godly prophets had by an inherent habit, but transitory, as Baalams ass
had faculty to speak, at one time, but did not afterward speak any more. S.
Aug. l^. 2. q. 1. ad Simplician.
prophesied til he came into Naioth in Ramatha. And he stripped himself

CHAP. XX. Ionathas comfort David, 3. confirms their former league. 18. By
an appointed sign (24. endeavoring first, but in vain, to pacify his father)
35. certifieth David of his fathers malice against him. 41. They meet again
secretly, and sorowfully part each from other.
BUT David also fled from Naioth, which is in Ramatha, neither can it be, that
I should not tell thee, if I shall certainly know that my fathers malice is
complete against thee. And which was beside the wall, Ionathas arose, and Abner
sat at the side of Saul, and David's place appeared void. And them into the
city. And when the boy was gone, David

CHAP. XXI. In case of necessity Achimelech the priest g^ueth hallowed bread to
David, 8. also the sword which he had taken from Goliath 10. then: David going
to Achis king of Geth, is forced to feign himself mad.
AND David came into Nobe to Achimelech the priest: and Distinction of common
and holy bread. Also an example of dispensation in case of necessity.
lay breads at hand, but only holy bread, if the servants be clean, especially
from women? And David answered said: Lo here the sword of Goliath the
Philistian, whom thou slewest in the Valley of terebinth, is wrapped up in a
mantel behind the Ephod: if thou will take this, take it. for neither is here
any other beside that. And David said: There is none other like to that, give
me it. David therefore arose, David most wisely in such distress fained
himself to be a fool. By which the Holy Ghost mystically signified that
Christ should do such things not of fear but of divine wisdom, as he should be
counted a fool. Mar. 3. v. 21. Luc. 23. v. 11. 1. Cor. 1. v. 23 ^. Beda.
Quest. in 1. Reg. c. 14.
changed his countenance

CHAP. XXII. David with a great retin^^ goes to the king of Moab 5. but by
advise of Gad the prophet, returns into Judah. 6. Saul lamenting that many
conspire against him. 9. Doeg accuses Achimelech, 14. who justifies both
David and himself. 16. He and all the Priests with much people in Nobe are
slain by Saul's commandment, 20. only Abiathar escaping flies to David.
DAVID therefore went from thence, and fled to the cave And Saul heard that
David had appeared, and the men that Saul unjustly condemning David, condemned
also al those that justified him.
for their hand is with David, knowing that he was ^led, and they told me not.
And Seeing so manifest injustice and cruelty they obeyed God, rather then m^^.
the kings servants would not extend their hands upon the priests of our
Lord. And the king said to Doeg: Turn thou, and run upon the priests, and
murdered in that day eighty five men reuested with an ephod of linen. And
Nobe the city of the

CHAP. XXIII. The city of Ceila oppugned by the Philistijms is relieved by
David. 7. Who fearing to be there betrayed, 13. flees into the desert of Ziph.
16. Ionathas repayreth secretly to him, and they confirm again their former
league. 19. The Ziphians promise to betray David: 27. but Saul leaves for a
while to persecute him, being forced to defend the land from the Philistians
inuading it.
AND they told David, saying: Behold the Philistijms David understood, that
Saul secretly prepared euil^ against him, he said* to Abiathar the priest: By
this it appears that David consulted God by the high priest* and the high
priest for this purpose joined the priestlie ornament called Ephod to the
Rationale, and so had revelation from God. Exo 18. Leuit. 8.
Apply the Ephod. And David said: Lord God of Israel, thy servant has heard
Conditionally: If thou ^arie here.
They will deliver thee. David were in the desert Maon, in the champaine country
at the right hand of Iesimon. Saul therefore and his company

CHAP. XXIIII. Saul chancing to come into a cave, David being hid with others
in the same place, only cutteth the skirt of his cloak, 5. which after showing,
Saul acknowledges his fault, and cease for a time to persecute him.
DAVID therefore went up from thence, and dwelt in A tender conscience had
scruple of a small doubt which was no sin: a large conscience sticks at
nothing.
David's Saul being anointed king by God* appointment, could not lawfully be
slain by his subjects without like ordinance from God. For though David was
also already anointed, yet that was not to reign presently, but when Saul
should die, or otherwise be taken away.
that I do not this thing to my Master the anointed of our Lord, that I
should lay my hand upon him, because he is the anointed of our Lord. And David
persuaded his men with words, and permitted them not to rise against Saul:
moreover Saul rising out of the cave, went on his journey begun. And David
rose up after him: and going out

CHAP. XXV. Samuel dies and is mourned. 3. David requesting, 10. and not
obtaining victuals of Nabal, 13 threatens to kill him. 14. But his wife Abigail
prudently preuenteth the revenge, 18. by sending victuals, 23. and giving good
words. 37. Al which when Nabal understands, he ^ainteth, and after ten
days dies. 39. David marieth Abigail: 43. also Achinoam: 44. and his wife
Michol is given to an other.
AND Samuel died, and al Israel was gathered together, words that he had said.
Then said David to his servants: Not a malicious mind, such as Saul bore
unjustly against David; but punishment is decreed against Nabal, for not only
denying a reasonable request, but also for so reprochful an answer.
malice is accomplished against thy husband, and against thy house, and he is
the son of Belial, so that no man can speak to him. Abigail therefore made
have, and took Evil words for courteous usage heret o sore, and for late
gentil entreating by messengers.
evil for good. These things do God to the enemies not come unto blood, and
has saved thy hand to thee: and now be thine enemies as Nabal, and they that
seek evil to my lord. Wherefore receive this benediction, which thy Things
tye^ in bundels are stronger and more secure, then single and loose.
bundel of the living, with our Lord thy God: Moreover the life of thine
enemies shall be whurled, and in the violence, and whurle of a sling. When our
Lord therefore malice of Nabal has our Lord rendered upon his head. David
therefore sent, and spoke to Abigail, that he might take her to himself to
wife. And David's servants came to Abigail

CHAP. XXVI. The Ziphians bewrraying the place, Saul besieges David. 5. who by
night goes where Saul and his men are a sleep, 9. hurts him not: 12. but
takes from him his spear and bottle of water: 14. shows what he has done.
21. Saul again confesses his fault, and promises peace.
AND there came Zepheites unto Saul in Gabaa, saying: him through with my
spear in the earth once, and twice shall not need. And David said to Abisai:
Kill him not: for David is resolute, and often repeteth, that it is not lawful
for private subjects to kill their prince, no although him self was anointed
to succeed.
who shall extend his hand upon the anointed of our Lord, and shall be innocent?
And David said: Our Lord lives, unless Gods providence sent this
extraordinary sleep and inspired David, to do this fact, for more
justification of his innocence*
of our Lord, had fallen upon them. And when David had passed over things. And
David answering, said: Behold the kings

CHAP. XXVII. David for more security goes again to Achis king of Geth, 5.
obtains of him the city of Siceleg, (6. by which means it becomes subject
to the kings of Judah) 8. and makes prays upon the enemies of King Achis.
AND David said in his heart: at length I shall fall one day These countries were
neither subject to the Philistijms not to the Israelites, and were also of
those nations whom God had commanded to dest^roy, dwelling within the land of
Chanaan. Deuteronomy, 25.
Gessuri, and Gerzi, and from the Amalecites: for these villages were inhabited
in the land in old time, as men go to Sur, as far as the Land of Egypt. And
David stroke all the set upon to day? David answered: Against the south of Judah,
and against the south of Ier^miel, and against the south of Ceni. David gave
life neither to man nor woman, neither

CHAP. XXVIII. The Philistians fighting against Saul, David promises fidelity
to Achis. 3. Saul destroys magicians, 6. but God not answering him, 7.
seeks a woman that has a Pithon spirit, 12. wills her to raise up Samuel.
The fourth part. Of the ruin of Saul, and exaltation of David.
15. who appearing fortelleth him, that he, and his sons shall die the next
day.
AND it came to pass that in those days the Philistijms and how he has
raised the magicians and sothsayers out of the land: why therefore do thou
lie in wait for my life, that I may be slain? And Saul swear unto her in our
Lord, Not many but one excellent person, an old man come lie in apparel.::
Saul adored not Samuel with divine honor, but with dulia, reuerencedue to a
blessed soul.
Gods coming out of the earth. And he said to her: What manner of form
^iadag^ cognouit Luevv.
understood that it was Samuel,and he bowed himself upon his face on the
earth, and:: adored. And Samuel said to Saul: why have thou disquieted In state
of the dead in an other world, not in the same particular state.
with me: yea the camp also of Israel will our Lord deliver into the hands of
the Philisthijms. And forthwith Saul his servants and the woman forced him,
and at length hearing their voice, he arose from the ground, and sat upon the
bed. And that woman had a pasture fed calfe in the house,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXVIII.
14. Saul understood that it was Samuel.] It is not defined nor certain,
whetherthe soul of Samuel appeared, or an evil spirit took his shape, and
spoke to Saul. S. Augustine ( li. 2. q. 3. ad Simplician) proposes both the
opinions as S. Augustine: opinion whether Samuele soul appeared, or no.
probable. Where first he shows, that Samuels soul might appear; either
brought thither by the evil spirit, which is not so much to be merueled at, as
that our Lord and Savior suffered him self to be set upon the pinnacle of
the temple, and to be carried into a high mountain by the devil; yea to be
taken prisoner, bound, whipped, and crucified, by the devils ministers: or else
that the spirit of the holy prophet, was not raised by force of the
enchantment, or any power of the devil, but by Gods secret ordinance unknown
to the pythonical woman, and to Saul, and so appeared in the kings presence,
and stroke him with divine sentence Again he answers, that there may be a
more easy and ready sense of this place, to wit, that Samuels spirit (or
soul) was not in deed raised, but an imaginary illusion made by the devils
enchantment, which seemed to be Samuel, and which the Scripture calls by the
name of Samuel, as pictures or images are commonly called those persons or
things, More probable that his very soul appeared, not compelled by the evil
spirit but obeying Gods secret ordinance.
which they represent. So when we behold pictures in a table, or on a wall, we
say, this is Cicero, that is Salust, that Achilles, that is Rome. To this
effect S. Augustine discourses more at large in the place before cited. But in
an other work written after ( de cura pro mortuis gerenda. c. 15.) teaching
that souls of the dead appear sometimes to the living, he says expressly,
Samuel the prophet being dead, foretold suture things to King Saul yet living.
Though some be of opinion (says he) that Samuel himself appeared not, but
some evil spirit took his similitude.

And this last judgment of S. Augustine is much confirmed; first by the words
of this text, literally and plainly affirming that Samuel appeared, and spoke
First proose*
to Saul, and Saul to him. and that Saul understood (or^nevv, not only thought,
imagined, or supposed) that it was Samuel. Secondly, this apparition came
sooner, preventing the enchantment, and in better order, then the pithonical 2
woman expected, as appears by her answer, saying she saw God (or an
excellent person) ascending in comely manner and attire: whereas evil spirits
used to appear (as the Rabbis testify) in ugly bodies, with the heels into
the air, and head downward. Thirdly, the Author of Ecclestasticus (chapter 46.)
amongst the praises of Samuel the prophet, says, he slept, (or died) and
certified 3
the King, and shevved to him, the end of his life. Where it seems clear,
that the same person that died, denounced Gods will and sentence to Saul.
Moreover if it had been an illusion of an evil spirit, it would hardly seem
any praise at al. Fourthly, the devil could not naturally foretell that Saul
and his sons, 4
with many of the people should be slain the next day, and David reign^ after
him: neither is it probable, that God reueiled such secrets to evil spirits,
whereby men might take more occasion to follow nicromancie. Fifthly, most Fathers
and Doctors are of the same judgment. S. Justinius Martyr. ^
to. ^. page 210.
Dialogo cum Triphone. S. Basil. Epist. 80. ad Eustathium. S. Ambrose li. 1. in
Luc. 1. S. Hierom. in Isaiae. 7. Josephus li. 6. c. 15. Antiq. and many other
old and late writers. The chiefest argument for the other opinion is the
authority of Tertullian. li. de anima. Procopius and Eucherius upon this
place. and the uncertain authors, Questionum apud Iustinum. q. 52. lib. de
mirabil. Sac. Script. and Quest. vet. Testamenti, q. 27. apud Augustinum, tomo.
3. et. 4. As for the Protestants denying, that souls once parted from their
bodies, can appear to any alive, S. Augustine confuteth them, both by this
example of Samuel, supposing the Souls sometimes appear after death.
loco (...) tat^.
book of Ecclesiasticus to be Canonical Scripture, and of Moses being dead,
and Elias yet living (whom they hold also to be dead) both appearing with
Christ in his transfiguration. Mat. 17.

CHAP. XXIX. David going with the Philistijms toward the war, 4. the princes
urge and force the king to send him back.
THEREFORE all the companies of the Philistijms were He speaks by
amplification to make his fact seem more reasonable: whereas the time of David's
abode with him was but foute months. chapter 27. v. 7.
years, and I have not found any thing in him, since the day that he fled to
me, until this day? But the Return therefore, and go in peace, and offend not
the

CHAP. XXX. David returning to Siceleg, finds it burned and spoiled, and
himself in danger of the people: 7. By our Lords warrant be pursues the
enemy, 11. takes a guide: 17. recouereth all that was taken away: 22. and
rewards the souldiars, also those that stayed with the baggage; 25. making it
a law for the time to come, shat the keepers of the baggage, shall have like
share with those that fight in battle.
AND when David and his men were come to Siceleg Consuit out Lord for me:so
David by the priests mediation, was instructed what to do.
unto me the Ephod. And Abiathar applied the Ephod to David, and David
consulted who came forth to meet David, and the people that were with him. And
David coming to the people, saluted them peaceably. And every naughty, and
wicked fellow of the It is not against Gods commandment, Deuteronomy. 4. and. 12. to
make new laws, so they be conformable, and not contrary to Gods former laws*
it was decreed, and ordained as a law in Israel. David therefore came into
Siceleg,

CHAP. XXXI. Saul with his sons are slain in battle. 7. The Philistijms
possess the place, and hang the dead bodies on a wall, 11. but valiant men of
Iabes Galaad take them away, and burn them, bury their bones, and fast seven
days.
AND the Philistijms fought against Israel, and the men:: Saul killing himself
after that he was wounded (...) his enemies signifies those that being
overcome by tentations desperately persist, and wilfully die in their sin. S.
Greg. ^^o 10
strike me: lest perhaps these uncircumcised come, and kill me, mocking me. And
his esquier would not: for he was frighted with exceeding fear. Saul therefore
caught his sword, and fell upon it. Which when his esquier had seen, to wit
that Saul These men are commendable for gratitude toward Saul, who had
delivered them. chapter 11. for a work of mercy in burying the dead: for piety
toward their king and princes, and for fortitude in atchiuing so heroical an
act.
the inhabiters of Iabes Galaad

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND BOOK OF KINGS.
BESIDES a great part of the first book, and beginning of the third, This
book is wholly of David*
this second book is wholly of King David. Whose many laudable Acts, as
also his faults (which were fewer) with his true repentance, and punishment
are related, not in such method, as may easily be divided into distinct parts,
in order of the chapters; but according to the distinction of things His
succession to the kingdom.
contained, his succession to the royal crown, first in Judah, and after in all
Israel, with the declination and death of his competitour Isboseth, are
recorded in the 2. 3. 4. and 5. chapters. His virtues, and praises, to wit, his
solemn His virtues.
mourning for Saul and that family, his devotion, fortitude, piety, and
gratitude Faults.
are specially touched in the 1. 6* 7. 8. 9. and 10. chapters. His sins of
adultery with Bethsabee, of killing her husband Vrias, of pride in numbering
his people, with his hearty repentance, and temporal punishment for the same,
are written from the 11. chapter to the 21, together with the 24. The Thanks,
and Prophecy.
22. and 23. chapters conteyne his thankesgeuing to God for benefits received,
and prophecy of things to come, with a catalogue of valiant men.

THE SECOND BOOK OF SAMVEL, WHICH WE CALL THE SECOND OF KINGS.
CHAP. 1. David hearing that Saul and Ionathas are slain, 11. mourns with all
his family, weeping and fasting. 13. causes him to be slain who affirmed
that he had killed king Saul. 18. He traineth up archers. 19. and inuiteth also
al Israel to mourn.
AND it came to pass, after that Saul was dead, He fained all this, thincking
to get favor (for Saul killed himself, li. 1. chapter 31.) but David punished
him, as such a crime desetued. v. 15.
By chance I came into mount Gelboe, and Saulleaned upon his spear: moreover
the chariots and horsemen approached unto him, and turning backward, Exequies of
Saul observed with mourning weeping and fasting.
mourned, and wept, and fasted until evening of our Lord, and upon the house of
Israel, because they were fallen by the sword. And David said to the young man
that The Philisthijms were strong and cunning archers therefore David commanded
that his subjects should learn and exercise the same manner of fight.
teach the

CHAP. II. David is received and anointed King of Judah. 5. He commends those
of Iabes Galaad, which buried Saul. 8. Isboseth the son of Saul reigns over
the rest of Israel. 12. whereby rises sharp war between Abner and Ioab,
chief captains of the two kings. 30. Many more are slain of Abners party
then of Ioabs.
THEREFORE after these things David consulted This second anointing, as also
the third, ( chapter ^.) was in confirmation and to put him in possession of the
first m^^^ long before. 1. Reg. 16.
anointed David He reigned two years before he began much to decline, but
in all seven years and a half, for so long David reigned only in Judah. v. 11.
two years: and only the house of Judah followed David. And the number of the
days, that David abode, reigning Hence perhaps comes the phraise, that one
army plays upon an other with small and great ar^^lane, that is, strike and
kill their enemies with all sorts of gunnes. Josephus li. 7. c. 1. Antiq.
play before us. And Ioab answered: Let them rise. There rose therefore and the
name of the place was called: The field of the valiantes, in Gabaon. And there
rose a very sore battle in that day: and him in the sepulcher of his father in
Bethlehem: and Ioab, and the men that were with him, walked all the night, and
in the very twilight they came into Hebron.

CHAP. III. ^^boseths forces daily decay, David increases in power, and has
many sons. 7. Abner upon occasion of a sclander breaks from Isboseth, and
serves David, bringing Michol to him, and much people of Israel. 23. Ioab of
emulation and revenge kills Abner. 28. for which David is offended with Ioab,
31. and mourns for Abner.
THERE was made therefore long strife between the Am I co^temptible in thy
sight, and yet head of them that oppose against David, I that have done so
much for thee, will not endure to be reprehended, for a small fault. So God
suffers the maintainers of an eui^ quarrel to fall out among them selves,
whereby the right cause is advanced.
am I a dogs head against Judah this day, which have done mercy upon the
house of Saul thy father, and upon his brethren and nearest friends, and have
not delivered thee into the hands of David, and have thou sought against me
that thou might charge me for a woman to day? These things do God to Abner,
and these with thee: but one thing I desire of thee, saying: Thou shall not see
my face before thou bring Michol the daughter of Saul: and so thou shall come,
and see me. And David sent parts, and he died, in revenge of the blood of
Asael his brother. Which when David had heard, that the thing weak, being
newly received king, and not able to punish strong offenders. But Ioab and
others were afterward punished, 3. Reg. 2.
delicate, and anointed king: moreover the

CHAP. IIII. Baana and Rechab secretly kill Ioboseth: 8. bring his head to
David. 9. who condemning their fact, puts them to death.
AND Isboseth the son of Saul heard that Abner was of the sons of Benjamin:
for Beroth also was accounted in Benjamin. And the Berothites fled into
Gethaim, and

CHAP. V. With general consent David is anointed king of al Israel. 7. He
takes the tower of Sion in Jerusalem, destroying the Iebuseites. 9. builds
there a new house: 13 marieth more wives, and has more children. 17. The
Philiflym: rising against him are overthrown: 22. also the second time.
AND all the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron, thou wast he that did
lead us forth and bring back Israel: and our Lord said to thee: Thou shall
feed my people Israel, and thou shall be prince over Israel. The ancientes
also of They anoint him again in confirmation of their consent (as Judah had
done chap. 2) acknowledging Gods ordinance. 1. Reg. 16.
anointed David to be king over Israel. Thirty years old was King David now
atcheued that the tribe of Judah could not in the time of Iosue. Iosue* 15.
David took the tower Idols that have eyes and can not see, feet and can not
go, shall not enter into the Church of Christ.
The blind and the lame shall not enter into the temple. And David dwelt in the
tower, and in thy hand. David therefore came into Baal Pharasim: and ^c^lp*
^^lia,
graven gods: which David, and his men took. And the Philistians added yet
to go up, and spread themselves

CHAP. VI. With great solemnity David brings the A^ke of God from Abinadabs
h^u^^. 6. Oz^ for touching it is suddenly slain. 9. whereupon David fearing to
bring it to his ow^^ house, leaves it in the house of Obededom three months,
12. then fetches it, dancing before it, though Michol scorn his devotion. 17.
He offers sacrifices, distributeth gifts, blesses the people. 23. And
Michol is barren.
AND David again gathered together all the chosen of against Oza, and stroke
him for the (...) there (...) and (...) that (...), as he (...) to (...). S.
(...) S. (...).
rash^nes: who died there before the ark of God. And David was s^ook^n sad* To
dance before the arc is to dance before our Lord.
before our Lord: and she despised him in her heart. And Israel, both will I
play, and will become more vile then I have

CHAP. VII. David's good purpose to build a Temple is differred by Gods
appointment. 12. with promise that his son shall perform it, and be
established in the kingdom. 18. For all which he rendereth thanks to God.
AND it came to pass when the king sat in his house, The tabernacle made by
Moses was a goodly thing, but being covered with skins and in many
respects insufficient for Gods service, David desired to build a glorious
Temple. But was not permitted to do it, for mystery sake to signify that
Christ the true Solomon should build his Church, that far excels the
Synagogue of the Jews, and old Testament S. Augustine. li. 17. c. 8. deciuit.
in the mids skins? And Nathan said to the king: which shall come forth of
thy womb, and He that supposes this great promise to be fulfilled in Solomon,
erreth much says S. Augustine. ibidem*
I will establish his kingdom. He shall build a house to my name, and I will S.
Paul expounds this of Christ. Heb. 1. v 5.
I will be This can not be said of Christ, but of Solomon, and of any
christian. so this place has many literal senses.
he shall do any thing unjustly, I will rebuke him in the rod of men, and in the
plagues of the sons of men. But my The Sea Apostolic, and priestly power in
the church of christ, is this perpetual kingdom. S. Epiphanius. Heresi. 29.
thy kingdom for ever before thy face, and thy throne shall be firm
continually. According to al these Here and in many other places the Hebrew
word is of the plural number, Elohim, Gods, signifying more divine Persons.
God has gone, that he might The work of man's Redemption is appropriated to
God the Son.
redeem it to be his people, and might make him self a name, and do for them
great wonders, and horrible things upon the earth, before the face of thy
people, whom thou redemedst to thy self out of Egypt, from the nations and
from their gods. For these good things. Begin therefore, and bless the
house

CHAP. VIII. Diverse nations and countries to which Israel paid tribute, are
subdued by David, and pay tribute to Israel 16. Chief officers are mentioned.
AND it came to pass after these things David stroke For (...) ^^p^^^^ David
comp^ssing then with cords, as (...) are e^^i^^^^d, cast them on the around,
and by lotte killed some, and spared some alive.
a cord, making them even with the earth and he measured two cords, one to
kill, and one to save alive: and Moab became serving David under tribute. And
David stroke Adarezer the son Set (...) an Arch in memory of triumph.
made himself soldiers in Idumea, and placed a garrison: and al Idumea was
made to serve David: and our Lord preserved David in all things to whatsoever
he proceeded. And David reigned ^rcha^ ^^l^r.
recorder: and Sadoc the son of Achitob, and Achimelech the son These were
archers and sling throwers of the guard. Phara^^rasis ^h^ll.
the Cerethi and Phelethi: and the sons of David Or priests, o^ chief
rulers. See the annotation. Gen 47. v. 22. 1. Pa^^l, 18. v. 17.
princes.

CHAP. IX. Miphiboseth a lame son of Ionathas is piously releeud by David: 9.
giving to his use the particuar inheritance of Saul.
AND David said: Is there any think you that is remaining The parti^^lar
inhere^^^^ that per^^ined to Saul's family.
the lands of Saul thy father, and thou shall eat bread upon my table
always. Who adoring Not si^^e (...) table with the king but have his diet of
the kings provision, besides the forsaide inheritance.
upon my table. And Siba had fiftene sons, and twenty servants. and Siba
said to the king: As thou my lord king have commanded

CHAP. X. Hanon king of Ammon for evil entreating David's men, sent unto him of
courtesy, 7. is justly plagued, with his confederates. 15. Also the second time
they are overthrown by David.
AND it came to pass after these things, that the king of This Naas king of
Ammon curtously entertained David's freindes which escaped from the king of
Moab, killing most of them that were commended to him, because David had leift
his country, and was returned into Judah. 1. Reg. 22. Histor. Eccles.
his father has done mercy with me. David therefore sent, conforting him by
his servants upon his fathers death. But when the servants of David were come
into the land of the children of Ammon, the princes of the children of Ammon
said to Hanon there was battle prepared against him, both before him and behind
him, he piked out of all the chosen of Israel, and directed his army against
the Syrian: and the rest of the

CHAP. XI. David overcome with concupiscence commits adultery with
Bethsabee: 6. not finding other means to hide the crime, causes her husband
Vrias to be slain. 27. Then marieth her, she bears a son, and God is
offended.
AND it came to pass the year turning about, at such noone, and walked in the
top of the kings house: and he saw a woman washing her self, over against
the roof of his house: and the woman was very beautiful. The king therefore
Then do sius the E^^rerour preten^ing to be excused from punishment for his
sins, because king David also was an adulter ^ and a manslaver, S. Ambrose
replied, saying: Thou that have solovveding David evving, follow him ^epenting.
After which admon^tion the Emperor most humbly did public penance enjoined
him by the Bishop. in v^^a. Theod^sij.
took her, who when she was entered in to him, he slept with her: and forth
with she was sanctified from her uncleanness: and she returned into her house
having conceived all the story of the battle: and he commanded the messanger,

CHAP. XII. Nathan the prophet by a parable induces David to condemn him self
of great sin, 7. blames and threatens him for the same. 13. But upon his
confession denounces remission of his sin, with reservation of temporal
punishment, 15. the death of the child. 24 Bethsabee bears another son,
who is called Solomon. 26. The city of Rabbath is taken, and a rich crown
with other pray.
OUR Lord therefore sent Nathan to David: Who when of his cup, and sleping in
his bosom: and it was to him as a daughter. And when a certain stranger was
come to Now and then some of thy seed shall be violently slain: so were slain
three of his own sons, Ammon, chap. 13. Absalom chap. 18. Adonias, 3. Reg.
2. six sons of Iosaphat, and al Iorams sons save one, ^ paralip. 21. also
Ochozias. Amasias, Josias. 2. Par. 24 25. 35. and the sons of Sedechias,
himself having his eyes put out and so brought into Babylon. 4. Reg. 25.
for ever, because thou have despised me, and have taken the wife of Vrias the
Hetheite, to be thy wife. Therefore thus says our Lord: Behold, I will raise
that the infant died: and the servants of David feared to tell him, that the
child was dead. For they said: Behold when the child yet lived, we spoke to
him, and he heard not our voice: how much more if we shall say: The child is
dead, will he afflict him self? When David therefore saw his servants

CHAP. XIII. Amnon rauisheth Thamar. 20. For which Absalom kills him. 37. and
flies into Gessur.
AND it came to pass after these things, that Amnon force raui head her, and
lay with her. And Amnon hated And all the kings sons rising gatte up every
one upon their mules, and fled. And when they yet went on in their way,

CHAP. XIIII. Ioab suborning a woman first to propose the suite by a parable,
21. obtayneth pardon for Absalom. 24. but so that he appears not in the
kings presence. 25. He is exceeding fair, has three sons and one daughter.
29. Ioab refusing to deal further for his free release, Absalom burns his
corn. 31. Then Ioab procures his access to the king.
AND Ioab the son of Saruia, understanding that the And thou shall go in
unto the king, and shall speak to Angel of God, so is my lord the king, that
he is moved neither with blessing nor cursing: Wherefore our Lord also thy God
is with thee. And the king answering, said to the woman: Praised and thanked
the king.
blessed the king: and Ioab said: This day thy servant has understood, that I
have found grace in thy sight my lord king: for thou have done the word of thy
servant. Ioab therefore arose These children died before him as appears, cha.
18.
three sons: in his house, and said: Why have thy servants burnt my corn
with fire? And Absalom answered Ioab: I sent to thee beseching

CHAP. XV. Absalom gets favor of the people, 7. and conspireth in Hebron
against his father. 14. Who fleeing, 19. With difficulty permits Ethai a
stranger to go with him: 24. but sends Sadoc, and other priests and levites
with the arc back into the city. 31. Sends Chusat to defeat Achitophels
counsel.
THEREFORE after these things Absalom made him Absalom reigns in Hebron.
Moreover with Absalom Concubines were lawfully married but had not al
priuilegies as other wives. See (...). 25. Iudi^. 19.
concubines to keep the house. And the king going forth and al Israel on
passed, which was come forth of the city. And the king He covered his head
that he might not be seen to weep, lest he should discorege the people.
nevertheless the people also wept, and likewise covered their heads.
covered, yea and all the people which was with him, their head covered went up
weeping. And it was told David that Achitophel also was

CHAP. XVI. Siba bringing victuals obtains (by false suggestion) his master
Miphiboseths enheritance. 5. Semei curses, and throws stones at the king,
who nevertheless forbids to kill him. 15. Absalom enters into Jerusalem, 16.
intertayneth Chusai, 20. and by Achitophels advise lies with his fathers
concubines.
AND when David had passed a little the top of the King David was here abused
by false information: to which he ought not so easily to have given credit.
chap. 19. v. 24.
Let al things be thine that God suffered Semei, being of his own free will
malicious for punishment of David's sins to curse him but was not the author
of his malice, for so Semei had committed no fault therein and then he could
not lawfully have benne punished for it, as he was. 3. Reg. 2.
commanded him to curse David: and who is he that dare say, why has he so
done? And the king said to Abisai, and to al his earth. The king therefore
came, and all the people with The people doubting lest Absalo^ might be
reconciled to his father, were not allured unto him til they saw such a crime
committed as seemed to make reconciliatio^ impossible. So al rebels and
vsurper^ of others right, seek by some enormious fact to make their adherentes
and folowers sure unto them: but God plagueth them in the end, as he did both
Achitophel and Absalom.
that when al Israel shall hear that thou have defiled thy father, their hands
may be strengthened with thee. They pitched

CHAP. XVII. Achitophel counsels Absalom: presenly to assault his father
with forces, 7. Chusai persuades the contrary, 15. and secretly aduertiseth
the king thereof. 23. Achitophel hangs him self. 25. Absalom appoints Amasa
general of his army. 27. Other freindes bring victuals to the kings camp.
ACHITOPHEL therefore said to Absalom: I will choose It is not good counsel,
that Achitophel has given this time. And again Chusai inferred: Thou know
thy father, over the mouth of the well, as it were drying sodde barley: and so
the thing was not known. And when Absaloms Bad counsa^^ often falls worst to
the counselor*
hanged him self, and was buried in the sepulcher of his father. But David came
into the Camp, and

CHAP. XVIII. King David disposes his army in three parts, giving special
charge to save Absalom alive. 9. Whom nevertheless (hanging by the hears of
his head in an oak) Ioab kills: 16. and saves the common people. 19. Which
David understanding greatly bewayleth Absalom.
DAVID therefore having viewed his people, appointed under the hand of Abisai
the son of Seruia the brother of Ioab, and the third part under the hand of
Ethai, who was of Geth: and the king said to the people: I also will go forth
with you. And the people answered: Thou shall not go David moved with
compassion toward his son Absalom, being in actual rebellion against him
presigured Christ's compassion, toward his persecuters, being his creatures,
praying for them in his passion. S. Ambrose in Psalm. ^18. v. 108.
Save me the child Absalom. And all the people heard the King commanding all the
princes for Absalom. The people therefore went out into the filde against And
Ioab sounded the trumpet, and stayed the people, Al his sons being ^ea^, ^^t
he had once three sons and a daughter. chap. 14. v. (...).
no son, and this shall be a monument of my name. And he called the title by
his name, and it is called The hand of Absalom, until this present day. And the
king, Pass, said he, and stand here. And when he had

CHAP. XIX. David moved by Ioabs admonition, 8. cease mourning for Absalom,
and reconcileth the rebels. 19. Semei is pardoned. 24. Mipbiboseth clereth him
self of his servants false accusation, yet recouereth not his whole right. 32.
Berzellai is courteously entreated. 40. The other tribes contend with Judah for
their affection to the king.
AND it was told Ioab, that the king wept, and mourned therefore arose and sat
in the gate: and it was told all the people that the king sat in the gate: and
all the multitude came forth before the king, but Israel fled into their
tabernacles. All the people also strove in all the tribes of Israel, All the
eleven tribes are called by the name o^ Ioseth, being chief after Judah. S^
Semei not of the proper tribe of Joseph ^ut of Benjamin pleading for pardon of
his former fa^lt, alleges that he came first of the eleven tribes, to
submit him self and serve the king.
the house of Joseph, and am descended to meet my lord the king. But Ab^^a^
the son of Saruia killed in Israel to day? Do I not know that this day I am
made king over Israel? And the king said to Semei: Thou shalr king, and do to
him whatsoever seems good to thee. The

CHAP. XX. Seba raises rebellion, is pursued by Ioab, (10. Who in the way
trecherously kills Amasa,) 13. Abela is besieged, because Seba saves him
self there. 20. but his head being cut of and cast over the wall to Ioab, the
army departs. 23. Chief men in office are mentioned.
IT chanced also that there was there a man of Belial, men of Judah against the
third day, and be thou present. Amasa therefore went to call together Judah, and
tarried of thy handmayd. Who answered: I do hear. And she Chief or great in
^amil^^iti^.
priest of David.

CHAP. XXI. E^mine oppressing Isiael three years, for the sin of Saul
against the Gabaonites, 6. seven of Saulsrace (7. Miphiboseth saned) are
crucisied. 12. Their bones with Saul's and Ionathas are buried in the Land of
Benjamin. 15. David has four great battles and victories against the
Philistians.
AND there came a famine in the days of David three Iosue. ^.
and Saul would strike them of zeal, as it were for the children of Israel and
Judah.) David therefore said to the Gabaonites: question upon silver and gold,
but against Saul, and against his house: neither will we that a man be slain of
Israel. To whom the king said: What will you then that I do for you? Who said to
the king? The man, that has wasted us and ounces, and he was girded with a new
sword, assayed to strike David. And Abisai the son of Saruia reskewed him,
and

CHAP. XXII. King David's Canticle of thankesg^uing, for his delivery from al
enemies: 44. With a prophecy of the reiection of the Jews, and vocation of
the Gentiles.
AND David spoke to our Lord the words of this song, After that David was
delivered from the hands of Saul (...) and (...) must dangerously of ^. m^^
^^secut^^^^^, and (...) here specially named and from al his enemies, c^rp^ral
and spiritual* when he had good repose of mind his visible enemies being (...)
^ed, and his sins remitted, acknowledging Gods infinite goodness, by
inspira^ion of the Holy Ghost, made this Can title of thanks giving, and
praise of God. It is inserted amongst the Psalms the 17 in order, al one in
sense, so differing in some words that the one explicateth the other.
the day that our Lord delivered him out of the hand of al his enemies, and out
of the hand of:: Saul. And

Our Lord is my rock, and my strength, and my savior.











mountains were strycken, and shaken, because he was angry with them.







































And the poor people thou will save: and the hautie in thine eyes thou will
humble.































Though some few Gentiles were subdued by David, and some were converted to
true religion in the old Testament: yet the fulcon uersion of Gentiles
per^eineth to the Church of Christ which is here forshewed and described to
have perpetual seed for ever.
the head of the Gentiles: the people which I know not, will serve me.







God which geuest me reuenges, and throwest down peoples under me.







CHAP. XXIII. The last words of David concerning reward of the good, 6. and
punishment of the bad. 8. A Catalogue of David's valiant men.
AND these are Dauides last words. David the son of King David in this last
prophecy plainly distinguishes between the covenant and pro^^ise made to him
touching ^^s earthly kingdom and the kingdom of Christ* who should be borne of
his (...). In both which (...) the reward of the good and punishment of (...)*
Neither is my house so great with God, that he should enter Age of Arari. And
the Philisthijms were gathered togehter in their ward: for there was there a
filde full of rice. And when the people was fled from the face of the
Philisthijms, he stood in the mids of the filde, and defended it, and The
king proposed not this for desire of that water, but to try and exercise his
men's fortitude.
therefore desired, and said: O that some Precious things are most mete to be
offered to God.
offered it to our Lord, saying: Our Lord be merciful to me, Netophathite,
Ithai the son of Ribai of Gabaath of the children of Benjamin, Banaia the
Pharathonite, Heddai

CHAP. XXIIII. For David's sin in numbering the people, 11. three sorts of
punishments are proposed to his election: 14. of which he chooses the plague,
and seventy thousand die in three days. 16. God shows mercy. 17. David
prays. 18. builds an altar, 25. and the plague cease.
AND This sin and punishment happened before, when David had health and
streingth of body.
the fury of our Lord added to be angry against:: The fury of our Lord, that
is* Satan (a ^u^^o^s spirit, yet Gods creature) not our Lord him self, but by
permission only* 1. Par. 2. 1. Satan arose against Israel, and (...) David.
Israel, and stirred up David among them saying: Go, number Israel and Judah.
And the king said to Ioab the there were found of Israel eight hundred thousand
strong men, that could draw sword: and of Judah five hundred thousand fighting
men. But David's Contrition.
heart struck him, after the Confession.
I have sinned very much in this fact: but I pray thee Lord to transfer the
iniquity of thy servant, because I have done exceeding folishly. David therefore
arose in the morning, and the Satisfaction.
Choice is given thee of three things, choose one of them which thou will,
that I may do it to thee. And when The Epistle in a votiue Mass in time of
plague or mortality.
unto the time appointed, and there died of the people from Dan to Bersabee
seventy thousand men. And when the Temporal punishment inflicted after the
guilt of sin was remitted*
It is sufficient: now hold thy hand: and the Angel of our Lord was beside the
floor of Areuna the Iebuseite. And David said to our And Areuna said to David:
Let my lord the king take, and If subjects had not propriety in their goods,
but that the right and dominion of al perteyned to the prince, then could
nothing at al, in any case be given gratis by the subject, but only yielded as
due, to his sovereign.
given gratis. David therefore bought the floor, and the oxen, for fifty
sicles of silver: and

THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS.
WITH commemoration of king David's old age, of his appointing a successor,
and of his death, in the first and part of the second chapters, this book
conteyneth two other principal parts: the former is of king Solomon: of his
entrance to the kingdom; his devotion; wisdom; magnificence; richesse; great
family; building of the Temple; and other The contents of this book, divided
into three parts.
sumptuous palaces; of his fall also into luxury, and idolatry; in the rest of
the second chapter to the end of the eleventh. The other part shows the
division of the kingdom; only two tribes remaining to Roboam, Salomons son,
with title of king of Judah; and ten passing to Jeroboam his servant, called
king of Israel. So follow the several reigns of Abias, Asa, and Iosaphat kings
of Judah: and of Madab, Baasa, Ela, Zambri, Amri, Achab with Iezabel, and
Ochosias kings of Israel: with the preaching, miracles, and other acts of
Abias, Elias, Eliseus, and other prophets* in the other eleven chapters.

THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS; ACCORDING TO THE HEBREWS THE FIRST OF MALACHIM.
CHAP. I. King David waxing old, Abisag a Sunamite is brought to him. 5.
Adonias pretending to reign, 11. Nathan and Beth^abee obtain, 28. that
Solomon is declared and anointed King. 41. Whereupon Adonias (his folowers
parting to their houses) 50. flees to the altar in the tabernacle, but upon
promise of safe^^^ does homage to Solomon.
AND king David was old, and had many days The first pa^^ King Dauides
admonitions to his son: and his death
of age: and when he was covered with clothes, he was not warmed. His servants
therefore For this conspiracy Abiathar was deposed. chapter ^ v. 27.
Abiathar the priest, who furthered Adonias side. But Sadoc the priest, and
Banaias the son king, and all the men of Judah the servants of the king: But
Basely esteemed, or punished as offenders upon suspicion or ^^lo^^^.
sinners. As she was yet speaking with the king, Nathan the prophet should
sit upon the throne of my lord the king after him? And king David answered,
saying: Call unto me Bethsabee. him Sadoc the priest, and Nathan the prophet,
and Banaias the son of Ioiada, and Cerethi, and Phelethi, and they have set
him upon the kings mule. And Sadoc the priest, and Nathan King David did not
ad^^e his son as a subject adoreth his prince* ^a^ adored God, giving thanks
for this bene^^^e of a succed^^* as it follows in the next verse.
adored in his bed: and he has thus spoken: Blessed be our Lord the

CHAP. II. David gives godly precepts to Solomon. 5. wills him to punish
certain offenders: 10. and dies. 12. Solomon reigns. 13. Adonias, by
intercession of ^e^hsabee, requesleth to have Abisag to wife: 22. but is put to
death for demanding her. 26. Abiathar the priest is banished, and deposed, for
conspiring with Adonias. 28. Ioab also for the same cause, and former crimes is
slain. 36. Semei is confined in Jerusalem, 40. and for transgressing his
limits, together with old faults is likewise slain.
AND the days of David approached that he should die, that our Lord may
confirm his words, which he has

And Solomon sat upon the throne of David his father, The second part. O^
Salomons r^^^ne, and acts good and bad.
and his kingdom was confirmed excedingly. And Adonias speak unto him for
Adonias: and the king arose to meet her, and adored her, and sat down upon
his throne: and a throne was set for the kings mother, who sat on his right
hand. And she said to him: One little petition I desire of thee, confound In all
co^^e (...) suires^^ (...) the (...) to hear his mother.
it behooves not that I turn away thy face. Who said: By special instinct
Solomon did this extraordinary fact as a prophet and minister of God,
executing his sentence given before against the house of ^^l^ (...) the sins
of his children, ^. Reg. 2. ^. 31. and for A^^athars proper fault (...) with
Adonias against Solomon 3. Reg. 1.
cast out Abiathar, that he should not better then him self: and slew them with
his sword, my father David not knowing, Abner the son of Ner general of the
warfare of Israel, and Amasa the son of Iether general of the army of Judah:
and their blood shall return upon the head of Solomon was not only a king but
also a prophet. Moreover some secular princes do^ (...) ^^inate spiritual
superiors, are in shall them in, there (...) yet their i^^^sd^ction is not
depending on the (...) but the (...) to be (...) by them Number 27. v. 21.
placed for Abiathar. The king also sent, and

CHAP. III. King Solomon marieth Ikaraos sister. 3. offers Victims in high
places. 5. admonished by God in his sleep to demand what he will, he asks
wisdom to govern his people. 10. which God grants him, with much richesse
also and glory. 16. He decideth a controversy between two women contending
about a living child and a dead.
THE kingdom therefore was established in the hand of has been like thee ^^^^g
the kings al days hertofore. And if thou will wall (...) my ways, and keep
my precepts The Epistle on monday in the 4 weke of Le^^.
lottes to the king, and stood before him: of the which one So here^^^es not
being able to prove that their synagogue is the true and permanent Church,
would destroy the Catholic and so have none at al.
be it neither mine, nor thine, but let it be divided. The king answered, and
said: Give

CHAP. IIII. Chief men of Salomons kingdom are recited by their names, and
offices. 22. likewise the provision of victuals for his house, 26. the number
of his horses, 19. his wisdom excels al others. 3^. he writ many
parables and verses, and lernedly discoursed of al things.
AND king Solomon was reigning over al Israel: and presents, and served him all the days of his life. And the These books are not extant.
three thousand parables: and his songues were a thousand and five. And he
disputed of trees from the ceder,

CHAP. V. Hiram king of Tire grants timber and workmen for building the
Temple: Solomon allowing victuals, and paying wages. 13. the number of workmen
and overseers.
HIRAM also the king of Tire sent his servants to Solomon: imminent round
about until our Lord put them under the sole of his feet. But now our Lord my
God has given me rest Hiram hewed: moreover the Giblians prepared timber and
stones, to build the house.

CHAP. VI. In the year four hundred and four score after the Israelites came
from Egypt, Solomon, the fourth year of his reign, begenneth to build the
Te^^^e 2. The principal parts with the greatness, form, and ornaments thereof
(...) described. 38. It is in building seven years.
AND it came to pass in the four hundred and four Narovv without and broad
within.
oblique windows. And he built upon the wall of the temple loftes round about,
in the walls of the (...)
not heard in the house when it was built. The doot^ will dwell in the mids of
the children of Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel. Solomon therefore
built the house, Holy of holies or most holy place.
Sanctum Sanctorum. Moreover the temple it self was forty cubits before the
Stones in buildinges, and bones in ^^^ng bodies represent the state of
religious persons who being hid in their Monisteties and c^ll^s, so much the
more fortify the Church, by how much (...) they appear abroad* because their
office is not to t^^ch, but to mou^ne. S. Bernard. Ser. 64.
neither could there a stone appear in the wall at al. And he made the oracle
in the mids It is a clear (...) that al ^ar ued and graven pictures, or
images were not unlawful, but were religiously made and set in the holy
Temple, for the more honor of God.
diverse pictures, as it were standing out of the wall, and coming forth. Yea
the pauement also The end of the fourth age.
house of our Lord founded in the month of Zio: and in

THE CONTINVANCE OF THE CHVRCH AND RELIGION IN THE FOVRTH AGE: FROM the parting
of Israel out of Egypt, to the fundation of the Temple. The space of 480.
years.
WE HAVE senne already in the three first ages, or distinct times of the
world, the biginning, increase, and continuance of the Church and Religion of
God, without interruption. Now in this fourth age, in which God gave his people
a written Law, it is yet more evident, that the Articles of ^aith, other
points of religion, and state of the Church more expressed in this fourth age
then before.
same faith and religion, not only continued but also was more expressed, and
explicated; and the Church had more variety of Sacrifices, Sacraments, and
other holy Rites, and Obseruances: and the two states Ecclesiastical and
Temporal more distinguished, and each of them, especially the Priestlie and
Leuitical Hierarchy, more disposed in subordination: the civil government also
under Dukes Judges, and Kings, more distributed among superior and inferior
officers then before.

For first the principal point and ground of al religion, the belief in
Belief in one God.
one God, and his proper divine worship, is above al most stristly commanded,
often repeated, diligently observed by the good, and severely punished in trans
gressours. To which end and purpose, after that God had singularly selected
three more renowned Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, preserving them by
his special grace from idolatry, and from wicked ways of most peoples and
nations, blessed their seed, not in the whole progeny of the two former, but
in Jacob only, whom he otherwise named Israel, multiplying his children
excedingly, yea most of al (which was most marvelous) in holy persecution:
then bringing them forth of the furnace of Egypt, in his strong hand, as is
recorded in the former age, at last his Divine Majesty delivered to them his
perfect and eternal Law, contained Divine laws.
in two tables, distributed into ten precepts, teaching them their Moral.
proper duties first toward himself their God and Lord, then toward each
other. Adding moreover for the practice and execution thereof, other particular
Ceremonial
precepts of two sorts, to wit, Ceremonial prescribing certain determinate
manners and rites, in observing the commandments of the first table pertaining
to God: and Judicial laws directing in particular how to fulfill the Judicial
commandments of the second table, concerning our duties toward our
neighbors. So we see the whole law is nothing else, but to love God above al,
Mat. 22.
and our neighbors as our selves. The manner of performing al, is to believe
and hope in one only Lord God, honor and serve him alone, who made al of
nothing, conserueth al, will judge al, and render to al men as they deserve, and
therefore fully to confirm this point, he begins his commandments with
express prohibition of al false and imaginary gods, saying (Exodus 20. v 3.)
Thou shall not have strange gods, and after Only God to be (...).
threats to the transgressors, and recital of the other nine commandementes,
he concludes ( v. 23.) with repetition of the first, saying: You shall not make
gods of silver, nor gods of gold shall you make to you. (...) i^ repeted and
explaned ( Deuteronomy. 5.) And in the next chapter Moses (...) the people says:
Hear Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And God himself speaking again
says: (Exodus 23.) See ye that I am only, and there is no other God besides
me. The royal prophet David (2 Reg. 22. and Psalm. 17.) who is God but our God?
and in sundry other places the sene^ doctrine of one God is grounded,
confirmed, and established.

The Mystery of the B. Trinity, or of three Divine Persons, is no less true
The (...)
and certain, then that there is but one God, though not so manifest to
reason, no^ so expressly taught in the old Testament, yet believed then also,
and often in invaded, where God is expressed by names of the plural number: as
Elobim, Elim, Elah^, Saddai, Adonai, Tsebaoth: which import plurality of
Persons in God, who is b^^e one nature and substance. Distinction also of
Persons in God (...)ced (Exodus 33.) God saying: I will call in the name of the
Lord That is (as S. Augustine and other fathers expound it) the second q. 154.
in Eoxd.
Person by his grace makes his servants to call upon God. More distinctly
(Psalm. 2.) The Lord said to me: Thou art my Son, I this day have begotten
thee. (Psalm. 109.) The Lord said to my Lord: that is, God the Father to God
the Son: who according to his divinity is the Lord of David, according to
his humanity the son of David. The same Mat. 22.
king David makes mention also of the third Person, the Holy Ghost praying
(Psalm. 50.) Thy holy Spirit take not from me. In the form of blessing the
people (Number. 6.) al three Persons some to be understood in the name of our Lord
thrice repeted; our Lord (the Father) bless thee and keep thee. Our Lord (the
Son) show his face to thee, and have mercy upon thee Our Lord (the Holy
Ghost) turn his countenance unto thee, and give thee peace.

Of the Incarnation of the Son of God, we have in this age many prophecies
(...) Christ.
and figures. Moses evidently (Deuteronomy. 18) forsheweth that after other prophets
Christ the Son of God should come in flesh, and redeem mankind, as S. Peter
teaches (Act. 3.) Likewise in his Canticle, and Blessing of the tribes (Deuteronomy.
32 and 33) he speaks more expressly of Christ and his Church, then of the
Jews and their Synagogue. The star prophesied by Balaam (Number. 24.) forshewed
both to Jews and Gentiles, that Christ should subdue al nations. Iosu^ both in
name and office was a manifest figure of JESUS Christ, Also the Judge, and
Kings, some in one thing, some in an other, most especially king David and
king Solomon, were figures of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The brazen
serpent (Number. 21.) sign fied Christ to be crucified, as him self expenndeth it
(Joan. 3.) Bri fly the whole Law was a pedagogue, or conductor to bring men to
Christ (Galat. 3.) and by him to know God and them selves: to wit, God
omnipotent, al perfect, Creator of al, our Father, Redemer, and Sanctifier: and
man his chief earthly creature; though of himself w^^k^ and impotent, yea
through sin miserable, yet in nature of free condition, endued wish
understanding, to conceive, and discourse; and with freewil, to choose or
refuse what likes or displeases him.

For God appointing al creatures their offices, ingraffed in all other things
Freewil in Angels and men
inuariable inclination to perform the same, so that they could neither by
virtue nor sin make their state better not worse then it was created, but
ordaining Angels and men to a higher end of eternal felicity, left their wills
free to agree unto, or to resist his precepts, and counsels. Whereupon Angels
cooperating with Gods grace were confirmed in glory, and some reuoking were
eternally damned. Man also offending fell into damnable state, but through
penance may be saved, if he cooperate with new grace of our Redemer, which is
in his choice to do, or omit. As when God gave his people meat in the
desert (Exodus 16.) he so instructed them, how to receive it and use it, without
force or compulsion, that he might prove them (as himself speaks) whether
they would walk in his law or no. And after making covenant with them (Exodus
19. Deuteronomy. 26.) required and accepted their voluntary consent: entering into
formal contract or bargain between him self and them: he promising on the one
party to make them his peculiar people, a priestlie kingdom, and a holy
nation: they on the other party promising loyalty, obedience and observation
of his commandments, saying: Al things that our Lord has spoken we will do.
For which cause Gods promises are conditional (Deuteronomy. 7.) if thou keep his
judgments, God will keep his covenant to thee. Again most plainly (Deuteronomy. 11.)
Behold I set before your sight this day benediction and malediction, and
(Deuteronomy. 30.) I call for witnesses this day heaven and earth, that I have proposed
to you life and death, blessing and cursing. Choose* therefore life that thou
may live. In all which it is certain that Gods promise being firm, man's will
is variable, and so the event not necessary: which made Caleb hoping of
victory to say (Iosue 14.) if perhaps our Lord be with me. Neither does Gods
foreknowledge make the event necessary, Objection of Gods ^or ^novvledge
answered.
for he sees the effect in the cause, as it is voluntary or casual: yea God
knows al before, and some times fortelleth things, which conditionally
would happen, and in deed (the condition failing) come not to pass, as (1.
Reg. 23.) God answered, that the men of Ceila would betray David (meaning if he
stayed there) which they did not; for he parted from thence.

Yet is not man able by this his freedom, nor otherwise of himself, to do,
Grace necessary.
nor so much as to think any good thing but through Gods mere mercy, and 2.
Cor. ^.
grace, given him without his deserving, sufficient to al, and effectual to
those that accept it. God also gives particular grace for special functions;
as (Leuit. 8.) to Priests (Number. 11.) to seventy ancients, and (1. Reg. 10.)
to king Saul.

By which divine assistance the commandments of God are possible, Gods
command mentes possible to be kept.
as himself avouches, saying: (Deuteronomy. 30.) This commandment that I command
thee this day is not above thee. Again; I have set before thee life and
good, death and evil, that thou may love God, walk in his ways, and keep
his commandementes.

Works done by grace and freevvil are good and commendable, Moses so
testifing (Deuteronomy. 14.) This is your wisdom and understanding before peoples.
Yea are meritorious: and rewards are promised for the same Good works.
(Leuit. 26.) and contrariwise punishments threatened to the transgressors.
Meritorious.
And Booz knowing revvard to be due for well doing, prayed God to render to
Ruth (chapter 2.) a full reward for her well deserving. The royal prophet affirms
(Psalm. 18.) that in keeping Gods precepts is much reward. and (Psalm. 118.)
professes that he inclined his heart to keep them for reward.

Amongst other services of God, and means of men's salvation, external
Sacrifice is of the greatest. And therefore the manner of offering al sorts is
a^ D^^ers sertes* of Sacrifices
large prescribed in the Law, especially in the seven first Chapters of
Leuiticus. The first and principal was Holocaust, wherein all the oblation was
^^rned Holocaust.
and consumed in the honor of God our Sovereign Lord. The second was
Sacrifice for sin, according to the diversity of offenses and persons,
whereof ^^^ sin.
part was burned, the other part remained to the priests, except it were for
the sins of priests, or of the whole multitude (Leuit. 4.) for then the
priests had no portion, but al was offered to God. The third was pacifique
sacrifice, Pacifique.
either of thanksgeuing for benefits received, or to obtain Gods favor in all
occurrent necessities, and good desires. And of both these sorts one part was
consumed in Gods honor, an other part was the priests, the third was theirs
that gave the oblation. In confirmation of these sacrifices God at first
miraculously sent fire to burn them (Leuit. 9.) whereof he had given
commandment before (Leuit. 6.) that it should be conserved, and never
extinguished, Fire sent from God (...) charity.
to teach us especially of the new Testament, that have the real Sacrifice, and
very hodie of the former shadows and figures, to nourish and keep the fire
of charity, not procured by our own power, but given by God, that it never
cease, nor be extinguished in our hearts.

Likewise in the same law of Moses, besides* Circumcision instituted before
Sacraments
(Genesis 17.) and here confirmed and continued (Leuit. 12. Iosue. 5) al hosts
and sacrifices for sin (Leuit. 4. 5. 6. and 7.) consecration of Priests,
(Leuit. 8) and the sacrifices adjoined thereunto, also diverse other washinges
and purifications of legal vncieannes (Leuit. 14. 15. 16. Alanus de Sacra. c. 9.
and 17.) were al Sacraments; signifying either first justification and
remission of sin, or increase of grace, and purity; of which sort it is also
probable that the Paschal lamb, and Loaves of proposition were sacraments
(Exodus 12. 25.) Which multitude S. Augustine comparing with Many more in the
old Testament then in the new.
ours of the new Testament, says: The people bound with fear in the old law,
was burdened with many sacraments. For this was li de vera Religi^ne c. 17.
profitable to such men (says he) to make them desire the grace, foretold by
the prophets, which being come from the wisdom of God becoming Man, by whom
we are called into freedom, a few most wholesome Sacraments are instituted,
which hold the society of christian people under one God of a free multitude.
But as Christ's sacraments are fewer in number, so they are more excellent in
virtue. And to most of these new, the former do answer as figures and
shadows. Christ's Sacraments more excellent.
So to our Baptism answers Circumcision, as S. Paul teaches (Coloss. 1.)
that Christians are circumcised in the circumcision of Christ, buried with him
in Baptism. To our holy Eucharist, as it is a Sacrament, did answer the
Paschal lamb, and Loaves of proposition, as also Manna, and blood of the
Testament. It was prophech^ed Psalm. 18. Adore his foot stool: as holy
Fathers expound it. And as the same Eucharift Most of Christ's Sacraments
presigured in the old law but not al.
S. Aug. in hunc. Psalm. ser de ve^bis Domini. li. 17. ciuit. c. 20, li. 1.
cont. aduers. leg* c. 18. S. Cyril. li. 3. m Joan. S. Leo ser. 8. le passione.
is a Sacrifice, it was prefigured by all the old Sacrifices of the law of
nature, and of Moses: as S. Augustine, and S. Leo do prove; and prophesied
(Psalm. 19.) Be he mindful of al thy sacrifice etc. To the sacrament of holy
Orders answered consecration of Priests. All the ablutions, purifications,
cleansinges and oblations for sin, which in great part were both Sacraments
and Sacrifices, answered to our Sacrament of Penance, which was also prefigured
by the second tables of the decalogue. (Exodus 34.) More plainly forshewed by
example of particular confession of sins and satisfaction (Number. 5. 14. and
29.) Contrition also was no less required, as appears by the example of king
David. 2 Reg. 24. Marriage in the old Testament, though not a sacrament yet
signified the Sacrament of Marriage among Christians. But the Sacrament of
Confirmation had not any so answerable a figure, in the old law, which brought
not to perfection. Neither Extreme unction, because the law gave not immediate
entrance into the kingdom of heaven, which defectes were signified by the high
priests entering only once in the year into Sancta Sanctorum. Leuit. 16.

Likewise touching practice of holy Rites; diverse uncleanness hindering
participation Some like im^^^^ments in ^se of holy Rites.
of sacrifices, and conversation with other men (Leuit. 14.) Degrees of
consanguinitie and affinity; hindering marriage (Leuit. 18.) and sundry
Irregularities excluding from the office of Priests (Leuit. 21.) were
figurative resemblances of sins and censures, and of impediments to holy
Orders, and to Marriage, in the new Testament.

To the peculiar service of God perteyned also the Tabernacle, with the
Tabernacle. Propitiatory with appertinances.
Propitiatory, Arc, Cherubims, Table for loaves of proposition, Candlestick,
Lamps, Altares for Holocaustes, and Incense, Vestments for Priests, a brazen
lauer, and other vessels described Exodus 29. et seq. Al which were kept and
carried by the Levites, resting or marching in the mids of the camp. Number. 2.
3. And when the Land of Chanaan was conquered, the same were fixed in Silo.
Iosue 18. Whither the people resorted at certain set times, and upon sundry
occasions. From thence long after they took the Arc; and often upon diverse
occasions removing it, made Oratories, or Chapels, wheresoever it rested,
devotion increasing, and religious estimation of it in all Israel. 1. Reg. 4. 7.
10. Yea the infidel Philisthims in Azotus seeing and feeling the virtue thereof,
ouerthrovving their god Dagon, and them selves sore plagued, found it best for
them to send the Arc home to the Israelites, not without costly and precious
oblations (1. Reg. 5. and 6.) King David most specially honoring it (2. Reg.
6.) Who further considering that himself dwelled in a house of cedar, and the
Ark of God remained in the tabernacle covered with skins, intended to build
a more excellent house for God. 2. Reg. 7. But his godly purpose was
differred by Gods appointment, and his son king Solomon builded the famous
Temple in Jerusalem. 3. Reg. 6.

Which succeding in place of the Tabernacle, each of them (one after the The
Tabernacle, and afterward the Temple, the only place for Sacrifice.
other) was the only ordinary place of Sacrifice. The law commanding (Leuit.
17.) If any man of the house of Israel, kill an ox, or a sheep, or a goat
(towit for Sacrifice, as S. Augustine, and other fathers expound it) Q^est. 56.
in Leuit.
and offer it not at the door of the tabernacle, (afterward at the door of the
Temple) he shall be guilty of blood, as if he had shed blood. and so shall he
perish out of the mids of his people. Nevertheless Yet God some times
dispensed therein.
upon occasions, and by special revelation sacrifice was lawfully offered in
other places. For so in the time of the tabernacle, Samuel the prophet, offered
Sacrifice in Masphath. 1 Reg. 7. And the prophet Elias offered Sacrifice
without the Temple, when he convinced the false prophets of Baal. 3 Reg. 18.
whose fact (as S. Augustine notes) the miracle sufficiently showed to be ibidem.
done by Gods dispensation.

And as pecultar places were dedicated, so also special times were sanctified,
Feasts of the old law.
and diverse feasts, and festiuities partly ordained before (as the Sabbath.
Genesis 2. and Pasch Exodus 12.) were confirmed by the Law (Exodus 20. 23.) and
others likewise instituted (Exodus 23. Leuit. 23. Number. 28. 29. and Deuteronomy. 16.)
with proper sacrifices for every sort. First and most general was the daily
sacrifice of a lamb every day twice, at morning and evening (Exodus 29.) which
was not properly a feast, but a sacred perpetual office in the tabernacle, and
after in the temple. At the rest were festiual days, in which it was not
Figh^sortes of feasts, besides the daily sacrifice.
lawful ordinarily to do servile work. The first of these was the Sabbath,
that is the seventh and last day of every weke, which is our saturday: Kept
still solemnly by the Jews, even at this time, in all places where they dwell;
but not by Christians, because the old Law is abrogaeed; and we keep the next
day, which is Sunday, holy, by institution and tradition of the Church. The
second, Neomenia, or new moon, in which day they always began the month;
and twelve such months made a year, by the course of the moon; for by the
course of the sun, the year contains eleven days more, which in three
years make above a month. And so every third year, and sometimes the second
(for it happened seven times in nintene years) had thirtene months: and was
called Annus embolismalis, being increased S. Beda de Embolismo. (...). 1.
by means of those eleven days. The third feast was Pasch, or Phase, first
instituted at the parting of the children of Israel out of Egypt, in the full
moon of the first month in the spring, in which the Paschal lamb was eaten,
as is prescribed; Exodus 12. The fourth feast was Pentecost, or first fruits,
the fiftith day after Pasch, when Moses received the Law in mount Synai. The
fifth, the feast of Trumpets, the first day of the seventh month, in grateful
memory that a ram sticking by the horns, was offered in sacrifice by
Abraham in place of Isaac. The sixth was the feast of Expiation, the tenth day
of the seventh month; wherein solemn fast was also prescribed from
Prescribed fast from even to even.
evening of the ninth day to evening of the tenth, for remission of sins in
general, besides particular sacrifices and satisfaction for every sin,
whereof any man found himself guilty. The seventh was the feast of
Tabernacles, seven days together, beginning the fiftenth of the seventh
month, in memory of Gods special protection, when they remained in
^abirnacles, forty years in the desert. The eight feast was of Assembly
and Collection, the next day after the forsaid seven, in commemoration of union
in the people, and peaceable possession in the promised land. In this day
general collection was made for necessary expenses in the public service of
God.

Moreover the seventh year was as a Sabbath of rest (Leuit. 25.) in Seventh
year of rest: and Iubiley year.
which no land was plowed, no vines pruined, nor those fruits gathered that
sprung without man's industry of the earth. Again the fiftith year was
peculiarly made holy, and called the Iubiley, or joyful year. In it al
bondmen were set free; al inheritances amongst the Israelites, being for the
time, sold or otherwise alienated, returned to the former owners.

Besides Sacrifices; Sacraments; holy places, holy times, and many other
sacred O^^^r ceremonial obseruances. (...) and unclean.
things belonging thereto; there were yet more ceremonial Obseruances commanded
by Moses law, as well perteyning to the service of God in that time, as
signifying christian life and manners. So certain beasts, birds, and fishes
were reputed unclean (Leuit. 11.) and Gods people forbid to eat them; No
blood to be eaten, nor (...).
as also that they should not eat any blood at al, nor fat. Leui. 3. The
reason of al which was not, as though any creature were il in nature, but
partly to avoid idolatry, partly to exercise them in obedience, and
temperance; and partly for that the same things signified vices and
corruptions, from which Not (...) ^eed^ in one field.
Christians especi^lly ought to resraine. Likewise Leuit. 19* they were
commanded not to sovv their fields with two sorts of seed; nor to wear
garments wouen of two sorts of stuff, that they might be more distinguished
from Infidels No cloth of d^^ers matter.
by external signs, and not only by Circumcision, but especially to teach
christians to practice simple innocence, and to avoid duble and deciptful
dealing.

A^ which, and other precepts as well moral, as ceremonial and judicial,
Strict commandment to kep^^l the Law.
were most strictly commanded; the obseruers blessed and rewarded; and
transgressors seuerly threatened with great curses (Leuit. 20. 26. Deuteronomy. 4.
27. 28.) and diverse actually punished, Exodus 32. three thousand slain for
committing idolatry. Many swallovved up in the earth. (Number. 16.) descending
quick into hell, and many more burned with fire from heaven, for making and
favoring The obseruers blessed and rewarded.
Schism. Yea by one means and other, all that were above twenty years of
age, coming forth of Egypt, except two only (Iosue and Caleb) died in the
desert, for the general murmur of the people. Number. 11. 14. 25. and 26. Al
Israel beaten in Trans^r^ss^^^s cursed and punished.
battle til one malefactor Achan was discovered and punished. Ios. 7. All the
tribes were punished for suffering public idolatry in Dan: and Benjamin
almost extirpate, for not punishing certain malefactors. Iudic. 20. And the
whole people very often invaded and sore afflicted for their sins; as
appears in the book of Judges. In particular also diverse were advanced and
prospered for their virtues, as Iosue, Caleb, Phinees, Samuel, David and
others. Contrariwise Nadab and Abiu priests were miraculously burnt for
offering strange ^^re, Leuit. 10. One stoned to death for gathering sticks on
the sabbath day, Number. 15. King Saul deposed, for presuming to offer sacrifice,
and not destroying Infidels (1. Reg. 13. 15.) and Oza, 2^ Reg. 6. suddenly
slain for touching the Ark of God, the Law forbidding under pain of death,
Number. 1. v. 51. and 18. v. 7. that none should approach to holy office being not
thereto orderly called.

Of works also of Supererogation (called counsels not precepts) we have
VVork^^ of supererogation. Vows.
examples in vows, voluntarily made of things not commanded; the law
prescribing what vows might be made, and by whom. Nu. 30. And Number. 6. a
particular rule was proposed to such as of their own accord, would embrace
it, and a distinct name given them, to be called Nazarites, that is, Separate
Nazarit^^.
or Sanctified. In which state they were to remain either for a time, limited
by themselves or their parents, or perpetually, if they so promised. Iudic. 13.
1. Reg. 1. For s^ far as their promise extended, they were strictly obliged
to perform. Deuteronomy. 23. When thou have vowed a vow to our Lord thy God, thou
shall not slack to pay it: because our Lord thy God will require it: and if
thou delay, it shall be reputed to thee for sin. If thou will not promise,
thou shall be without (this) sin. Pay thy vows unto the Highest, Psalm. 75.
Vow ye* and render (your vows) to our Lord your God, Psalm. 49. The Rechabites
afterward Rechabites.
had a like rule to the Nazarite^; and the same perpetual (Hierem. 3^.) never
to drink wine, nor to build nor dwell in houses, but in tabernacles, nor sow
corn, nor plant vineyardes. Which rule though instituted by a man, yet the
observation thereof was much commended and rewarded by God. v. 19. Such
distinct state of religious persons, with other states of the church of Christ,
were also prefigured (Leuit. 11.) by the clean Three so^^^ of Chri(...)
prefigured.
fishes, of three distinct waters, as some holy Fathers do mystically expound
that place. To vvitte, the clean fishes of the sea are the multitude of lay
persons, which are drawn out of the sea of this world, and happily found
good Laity.
fishes in our Lords net. Math. 13. The clean fishes of the rivers, are the
good and fruitful Clergy men, that vvatter the whole earth, by teaching
Clergy.
Christian doctrine, and ministering holy Sacraments, with other Rites, and
Governing the whole Church. And the clean fishes of standing pooles, are
Mounkes.
the Monastical persons, living perpetually in Cloisters, where good souls
are always ready for our Lords table, as S. Bernard teaches. Holy
scip^^res expo(...) mystically,
Much more the more ancient fathers. S. Beda S. Gregory, S. Augustine, and
others explicate innumerable places of holy Scripture mystically; relying
therein upon example of the new Testament so expounding the old. Namely S. Paul
S. Bern. Ser 1. de S. Andrea. S. Beda (...). 4. S. Aug. cont. Faust. S. Greg.
in li. 1. Reg. et in Job.
teaching (as before is noted) that the whole law was a pedagogue guiding men
to Christ, and affirming that al things happened to the people of the old
Testament in figure of the new.

Leaving therefore to prosecute the same further, which would require a very
great work, it may here suffice to give according to the literal sense, a
brief view of certain other points of Religion, practiced in this fourth age.

Where it is clear, that as Jacob the Patriarch had fortold (Genesis 48.) that
Abraham's, Isaacs, and his own name should be inuocated, so Moses Invocation
of Patriarchs.
prayed God for his promise made to them, and for their sake, to pardon the
people, saying: Exodus 32. Remember o Lord Abraham, Isaac, and Israel. And our
Lord was pacified, from doing the evil which he had spoken against his people.
His divine providence so disposing, that he could be S. Hiere. Ep. 12. ad
Gauden.
hindered, by such prayers, from that which h^threatned. And whereas Moses
Objections answered by holy Scriptu^es.
did not directly invoke the holy Patriarchs, as Christians now call upon
glorified Saints, to pray for them, the cause of difference is, for that now
Saints seeing God, know in him, whatsoever perteyneth to their glory, which
state none before Christ attain^d unto. Number 35. v. 25. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 12. Again
Protestants object, that for so much as God knows al our necessities
desires, dispositions, and whatsoever is in man, it is needles (say they)
superfluous and in vain, that Saints should commend our causes. To this we
answer, that not only glorious Saints, but also mortal men by Gods ordinance
(by which nothing is done vainly) do such offices, as mediators between God and
other men; for so Moses told the words of the people to our Lord (Exodus 19.)
notwithstanding Gods omniscience, or knowledge of al things. Also God expressly
commanded Jobs friends to go to Job, promising to hear his Job. 4^.
prayer for them. As for Saints hearing or knowing our prayers made to them,
How Saints kn^w men's prayers.
though only God of himself, and by his own power, sees men's secret
cogitations, and therefore is properly called the searcher of hearts (1. Reg.
16.) yet God communicates this power to prophets, to see the secret
thoughts of others; so Samuel knew the cogitations of Saul (1. Reg. 9. v. 20.)
And Abias saw by revelation the coming of Ierobomas wife to him in Silo (3.
Reg. 14.) Much more God reuealeth our present state, and acts to glorified
souls; who are as Angels in heaven (Math. 22.) and being secure of their own
glory, are careful (says S. Cyprian) of our Salvation. Titles given to men
in office, and to Saints.
lib. de mortalitate.
Neither is it derogation to God that Saints are honored, and titles ascribed
to them, of intercessors, mediators, and the like; for such titles are given to
them not as to God, but by way of participation only. So Judges are called
gods and saviors (Exodus 21. Iudic 3.) and Priests called gods (Exodus 21.)
Praise given to God and Gedeon Iudic. 7. Angels ad^^ed.
Protection and adoration of Angels is very frequent, Exodus 23. 31. Number. 22.
Iosue. 5. Iudic. 2. 6. 13. The names of the twelve sons of Israel were graven
in the two chief ornaments of the high priest, in the Ephod and Rationale
(Exodus 28.) Manna was not only reserved as a memory of Gods singular benefit,
but also honorably reposed as a Relics*
Relic in a golden vessel, and kept in the Ark of God (Exodus 16. Heb. 9.)
Joseph's bones reserved and removed (Iosue 24.) Images of Images.
holy Cherubims were made and set up together with the Arc, and
Propitiatory in the chief place of the Tabernacle, called Sancta Sanctorum
(Exodus 25.) An image also of a serpent was made in brass for the health of
those that were stricken by serpents (Number. 21.) Images also of lions and oxen
were made, and set under the foot of the lauer (called a sea) in the Temple
(3. Reg. 7.) The honor done to any holy thing, namely to the Arc (2. Reg.
6.) redounded to Gods more honor, and all this so far from idolatry, that
quite contrary, in presence of the Arc the idol Dagon fell to the ground, and
broke in pieces. 1. Reg. 5.

Exequies for the dead with weeping and fasting were then practiced Exequies
f^^ the dead.
in the Church, as appears by the peoples mourning for Aaron thirty days.
Number. 20. Also for Moses. (Deuteronomy. 34.) By the Gabaonites fasting seven days for
Saul and his sons lately slain. 1. Reg. 31. Likewise king David with all his
court mourning weping and fasting for them. 2. Reg. 1. Al which were to no
purpose, if souls departed could not be releiued by such means. It moreover
appears that the same royal prophet believed diverse places to be in hell, when
he said (Psalm. 85.) Thou have delivered my soul from the lower hell, signifiyng
plainly that there is a lower and a higher hell: which higher the Church calls
Purgatory. Purgatory.
where souls suffer that pain in satisfaction for their sins, which
remains not satisfied before death, and is due after the guilt of sin is
remitted, the law prescribing that besides restitution of damage, sacrifice
should also be offered (Leuit. 5. 6. 16.) And David was punished by the death
of his child. 2. Reg. 12. and by the plague sent amongst his people 2. Reg. 24.
after his sins were remitted. He feared also punishment in the other world,
yea two sorts and therefore prayed to be delivered from both, saying: (Psalm.
6.) Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chastise To. 2. in sept. Psalm
paeuitent.
me in thy wrath. That is (says S. Gregory) Strike me not with the reprobate,
nor aflict me with those, that are purged by the punishing flames. And most
expressly signifies also a higher place called hell, saying (Psalm. 15.) in the
person of Christ to his Father. Thou shall not Limbus patt^.
leave my soul in hell. From whence Christ delivered the holy Patriarchs
Prophets and other perfect souls; resting without sensible pain, and
brought No entrance into heaven before Christ.
them into heaven, vvhither before him none could enter. Which was also
signified by the cities of refuge, whence none might depart to their proper
country, til the death of the high priest (Number. 35.) and by Moses dying in
the desert, and not entering into the promised land over Jordan. Deuteronomy. 4. 31.
and. 34.

Presupposing the general Resurrection of al men (as a truth known by former
traditions) king David shows the difference of the wicked, and Resurrection.
godly in that time, saying (Psalm. 1.) The impious shall not rise again in
judgment: nor sinners in the council of the just. That is, the wicked shall
not rise to joy and glory, as the just and godly shall do.

Of general judgment is more plainly prophesied, 1. Reg. 2. That our Lord shall
judge the ends of the earth, not that David, nor Solomon, Judgment.
but Christ should reign in his m^litant Church, even to the ends of the
earth, and in fine judge the whole world. The same is confirmed Psalm. 49. God
will come manifestly our God, and he will not keep silence. Fire shall burn forth
in his sight. Psalm. 95. He shall judge the round world in equity, and the
peoples in his truth. Psalm. 96. Fire shall go before him, and shall inflame his
enemies round about. Again the same royal prophet (Psalm. 48.) describes the
future and eternal state of the damned saying: as sheep (creatures unable to
help themselves) they are put in hell, death shall feed upon them. Of the
blessed he adds: And the just shall rule over them in the morning, that is, in
the resurrection, and Psalm. 149. The Saints shall rejoice in glory, they shall
be joyful in their beds (in eternal rest.) The exaltations (pra^ses) of God
in their throat, and two edged swords in their hands: to do revenge in the
nations, punishments among the peoples. To bind their kings in fetters, and
their nobles in iron Eternal pain of the damned and glory of the blessed.
manicles. That they may do in them the judgment that is written: This glory
is to al his Saints. And much greater glory belongs to Saints: for this
is but accidental, uttered according to vulgar capacity. The essential and
perfect glory, which no eye has seen, nor ear has heard. 1. Co^. ^.
nor heart can cone iu^, consists in seeing God. Among accidental glorious
(...) dowries of glorified bodies presigured.
gifts, the four dowries of glorified bodies are especially prefigured:
Impassibilitie 1 Cor. (...).
by the wood Setim, whereof the Arc was made (Exodus 25.) Agilitie and
Penetrabilitie in some sort by David's quicknes against G^liath, and his
conuering of him self into Saul's camp and forth again (1. Reg. 17. and 26.)
but a more plain figure of Claritie was in Moses face (Exodus 34.) which by
his conversation with God, became more glorious then mortal eyes were able to
behold, glistering and shining as most splendent Cath^. c^^s. Rom p. 1. c 12. q
9.
l^ght through crystal, described as if his skin had benne a clear horn,
a^^earing and spreading beam^ like the sunn^, proceeding from the beauty of his
soul, so th^^ none of all the people could look directly upon him, except he
covered his face.

Thus much concerning particular points of faith and religion. And it is The
Church more known to other nations then before.
no less evident, that the universal Church and City of God still continued:
yea was more visible, and conspicuous to the whole world then before. First by
Gods marvelous protection thereof in the desert, and famous victories and
conquestes of the land of Chanaan. And by the excellent laws given to this
people; which al nations admired, and none had the like. Deuteronomy. 4. For in this
fourth age, besides other laws and precepts, the spiritual and temporal
States were more distinguished, and the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy The
Ecclesiastical and temporal states more distinguished
especially disposed in subordination of one supreme head, with inferior
gouerners, each in their place and office, for edification of the whole body.
For Moses being chief ruler and conduct^r of the Israelites out of Egypt,
received and delivered to them the written Law (Exodus 20.) And for observation
and conservation thereof by Gods express appointment (Leuit. 8.) consecrated
Aaron the ordinary High priest, himself remaining still extraordinary
Superior, also above Aaron. And after Aaron he consecrated in like manner his
son Eleazar high priest, and successor to his father (Number. 20.) To whom
Succession of High Priests.
succeeded others in this order (1. Paralip. 6.) Phinees, Abisue, Bocci, Ozi,
Zacharias, (otherwise 1. Reg. 1. called Heli) Meraioth, Amarias (otherwise
Achimelec, whom Saul slew, 1. Reg. 22.) Achitob (otherwise Abiathar, who was
deposed, 3. Reg. 2.) and Sadoc, in whose time the Temple was founded.

To these were adjoined other Priests, also consecrated in a praescript form
(Leuit. 8.) and Levites ordained to assist in lower and distinct offices (Number.
3. and 4.) In the first degree the Caathites, whose office was to Distinction
of offices in Priests and Levites.
carry the Sanctuary, and vessel thereof vvrapped up by the priests, but
were forbid in pain of death, to touch them, or to see them. In the second
degree the Gersonites; who carried the cortines and couers of the Tabernacle,
and vessel of the Altar. In the third degree the Merarites; who carried the
bordes, bars, and pillars, with their feet, pinnes, cords, and other
implementes of the tabernacle; every one according to their office and
burdens, Number. 4. v. vlt.

But in the temporal state and government Iosue of the tribe of Ephraim
Succession of temporal princes interrupted. Dukes:
succeeded to Moses (Number. 27. Deuteronomy. 3. and. 34.) And after Iosue were diverse
interruptions of succession, with gouerners of diverse tribes, and change of
government, from Dukes to Judges, and from Judges to Kings. For after Iosues
death the people being sore afflicted by invasions of Infidels, God raised
certain special men, with title of Judges to deliver and Judges.
save them. First Othoniel of the tribe of Judah; then Aod of Benjamin; after
him Samgar (the Scripture not signifying of what tribe) then Barach with Debora
of Ephraim; Gedeon of Manasses; Abimelech, his bas^ son, an usurper; Thola of
Issachar; Iair, and Iephte of Manasses; Abesan of Judah; Aialon of Zabulon;
Abdon of Ephraim; Sampson of Dan; and Heli, who was also high priest of Aarons
stock, otherwise called Zaraias (1. Paralip. 6.) and Samuel also of the tribe
of Leut a Prophet. In his time the people demanding and urging to have a King,
Saul of the Kings.
tribe of Benjamin was anointed. 1. Reg. 10. But for transgressing Gods
commandments, especially for exercising spiritual function without warrant (1.
Reg. 13.) and not destroying idolaters (1. Reg. 15.) was deposed, and David of
the tribe of Judah was anointed King; who after many great trubles, possessed
the whole kingdom, and died in peace, leaving his son Solomon invested and
anointed king in his throne.

The Church being thus established in distinct states and orders, albeit there
M(...) Church.
were many imperfections in all sorts of persons, and great sins committed,
yet God so punished offenders, and chastised the whole people, that he still
conserved, the greatest, or chief part, in true faith and religion. For whiles
they were in the desert, they murmured very often against God, and his
Ministers Murmr.
their Superiors. (Exodus 17. Number. 11. 14 20. 21.) Many fell to idolatry
Idolatry.
(Exodus 32.) Aaron not free from cooperating in the peoples sin. Nadab and
Abiu Aarons sons, and consecrated priests, offered strange fire (Leuit. 10)
Core Dathan and Abiron, with their accomplices made (...)e.
a great schism (Number. 16.) Many committed carnal fornication with (...).
Infidels; and were thereby drawn to spiritual (Number. 25.) Of which and other
like, ^innes the Psalmist speaks (Psalm. 94.) exhorting his people not to
harden their hearts, as in the desert their fathers had tempted God. Forty
years was I offended (says God) with that generation, and said: They always
err in heart. And therefore he swear in his wrath: that the same generation
should not enter into the promised land of Chanaan: but their children entered
and possessed it. Number. 14. Iesue. 3.

A(...) the people falling to idolatry and other sins, were afflicted and
sore press^d by foreign enemies, but repenting were delivered and saved by
certain (...)
capitaines called Judges and Iudic. 3.
Saviors: as appears in the book of judges. They had also tribulations by
some of their own nation, for among the Judge one (called Abimelee) was a
tyrannical usurper. (Iudic. 9.) Saul their first King falling from God unjustly
persecuted David (1. Reg. 18. and ^.)* Ambitious Absalom rebelled against the
King his father. (2. Reg. 15.) and Seba of the tribe of Benjamin raised an
other rebellion (2. Reg. 20.) ^^^^wise Adonias, assisted by Abiathar the high
priest, and by Ioab general of the army, pretended to reign his father David
yet living, to prevent S(...)n of the kingdom 3. Reg. 1.) So God both showed
his justice, in suffering su^^ afflictions to happen, for punishment of sin:
and his mercy, in saving hi^ Church from ruin.

Moreover for preservation of the Church, there were diverse divine Ordinances
provided by the law. For first al were strictly commanded, not to communicate
Ordinary means of conseruing the Church. No participation with infi^els. No
(...). But one Tabernacle. One Altar (...) (...).
with Infidels in their idolatry (Ex. 23.) nor with Schismatikes in their
schism (Nu. 16.) but to destroy al Idolaters (Number. 33.) and shun al
novelties in religion, as a sure mark of idolatry, or false doctrine (Deuteronomy.
13.) Further 8. Chris. orat. 1. aduers. Iudeos.
to conserve unity there was but one Tabernacle, and one Altar for Sacrifice,
in the whole people of Israel. Whereupon when the two tribes and half, on the
other side Jordan, had made a several altar, all the tribes that dwelt in
Chanaan, suspecting it was for sacrifice, sent presently to admonish them, and
prepared to make war against them, except they destroyed their new altar, but
being advertised that it was only an altar of monument, and not for sacrifice,
were therewith satisfied. (Iosue. 22.) Afterward the tribe of Dan, setting up
idolatry, and the other tribes not correcting it, they were al punished.
Which happened by occasion of an other enormous sin, committed and not
corrected in the tribe of Benjamin. For the other eleven tribes making war
against them for this just cause, yea by Gods direction, and warrant, yet had
the worse, susteyning great slaughter of men in two conflictes; and in the
third Benjamin was almost destroyed. Iudic. 20.

Finally for decision of al controversies and ending of strife, the High One
supreme Judge of controversies. Al bound to obey him. His sentence infallible.
Priest was expressly ordained supreme Judge, (Deuteronomy. 17.) And al were commanded
in pain of death to submit their opinions, and obey his sentence: with
promise of Gods assistance, whereby his definitions were certain and
infallible. For in consultations of doubts, and difficult cases, God inspired
him with doctrine of verity (Exodus 28. 29. Leuit. 8. Number. 3. 7. 9. 1. Reg. 23,
30.) Which judgment Seat Christ admonished the Jews to repair unto and
follow (Math. 23.) though the Judges themselves did not the things which they
taught. In so much that Caiphas, through this assistance of Gods spirit, being
otherwise a wicked man, yet pronounced the truth, That one must die for the
people. Which therefore S. John the Evangelist ascribes to his Chair and
office, because he was High priest that year. Joan. 11.

Seeing then Gods providence and continual assistance was so clear, and assured
The Church of Christ preserved from ^^^ing in Religion.
in the Church of the old Testament, much more is the Church of christ builded
upon a sure rock, assured of his perpetual assistance, and Math. 16. 28. Luc.
22. Joan 14. 16. Ephesians. 4. ^. T^m. 3.
always preserved from erring in Faith, or in general practice of Religion. And
that by Gods like assured ordinance of one supreme head and Judge, S. Peter,
and his Successor: for whom our Savior prayed, that his faith should not
fail. Further commanding him, that he should confirm his brethren. Al which
vvse see is performed in the Successors of S. Peter, vvheras the successors
of the other Apostles, are al failed long since. The same most assured
stabilitie of the Church of Christ, is further confirmed by the whole Law and
Prophets. Namely, Deuteronomy. 32. and 33. where Moses fortelleth more power and
grace in the Church, to be collected in the Gentiles of al nations, then ever
was in that of the Israelites or Jews. Likewise, 1. Reg. 2. The same was both
prefigured and prophesied by holy Anna: The hungry (those that desire Gods
grace and glory) are filled: until the barren woman (the Church of the
Gentiles) bare very many: and she that had many children was weakened.
Showing that the Church of the Jews had many, until the plenitude of Gentiles
much more abounded. Wherefore the Psalmist inuiteth al nations to praise God,
saying: Psalm. 116. Praise our Lord al ye Gentiles: praise him al ye peoples.
Also 2. Reg. 7. God promised David, saying: Thy Kingdom for ever before thy
face, and thy Not any temporal but Christ's kingdom is in all nations and
perpetual.
throne shall be firm continually. which was not verified in David's temporal S.
Aug. li. 17. ^ ^. de ^^uit S. ^^pip^^ here is. 2^.
kingdom. For it was quickly divided, after Salomons death, and a small part
left to his son Roboam. And after the captivity in Babylon, his seed bad
only title and right without possession of royal throne. Again 2. Reg. 22.
The same royal prophet in his Canticle of thanks giving, and last prophetical
words (chap. 23.) much prefers the spiritual kingdom of Christ, before the
earthly kingdom of the Jews. But most specially and plainly in the Psalms.
Psalm. 2. Why did the Gentiles rage, and peoples meditate vain things?
Signifying that the fury of al adversaries rages in vain, against Christ and
his Church. For, I am appointed, by him King (says Christ The Church of Christ
universal.
to his Father) over Sion, his holy hill. I will give thee (says God to his
Son) the Gentiles for thine inheritance, and thy possession the Act. 4.
ends of the earth. Psalm. 17. A people which I knew not, has served me. Psalm.
44. The Queen (the Church) stood on thy right hand in golden raiment,
compassed with variety; of virtues, and diverse sorts of holy professions.
Psalm. 47. Mount Sion is founded with the exultation of the whole earth. For
ever and ever he (Christ) shall rule us evermore. Psalm. 86. Glorious things are
said of thee, o city of God. But omitting innumerable other such textes, the
88. Psalm conteyneth a large prophecy of Christ and his Church, where S.
Augustine gives us this in hunc. Psalm.
brief admonition. Christiani estis, Christum agnoscite. You are Christians,
agnize Christ. I will put (joyth God) his hand in the sea, Christ's dominion in
the Gentiles, and his right hand in the rivers; al sorts shall serve him. He
shall be high above the kings of the earth. Of the Church he adds: I will put
his seed for ever and ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. Neither do
sins frustrate this promise of God, therefore it follows: But if his children
shall forsake my law: and will not walk in my judgments. If they shall profane
my justices, The Jews will not see Christ: 2. Cor. 3. And Heretics will not see
the Church: which yet is always visible. S. Aug. in Psalm. 30. c^n^. 2. Collat.
Carthag. at cont, Donatist.
and not keep my commandments; What then, will Christ for all this abandon his
Church, as he did the old Synagogue, of which God says: Deuteronomy. 32. They have
provoked me in that which was no God: and I will provoke them, in that which is
no people? Not so. How then? I will visit, says our Lord, their iniquities
with a rod, and their sins with stripes. But my mercy I will not take away
from him. This is a strong Firmament (says S. Augustine) God promises, yea
swears, Ibidem.
and vvil not lie to David, that his seed shall continue for ever. His throne
as the Sun in Gods sight, and the Moon perfected for ever. So this great
Doctor ^heweth by holy Scriptures against the Donatistes, and in them against
Protestants, that the militant Church of Christ has benne still, and shall be
visible, during this transitory world.

CHAP. VII. Salomons palace, 2. his house in the forest, 8. and the queen's
house is built, 13. The beginning of the fifth age.
Two great brazen pillars: 23. asea (or lauer) 27. ten brazen ferte. 38.
ten less lauatorics, and other vessels, and implementes pertaining to the
Temple, adorned with images of Angels, and other creatures are further
described.
AND his own house Solomon built in thirtene years, and one rue of planed
ceder, moreover also in the inner court of the house of our Lord, and in the
porche of the house. King Solomon also sent, and took Hiram from Tire, Firmnes.
Iachin: in like manner he erected the second pillar, and called the name thereof
in strength*
Booz. And upon the heads of the pillars he put a A vessel so (...) for the
(...) being (...).
a sea of founders work of ten the brimme of a chalice, and the leaf of
crisped lilie: it contained two thousand ^atus contained (...).
bates. And he made ten brazen seete, over the heads of the pyllers. And four
hundred pomegranates Had designed and dedicated to holy uses.
had sanctified, silver and gold, and the vessel, and laid them in the
treasures of the house of our Lord.

CHAP. VIII. The arc is brought in, and the temple dedicated. 10. a glorious
cloyvde replenisheth it, 14. Solomon prays long to God, 55. blesses the
people. 62. and many victimes are offered in this solemn festiuitie.
THEN were gathered together all the ancientes of Israel And king Solomon, and
all the multitude of Israel, which There was no more with in the arc, Deuteronomy. 10.
but on the outside was the rod of Aaron. Nu. 17. Heb. 9. the golden pot
with Manna. Exodus 16 Heb 9. and the book of the law repeted by Moses. Deuteronomy. 31.
nothing else but two tables Prices bless their people and parents their
children.
blessed all the when they came out of the Land of Egypt. And Solomon Solomon
knew well Gods conditional promise, but perseuered not in keeping his
co^mandments, and therefore a great part of the kingdom was taken from his
children, yet the right of the kingdom of Judah remained to his seed even to
Christ our Savior.
yet so if thy children shall keep their way, that they walk before me as thou
have walked in my sight. And now Reward of good works.
rewarding him according to his justice. If thy people Israel fathers. If the
heaven shall be shut, and it rain not, because External works of penance,
except they proceed from the heart, suffice not for remission of sin.
heart in the place of captiuirie, and converted shall beseech thee in their
captivity, saying: We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have dealt
impiously: and shall return to thee in all their heart, and al their soul, in
the land of their enemies, to the which they shall be led captive: and shall pray
to thee against the way of their land, which thou gave to their fathers, and
of the city which thou have chosen, and of the temple which I have built to
thy name: thou did immolate victimes besore our Lord. And Solomon killed

CHAP. IX. Our Lord appearing again to Solomon. 4. admonishes him and his
people to keep the precepts. 6. threatening punishment if they do not. 10. The
king of Tire receives twenty cities of Solomon, but likes them not. 14.
Solomon builds more cities and towns. 20. Makes diverse nations tributarie.
24. The Queen repayreth to her house. 25. The king offers victimes thrice
every year. 26. and fetches gold from Ophir.
AND it came to pass when Solomon had perfected the External worship is not
acceptable to God, except it proceed from internal sincerity and d^^odon.
Wherefore S. Augustine says: God is worshipped in faith, hope, and charity.
Enchirid. c. ^.
in simplicity of heart, and in equity: and wilt do al things, which I have
commanded thee, and wilt keep my ordinances and my judgments, I will set
the throne of and your children shall turn away, not following me, nor keeping
my commandementes, and my ceremonies, which I have proposed to you, but shall
go and worship strange gods, and adore them: I will take away Israel from
the Solomon did not ^el these cities, for he could not alienate them, but let
the king of Tire have the use and revenues in payment for timber, and for the
gold which he sent.
gave to Hiram twenty towns in the Land of Galilee. And Hiram dirtie or
disples sing.
Chabul, until this day. Hiram also sent to king the children of Israel could
not abolish: Solomon made tributaries, until this day. But of the children of
Israel Solomon a monument.
a name in Asiongaber, which is

CHAP. X. The queen of Saba coming to king Solomon, admireth his wisdom,
magnificence, and order of government 10. She gives and receives gifts. 14.
Solomon receives much gold diverse vvayes: 16. makes golden targ^^tes. ^8. a
magnificent throne. 21. and much golden vessel. 25. Many bring him presents.
26. He has many chariottes, horsemen. 27. abundance of silver 28. Marchantes
of diverse kingdoms sell him horses.
BUT the Queen of Part of Arabia is called Saba, nere to Jury. but this Saba
is beyond Arabia, as S. Hierom testifies in Esaiae. 60 li. 17 it seems to be
in Aethiopia, for our Savior says Mat. 12. The queen of the South came from
the ends of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon.
Saba also having heard the fame which he offered in the house of our Lord As
this queen had no spirit, when she saw Salomons wisdom, so the Church gathered
of gentiles knowing Christ's grace, and finding the masters of Euangelical
doctrine, casting away the spirit of pride, and laying of al hautinesse of
mind, learned to distrust in her self, and to trust in the great mercy of her
king. S. Greg in Psalm 7. pa^^ten. to 2.
she had no longer spirit, and she said to the king: The report is true, which
A wonderful thing, that a Queen upon fame of a man's wisdom traueled so far to
hear him speak, and to see his government. but it was Gods inspiration, to
signify by this figure, that the Church of Christ should be gathered of the
Gentiles in all nations. Kiges, Queen's and no^ potent Princes also submitting
themselves to Christ. Isaae. c. 49.
trees brought, nor seen until this present day.) And king was not such a
work made in all kingdoms. Yea and al

CHAP. XI. Solomon loving and marying many women of diverse nations, is drawn
by them to idolatry. 9. God therefore offended suffers Adad an Idumean, 23.
Razon king of Damascus, 26. and Hieroboam his own servant to make war
against him. 29. Ahias the prophet fortelleth Hieroboam, that he shall reign
over ten tribes, leaving but two to Salomons heirs, 38. With promise to
prosper, if he serve God. 42. Solomon dies.
AND king Solomon loved many women strangers, the unto yours: for they will
most certainly turn away your hearts to follow their gods. To these therefore
was Solomon copled in most seruent love. And he had wives as it were queens
Though plurality of wives was then allowed, yet it was forbid to multiply
many. Deuteronomy.
seven hundred, and concubines three hundred: and the women turned away his
heart. And when he was now old, The tribe of Judah.
one tribe I will give to thy son for David my servant, and By Jerusalem is
understood the tribe of Benjamin, wherein it stood. so there remained two tribes
to Salomons heirs.
Jerusalem. Which I have chosen. And our Lord raised 2. Reg. ^.
them that were slain, and had slain al malekind in Idumea, ( for Ioab tarried
there six months and al Israel, til he slew assigued him land. And Adad found
grace before Pharao ^^. Reg. 10.
and he gathered men against him, and he became the From the time that Solomon
fell to idolatry, he was more impugned by three perpetual adversaries, Adad,
Razon, and Hieroboam; mystically signifying the flesh, the world, and the devil.
all the days This fact confirmed his words. that he spoke seriously and
fained not.
cut it into twelve parts. And he said to Jeroboam: not walked in my ways, to
do justice before me, and my precepts, and judgments as David his father.
Neither will Whether he repented and was saved or no, is uncertain.
slept with his fathers, and was buried

CHAP. XII. Roboam following youngmens counsel, 16. Jeroboam possesses ten
tribes of his Kingdom. 21. Which he endouoring to recover by war, is
admonished by The third part. The division of the Kingdom. Several reigues of
certain kings: and preaching of special prophets.
a prophet to cease. 26. Hieroboam sets up golden calves to be adored,
making temples, altares, and priests fit for his purpose.
AND Roboam came into Sichem: for thither was al yoke upon us: thou therefore
diminish now a little of thy fathers most hard empire, and of the most heavy
yoke, that he laid upon us, and we will serve thee. Who said to them: This
pharaise notes the sequel, not the final cause. As chap. 14. ^. ^.
that he might raise up his word, which he had spoken in the hand of Ahias the
Silonite, to Jeroboam the son of Nabat. The people therefore therefore sent
Aduram, who was over the tributes: and al Israel stoned him, and he died,
moreover King Roboam in have went up into his chariote, and fled into
Jerusalem: and A devilish policy to make a religion conformable to the
temperal state.
a devise he made two golden calves, and said to them: Go up no more into
Jerusalem: Behold thy gods Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. And he put one in For such a religion such priests were fittest.
of the abiectes of the people, which were not of the children of Leui. And he
appointed a solemn day in the eight Places on hills, where they sacrificed
calves, and other things to the images of calves.
excelses, which he had made. And he went upon the altar, which he had built in
Bethel, the fiftenth day of the eight month, which he had ^orged out of his
own heart: and he made a solemnity to the children of Israel, and went up upon
the altar, to burn incense.

CHAP. XIII. A prophet sent from Judah to Bethel fortelleth the birth of Josias,
and destruction of Ieroboams altar, 4. whose hand being sudenly withered, 6. is
restored by the prophets prayer. 11. The same prophet is deceived by an other
prophet, and slame by a lion. 33. Hieroboam proceeds in impictie.
AND behold a man of God came out of Judah, in the word This foreshewing long
before the name of a child that should be borne, imports that he should do
great things. See. 4. Reg. 2^.
Josias, and he shall immolate upon thee priests of the excelses, which now do
burn frankencense on thee, and he shall burn men's bones upon thee. And he gave
a sign And a certain prophet being old dwelt in Bethel, to This man of
Bethel was indeed a prophet of God, but in this lied wickedly, and so
deceiving the other prophet, made him to break Gods commandment, for which he
was slain Whereupon Hieroboam swhom the wiked prophet sought to please) was
less afeard to proceed in idolatry.
an Angel has spoken to me in the word of our Lord, saying: Bring him back
with thee into thy house, that he may eat bread, and drink water. He deceived
him, and brought him Not only the deceiuer, but also he that is deceived, is
guilty and punishable for breaki^g Gods commandment.
killed him, and his body was cast forth in the way: and the ass stood by
him, and the lion stood by the dead body. And behold, men passing by saw the
dead man of God, that was disobedient to the mouth of our Lord, and our Lord
has delivered him to the lion, and he has torn him, and killed him according
to the word of our Lord, that he spoke to him. And he said to hie sons: Sadle
me an By this it appears to be Gods work and punishment.
did not eat of the dead body, nor hurt the ass. The prophet therefore took

CHAP. XIIII. Ahias the prophet forsheweth the ruin of Hieroboams famili: 12.
namely the death of his son, for whom being sick, the mother consulteth the
prophet. 20. Hieroboam dies, and his son Nadab reigns. 21. Some also of
the people of Judah, committing idolatry and other sins, 25. the King of
Egypt inuadeth and sacketh Jerusalem. 31. Roboam dies and his son Abias
reigns.
AT that time Abia the son of Jeroboam was sick. spoken: and rising up went
into Silo, and came into the house of Ahias: but he could not see, because his
eyes were dim for age. And our Lord said to Ahias: Behold the wife of
Jeroboam did not wittingly and of purpose set up false gods, to the end he
might provoke God to anger: for his intention only was to keep the people from
going to Jerusalem, left by that occasion they should return to Roboam their
Lord* king of Judah. chapter 12. v. 27. But by setti^g up idols he did provoke God
consequently to anger. So here and in other places this phrase: that he might
provoke: that it might be fulfilled, and the like, signifies not the final
cause, but the sequel of other factes, without direct intention:
that thou might provoke me to anger, and have rejected me behind thy back:
therefore behold I will bring in evils upon the house of Jeroboam arose, and
departed, and came into Thersa: and when she entered the threshold of the
house, the child died, and they buried him. And al Israel mourned for him
according

CHAP. XV. Abias reigns wickedly in Judah three years. 8. After him his son
Asa succeding destroys idolatry, reigning forty one years. 16. Who
having w^rres with the king of Israel, makes league with the king of Syria,
24. As^ dying Iosaphat succedeth. 25. Nadab reigns wickedly two years in
Israel, is then slain by Baasa of the tribe of Issachar, 29. and his whole
family is destroyed. 33. Baasa also reigns wickedly twenty four years.
THEREFORE in the eightenth year of king Jeroboam David's postetitie conserved
for his sake.
because David Those altares which Solomon had made for his wives, that were
idolaters Asa destroved not* but al which Roboa^ and Abias had made, or
suffered to be made for their own people he pulled down. Josias afterward
destroyed also those which Solomon had made 2. ^^^^l. 34.
the side the king of Judah. Asa therefore taking all the silver, and The a^^^ou^
of schism punished in his posterity.
all the house of Jeroboam: he leaft not so much as one soul of his seed, til
he destroyed him according to the word of our Lord, which he had spoken in the
hand of Ahias the Silonite, for the sins of Jeroboam, which he that he
wrought, are not these things written in the Book of the words of the days
of the kings of Israel? And there

CHAP. XVI. Iehu for prophesying the destruction of Baasa and his house, 7. is
slain. 8. yet his son Ela reigns two years. 9. Then Zambri rebelleth,
kills Ela, and reigns. 16. Part of the people choosing Amri (prince of the
army) their king, 18. Zambri desperately burns himself and the kings palace,
21. an other part follow Thebni as king til his death. 23. Amri reigns twelve
years wickedly. 29. His son Achab succedeth, marieth Iezabel, and serves
Baal. 34. In the mean time Hiel repairer^ Jericho.
AND the word of our Lord came to Iehu the son of half part of the horsemen:
and Ela was in Thersa drinking, and dronken in the house of Arsa the governor
of Thersa. Zambri therefore rushing in, stroke and slew him in the seven Al
those that were in the camp chose their general to be their king and prevailed
therein: though an other half of Israel chose and followed an other for a time.
al Israel made Amri their king, who was General of the warfare over Israel
that day, in the camp. Amri therefore Thebni being then dead he reigned
peaceably* for he began his reign the 27. year of Asa. ^. 15. and 16. and
reigned in all 12. years.
the one and thirteth year of Asa the king of before him. And he walked in all
the way of Jeroboam the When Hiel began to build Jericho, his eldest son
died* so the rest successively, that the last died when he finished the
building: because God by the mouth of Iosue had forbid the building thereof.
in Abiram Iosue. ^.


CHAP. XVII. Elias by his prayer ^hutteth the heaven from raining. 2. Is fed by
a crovv. 8 and by a widow of Sareptha. 13. whose pot of meal, and barrel
of oil diminishes not. 17. Her son dies, and is raised to life.
AND Elias the Thesbite of the inhabiters of Galaad said and flesh in the
morning, in like manner bread and flesh in the evening, and he drank of the
torrent. But after certain The Epistle (...) Teusday in the 2. weke of Lent.
earth. Therefore the word of our Lord came to him, saying: The epistle (...)
Friday in the 4. weke of Lent.
dress it for me and my son, that we may eat, and die. To whom Elias said:
fear not, but go, and do as thou:: To this question (says S. Augustine) the
prophet answered in spirit: No. For God killed not this child to afflict so
good a mother, but to confirm her in true religion and comfort her by raising
him from death. So Lazarus died not to remain dead, but to be raised to life,
for Gods more glory: Joan. 11. v. 4. S. Aug li. 2. q. 5. ad Simplicia.
oil be diminished until the day, wherein our Lord will give rain upon the face
of the earth. Who went and did according thee, return into his body. And our
Lord heard the voice

CHAP. XVIII. The third year of famine, Elias meeting the chief governor of
Achabs house, hardly persuades him totel Achab, that he is present. 17. Achab
blames Elias; but Elias freely avouches that not he, but Achab trubleth
Israel. 19. By a miracle four hundred and fifty falsprophetes are convinced,
40* and are slain. 41. Elias prays and it rayneth.
AFTER many days the word of our Lord came to Elias, Abdias adored Elias as
the prophet of God, and a holy man not with civil honor, for in the world
Abdias was the greater person nor with divine honor, for that had benne
idolatry. It was therefore religious honor, called dulia, due to spiritual
excellency of Gods servants.
fell on his face, and said: My lord, art not thou Elias? To whom not: and I
entering in shall tell Achab, and not finding thee, he will kill me: and thy
servant fears our Lord from his infancy. Has it not been told thee my
lord, what I did Such zealous expostulation is necessary to al Nentrals in
religion who are neither hoto nor cold, but luke vva^me. such as Angels detest
Apoc. 3.
How long halt you on two sides? If our Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal,
follow him. And the people did not answer him a word. And Elias said again or
is in his inn, or in the way, or at the least he slepeth, that he must be
waked. They cried therefore with a loud When miracles are attempted for trial
of the truth, the devils power is restrained, and only the truth is testified:
Our Lord vvorking ^^^thal, and confirming the doctrine with sig^^^ following.
(...). vlt.
that this people may learn, that thou art our Lord God, and thou have
converted their heart again. And the is nothing. And again he said to him:
Return seven times. And in the seventh time: Behold a little cloud as it were a

CHAP. XIX. Elias fleing Iezabel, in the desert eats a harth cake and
drinks water, brought by an Angel, and so goes forty days and nights
unto mount Horeb. 9. Lamenting that he alone is leist of the prophets of God.
15. God commands him to return to Damascus, and anoint Hazael king of Syria,
Iehu king of Israel, and Eliseus a prophet: 18. and tells him, there remain
seven thousand in Israel, which have not bowed to Baal.
AND Achab told Iezabel al things that Elias had done, for our Lord the God of
hosts* because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant: thy altars
have they destroyed, and thy prophets they have slain with the sword, and
Elias knew no other at that instant in the ten tribes, that were not
partakers in idolatry; but there were in deed seven thousand ( v. 18) that
bowed not their knees to Baal. And the whole kingdom of Judah observed true
religion, where Asa then reigned, and after him Iosaphat: both good kings,
chap. 15. v. 11. 22 v. 43. 2. Par. 15. and * 17.
I alone am leaft, and they seek my life to take it away. And he said Elias
prophesied that these two should be kings, and cast his cloak over Elizeus. v.
19. Elizeus declared to Hazael that he should be king. 4. Reg. 8. an other
prophet anointed Iehu. 4. Reg. 9.
shall anoint Hazael king over Syria, and Iehu the son of Namsi thou

CHAP. XX. The Syrians threatening and besieging Samaria, 13. God signifies by
a prophet to Achab, that he shall have the victory. 20. which he obtains. 23.
Also the second year fighting in the champaine. 31. ^ut saving the king of
Syrians life, and making league with him, 35. one of the children of the
prophets being slain, for not stryking when he was so commanded, 37. an other
denounces revenge to Achab, for not killing the Syrian King.
MOREOVER Benadad the king of Syria, gathered together:: Those that are girded,
and strongly armed do not wisely in trusting their own strength, and
contemning their adversaries: for by so doing they are often overthrown. And
those that distrusting them selves trust in God, one way or other always
prevail A necessary lesson, both in temporal and spiritual warfayre.
the girded glory as the vngirded. And it came to pass, behold, I will deliver
them into thy hand this day: that thou may know, that I am the Lord. And
Achab said: By whom? Thus says our Lord: Because the Syrians have said: The
Lord is God of the mountains, and is not God of the Valleis: I will give all this great multitude into thy hand, and Many victories and other benefits
were besi^wed upon Achab, to make him know God: but he co^temning them al
remained in his impiety, and finally was slain. chapter 22, v. 38.
you shall know that I am the Lord.) And seven days did these, and whiles I
being trubled turned hither and thither, suddenly he appeared not. And the king
of Israel said to him: This is thy judgment, which thy self have decreed. But
he forthwith Foolish pity in sparing a dangerous and common enemy is
offensi^^e to God, and severely punished by his justice.
Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man worthy to die, thy life shall
be for his life, and thy people for his people. The king of Israel therefore
returned into

CHAP. XXI. Naboth for denying his vineyard to King Achab, is by queen Iezabels
commandment, falsely accused, and stoned to death. 10. Achab hastening to
possess the vineyard, Elias the prophet threatens him many euiles. 23. and
no less to Iezabel* both being obstinate in sin. 27. Yet Achab for fear of
punishment, does external works of penance, and thereby escapes part of the
temporal plagues.
AND after these words, at that time Naboth the Iezrahelite If no subject were
lord of any land, but only at the kings pleasure and kings were proper lords
of all the lands in their kingdoms, then Achab might have taken Naboths
vinyard; especially giving him a better, or money for it. Neither was it a
vain scruple in Naboth, to conserve his ancesters inheritance. For both his
denial is here justified, and Achabs extortion co^^^mned. S. Ambrose li. 3.
offic. c. 9. counts Naboth a Martyr. See Annot. 1. Reg. 8.
I will give thee for it a better vineyard: or if thou think it more commodious
for thee, the price of silver, so much as it is worth. To whom Naboth answered:
She therefore wrote letters in the name of Achab, and To avoid horrore of
blasphemy holy scripture often uses the term blessing for cursing.
blessed God and the king: and bring him forth, and stone him, and so let him
die. His citizens therefore the ancientes and chief men, chap. 22. v. 38.
shall lick thy blood also. And Ahias: because thou have done, to provoke me to
anger, and have made Israel to sin. But of Iezabel also our Lord spoke, So
addicted to wickedness, as if he had sold him self to the devil for some
temporal profit or pleasure. In your iniquities you are sold. Isaiae. 50. S.
Aug. q. 102. ex vtro. test S. Greg. (...). 10. in Ezech.
was sold to do evil in the sight of our Lord: for his wife Iezabel set him
on, and he became abominable, in so much that he

CHAP. XXII. Achab King of Israel consulting and believing false prophets
rather then Micheas a true prophet, accompanied with Iosaphat king of Judah,
resolves to fight against the Syrians for Ramoth Galaad. 26. Commits
Micheas to prison, 29. proceeds to the war, 34. is slain, and Ochozias
saccedeth. 41. Iosaphat refuses to traffike longer with Ochozias; dies, and
his son Ioram reigns. 52. Ochozias follows the evil steps of his parents.
THERE passed therefore three years without war The godly King Iosaphat
justly suspecting the schismatical s^^^e prophets, advised the other King to
co^sult a true prophet of God.
Is there not here some prophet of our Lord, that we may ask by him? And the
king of Israel said to Iosaphat: There is one man Falls prophets imitate true
prophets in some exterior things, to make their prophecies seem more
authentical. Such horns appeared in a prophetical vision to Zachary the
prophet. Zach. 1. v 18.
horns of iron, and said: Thus says our Lord: With these shall thou strike
Syria, til thou destroy it. And all the prophets in like manner prophesied, The
prophet gives not this for a resolute answer, but seeing the king will go, he
prays he may go prosperously. And the king conceiueth no otherwise of his
answer, and therefore urges him to answer resolutly in the next words. I
adjure thee etc.
Ascend, and go prosperousely, and our Lord will deliver it into the kings
hands. But the king said to him: I adjure thee again and will go forth, and
be a lying spirit in the mouth of al his prophets. And our Lord said: Thou
shall deceive, and shall prevail: The coherence of the text shows that God
only permitted, but commanded not the devil to deceive Achab. So S. Augustine.
li. 2. q. vlt. ad Simplic. S. Greg. li. 2. c. 21. Moral, and other fathers
explicate this and like places.:: When this false prophet heard that the king
was slain he hid him self, fearing the kings sons, that they would kill
him. Josephus li. 8. c. 14* Antiq.
go forth, and do so. Now therefore It happened by chance in respect of the
archers intention, but otherwise by Gods providence directing his hand. So
Achabs craftic persuading Iosaphat to put on his kingly attire. ( v. 30.) him
self fighting in vulgar armor, saved him not from just revenge.
by chance he stroke the king of Israel between the lunges and the stomach. But
he said to his cochere: Turn thy hand, and carry me out of the army, because
I am greuousely wounded. The battle therefore was fought that day, and in
Samaria, and washed his chariote in the poole of Samaria,

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FOVRTH BOOK OF KINGS.
THIS fourth book prosecuteth the history of the two Kingdoms of Judah and
Israel, to the several captiuities of them both. Showing many special virtues
and heroical acts of good Kings, Prophets, and other godly persons: and
diverse crimes of the wicked. For in Judah were some good kings, The kingdom of
Judah conserved in David's seed.
highly commended; some evil, whom God spared in this world for David's sake. So
that in both sorts King David's seed continued in his throne, and royal state
(first in the twelve tribes, afterward in two) nere four hundred fourscore
years. And after the captivity (as will appear in the age ensuing) it was
conserved in honor and estimation, til Christ our Savior. But in the Many
royal families begu^ne and destroyed in the kingdom of Israel.
Kingdom of Israel (or ten tribes) which stood about two hundred fifty
years, was great change, by raising and extirpating royal families. Al their
kings were bad, yet partly were set up by God himself, partly suffered to
reign; and in both Kingdoms, were true and false prophets, God using the
ministry of al, to his own glory, the good of his Church, and punishment of
others, and sometimes of themselves. So this book may be divided into two This
book divided into two parts.
parts. In the seuentene former chapters, are recorded jointly and mixtly the
principal things done in both kingdoms, til the captivity of the ten
tribes. The other eight chapters contain other things done in Judah, until
their captivity in Babylon.

THE FOVRT BOOK OF KINGS: ACCORDING TO THE HEBREWS, THE SECOND OF MALACHIM.
CHAP. I. Ochozias King of Israel consulting Beelzebub, for his sickness, is
blamed by Elias, and fortold, that he shall die. 9. Fire from heaven deuoureth
two capitaines with each of them fifty men. 13. The third by his more modesty
escapes the like danger, 15. With him Elias comes to the King. 17. The same
King dies, and his brother Ioram succedeth.
AND Moab moved war against Israel, after that The first part. Of things
done in both kingdoms, with the declination and ^^ine of Israel.
^chab was dead. And Ochozias fell through the an Angel of our Lord spoke to
Elias the Thesbite, saying: Arise, and go up to meet the messengers of the
king of Samaria, and thou shall say to them: What is there not a God in Israel,
that ye go to consult Beelzebub the god of Accaron* Wherefore thus says our
Lord: From the bed on Elias was known by his much hair, and distinct habit,
from ordinary men.
It is Elias the Thesbite. And he In zele of justice Elias procured fire from
heaven to burn these proud capitaines and their men, as he procured fire to
burn the holocaust, and then ^lew the falsprophetes. 3. Reg. 18. apud. Aug.
li. 2. c. 20. de mirabil. ^. Script.
let fire come down from heaven, and devour thee, and thy fifty. Fire
therefore came down from heaven, and devoured him and the fifty men that were
with him. And he sent again down with him to the king, and spoke to him: Thus
says

CHAP. II. Eliseus will not part from Elias. 7. Fifty disciples follow them to
Jordan. 8. The water is divided by Elias cloak, and they two pass the dry
chanel, 9. Elias is assumpted in a fiery chariote, and his duble spirit is
given to Eliseus, 13. Who returning by like miraculous means over Jordan, the
disciples receive and honor him as their religious Superior. 16. They seek
Elias, but find him not. 19. Eliseus amendeth the waters by casting in salt.
23. Boys are torn by bear^s for mocking Eliseus.
AND it came to pass, when our Lord would take up air or lovver heaven.
heaven, Elias and Eliseus went from Galgal. And Elias said to Eliseus: Sit
here,:: VVhither Elias was carried being taken up into the air, is uncertain:
but certain that he yet lives, and must dye As S. Augustine teaches. li. 9.
c. 6. de Genesis ad lit. See Annot. in Genesis 6 and Apocalip. 11.
leave thee. And when he was come down to Bethel, the followed them, who also
stood over against them, far of: but they two stood upon Jordan. And Elias
took his mantel, He desired not duble spirit to his master, but the duble
spirit of prophesying, and of working miracles, which Elias had. v. ^5.
thy duble spirit. who answered: Thou have asked a They adored him for his ho
lines, and because God had given him the spirit of so great a prophet, not for
wordlie, but spiritual excel lencie, and therefore not with civil but religious
honor.
adored him flat to the ground, and they said to him: Behold, there are with
thy death shall no more be in them, nor barrenness. The waters

CHAP. III. Ioram king of Israel accompianed with the kings of Judah and Edom,
fights against the king of Moab, for not paying tribute according to their
league. 9. wanting waters. 16. Eliseus procures sufficient without rain: and
prophecieth victory. 21. The king of Moab deceived by a vision is overthrown
in the field. 26. then being besiged immolateth his first begotten son: and
the Israelites leave the siege.
AND Ioram the son of Achab reigned over Israel in together, that he might
deliver us into the hands of Moab. And Iosaphat said: Is there not here a
prophet of our Lord, It was forbi^* Deuteronomy. 20. to cut down fruict trees in the
land of Chanaan, which the Israelite should possess, but the land of Moab
perteyned not to them and ^o^ was ^ot prohibited to an^y that country upon
just offense.
shall cut down al fruiteful trees, and shall stop up al fountains of waters,
and every goodly field you shall cover with stones. It came to pass therefore
destroyed the cities: and every principal field they filled every man casting
stones: and they stopped up all the fountains of waters: and cut down al trees
that bare fruit, so that there remained only brike walls: and the city was
besette of the slingers, and for a great part thereof was strooken. Which

CHAP. IIII. Eliseus so multiplieth a poor widows oil, that she pays her
debtes, and lives of the rest. 8. By his prayers a Sunamite Woman has a
son. 18. which dying he rayseth to life. 38. He takes away the bitterness of
coloquintida, which by chance was put in the pot, 42. and feeds many with
few loaves.
AND a certain woman of the wives of the prophets The Epistle on Teusday in
the third weke of Lent.
and thou know that thy servant was one that feared God, and behold the
creditour is come to take away my two sons to serve him. To whom Eliseus
said: What will thou that said to her husband: I perceive that this is a holy
man of God, which passes by us often. bet us therefore make him The Epistle on
Thursday in the 4. weke of Lent.
that which I command thee. She therefore went forward, and about thy son? Who
answered: Well. And when she God sent his law by his servant, and it auailed not
to mankind dead in sins. But he coming and accommodating himself to our
infirmity, participating our death we are quicned So S Augusting mystically
applies this figurative miracle to Christ and his Church li. 1^. c. ^5. cont.
Fast. Manich and manielike things of the old Testament he shows to be
figures of the new.
The child is not risen. Eliseus therefore went into the house, and behold the
child lay dead on his bed: and going in he shut there was no more any
bitterness in the pot. And a certain

CHAP. V. Naaman the general captain of Syria is cleansed of deprosie, by
washing him self as Eliseus appoints him seven times in ^oraan. 15.
professes his bell of in one God promising to serve him. 20. Giezi takes
gifts of Naaman, 25. and is stricken with leprosy.
NAAMAN the General of the warfare of the king of The Epistle on Monday in the
3* weke of Lent.
Syria, was a great man with his lord, and honorable: for by him our Lord gave
health to Syria: and he was a valiant man and rich, but a leper. Moreover out
of Syria there know that there is a prophet in Israel. Naaman therefore In
respect of Gods special electing and sa^ctifying the land of Chanaan, by his
true religion, Naaman rightly esteemed that earth fitter for an altar then the
earth of his own country.
the earth the burden of two mules: for thy servant will no more make holocaust,
or victimes to strange gods, but to the Lord. But this only is it, for which
thou shall beseech the Giezi prefigured Judas the false Apostle of Christ* and
al those that buy or sell spiritual things for money who by their avarice lose
Gods grace, and gain infamy in this world, and eternal damnation in the next.
S. Aug. ser. 208. de tempore.
Giezi the servant he said: Well. my master has sent me to thee, saying: Even
now there are come to me two young men from mount Ephraim, of the children of
the prophets: give them a talent of silver, and two change of raiment. And
Naaman said: It is better

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. V.
19 Go in peace.] Shcismatiques, as they are commonly (but improperly) now
called in England, which being in mind and judgment Catholics, go The case
of going to heretical service, and Naamans going to the temple of an idol
differ in diverse respects. Difference of times.
sometimes to Protestants common prayers, or ^^^mons, draw an excuse of their
fact, from this warrant of the Prophet, permitting a Nobleman of Syria to go
and serve his king in the temple, when he adored an Idol. But whosoever will
duly consider this example, shall find great difference in respect of the times,
places, persons, and of the very doubts proposed, between this man's case and
ours. For before Christ's Gospel was promulgate, neither al Articles of faith
were so expressly taught, nor the external profession thereof so strictly
commanded, as now they are in time of more grace, which gives more aid to
man's weakness, wherein also more perfection is required, and therefore our Savior
exacteth of al to confess him, and his Religion, before men: else he vvil deny
them before his Father. Likewise in the place* where this Nobleman dwelt, his
Mat. 10.
presence in the temple, and service to the king, could not be accounted a
revolt from true religion, which was never professed there, nor be scandalous
to any Of places.
man being al Infidels: but in a christian country; where al bear the name of
Christians, especially where men are at controversy about the true Christian
religion, all that frequent, or repair to the same assemblies, for public
service of God, are reputed to be of the same religion; or else dissemblers, as
it were to have no care of religion, knowing God, and not glorifying him as
God. Romans 1. 2. Pet. 1.
and reuolting from the truth which they had learned. The difference also of
persons Of persons.
is great. For this Nobleman having before his conversion served his king, in
the office of sustayning him, when he bowed to the Idol, if he should have
refused to do the same, it would rather have been supposed, that he disdained
his Master, or showed disloyalty, then thought, that he refrayned for
religion: whereas in our case, very few do such temporal service, about the
king in the church: and such as do carry the sword, scepter, or the like, are
accounted of that religion, which is there practiced; except they manifest the
contrary, as this man did, and our men commonly do not. Yea if any do say
they are Catholics, and yet go to the Protestants church, they are counted
of that rank, S. Paul speaks of, which confess they know God, but deny him
in their deeds. Tit. ^.
And those which refuse such an office, can not be judged disloyal, because it
The things demanded differ much.
is sufficiently known, that Catholics refuse of mere conscience. An other
most especial difference is in the things demanded. This Syrian promising
expressly before the Prophet, and his own great train, that he would never
again serve false gods, and that he would serve the only true God, and for
that purpose carried earth with him, to make an Altar for Sacrifice, and
returning home preached the miracle wrought in himself, desired not to do any
thing, whereby he might seem to serve an Idol: but that when the king leaning
upon D. ^^istous Motiuo. 23.
him, should adore Remmon, he might bow with his master, not adoring the Idol,
for he resolved and promised the contrary, but adoring God Almighty, in whom
now he believed. And this the Prophet approved, in that time, place, and person
to be lawful. But those that now in England go to Protestants Personal
presence at heretical service in England, a distinctiue sign of conformity to
heresy.
service, or sermons, do neither publikly renounce al heresies, not profess to
frequent Mass, the true Sacrifice of the Christian Church, nor avouch the
erecting of an Altar, but go to church, to show them selves obedient to the
Parliament law, which abandoned the true Divine Service, and in place thereof
appointed and commanded al to be present, at a new form of common prayer,
thereby making it a distinctiue sign of conformity, and participation in that
religion, which these dissemblers in their consciences know to be false.

This example therefore does in no sort warrant their going to the heretical
church: but contrariwise admonishes al to take resolution in our case (as
Naaman did in his) of our Eliseus, or spiritual Superior, and if he should say:
Go in peace, then might they plead an excuse, but he says: None can go
without incurring grievous sin, and eternal damnation The case being so much
different from Naamans. It is in deed more like to that of Eleazatus, and
other Machabees, who were commanded by eating svvines flesh, to depart from the
law of A case very like to ours
2. Machab. ^. 7.
God, and their fathers. Which by no means was lawful to do, nor to make
show of doing it, but rather to dye, as they did most gloriously.

CHAP. VI. Eliseus makes iron to swim upon the water: 8. leads the king of
Syria his men (sent to apprehend him) blindly into Samaria. 20. where their
eyes being opened, they are curtously entertained, and freely dismissed. 24.
The Syrians besiege Samaria. 26. For extreme famine a mother eats her child.
31. And the king commands to kill Eliseus.
AND the children of the prophets said to Eliseus: Behold come. And he went
with them. And when they were His grief was g^^ it, because he ha^ not means
to recompense the loss to the owne^.
did borow. And the man of God said: where A husband* man, in yorkshire called
Ketle had the gift to see evil spirits, whereby he often detected and (...)red
their ^ad purposes. ^^^. brig. li. ^. c. (...)* Rer. Anglic.
he behold: and lo the mountain full of horses, and of fiery chariotes round
about Eliseus. But the enemies went down were entered into Samaria, Eliseus
said: Lord open the eyes of these men, that they may see. And our Lord opened
their eyes, and they saw them selves to be in the mids of Samaria. And the
king of Israel said to Eliseus, when he had seen By bread and water is
understood ordinary meat and drinck. v. 2^.
set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to
their master. And a great preparation of meats

CHAP. VII. Eliseus prophecieth plenty of corn the next day, and death to a
chief man that will not believe it. 3. Four Lepers going to yield themselves to
the Syrians, 6. who by Gods providence are frighted and fled away, 9. bring
news thereof to Samaria, 12. which by trial is found true, 16. And so there is
plenty of corn, and the incredulous nobleman is trod to death, with press of
multitude in the gate, as the prophet fortold.
AND Eliseus said: Hear ye the word of our Lord: Thus Discourse of man's reason
can not reach to the power of God, who can do all that he will, and will do all that he says: therefore the incredulous are justly punished. v. 20.
can that possibly be which thou speak? Who said: Thou shall see it with
thine eyes, and shall not eat thereof. There were court. And when they were
come to the gate of the city,

CHAP. VIII. After seven years famine fortold by Eliseus, the Sumanite Woman
returning home, recouereth her lands and revenues. 7. Eliseus forsheweth the
death of Benadad king of Syria, and cruel reign of Hazael. 16. Ioram reigning
in Judah, the Idumeans revolt from him. also Lobna. 23. He dies, and his son
Ochozias succeeds.
AND Eliseus spoke to the woman, whose son he restored This was true in some
sense, sickness ending when death came.
Thou shall be healed: but our Lord has showed me that dying he shall die. And
from Eliseus, came to his master, who said to him: What said Eliseus to thee?
But he answered: He told me: Thou shall recover health. And when the next day
was come, he took Athalia v. 26. is called the daughter of Amri. Wherefore it
seems that either she was the adopted daughter of her brother Achab, or is
there called the daughter of her grandfather.
the daughter of Achab was his wife: and he did that which is evil in the sight
of our Lord. But our Lord would not destroy Judah,

CHAP. IX. Iehu is anointed king of Israel, 7. to destroy the house of Athab
and Iezabel. 14. He presently kills Ioram king of Israel, 27. Likewise
Ochozias king of Judah. 30. also Iezabel, who is eaten by dogs.
AND Eliseus the prophet called one of the children of trumpet, and said: Iehu
has the kingdom. Iehu therefore When Naboth was falsely accused and unjustly
stoned to death, as if he had bla^phe med God, and cursed the king, for his
pretended crimes, his sons were also slain, and his lands and goods con^^^
^ate: which appea^eth by the kings present going to posie^^e the vinyard. 3.
Reg^ 21.
for the blood of his children, which I saw yesterday, says our Lord, I
requi^e thee not in this field says our Lord. Now therefore take him, and throw
him into the field according to

CHAP. X. The Samaritanes fearing the force of Iehu, choose no other king, but
offer him their service: 6. and by his commandment kill the late kings seventy
sons. 12. Forty two brothers of Ochazias late king of Judah are slain. 15.
Iehu making league with Ionadab, utterly destroys Achabs house. 18. by a
stratagem kills all the worshippers of Baal, 26. burns his statua, and
turns his temple into a iakes: 28. but maintains Ieroboams golden calves.
32, The Asyrians afflict Israel. 34. Ieh^ dies, and his son Ioachaz reigns*
AND Achab had seventy sons in Samaria: Iehu therefore the cabin, two and
forty men, and he leaft not any of This Ionadab instituted a peculiar rule of
religious abstinence: which his posterity duly ob* served. I^^^m. 35.
Ionadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him, and he blessed him. And he
said to him: Is thy heart right as my heart with thy heart? And Ionadab said: It
is. If it be so, quoth he, g^ue me thy hand. Who gave him his hand. But he
lifted him up to Iehu sinned in feaning, and causing others to sacrifice to
Baal, his zele wanting both diseretion and equity for evil must not be done
that good may come thereof. Romans 3.
I will worshipe him more. but yet from the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nabat, ^oral good works done in state of mortal sin not meriting eternal
life, a^e often rewarded temporally. S. Aug. cont. ^en^. c. 2.
Because thou have diligently done that which was right, and that pleased in
mine eyes, and have done al things that were in my heart, against the house of
Achab: thy children shall sit upon the throne of Israel to the fourth
generation. Moreover Iehu observed not to walk

CHAP. XI. Athalia killing all the kings progeny (except loas, who is saved by
his aunt) usurps the kingdom. 4. But the seventh year Ioiada the high
priest crowns loas king. 13. causes Athalia to be slain, 17. and makes
covenant between God, the king, and the people.
BUT Athalia the mother of Ochozias seeing her son Ambition cause of much
cruelty.
slew all the kings seed. But Iosaba Our Savior calls this high priest,
Zacharias; which signifies blessed of our Lord, for the justice which he did
toward Athalia and Ioas. S. ^^^rom. li. 4. in Math. c. 23.
Ioiada sent and of you go in on the Sabbath, and keep the watch of the
kings house. And let a third part be at the gate Sur: and let a third part be
at the gate behind the dwelling of the shildebearers: and you shall keep the
watch of the house of Messa. But let two parts of you all that go forth on the
Sabbath, Great respect is to be had of holy places. VVherof comes the
privilege of Sanctuaries.
not be slain in the temple of our Lord. And and Phelethi, and all the people
of the land, and they brought the king from the house of our Lord: and they
came by the way of the gate of the shildebearers into the palace, and he sat
upon the throne of the kings. And all the people of

CHAP. XII. Ioas wills the priests to repair what needs in the temple,
receiving all the money offered there. 6. which they not performing, the high
priest provides that al is amended, 16. the priests receiving only the money
due to themselves. 17. Hazael king of Syria taking Geth, and threitning
Jerusalem is pacified with money. 19. Ioas is traitarously slain by his
servants, and his son Amasias reigns.
IN the seventh year of Iehu reigned Ioas: and he reigned That is, the
ordinary ob lation for each particular person. Exodus 30.
price of a soul, and which of their own accord, and of their own free heart
they bring into the temple of our Lord: let the priests take it according to
their order, and maynteine a chest or alm^s box^.
a treasury, and kings scribe, and the high priest went up, and powered it
out, and counted the money, that was found in the house of our Lord: and they
gave it according to number and measure Dedicated to helie use.
consecrated, and which him self had offered: and all the silver, that could be
found in the treasures of the temple of our Lord, and in the kings palace: and
sent it to Hazael the king of Syria, and he retired from Jerusalem. But the
rest of the words of Ioas, and al He was buried in the city but not in the
sepulcher of the kings. 2 Paral. 24. for his impiety in the latter part of
his life.
the city of David, and Amasias his son reigned for him.

CHAP. XIII. Ioachaz King of Israel is afflicted by the Syrians, 4. and
delivered. 6. Yet destroys not idolatry. 8. dies, and his son Ioas
follows his evil steps. ^4. Eliseus being sick wills the king to shoot,
18. and to strike the earth, who striking thrice, is told that he shall thrice
strike the Syrians. 20. Eliseus dies, and a dead men is revived touching his
bones. 22. Ioas recouereth that which the Syrians ^ad taken from Israel.
IN the three and twenteth year of Ioas the son of Ochozias to him, and wept
before him, and said: My father, my father, the chariote of Israel and the
garder thereof. And Eliseus It was reueiled to the prophet that so often as the
king should strike the earth, so often he should have victories against the
Syrians, but not how often he would strike on the* earth.
If thou had stricken five or six or seven times, thou had stricken Syria
even to destruction: but now three times shall thou strike it. Eliseus therefore
died, and they buried

CHAP. XIIII. Amasias king of Iudakilleth those that had slain his father; 7.
and strikes Edom. 8. Provoking Ioas king of Israel to war, receives a
contemtible answer: 11. provoking again is beaten in battle, and Jerusalem is
ransact. 15. Ioas dies and his son Jeroboam follows the bad steps of the
first Jeroboam; yet recouereth many places lost before* and dying his son
Zacharias reigns.
IN the second year of Ioas the son of Ioachaz the king Deuteronomy. (...)*
children, neither shall the children die for the fathers: but every one shall
die in his own sin. He smote Edom in Amongst kings being at variance, Seeing
one an other imports, as much as to fight a battle.
let us see one an other. And Ioas the king of Israel sent Amasias the king of
Judah, are not these things written in the Book of the words of the days of
the kings of Israel? And ^^^^. 1.
Amathi, the prophet* who was of Geth, which is in Opher. For our Lord saw the
afliction of Israel exceeding bitter,

CHAP. XV. Azarias begins well, 4. afterward (for offering incense on the
altar* 2* Paralip. 26.) is strooken with leprosy, cast out of the temple, and
from conversation weth the people, his son Ioathan ruling the kingdom. 8.
Sellum kills Zacharias king of Israel and reigns in his place. 14. After
one month Manahem kills Sellum and reigns also Wickedly. 19. Makes league
With the Syrians. 22. dies and his son Phaceia reigns. 25. Phacee kills
him, and reigns. 29. The Assyrians spoil the country, and carry away many
captives. 30. Osee kills Phacee and reigns. 32. In the mean time Ioathan
regning in Judah is infested With enemies. 38. dies, and his son Achaz
reigns.
IN the seven and twenteth year of Jeroboam the king Otherwise called Ozias.
2. Paral. 26. Mat. 1.
Azarias the son of Amasias the king of Judah. He was sixtene years old, when
he began to This punishment was inflicted upon him, for his presumption to
offer ince^se on the altar. 2. Paralip. 26.
a He was buried honorably in the city of David, that is, nere to the walls,
but in the filde, because he was a leper even to his death. 2. Paral. 26.
in the city of David, and Ioathan his son reigned for him. In the eight and
thirteth and slew him, and reigned for him. But the rest of the words Some men
of Ruben, Gad, Manasses, and Nepthali, were carried captives into Assyria.
took Aion, and Abel the house of Maachat and Ianoe, and Cedes, and Asor, and
Galaad, and Galilee, and all the land of Nepthali: and transported them unto the
Assyrians. And Osee the son of Ela conspired, and lay in Otherwise called
Azarias. ^. 1.
Ozias. But the rest of the words of

CHAP. XVI. Achaz king of Judah besides other idolatry, sacrifices his own
son to idols. 5 The kings of Israel and Syria besiegeing Jerusalem, the
Assyrians are hired to releue it. 10. Achaz causes Vrias to make an altar like
to one in Damascus, 14. in place of Gods altar: 17. remoueth diverse other
things perteyning to divine service, 19. dies, and his son Ezechias reigns.
IN the seuenteth year of Phacee the son of Romelia also victimes, and burnt
incense in the excelses, and on the hills, and under every tree full of green
leaves. Then things, which king Achaz had commanded him. And king the great
vessel.
sea from the oxen of brass, that held it up, and put it upon the pauement
paued with stone. The the place where the king offered.
Musach also of the Sabbath, which he

CHAP. XVII. Salmanazar king of Assyrians makes Osee king of Israel
tributarie, and perceuing his endeavor to be delivered thereof, imprisoneth him;
after three years siege takes Samaria, and carries the people captive into
Assiria. 7. Al which God permits for diverse great sins here recited. 25.
The new inhabitants of the country not knowing God, are devoured by lions.
Whereupon a true priest is sent to instruct them. 29. but they lerning the
rites of true religion do mixed the same with idolatry.
IN the twelfth year of Achaz king of Judah, reigned Osee the children of
Israel, and of the kings of Israel: because they had done in like manner. And
the children of Israel offended That is, consequently they did provoke him* as
3. R^g* 14. v. 9.
that they might provoke him. And our all the sins of Jeroboam, which he had
done: and they departed not from them, until our Lord took away Israel Not
truly worshipped but made show to worship. For true worship of God admits
not worship of any false god. ^* 34.
worshipped them, saying: Fear not strange gods, and adore them not, neither
worship them, and immolate not to them. But the

CHAP. XVIII. Ezechias destroys al places of idolatry in Judah, breaking also
the brazen serpent, made by Moses, because the people offered incense to it.
9. The captivity of the ten tribes is repeted. 13. Ezechias not able to resist
the Assyrians pays much money to them. 17. They nevertheless send forces
against Jerusalem, reproach the king, blaspheme God, and terrify the people.
IN the third year of Osee the son of Ela king of Israel, The second part.
Acts of other kings til the captivity of Judah.
This image of a serpent not only when it wrought miraculous health, but also
long after was worthily reserved in memory of the benefit: but when the
people offered sacrifice unto it, which is proper to God only, good Ezechias
did laudably break it And to show that there was no deity in it: called it
Nohestan, that is, a piece of brass. And so in the Catholic Church when any
holy Relic or Image is abused, it is taken away, or theerrour otherwise
corrected. See. S. Aug. li. 10. ^. 8. ciuit. Ser. 4 de verb. Apost. and 101. de
temp.
burnt incense to it: and he called the name thereof a piece of brass.
Nohestan. He trusted in our Lord the God of Israel: therefore Assyrians, and
served him not. He stroke the Philisthians or recorder.
register, And Rabsaces said to them: Speak of Egypt, to all that have
confidence in him. But, if you He sasly adds of his own that he should
destroy it. For Isaias prophesied the contrary, that the Assyrians camp
should be destroyed* Isa^e. 37. and so it came to pass. chapter 19. v. 35. 2.
Pharal 32.
and destroy it. And Eliacim the son Paganes and Heretics are foolish and
impudent to compare their false gods and phancies with God almighty and
Cathelique Religion.
Did the gods of Nations deliver have delivered their country out of my
hand, that the Lord can deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? The people therefore

CHAP. XIX. Ezechias in affliction requesteth the prayers of Isaias the
prophet. 6. who assures him of Gods help. 8. The king of the Assyrians still
threatens and blasphemeth. 15. Ezechias prays, 20. and God hearing the
prayers of the one, and blasphemies of the other, 28. promises to protect
Jerusalem. 35. An Angel in one night kills an hundred fourscore and five
thousand of the Assyrians camp, their king returns to Niniue, is there
slain by two of his own sons, and an other son reigns in his place.
WHICH things when Ezechias the king had heard, Behold, he is come forth to
fight against thee: and went against him, he sent messengers to Ezechias,
saying: Say Before the Arc and Propitiatory being the special place of prayer.
before our Lord, and prayed in his sight, saying: Though many in the kingdom
of Judah sell to ido lattie, yet in respect of the rest publikly professing true
faith and religion the Church is still called a virgin and despiceth and
idolaters blasphemers, and false gods.
virgin daughter of Sion has despised thee, and scorned thee: Behind thy
back has the daughter of Jerusalem wagged her head. Whom have entered into
the borders thereof, and the forest of the A pleasant hill in the forest.
carmel thereof have I cut down. And I have drunk strange waters,

CHAP. XX. Ezechias being sick is told by Isaias that he shall die: but praying
to God obtayneth fiftenne years longer life, 8. and in confirmation thereof
receives a sign in Achaz dial, returning back ten lines. 12. To the
A^yrians bringing him presents, he shows al his treasures. 16. which Isaias
reproving prophecieth the captivity of Judah. 20. Ezechias dies, and his son
Manasses reigns.
IN those days Ezechias was sick even to death: and Isaie If these ten lines
importe so many houses, then the dial going forwards again, by like degrees,
this day was increased by twenty hours, and so was longer then that in which
Iosue procured stay of the sun the space of one day, to wit of twelve
hours. Iosue. 10. as S. Dyonise thinks. Epist: ad Pol^carp: See Glossa erd:
in Iosue.
the lines, by the which it was now gone down in the dial of Achaz, backward
ten degrees. In that time Berodach Baladan, the son of And Ezechias reioysed
in their coming, and he showed

CHAP. XXI. For the enormious impiety of Manasses, 10. God threatens
destruction of the kingdom. 16. He spilleth innocent blood, 18. dies, and his
senne Amon reigns also wickedly: 23. is slain by his servants, and his
son Josias reigns.
TWELVE years old was Manasses, when he began to And he built altars in the
house of our Lord, of the which the Jews sinned more grievously reuolting from
the Law of God and contemning the admonitions of holy prophets, then the
nations that had neither law nor prophets to instruct them.
above the Nations, which our Lord destroyed before the face of the children of
Israel. And our Lord God still preserved some in true religion, though they also
suffered tribulations with the wicked for the general sins of the king and
people. Psalm. 88. v. 35. Yea this king Manasses in captivity became virtuous
and recovered his kingdom. 2, Pacalip. 33.
But I will leave remnantes of mine inheritance, and will his fathers, and was
buried in the garden of his house, in the garden of Oza: and Amon his son
reigned for him. Two and twenty years old was Amon when he began

CHAP. XXII. Josias repayreth the temple, and Divine service. 8. The book of
law is found 11. whereupon they consult our Lord, 15. and are foretold that much
evil shall fall upon them, 18. but the good king shall dye in peace.
EIGHT years old was Josias when he began to reign, he reigned one and
thirty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Idida, the daughter of
Hadaia of Besecath. And he did that which was liked before our Lord, and the
money which they receive be accounted to them, but let them have it in their
power, and upon their fidelity. And Within the second wall the city having
three walls. 3. Reg. 3.
second: and they spoke to her. And she heard it, says our Lord: therefore I
will gather thee to thy

CHAP. XXIII. Josias reading the law before the people, they al promise to
serve God. 4. Al things belonging to Idolatry are cast forth of the temple,
8. and other places of Judah. 15. He also destroys the altar in Bethel (not
removing the bones of a prophet) 19. and other altares in Samaria: kills the
false priests. 21. And makes a notorious great Pasch. 26. Yet God threatens
the captivity of Judah for their sins. 29. Josias is slain in battle by the
king of Egypt: and his son Ioachaz reigns. Who after three months is
deposed by the king of Egypt, and his brother Eliacim, henceforth called
Ioakim, made king.
AND they reported to the king that which she had said. which were in the house
of our Lord, for the which the women woue as it were little houses of the grove.
And he Because they had offered sacrific to false gods and in unlawful places
they were suspended from offering any more sacrifice at al.
of the excelses went not up to the ^* Reg. (...).
the idol of the Sidonians, and to Chamos the scandal of Moab, and to Melchom
the abomination of the children of Ammon, the king destroyed. And he brake in
pieces the 3. Reg: 13.
Lord, which the man of God spoke, who had foretold these things. And he said:
What title is that, which I see? And the Let him alone, let no man move his
bones. And his bones remained untouched with the bones of the prophet, that
came out of Samaria. Moreover all the temples of the excelses, Josephus writes
that this godly king gave thirty thousand lambs and kiddes to the poor
people for their Pasch and three thousand oxen for Holocaustes. The priests
also and Levites added more of their own. li. 10. Antiq. c. 5.
there was not such a Phase made from the days of the Judges, which judged
Israel, and of all the days of the kings of Israel, and of the kings of Judah,
as in the eightenth Albeit Manasses repented, and was restored to Gods favor,
and to his kingdom. 2. Paral. 3. Yet his sins were temporally punished, both
in himself, and his posterity.
Manasses had provoked him. Our Lord therefore he reigned three (...) in
Jerusalem: the name of his mother was A(...)* the daughter of Jeremy of Lobna.
And

CHAP. XXIIII. Ioakim serves the king of Babylon three years. 2. Many rouers
infest his country. 5. He dies, and his son Ioachim reigns 10. The king
of Babylon carries king Ioachim, and all the chief persons, and treasures into
Babylon, 17. appointing Matthanias, whom he names Sedecias, king of Judah. 20.
Who reuol^eth from the king of Babylon.
IN his days came up Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, the kings of Judah?
And Ioakim Not dying in peace, for he was slain by Nabuchodonosor, Josephus
li. 10. c. 8. Ant. And his body was cast out of the city, according as
Jeremy prophesied c. 22. with the burial of an ass shall he be buried* etc.
slept with his fathers: and In this he greuosly offended having sworn to
serve him And therefore Ezechiel c. 1^. fortelleth the misery that will fall upon
him. shall he that broke covenant escape? etc.
revolted from the king of Babylon.

CHAP. XXV. Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon beseiging Jerusalem two years, the
souldiars pressed with famine flee away. King Sedecias also flees, 5. is taken
and brought before Nabuchodonosor. 7. Al his sons are slain in his sight:
his eyes are put out, and he is carried into Babylon: the Temple, the kings
palace, and other houses burned; the walls destroyed, the people carried
captive 12. except poor husbandmen. 13. Al vessel of brass, silver, and gold
broken and transported. 18. Saraias high priest, and other principal men are
slain* 22. Godolias made gouernernour, 25. is slain by Ismael. 27. Ioachin is
delivered from prison, and exalted by a new king of Babylon.
AND it came to pass in the ninthe year of his reign, Certain falsprophetes
persuaded the king and the people not to believe the prophets, which forwarned
them of these calamites, because (said they) they contradicte one an other,
Jeremy saying ( ^h* 32. and 34.) the eyes of Sedecias should see the eyes of
Nabuchodonosor, and should be led into Babylon: and Ezechiel saying ( c. 12. v.
13.) that he should not see Babylon.
put out his eyes, and bound him with cheynes, and Both saying most truly: for
he was carried thither after his eyes were put out. Josephus. li. 10. Antiq. c.
10.
brought him into Babylon. The fifth month, the seventh day of the month,
king of Babylon, and the rest of the common people. And of There was so exceeding
much, that they well could not, or did not weigh it.
no weight of the brass of all the vessels. One pillar it came to pass in the
seventh month, there came Ismahel the son of Nathanias, the son of Elisama
of the kings seed, and ten men with him: and stroke Godolias, who also died:
yea the Jews also and the Chaldees, that were with him in Maspha. And all the
people rising up from little to great, By Gods special providence king Ioachin
(other wise called Iechonias. 2. Par. 3. and Mat. 1.) is exalted, and set over
all the Jews; unto whom others succeed in like authority. and so is fulfilled
the prophecy of Jacob. Genesis 49. The scepter shall not be taken from Judah, nor a
duke of his thiegh til he come that is to be sent.
lifted up the head of Ioachin the king of Judah out of prison. And he spoke
unto him courteously:

THE ARGUMENT OF PARALIPOMENON.
PARALIPOMENON, that is, A supplement of things ommitted, called by the
Hebrews Dibre haiamim, The words of the The signification of the name; and
the contents of this book.
days, or Chronicle, is an Abridgement briefly showing, besides diverse other
genealogies, from the beginning of the world, the faith and religion both of
the progenitors, and ofspiring of the Patriarch Jacob, whose progeny God chose
and made his peculiar people; and in that nation more particularly recounting
the Acts of king David, and other kings of his line, til they were led
captive into Babylon. A book of such and so great importance (says S.
Hierom.) as whosoever without it arrogateth the knowledge Epist. ad Paulin.
of Scriptures, may mock himself. The author is uncertain, but probably it
seems to be gathered by Esdras, out of other books and traditions, for the
perfecting of the old Testament: and is undoubtedly canonical Scripture. In
hebrew it is al one book, but being large, is with the Divided into two books.
Greeks and Latins parted into two. And the first book may be divided into
three principal parts. The first nine chapters conteyne diverse genealogies;
first by the only right line from Adam to Noe, then by diverse lines of Noes The
first book into three parts*
progeny, but most specially of Jacobs twelve sons. In the tenth chapter the
reiection, and death of king Saul is repeted. The other ninetene chapters are
al of David; to wit, of his election to be king, and inunction, his virtues,
his faults also, and his special acts, concerning Gods service, government of
the people; and provision made for building Gods Temple.

THE FIRST BOOK OF PARALIPOMENON. IN HEBREW, DIBRE HAIAMIM.
CHAP. I. The genealogy of Adam in the right line to Noe, and his three
sons, Sem, The first part. Genealogies partly of other progenies of Adam, but
specially of Jacobs issue.
Cham, and Iaphet. 5. The generations of Iaphet, 8. of Cham, 17. and of Sem.
24. The right line of Sem to Abraham. 26. Abraham's generations by the line of
Ismael, 32. by the sons of Cetura, 34. and by the line of Isaac; and his
son Esau; 43. with their kings, 51. and dukes.
ADAM, Adam had two other sons before Seth, but Cains race was utterly
extinguished by the flood, and Abel had no children.
Seth, Enos, Cainan, Malaleel, also, and Vsal, and Decla, Hebal also, and
Abimael, and As before the right line of Adam to Noe so here from his son Sem
to Abram.
Sem, Arphaxad, Sale, Heber For mystery sake God changed his name to Abraham.
Genesis 17.
Abraham. And the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Ismael. And Adad being dead,
there began to be dukes in Edom

ANNOTATIONS.
BECAUSE in diverse holy Scriptures, and especialy in these books of
Paralipomenon, many difficulties occur concerning diverse persons, and
places; as also Differences of names, numbers, and times, found in holy
scriptures, make them hard to be understood.
differences of numbers, and times; in reconciling whereof the holy Fathers and
Doctors have much labored, making sometimes large commentaries to satisfy
them selves, and other diligent searchers of the truth, and to remove the
obloquies of detractors from the authority of holy Scripture, whose learned
explications of such obscurities if we should cite, it would be over long, and
contratie to our purpose of brief Annotations; here once for often, we will
present to the vulgar reader, certain clear and ordinary rules, by which the
learned Divines do reconcile such apparent contradictions.

First, it is evident by sundry examples, that many persons, places, and some
Diverse means to reconcile seming contradictions in holy scriptures.
other things had diverse names, and so are sometimes called by one name,
sometimes by an other. Secondly (which is more common) many were called by the
same names, and so must be distinguished by the differences of times, places,
qualities, or other circumstances. Thirdly, in genealogies and other histories,
children are not always called the sons, or daughters of their natural 1.
parents, but sometimes of legal fathers; and sometimes also of those that 2.
Luc. 3.
adopted them for their children; and sometimes of their grandfathers, or 3.
former progenitors. Fourthly, sometime for mystery sake, an other number 4.
is expressed, being true in the mystical sense, differing from the precise
number according to the history. As in the genealogy of Christ the Evangelist
Mat. ^.
counts thrice fourtene generations from Abraham to our Savior, differing
from the history of the old Testament. Fifthly; even in the history it 5.
self, sometimes holy Scripture counts only the greater numbers, ommitting 6.
the lesser, and in some other adds also the odd numbers* Sixthly, the
Scriptures speak often by *tropes, as mentioning part for the whole, or the
whole for the part; so by the figure Synechdoche, Christ is said to have been
three days dead, that is, one whole day and part of other two. And some king
living or reigning so many years and part of an other, and his successor
reigning the other part, each part is countend to each of them for a whole
year, and so a year is added, more then is in the precise number. Seventhly,
sometimes the 7
sons reigned together with their fathers, as Ioathan reigned his father
Ozias yet living. 4. Reg. 15. and so both their reigns are sometimes counted,
sometimes their several years, as every one reigned alone. Eighthly. the times
of vacances, 8.
in the government of the Judges, reigns of kings, and the like, are
sometimes omitted in calculation, sometimes adjoined to the predecessor, or
successor. Ninthly, sometimes the holy Scripture mentions the only time that
9.
one lived or reigned well. as it were blotting out the rest with oblivion. So
Saul is said to have reigned two years (1. Reg 13.) Who well and evil reigned
much longer. Tenthly, by error in writing, words, names, and especially
numbers 10.
may easily* be changed, and can not easily be corrected. By these or other
like means, all the holy Scriptures may be defended, though none ought to
presume by his private spirit, to understand and expound al Sciptures; which
are Not private but public spirit of the Church expounder of holy Scripture.
hard not only by reason of their profound sense, surpassing man's natural
capacity, but also for that in outward appearance, sometimes there seem to be
contradictions, but in deed neither are, nor can be uttered by the Holy Ghost,
the Spirit of truth, Inditer of the whole sacred Bible. And therefore we must
rely 2. Pet. 1. v. 20.
upon Gods Spirit, speaking in his spouse the Church, commended unto us by
those Scriptures, whereof we are sufficiently assured.

CHAP II. The names of Isreal's twelve sons. 3. The geneologie of Judah, first
in the right line to David, the seventh son of Isai: 16. then other
genealogies of the same Judah.
AND the chidren of This patriarch first called Jacob signifying supp^ater was
afterward called Israel, that is, S^^ng God, or valient with God. Gen 35.
Israel: Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Judah, Either this man had two names, or there is
error in the last letter, here, or Iosue. 7.
Achar, who trubled Israel, and sinned in the theft of the anathema. The sons
of Ethan: Azarias. Otherwise called Cal^bi. v. 9.
Caleb the son of begat Iair, and possessed three and twenty cities in the
Land of Galaad. And he took Gessur, and Aram the towns of By sons as often
elsewhere, are vnstood nephews and other of spring.
the sons of Machir the father of Galaad. And when Hesron was dead: Caleb
went in to Ephrata. were the sons of Caleb, the son of Hur the
firstbegotten of Ephrata, Sobal the father of Cariathiarim. Salma the
dvvellings, or resting places.
restinges. and of the kindred of Valient men by whose help Ioab got victories
and triumphant crowns.
Crowns of the house of Ioab, and the Half of the resting of Sarai, The
kinredes also of the scribes

CHAP. III. The sons of King David. 10. The line of the Kings of Judah from
Solomon to Josias. 15. with diverse generations of the same Josias.
BUT David had these sons, which were borne to him S. Matthew omitteth this
Ioakim, and counts Iechonias as the son of Josias. The same Ieconias was
also otherwise called Ioachin. 4 Reg. 24. v. 6. and 25. v. 27. S. Hierom. li.
1. in Matthew.
Ioakim, the third Sedecias, the fourth Sellum. Of Ioakim was borne Iechonias,
and Sedecias. The sons of Iechonias were Asir, Semeia with his five sons
are counted six sons of Sechenias, though Semeia only was his proper son,
the other his nephews. See annotation. chapter 1. number. 3.
six in number. The sons of Naaria, Elioenai, and Ezechias, and

CHAP. IIII. Other genealogies of Judah: 24. and of Simeon, 29. by whom the
progeny of Cham, 42. and relics of Amelacites are subdued.
THE sons of Judah: Phares, Hesron, and Charmi, and In joining a vow to his
prayer he imitated holy Jacob. Genesis 28. And they both desired temporal things
for the better serving of God, and advancing his glory; especially that they
might be assisted with grace not to ye^d to tentatious, nor sin of malice.
Iabes inuocated the God of Israel, of Othoniel, Hathath, and Maonathi,
Maonathi begat Chieflo^d of the va^^^y; where the (...) dwelt that ma^e the
Temple.
the father of the Vale of Artificers: for there were artificers. And the
sons of Caleb Banaia, Ziza also the son of Zephei the son of Allon

CHAP. V. Genealogies of Ruben, whose birthright, concerning duble portion, is
translated to Joseph, the principality to Judah, with their special acts. 11.
Also of Gad. 18. who with Ruben, and half tribe of Manasses, subdue the
Agarenes: 25. but for their sins are led captive into Assyria.
ALSO the sons of Ruben the first begotten of Israel See annotations; Genesis
49. nu. 4.
but when he had violated his fathers bed, his firstbirthright was given to the
sons of Joseph the son of Israel, and he was not reputed for the
firstbegotten. Moreover Judas, which was the strongest east quarter also he
dwelt unto the entrance of the desert, and the river Euphrates. For they
possessed a great number of cattle in the land of Galaad. And in the days of
Saul Of these and the like, S Paul says. By says they over came kingdoms,
Heb; 11.
because they believed in him. And they God took away before them. And the God
of Israel raised

CHAP. VI. The genealogies of Leui, 4. with the right line of Aaron by Eleazar
to Iosadech, high priest in the captivity of Babylon, 16. other progenies of
his three sons; Gerson, Caath, and Merari, 31. with their offices in the
temple: 49. only Aarons sounes admitted to priesthood. 54. Particular
possessions of the Levites dwelling amongst the other tribes.
THE sons of Leui: Gerson, Caath, and Merari. The The lineal succession of
Hiegh priests from Aaron to the captivity in Babylon. Nicephorus counts
some others among these. li. 2. c. 4. Josephus also differs from this cata.
logue. li. 10. c. 11.
Eleazar begat Phinees, and Phinees begat Abisue, and 2. Paral. 26.
built in Jerusalem. And Azarias begat Amarias, and Amasai, and Achimoth, and
Elcana: The sons of Elcana: his son, Achitob his son, In Sadoc (3. Reg
2.) the high priesthood was reduced to the line of Eleazar which by Gods
ordinance was translated to Heli of Ithamars line but still continued in the
line of Aaron. The rest of Sadochs line by Achimaas etc. to Iosedech in the
captivity appears before. v. 9. ad 15.
Sadoc his son, Achimaas with the suburbs thereof. And of the tribe of Aser:
Masal

CHAP. VII. Genealogies of Issachar, 6. Benjamin, 13. Nephthali, 44 Manasses,
20. Ephraim, 30. and Aser.
MOREOVER the sons of Issachar: Thola, and Phua, Genesis 46. this third son is
called As bell: and seven more are there recited. And so in the rest is much
difference: but al may be reconciled by such rules as are noted. chap. 1.
Iadihel, three. The sons of Bela: Esbon, valiant unto battle, twenty
thousand and two hundred. Moreover the sons of Iadihel: Balon. And the sons
^^^^cheth: Regiaa Queen.
Queen bare Ishod, V^ram decorum. that is, A comelic personable or goodly
maa. So we leave the hebrew (...) in this place because ^. serom, and the whole
Church does so in the latin text which we translate.
Goodlieman, and Abiezer, and Mohola. And the sons of Semida were, Ahin, and
Sechem, these dwelt the children of Joseph, the son of Israel. The

CHAP. VIII. The progeny of Benjamin is further recited unto Saul: 33. and his
Issue.
AND Benjamin begat Bale his first begotten, Asbel the sons of Elphaal, and
Iacim, and Zechri, and Zabdi,

CHAP. IX. Who of Israel (after the captivity) first inhabited Jerusalem. 10.
Who exercised the offices of Priests, 14. and Levites, 35. with repetition of
part of Saul's progeny.
AL Israel therefore The genealogies of al Israel being hitherto recited before
their captivity, others are now added which first returned to Jerusalem after
their release.
was numbered: and the sum of Ephraim, and Manasses. Othei the son of
Ammiud, the towns: Whom David and Samuel the Seer appointed, upon their
fidelity. as well them as their sons. in the doors of

CHAP. X. King Saul with his three sons are slain by the Philistians. 8. who
spoi^e the army and carry (...) ay Souls head. 11. The men of Iabes Galaad
^^rie his body and his sons, fasting for them seven days. And the kingdom
is translated to David.
AMD the Philistijms fought against Israel, and the men:: The second part. King
Saul and al his family overthrown.
of Israel fled from the Palesthines, and they fell wounded in mount Gelboe. And
when the Philisthians were He offered Sanctifice on an Altar withut warranto.
1. Reg. 13. And destroyed not the Amal^ cites, as he was commanded. 1. Reg. 1^.
transgressed the commandment of our Lord which he had commanded, and kept it
not: yea and besides also consulted the Pythonesse, and trusted not

CHAP. XI. David is elected and anointed king. 5. He overthrows the
Iebusites taking the tower of Sion in Jerusalem, and prospers. 10. His
valiant men, and their heroical acts are recited. 17. He desiring water from
the cisterne of Bethleem, will not drink it, but offers it in sacrifice,
because it is brought with danger of his valiant men's lives. 20. Other valiant
men of the second order, are likewise recited.
AL Israel therefore was gathered together to David in The third part. King
David's reign and his special acts.
Hebron, saying: We are thy bone, and thy flesh. Yesterday him: and when they
had stricken the Philistheans, our Lord gave great health to his people. And
there went down Two stout men of Moab, as if they had benne lions. 2. Reg. 23.
v. 20.
two ariel of Moab: and he went down, and slew the lion in the mids of the
cisterne in the time of snow. And he storke the Egyptian, whose The sons of
Assem a Gezonite, Jonathan the son of

CHAP. XII. Who followed david when he fled from Saul. 23. And who came into
Hebron to make him king.
THESE also came to david into Siceleg, when as yet he meanest was captain
over an hundred souldiars, and the greatest, over a thousand. These are they
which passed Jordan An army of (...) o^ (...), is (...) to ^s ^^Soan^^ (...).
the army of God. This also is the number of the their kinredes. And of the
half tribe of Manasses, eightene

CHAP. XIII. The Arc is brought from Abinadabs house, 8. David and others
dancing before it. 9. Oza for touching it is strooken dead. 13. Whereupon David
fearing to bring it to Jerusalem, (...) remains three months in the house
of Obededom.
AND David took counsel with the tribunes, and centurions, therefore assembled
al Israel from Sihor of Egypt, til thou enter into Emath, to bring the Ark of God from Caria Thiarim. And David went up, and every man of Israel to the hill
of Obededom was a Leuite, ( c. 15. v. 18.) and therefore more mete to keep the
arc:
Obededom the Called a Getheite because he had dwelt in the town of Geth.
Getheite. Therefore the Ark of God remained in

CHAP. XIIII. King David provides timber, and workmen to build his own house.
3. marieth more wives, and has many children; 8. overthrows the
Philistians, 13. twice,
HIRAM also the king of Tire sent messengers to David, he went out to meet
them. Moreover the Philisthijms

CHAP. XV. With sol^nnitie the Arc is brought into Jerusalem, carried by the
Priests and Levites, 16. With music of diverse sorts, 26. Sacrifice of
thankesgeuing is offered. 29. Michel derideth David's devotion.
HE made also houses for him self in the city of David: sons of Hebron;
Eliel the prince: and his brethren eighty Of the sons of Oziel, Aminadab the
prince: and his had helped the Levites, which carried the Arc of the covenant
of our Lord, there were immolated seven oxen, and seven rams. Moreover David
was clothed with a robe of fine An other linen garment used by prophets, such
as Samuel did wear being a child 1. Reg. 2.
Ephod of linen. And al Israel brought the Arc of the covenant of our

CHAP. XVI. The Arc is placed in a tabernacle. Sacrifice is offe^ed. David
blesses the people, 4. disposes the offices of Levites. 8. and makes a
Psalm of praise to God.
THEY therefore brought the Ark of God, and set it in Not only king David being
a holy Prophet, but any other Superior might bless his subjects.
blessed the people in the name of our Lord. And he duided to al through out
every one, from That he also disposed certain offices of Levites was by
special privilege, which was no prejudice to the hiegh priests authority, for
superior power is proved by Gods institution, rather then by factes, either of
good men, which do many things by way of dispensation, o^ of evil v^u^^ing
whitho^t warrant, that to them perteyneth ^ot. For it is ^^ie that God
instituted supreme spiritual power in the high priest. Deuteronomy. 17. And al kings
and temporal princes are to receive the law at the priests hand. ibidem. v.
18. Eleazar the high priest was appointed to consult our Lord for Iosue, Nu.
27. Finally by Gods ordinance, the lavy of truth was in the mouth of priests*
Mal^s. 2.
appointed before Psalm ^ 104.
to him, and sing to him: and tell ye al his marvelous things. Praise ye his
holy name: let the heart of them that rejoice, seek ye his face always.
Remember his marvelous Psalm. 95.
salvation. Tell his glory among the gentiles: among Psalm. ^05.
ye to our Lord, because he is good: because his mercy is for ever. And say
ye: Save us o God our savior: and gather of the Arc continually day by day,
and in their courses. Moreover Obededom, and his brethren sixty eight: and

CHAP. XVII. David determining to build a Temple, 11. is admonished by Nathan
the prophet, that not he, but his son, sbal build it; and be established in
the kingdom. 16. David extolleth Gods benignity toward him, and the people.
AND when David dwelt in his house, he said to Nathan given a place to my
people Israel: it shall be planted, and shall dwell therein, and shall be moved no
more, neither shall the children of iniquity consume them, as from the
beginning, since the days that I gave Judges to my people Israel, and That is
continue and preserve thy seed, and samilie as we see it performed et en to
the B. virgin Marie, and Christ of the house of David. Mat ^* Luc. 2. 3.
a house. And when thou shall have accomplished Lord thou art God: and thou
have spoken to thy servant so great benefittes. And thou have begun to bless
the

CHAP. XVIII. King David has great victories, making many nations tributarie,
15. his chief officeres are recounted.
AND it came to pass after these things, that David 2. Reg. ^.
stroke the Philisthijms, and humbled them, and took away Geth, and her The
lesser towns and villagies are commonly called the dauhgters of some great
town or city to which they perteyne.
daughters out of the hand of the Philisthijms, and stroke Moob, and the
Moabites were made That which is dedicated to sacred use, is consecrated to God.
consecrated to our Lord, with the silver and gold, which he had taken out of
all the nations, as well of Idumea, and Moab, and the children of Ammon, as of
the Philisthijms and Amalec. And Abisai the son of Saruia stroke Edom justice
to al his people. Moreover Ioab the son of Saruia

CHAP. XIX. The king of Ammon evil entreating king David's men, whom he had
courteously sent to condole the death of his father, is overthrown in battle.
16. with the Assyrians his hired confederates.
AND it chanced that Naas the king of the children of ^. Reg. 10.
Ammon died, and his son reigned for him. And made against him before and
behind, chose the most valiant men of al Israel, and marched on against the
Syrian. And

CHAP. XX. King David prospers in War against the Ammonites, 4. and
Philisthims, 6. among Whom Jonathan David's nephew by his brother, kills a
monfiruous giant, Which had twelve fingers and twelve toes.
AND it came to pass after the compass of a year, at 2. Reg. 21.
such time when kings are wont to go forth to battle, Ioab gathered together
the army and force of war, and spoiled the land of the children of Ammon:
and went on and besieged Rabba. Moreover David tarried in Jerusalem, when Ioab
stroke Rabba, and destroyed it. And David brought forth: and he made harrowes,
and sleddes, and chariotes shod with Iron to pass over them, soc that they
were cut in sunder, and broken in pieces: so did David to all the cities of the
children of Ammon: and he returned with all his people into Jerusalem. After
these things there was war begun

CHAP. XXI. David sins in numbering his people, 8. repents, and prays,
yet is punished, many dying of the plague, 15. til God showing mercy spares
the rest. 16. David accusing himself and excusing the people is commanded by
the Angel to offer sacrifice, which he (22* bying ground for an altar) 26.
performs.
BUT By Gods permission David was tempted and overcome* 2. Reg. 24.
Satan rose against Israel: and moved David to number 2. Reg. 24.
Israel. And David said to Ioab, and to the princes Israel. And David said to
God: I have sinned excedingly King David was not without faith, nor hope, and
yet was contaminate with iniquity, from which he prayed to be delivered.
the iniquity of thy servant, because I have done foolishly. And our Lord
spoke to Gad the Seer of David, saying: Go, ground. And David said to him:
Give me the place of thy liitle carts.
the dreyes for wood, and wheat for sacrifice: I will give al things willingly.
And God showed by sending fire miraculously to burn the sacrifice, that he had
heard David's prayer.
in fire from heaven upon the altar of holocauste. And our Lord commanded the
Angel: and

CHAP. XXII. Workmen and al necessaries being prepared, 6. David commands
Solomon to build the Temple, for so God has appointed* 13. exhorts him to
serve God. 17. and other principal men to assist him.
AND David said: This is the house of God, and this is an 1. Reg. 7. 3: Reg: 5.
the proselytes of the land of Israel should be gathered to gether, and he
appointed of them masons to hew stones and polish them, that the house of God
might be built. David called Solomon his son: and commanded him that he
should build a house to our Lord the God of Israel. And Solomon sig nifieth
Peaceable. and therein, as in many other things, prefigured Christ who amongst
other names is called, Prince of peace. Isai. 9.
Peaceable: and I will give peace and quietness in Israel al his days. He

CHAP. XXIII. King David being old constituteth Solomon king. 3. disposes the
offices of Levites. 7. to wit, the families of Gerson, 12. of Caath, 21. and of
Merari: (26. ceassing to carry the tabernacle.) 27. to serve in the temple.
DAVID therefore being old and full of days, made Solomon Aarons sons being
consecrated Pricstes according to Gods ordinance. Leuit. 8 and the Le uites to
do other offices about the tabernacle. Number. 3. and. 4 king David (with Sadoc
the high priest, and other chief men. chapter 24. ^. 6.) disposed them by lottes
which should serve by courses, to sing and play on instruments, as well in the
tabernacle now resting in Jerusalem, v. 26. as in the Temple when it should be
built.
David distributed them by the and the sons of Cis their brethren took them.
The

CHAP. XXIIII. King David disposes sixtene families of Eleazar, and eight of
Ithamar, 7. by lottes, 19. to serve in the Temple, according to their priestlie
function, 20. likewise principal Levites in their offices.
MOREOVER to the sons of Aaron these were the principal men, then children of
Ithamar. And he divided to them, that is, to the children of Eleazar princes by
their families sixtene: and to the children of Ithamar by their families and
houses eight. Moreover he divided both families They were called princes of the
Sanctuary in respect of Sacrifices, and other sacred functions.
princes of the Sanctuary, and princes And princes of God in ^eguard of their
spiritual jurisdiction in the Church, or house of God.
of God, as well of the children of Eleazar, as of the children of Ithamar. And
Semeias also did cast lottes against their brethren the sons of Aaron before
David the king and Sadoc, and Ahimelech, and the princes of the Priestlie and
Leuitical families, as well the elder as the younger. Lotte divided al equally.

CHAP. XXV. Four sons of Asaph, six of Idithun, and fourtene of Heman,
chief musicians, 7. with their brethren in ^l^wo hundred and fourscore, 8. are
distributed by Lottes, in four and twenty companies, to serve in the temple.
THEREFORE David, and the officers of the host separated Otherwise called
Ethan. chapter 6. v 44. c. 15. v. 19.
Idithun: which should They played o^ instruments, Psalms and Canticles made
by Prophets.
prophecy on harpes, and psalteries, and cymbals according to their number
serving the office dedicated to them. Of the sons of Asaph: Zacchur, and
twelve. The ninth to Mathanias, to his sons and his brethren

CHAP. XXVI Porters are designed by lottes to watch at four gates of the
temple. 20. others made kepers of the holy treasure, and vissel, 30. Officers
also appointed in the two tribes and half over Jordan, for Gods service, and
the kings.
AND the divisions of the porters: of the Corites Meselemia, sons of Merari:
Semri the prince ( Either his first son was dead, or was not fit to be
chief over the rest.
for he had not a firstbegotten, and therefore his father made him chief)
Helcias Things are sanctified by designation to holy use.
sanctified, and the princes of families, and the centurions, and the captains
of the host of the wars, and Hasabias, and his brethren most able men, a
thousand seven hundred were chief over Israel beyond Jordan against the West,
in all the works our Lord, and for the ministry of the king. And the prince
of the Hebronites was Ieria according

CHAP. XXVII. Twelve military tribunes, with four and twenty thousand under
every one, by course of months serve about the king. 16. Other twelve
tribunes of the people govern in several tribes. 25. Prefectes also are made
over the kings treasures, cattles, and other commodities in the court, camp,
and country.
AND the children of Israel according to their number, four and twenty
thousand. The eight, in the eight month, King David having hereto fore
offended in commanding to number the whole people. 2. Reg. 24. would not now
attempt to number al, (which were in deed innumerable) but only those that
were to be disposed of in specialseruices.
would not number them from twenty the heardes that fed in Saron, the ouerseer
was Se^rai a Saronite: and over the oxen in the valleis Saphat the son of
Adli: but over the camels, Vbil an Ismaelite: and over the

CHAP. XXVIII. Again king David calling al his states together, with
commemoration of Gods singular favor in electing him, and Solomon, 8.
exhorts them al, and namely his son to serve God sincerly: 10. and to build
the temple, describing in what form to make it.
DAVID therefore called together all the princes of Israel, 3. Reg. 1.
the dukes of the tribes, and the heads of the compaynies, which ministered to
the king: the tribunes also and the centurions, and them that were chief over
the fubstance and possessions of the king, and his sons with the ennuches,
and the mighty, and all the most viliant in the host of Jerusalem. And when the
king had risen up, and stood, he 2. Reg. 7.
and have shed blood. Howbeit our Lord the God of Israel So Jacob prophesied,
that the royal scepter should come to the tribe of Judah, and therein remain
til Christ. Genesis 49.
of Judah he chose the princes: moreover of the house of Judah, my fathers house:
and of the sons of my father, it pleased him to choose me king over al
Israel. Yea as It is here evident, that Solomon was some time the true servant
and child of God, keeping his precepts and as certain, that he fell into
great sins* and lost Gods grace, and finally it is doubtful in what state he
died 3. Reg. 11. whereby is convinced their vain phancie that thinck, he who is
once the child of God can never fall, nor become a wicked man.
at this day. Now then before all the assembly of Israel in will be with thee,
and will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, til thou perfect all the work of the
ministry of the house of our Lord. Behold the divisions of the Priests and
the

CHAP. XXIX. King David once more by word, and example of his own
bountisulnes, inuiteth others to assist in building the temple, 6. whereto the
princes and people contribute much. 10. So after praises, 18. prayeres, 21. and
sacrifices offered to God, 22. Solomon is anointed king. 26. And king David
dies blessedly, having reigned forty years.
AND David the king spoke to all the assembly: Solomon a kind of sin white
stone.
stibians, and of diverse colors, and every precious stone, and marble of
Paros most abundantly: and above these things, which I have offered That which
he had already vowed and prepared he counted not his own, and now goueth more
to the building and (...)thing of the Temple.
of mine own peculiar goods, gold and silver unto the temple of my God, beside
those things, which I have prepared for the holy house. Three thousand
talentes of gold of the gold of Ophir: and of our Lord, by the hand of Iahiel
the Gersonite. And the As Abraham Isaac Jacob and others were strangers in
respect of Chanaan: so both they and also David Solomon and al men in this
world are pilgrims in respect of heaven. Heb. 13.
as al our fathers. Our days are as a shadow upon the earth, and there is noe
abiding. Lord our God, all this plenty, Albeit they did the same exterior act
of honor to God and the king: yet in their mind and intention they gave divine
honor to God, and civil to the king. See Exodus 20.
bowed themselves, and adored God, and then the king. And they immolated
victime to our Lord: ^. Reg. 1. v. 34.
they did eat, and drink before our Lord in that day with great joy. And they
anointed the second time Solomon the son of David. And they anointed him to
our Lord for the prince, and Sadoc for the high priest. And Solomon sat Either
Nathan and Gad writ the later part of the first book, and the second book of
kings, or else their books are not now extant.
Nathan the prophet, and in the Volume of Gad the Seer: and of al his kingdom,
and strength, and of the times, that

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND BOOK OF PARALIPOMENON.
AS the former book shows, how after many generations from the 1. Par. 1.
The connection of this book with the former.
beginning of the world, God selecting one special nation for his peculiar
people, and the same being afterward made a kingdom, the Scepter thereof,
both by Gods and the peoples election, came to David, and his son Solomon:
11. 28.
See this book declares that first Solomon reigned peaccably over the whole
kingdom. in the nine first chapters. Then, in the other twenty The contents
divided into two parts.
seven chapters, relates how the same kingdom was divided, ten tribes being
taken away (the history whereof is but here briefly touched) and two only, with
the title of the kingdom of Judah, were possessed, by succession of ninetenne
kings, al of David's and Salomons issue, in royal estate til the captivity in
Babylon.

THE SECOND BOOK OF PARALIPOMENON. IN HEBREW, DIBRE HAIAMIM.
CHAP. I. Solomon establi^hed in the throne, offers a thousand hosts of
sacrifice, 7. asking wisdom, 12. it is given him; with richesse, and temporal
glory, which he asked not. 14. He provides many chariottes and horsemen.
SOLOMON therefore the son of David was The first part. Salomons reign in the
whole kingdom.
was with him, and magnified him on high. And Solomon commanded al Israel, the
1. Pala^. 13.
and where he had pitched a tabernacle for it, that is, in Jerusalem. The altar
also of brass, which Beseleel the son but have desired wisdom and knowledge,
that thou may be able to judge my people, over which I have made thee king.
Wisdom and knowledge are given thee: and riches, and It is the manner of holy
scripture to express things exceeding vulgar capacity by the figure Hyperbole.
as

CHAP. II. Other workmen being provided to build the Temple, 7. Solomon
procures a cunning artificer from the king of Tire, and special timber, 16. to
be cut, and sent from thence.
AND Solomon determined to build a house to the name ^. Reg. 5.
and eighty thousand that should hew stones in the mountains, and overseers
of them three thousand six hundred. He sent also to Hiram the king of Tire,
saying: As thou house? but to this end only, that incense may be burnt before
him. Send me therefore a cunning man, that has skill to It is probable, that
this man had instructed the king of Tire in true religion of one God whom he
confesses. v. 11. 12. and that therefore the king called him his father.
my father, the son of a woman

CHAP. III. The Temple is begun to be built in mount Moria, the fourth year
of Salomons reign. 3. the form whereof is described, and the precious matter,
8. especially of Sancta sanctorum. 14. with a costly veil, 15. and two
excellent pillars before the gate.
AND Solomon began to build the house of our Lord in This mount Moria,
signifying vision, was so named by Abraham, who was there ready to sacrifice
his son Isaac Genesis 22.
Moria, which had been showed to David his father, in the place, which And
David, by the appointment of an Angel, offered there sacrifice. ^. Reg. 24. ^.
Par. 21.
David had prepared 2 Reg. 24 3. Reg. 6.
in the floor of Ornan the Iebuseite. And he began to were spread forth, and
were extended twenty cubits: and they stood upright on their feet, and
their faces were turned to the utter house. He made also a vele of hyacinth,
purple, 3. Reg. 7.
hand, he called Iachin: and that on the left hand, Boz.

CHAP. IIII. The forms of the brazen altar, 2. of the lauatorie (or Sea) with
figures of twelve oxen, 6. of other ten small lauatories, 7. ten
candlestickes, 8. ten tables, and an hundred bassens, a great hal for the
Priests, 10. and other vessel, and ornaments of the Temple are described.
HE made also an altar of brass As well the Temple as the Altars, and other
appertinances were made after the form of Moses Tabernacle altares of
sacrifice and incense, and the rest: but greater in quantity, of more precious
matter, and more excellent workmanship.
of twenty cubits in A great brazen vessel, and some other things that were
not before.
A Sea also cast, ten cubits from brimme 3. Reg. 7.
and a cord of thirty cubires did compass it round about. There was also
under it the similitude of oxen, and certain Also a greatter number of
candlestickes, and other the like.
ten golden candlestickes, according to the fashion which they were commanded
to be made by: and he set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five
on the left. Moreover the right hand, and five on the left. Phials also of gold
an hundred. He made also the court of the priests, and a great or pommels.
chapiters,

CHAP. V. Many gifts are offered. 4. The Arc is brought with great
solennitie into the Temple. 6. Innumerable hosts are offered, 11. with
excellent music, and the Temple is replenished with the glory of God.
SOLOMON therefore brought in all the things, that David 3. Reg. 7.
all the princes of the tribes, and the heads of families, of the children of
Israel into Jerusalem, to bring An other Arc was not made, because that was
most holy and most excellent, which Moses made. Likewise other holy things
of the tabernacle were brought into the Temple with great solemnity.
the Arc of the covenant of our Lord from the City of David, which is Sion.
There came therefore unto the king all the men of Israel in

CHAP. VI. Solomon blesses the people. 4. prays to God, giving thanks for
benefits received, 16. and requesting continual protection, and that God will
hear the prayers of the people, 32. yea also of strangers that pray in the
Temple.
THEN Solomon said: Our Lord promised that he would God showed his presence by
the dark cloud which replenished the Temple.
in darkness: and I have built a house to his Basilicae.
Temple, having five cubits of length, and breadth, and three of height: and he
stood upon it: and afterward Kneeling,
kn^eeling over against all the multitude of Israel, and Lifting up hands,
stretching forth arms, and the like external gestures do much help internal
attention in prayer, and also stir up others to godly imitation* and
therefore has been much practiced by devout persons both in the old and new
Testament.
his hands lifted up toward heaven, he said: Lord God of Israel, there is not
the like God to thee by mouth thou had promised, in work thou have
accomplished, as also the present time proves. Now therefore Lord enemies,
wasting the countries, shall besiege the gates of the city, and al plague and
infirmity shall press them: if any of In this chapter and often else where it
is evident, that places dedicated to Gods service are more acceptable to him,
then other places.
this house, thou thy Priests Lord God put on salvation, and thy Saints
rejoice in good things. Lord God turn not away from the face

CHAP. VII. Fire from heaven deuoureth the holocaustes, and glory replenisheth
the Temple. 5. More sacrifices are offered, 8. and the Temple is dedicated,
with seven days solemnity, the eight day collection is made. 12. God
signifies that he has heard Salomons prayer. 17. conditionally (as it was
made) if they serve him, 19. otherwise he will punish them.
AND when Solomon had finished to pour out his As the Temple was the special
place of prayer, chosen by God: v. 12 so special Hymm^s Psalms and other set
forms of blessing are more gratful to God, and more effectual to his servants.
the hymns of David by their hands: moreover the Priests sounded with
trumpettes before them, and al Israel stood. Solomon also sanctified rejoicing
and being glad for the good, that our Lord had done to David, and Solomon, and
Israel his people. And

CHAP. VIII. Solomon builds diverse cities, 7. makes the residue of the
Chananites tributarie. 12. offers the ordinary hosts of sacrifices in the
solemn feasts. 14. disposes the Priests and Levites in their offices, as
David had ordained: 17. and sends ships to fetch gold from Ophir.
AND twenty years being complete after that Solomon Solomon was yet so far
from communicating with Infidels, that he suffered not his wife (an infidel) to
be present where the Ark of God had been placed. 1. Par. 15.
because it is sanctified: because the Arc of our Lord is entered into it.
Then Solomon offered holocaustes to our Lord upon commanded. Neither did they
trangresse of the kings

CHAP. IX. The Queen of Saba admireth Salomons wisdom, 9. gives, and
receives presents. 13. Of the great store of treasure which is yearly brought
in, 13. king Solomon makes precious armor, 17. a throne, 20. and plate. 24.
Other kings send him gifts, so he abundeth in glory, and riches. 29. After
forty years reign he dies, and his son Roboam succedeth.
THE queen of Saba also, when she had heard the fame 3. (...). 10
of Solomon, came to prove him in hard propositions in Jerusalem, with great
riches, and camels, which carried spices, and very much gold, and precious
stones. And when she was come to Solomon, she spoke to him what things soever
were in her heart. And Solomon expounded to her would ordain thee over his
throne, king They are called kings, of God* which reign by his grace and
according to his will. Whereupon they use this style By the grace of God, K. of
England Jerusalem. etc.
of the Lord thy God. Because God loves Israel, and will preserve it for ever:
therefore has he set thee king over it, to do judgments and justice. And
she gave to the king an hundred And all the kings of the earth desired to see
Salomons His fall to luxury and idolatry is recorded. 3. Reg. 11.
slept with his fathers: and they buried

CHAP. X. Roboam requested by Jeroboam and the people to lighten their yoke of
service, 6. leaving the counsel of the ancient, and following young counselors,
threatens to press the people. 16. Wherupen many revolt from him.
AND Roboam went forth into Sichem: for thither al 3. Reg. 12.
The second part. Division of the kingdom. David's issue reigning only in two
tribes, which also are carried captive into Babylon.
Israel was assembled, to make him king. Which when words of clemency, they
will serve thee at al times. But

CHAP. XI. Roboam intending by force to reduce ^l Israel to his subjection, is
Warned by a Prophet to cease from that enterprise. 5. He makes Walls about
diverse cities, 11. ^urnisheth them With Victuals, and munition, 13. Priests,
Levites, and many others repair to Jerusalem, because Jeroboam makes a new
religion, and new priests 18. Roboam taket^ many Wives, and concubines. 22.
prefers A^ias above al his other sons.
AND Roboam came into Jerusalem, and called together A worthy example to
suffer temporal damage rather then to conform them selves to the practice of
false religion.
leaving their suburbs, and their possessious, and and concubines: for he had
married eightene wives, and threescore concubines: and he begat eight and
twenty sons, and threescore daughters. But he appointed for head Abias the

CHAP. XII. For the sins of Roboam, and the people many strong cities, also
Jerusalem; are taken and spoiled by the king of Egypt. 8. They repent, and the
Egyptians depart, 9. but carry away the treasures. 13. Roboam dies, and his
son Abias reigns.
AND when the kingdom of Roboam was strengthened entrance of the palace. And
when the king entered into the

CHAP. XIII. Abias makes war against Jeroboam. 4. exhorts the people of
Israel for justice, and religions sake to return to him. 13. In the mean time
Jeroboam inuironeth him with forces, but by Gods assistance Abias prevails.
21. and reigns securely.
IN the eightenth year of king Jeroboam, reigned Abias 3. Reg. 15
over Judah. Three years reigned he in Jerusalem, and A firm and perpetual
covenant. Number. 18. v. 19.
covenant of salt? And there rose up Jeroboam Solomon: moreover Roboam was
rude, and of a fearful heart, and could not resist them. Now therefore you say
that you Therefore Abias, his empite being strengthened, took

CHAP. XIIII. Abias dies, and his son Asa reigns, destroys idolataie, 6.
for ^i^^eth his cities, 9. and ouercometh, by Gods special help, the
Aethtopians army of a million of men.
AND Abias slept with his fathers, and they buried him It perteyned properly to
the king to destroy the exterior practice of idolatry, but to the Priests,
and prophets to inform the interior mind, and consciences of every one.
strange service, and the excelses, and brake the statues, and cut down the
therefore terrified the Aethiopians before Asa and Judah: and the Aethiopians
fled. And Asa pursewed them, and the

CHAP. XV. Azarias prophecieth that Israel shall lack the true God, Priests,
and the law, a long time. 8. which king Asa hearing most serioufly destroys
idolatry. 12. makes covenant and oath to serve God. 16. And deposes his
mother for offering sacrifice to Priapus.
AND Azarias the son of Oded, the Spirit of God coming upon him, went out to
meet Asa, and said to Cooperation with Gods grace meri^eth increase of grace.
because you have been with him. If you will seek him, you shall find: but if
you forsake him, he will forsake you. And many days shall pass in Israel
without the month, in the fiftenth year of the reign of Asa, they King Asa
destroyed the places where Idols were served, chap. 14. v. 2. but tolerated
the places where some offered sacrifice to God beside the proper altar in
Jerusalem, because this was dispensable and not the other.
Excelses were leaft in

CHAP. XVI. Against the king of Israel, king Asa procures help of the
Assyrians, 7. which a prophet reproving is put in fetters. 11. Asa dies, with
disease of his feet, and is buried with pomp.
AND in the six and thirteth year of his reign, came up 3. Reg. 15.
Baasa the king of Israel into Judah, and with a wall compassed Rama, that none
could safely go out and come in of the kingdom of Asa. Asa therefore brought
forth silver Rama, and intermitted his work. Moreover Asa the king:: Just
punishment with pain of his feet, for injuriously putting Gods prophet in
fetters v. 10. So God punished him temporally, for that and other passionate
sins: and he died in good state, for. his heart was perfect al his days, (
Chap 15. v, 17.) that is, most part of his life, especially in his last days.
multitude exceeding great: whom, when thou did believe in our Lord, he
delivered into thy hand? For the eyes of our

CHAP. XVII. Iosaphat succeding in the kingdom prevails in battle against the
king of Israel. 6. destroys Idolaters, and sends Priests and Levites to
instruct the people. 11. The Philistians and Arabians send presents to king
Iosaphat. 13. the leaders of the army and souldiars are numbered.
AND Iosaphat his son reigned for him, and grew strong of David his father:
and he trusted not in Baalim, but in Good, works approved by new benefices
from God, as a reward, there of do give more hope and confidence to proceed from
virtue to virtue. 5. Tho. li. deregimin^ Reg^m^i.
for the

CHAP. XVIII. Iosaphat joined in affiniti^ with wicked Achab king of Israel,
goes with him against Ramoth Galaad, four hundred false prophets promising
victory. 14. Micheas prophesying the contrary, 25. is put in prison. 28.
Achab (notwithstanding he changes his attire, and leaves Iosaphat in danger)
33. is slain.
IOSAPHAT therefore was rich and very glorious, and For this he was justly
reprehended, but his simple intention diminished his fault, and so he was more
easily pardoned, and for his good works otherwise done in Gods service. chapter
19. 3.
we will be with thee in battle. Iosaphat said to the king of Israel: Consult I
beseech thee me, that will I speak. He therefore came to the king. To See
Annotation. 3. Reg. (...). v. 15.
Go ye up: for all things shall fall out prosperous, and the enemies shall be
delivered into your hands. And the king said: Again, the king of Israel
changing his habit came to the battle. And the king of Syria had commanded the
captains of

CHAP. XIX. Iosaphat being reproved by a prophet for yelding help to Achab, 5.
appoynteth Judges in several cities, admonishing them to do justice. 8.
exhorts Priests and Levites to execute their sunctious carefully. 11.
Amarias High Priest directing and ruling in things belonging to God, Zabedias
general captain governs the kings affairs.
AND Iosaphat the king of Judah returned into his house Precisian Do^a^^stes
holding it vn^^^ful to converse with sinners amongst other Scriptures alleged
(...) reprehention of Iosa^^^ for his society with Achab. To whom S. Augustine
answers, that he was not blamed for other conversation with Achab, but for
ayding him, and, joining with him in the act of sin, when he contemning
Micheas the true prophet of God, and believing false prophets went to battle
wherein both kings offended, but with difference; so one was sa^^e though he
seemed to be secure, the other was saved in great danger. and repenting was
pardoned li. 2. c. 1^. (...). opist Parme^.
To the impious man thou geuest aid, and to them that hate our Lord thou art
joined in friendship, and therefore thou did deserve in deed the wrath of our
Lord: but good works are found in of persons, nor desire of gifts. In
Jerusalem also Iosaphat A most plame distinction of spiritual and temporal
authority and offices, not instituted by Iosaphat, nor any other king, but by
God himself. Deuteronomy. 17. Number. 27.
Amarias the priest and your

CHAP. XX. The Ammonites, Moabites, and Syrians ioynning forces against
Iosaphat, 3. he seeks Gods help by public prayer and fasting. 14. A
Prophet fortelleth that God will fight for them: 20. so they singing praises to
God, the enemies kill each other. 24. Iosaphat with his men gather very great
spoils. 30. reigns in peace, 35. but his navy perishes, for his societee
with wicked Ochozias.
AFTER these things were the children of Moab gathered They fasted not only to
sub due the flesh to the spirit but also for other necessities.
proclaimed a fast to al Judah. And Judas was gathered Example of pilgremage to
holy places, because it pleases God to hear the prayers of good people
rather in one place then in an other. chapter 6. 7. etc.
came out of their cities to beseech him. And when Iosaphat stood in the can
any man resist thee. Did not thou our God kill all the Faith is the fundation
of al good works. Heb. 11. but not sufficient to salvation without other
virtues, and therefore they not only believed but also fasted and prayed, and
where need required fought with weapons, though at this time it pleased God to
fight for them. See Iosue 23.
believe in the Lord your God, and you shall be secure: believe his prophets, and
al things shall fall out prosperous. He gave counsel also to Psalm. 135.
to our Lord, because his mercy is forever. And when they He destroyed the
places where sacrifice was offered to idols. chapter 17. v. 6. but tolerated other
places where the people offered to God our Lord without the temple, not being
able to reduce al to perfection.
yet the excelses he took our Lord the God of their fathers. But the rest of
the acts

CHAP: XXI. Iosaphat dies, and Ioram succeding kills his own brethren, and
some other chief men. 6. reigns wickedly. 8. Edom, and Lobua revolt from
him. 12. Elias by letters forwarneth him of plagues, 16. which falling upon
him, he dies after two years languishing, and horrible disease.
AND Iosaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with 4. Reg. 8.
them in the City of David: and Ioram his son reigned for him. Who had
brethren the sons of Iosaphat, Azarias, and stroke Edom, which had compassed
him, and all the captains of his horsemen. But yet Edom rebelled, from being
Elias was assumpted from ordinary conversation with mortal men the eighttenth
year of king Iosaphat 4. Reg. 2. 3. who reigned twenty five years 3. Reg.
22. v. 42. So he showed this special care of Ioram and his kingdom, after his
assumption seven years.
from Elias the prophet,

CHAP. XXII. Ochozias reigning one year, 3. is slain together with Ioram king
of Israel, by king Iehu. 10. Athalia kills the kings children (only Ioas
being saved by his aunt) and usurps the kingdom six years.
AND the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ochozias his 4. Reg. 8. v. 25. chapter 9.
least son, king for him: for all the elders, that had been before him, the
rouers of the Arabians had slain, which invaded the camp: and Ochozias the
son of Ioram the king of Judah reigned. Two and To wit when he began to
reign alone: for he reigned together with his father at the age of 22. 4. Reg.
8. v. 26. And after his fathers death but one year.
forty years old was Ocohzias See 4. Reg. 8. v. 18.
Amri. But he also went by the ways of the house of Human hope failed, but
Gods providence used means to conserve some of David's issue to sit in his
throne, yea to continue the succession (...) Christ. Mat. 1.
neither was there any more hope that any should reign of the stock of
Ochozias. For Athalia his mother, seeing that her son was dead,

CHAP. XXIII. Ioiada the Hiegh priest annoynteth and crowns Ioas king. 12.
causes Athalia to be slain, 16. idolatry to be destroyed. 18. and Gods
service advanced.
AND in the seventh year Ioiada taking courage, took 4. Reg. 11.
the centurions, to wit, Azarias the son of Ieroham, and Ismahel the son
of Iohanan, Azarias also the son of Obed, and Maasias the son of Adaias,
and Elisaphat the son of Zechri: and made a covenant with them. Who Gods
promise being absolute and certain, yet humane means were nevertheless
required.
therefore the vve^eli^ vvatch.
Sabbath of the Priests, and of Levites, and of porters shall be in the gates:
and a third part at the kings house: and a third at the gate, which is called
of the Fundation: but let all the rest of the common people be in the courts of
the house of our Lord. Neither let any other In case of right and necessity
we see here what the high Priest could do and did by his authority: who
otherwise intermedled not in the kings affairs. chapter 19* v 11.
Ioiada the high Priest had commanded; and they took every one the men that
were under them, and came by the order of the Sabbath, with them that had
fulfilled the Sabbath, and were to go forth. For Ioiada the high Priest
permitted not the companies to depart, which were accustomed to succeed one an
other every week. And Ioiada the Priest gave to the king. And they brought
forth the kings son, and put the They are wilfully blind that will not see
difference between images of Baal and of Christ or of Saints.
his simul^^ra.
images: Mathan also the priest of Baal they slew before the altars. And
Ioiada appointed

CHAP. XXIIII. Ioas reigning piously, so long as Ioiada lives, causes the
Temple to be repaired, 14. and new sa^red vessels to be made. 15. Ioiada an
hundred thirty years old dies. 17. Ioas falls to idolatry: 20. causes
Zacharias to be slain in the court of the Temple. 23. A few Syrians kill the
chief men about the king, and carry away great prays. 25. Ioas is slain by
his own men, and his son Amasias reigns.
SEVEN years old was Ioas when he began to reign: and By the law every one
paid yearly half a sicle, toward the repayring of the tabernacle and so
afterward of the temple. Ex. 30.
appointed of Moses the servant of our Lord, that all the multitude of Israel
should bring it in into the tabernacle of testimony? For the most impious
Athalia, they that wrought did industriously, and the breach of the walls was
closed by their hands, and they raised the house of our Lord into the old
state, and made it stand firmly. And when they had accomplished all the works,
they Man. (...)*
of the house of our Lord. And Ioas the king did not remember He that killed
his spiritual father was slain by his own servants.
for revenge of the blood of the son of Ioiada the priest, and they slew him
in his bed, and he dyed: and they buried him in the City of David, but not in
the kings sepulchers. And there conspired against him Zabad the son of
Semmaath an Ammonitesse, and Iozabad the son of Semarith a Moabitesse.
Moreover his children, and the sum of money,

CHAP. XXV. Amasias kills those that slew his father. 5. Besides his own
people, hyreth souldiars of Israel, but by advise of a Prophet dismisseth
them, 11. and with his own owerthroweth the Idumeans, whose idols taken in
battle (13. the dismissed souldiars in the mean time spoiling his country) he
adoreth. 15. Contemning admonition, 17. and provoking the king of Israel to
war, 22. is taken in battle and spoiled. 27. Fearing treason in Jerusalem
flees, and is slain in Lachis.
FIVE and twenty years old was Amasias when he began 4. Reg. 14.
to reign, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem, the name of
his mother was Ioaden of Jerusalem. And he did good in the sight of our Lord:
but yet not D^^t. 24
nor the children for their fathers, but every one shall die in his own sin.
Amasias therefore gathered together Judah, give thee much more then this. Amasias
therefore separated 4. Reg. 8.
Art thou the kings counseler? be quiet, lest I kill thee. And the prophet
departing, said: I know that God is minded to kill thee, because thou have done
this evil, and besides have not agreed to my counsel. Therefore Amasias the king
of Obduration of heart for former sin.
for the gods of Edom. Ioas therefore the king of Israel in Bethsames, and
brought him into Jerusalem: and destroyed the wall thereof from the gate of
Ephraim, to the gate of the corner, four hundred cubits. All the gold

CHAP. XXVI. Ozias serving God, 6. prevails in battle against the
Philistians, Arabians, and Ammonites. 9. prospers in honor and wealth. 16.
Then w^ixing proud offers incense on the altar, is stricken with leprosy,
expelled out of the Temple, and city. 20. and his son Ioathan rules the
kingdom.
AND all the people of Judah made his son Ozias sixtene So long as this king
observed the ordinance of God to be directed by the high priest N^. 27. v 2^.
he prospered in his affairs.
he directed him in all things. Moreover he went forth, rest, in the same side
of the wall, and strengthened them. He built towers also in the wilderness, and
dug many For usurping spiritual authority which pertayned not to him, the
high priest with his assistantes opposed themselves against the king: and God
confirmed their sentence, by striking the same king with leprosy. And so he
was not only cast out of the temple, but also out of his kingdom, and common
conversation with other men, and forced to dwell in a separet house without the
city according to the law. Leuit. 13. v. 46.
incense upon the altar of incense. And incontinent Azarias the Priest going in
after him, and Moreover Ioathan his son governed the kings house, and judged
the people of the land. But the rest of the words Neither could he be buried
in the propet sepulchers of the kings.
kings sepulchers field, because he was a leper: and Ioathan his son reigned
for him.

CHAP. XXVII. Ioathan a godly king, 5. prevails in battle against the
Ammonites. 7. dies, and his son Achaz succedeth.
FIVE and twenty years old was Ioathan when he began 4. Reg. 15.
^o reign, and he reigned sixtene years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother
was Ierusa the daugter of Sadoc. And

CHAP. XXVIII. For his great wickedness Achaz is taken in battle, his country
spoiled, and many ^^^yne by the kings of Syria, and Israel. 9. yet God
suffers not the kingdom to be subdued. 16. Then requiring help of the
Assyrians. 17 is spoiled by the Idumeans, Philisthians, and Assyrians. 22.
After al which pl^^nes he commits more idolatry. 26. dies, and his son
Ezechias reigns.
TWENTY years old was Achaz when he began to reign, 4. Reg. 16.
not right in the sight of our Lord as David his father. but And the men of
war dismissed the pray, and all the things that::Wicked policy avails
nothing, but hurts much.
whereas on the contrary part they were his ruin, and al Isreal's. Achaz
therefore having spoiled all the vessels of the

CHAP. XXIX. Ezechias repayreth the Temple, and divine seruiee* 5. zelously
exhorts offenders to repentance. 12. the Temple is purified in sixtene days.
18. the king and nobles offer hosts, which the Priests immolate. 25. with
solemn music (ordained by king David) and great joy of all the people.
THEREFORE Ezechias began to reign, when he was five 4. Reg. 18.
and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem:
the name of his mother was Abia, the daughter of Zacharias. And he did that
which was Moreover also of the children of Heman, Iahiel, and Semei: Levites
stood, holding the instruments of David, and the Priests trumpettes. And
Ezechias commanded that they

CHAP. XXX. Ezechias by messengers and letters exhorts the people both of
Judah and Israel, to make Paesch in Jerusalem. 11. which some of Israel, and al
Judah perform, 18. the fourtenth day of the second month, though al could not
be purified according to the law. 23. they make an other feast of Azimes seven
days more, the king aend princes giving hosts to the people.
EZECHIAS also sent to al Israel and Judah: and he wrote to the house of our
Lord in Jerusalem, and should make a Phase to our Lord the God of Israel.
Counsel therefore the Phase the fourtenth day of the second month. The Priests
also and the Levites at length being sanctified offered holocaustes in the
house of our Lord. And they stood in their order according to the disposition,
and law of Moses the man of God: but the Priests received the blood to be
powered out of the hands of the Levites, because a great Being penitent in ha^t
for their sins, Gods dispensation might be sapp^sed for legal purification i^
case of ^^ce ^ine, which otherwise was st^^^ly comma^^^^ L^^^t. 5. (...). Deuteronomy.
27. etc.
that in all their heart Voluntary works of superetogation, more then was
commanded.
other seven days: which also they did with great joy. For Ezechias the king
of Judah had

CHAP. XXXI. Idols being destroyed in all Judah and part of Israel, Priests and
Levites freely execute their functions. 4 Tithes and first fruictes are paid
in such abundance, 15. that they are put in store houses, and distributed by
officers.
AND when these things had been ritely celebrated, al Besides consession of
sins there is also confession of Gods excellency and goodness
confess, and sing in the gates of the camp of our Lord. And the kings the
second, after whom Iahiel, and Azarias, and Nahath,

CHAP. XXXII. Sennacherib king of Assyria inuading Judah, king Ezechias
encorageth the people, and provides to defend the country. 9. the Assyrians
threaten the people, and blaspheme God. 20. Ezechias and Isaias pray. 21. An
Angel destroys the Assyrians army, so their king retiring home, is slain in
his idols temple, by his own sons. 22. Ezechias reigns in peace, 24.
falls into deadly sickness, but miraculously recouereth, offends in pride,
and repents. 27. is exceeding rich, which he imprudently shows to strangers:
32. dies, and Manasses succedeth.
AFTER which things, and:: this manner of truth, came 4. R^g. 18. Isaie 36.
into Judah, besieged the fensed cities, desirous to take them. Which when
Ezechias had seen, to wit, that Sennacherib with vain persuasion, neither
believe ye him. For if no god o^ al nations and kingdoms, could deliver his
people out of my hand, and out of the hand of my fathers, consequently neither
shall your God be able to deliver you out of my hand. Yea and many other
things did his servants speak, ^ore danger of p^^^e in prosperity, then in
adversity.
because his heart was elevated: and wrath came against him, and against Judah
and Jerusalem. And he was humbled afterward, because his heart had foldes of
cattle, and six cities he built to him self: for he had

CHAP. XXXIII. Manasses for his manifold wickedness is led captive into Babylon.
12. repents in prison, is restored to his kingdom, and destroys idolatry:
18. dies, 21. and Amon succeding, 24. is slain by his servants, and Josias
reigns.
TWELVE years old was Manasses when he began to 4. Reg. 21.
name for ever, And I will not make the foot of Israel to A pregnant example of
the effect of hearty repentance.
and he heard his prayer, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom,
and Manasses knew that our Lord he was God. After these things This prayer is
not extant in the Hebrew but in Greek and Latin. as yet neither received for
canonical, by the Church no^ refused.
prayer also, and his obtaining, and al his sins, Manasses his father had
made, and served them. And he

CHAP. XXXIIII. Josias destroys idolatry. 8. repaireth the Temple. 14. The
book of the law found in the Temple is read before him. 19. whereby
understanding the sins of the people, 23. a prophet foresheweth their
punishment, 26. but not in his days. 29. He renews the covenant between God
and the people.
EIGHT years old was Josias when he began to reign, and 4. Reg. 22.
^. Reg. 12.
Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, of al Judah also, and Benjamin, and
the inhabiters of Jerusalem, they delivered Given by the hand of Moses.
by the hand of Moses. And he said the man, that sent you to me: Thus says
our Lord: Behold It is a benefit to be taken out of this world, before genera^
mise^^e come upon the people.
For now

CHAP. XXXV. Josias celebrateth a most Solemn Pasch. 20. Is slain by the king
of Egypt, al Iudalamenting him, 25. most specially Ieremias.
AND Josias made in Jerusalem This Phase, o(...)h made by Io^^as is fanious,
partly for that this feast had been omitted some years, but specially for the
great and extraordinary solemnity made at this um^.
a Phase to our Lord, 4. Reg. 16.
month. And he appointed the Priests in their offices, the Priests they
prepared afterward: for in oblation of holocaustes and of fat the Priests
were occupied until night: wherefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and
for the Priests the children of Aaron last. Moreover the Josias thought that
the king of Egypt intended to invade his kingdom. And it was Gods will he
should be slain, and not see the euiles that should happen to the people.
Josias would not return, but Solemn exequies with lamentations and music.
mourned for him. Jeremy des of Josias and of his mercies: which are commanded
by the law of our Lord: his works also the first and the last, are

CHAP. XXXVI. Ioachaz reigns three months. 4. His brother Eliakim (named
loakim) eleven years, 9. his son Ioachin three months, 11. his uncle
Sedecias eleven years. 14. Most Priests, and people contemning the
admonitions of Prophets, 17. many are slain by the Chaldees, the Temple and
Jerusalem spo led and burnt. 20. The said kings successively, and people are
carried captive into Babylon. 22. After seventy years Cyrus king of Persia,
releaseth the captivity, and gives leave to reedifie the Temple.
THE people therefore of the land took Ioachaz the Hitherto from K. Danids
death the son had ever succeeded to his father.
his brother king for him, over Judah and Jerusalem: and he turned his name
Ioakim: but he took Ioachaz himself with him, and carried him away into Egypt.
Five and of our Lord his God, neither did he reverence the face of Jeremy the
prophet speaking to him from the mouth of our Lord ^^re. 25.
their Sabbathes: for all the days of the desolation she kept a Sabbath, til
the seventy years were expyred. It is like that Esdras added this conclusion
when he restored the holy Scriptures that were lost* for he begins his own
book with the same words. The end of the fifth age.
the first year of Cyrus king of Persians, to fulfill the word of our Lord,
which he had spoken by the mouth of Jeremy, our Lord raised up the spirit of
Cyrus king of the Persians: who commanded to be proclaimed in all his kingdom,
yea by writing, saying: Thus says Cyrus king of the

THE CONTINVANCE OF THE CHVRCH AND RELIGION, IN THE FIFTH AGE. From the
fundation of the Temple, to the captivity in Babylon. The space of 430. years.
ALBEIT there were greater Schisms, Heresies, and more reuoltes from Gods law
and service in this fifth age, then in the former: Yet the true The Church still
visible, and the same faith as before.
Church and Religion continued still, and were no less conspicuous then before.
Which being clear and evident, touching many principal Articles, we will here
only remitte the reader to some special places, for confirmation thereof:
neither will we be prolixe, in declaring other points denied, or called into
controversy at this time, by the impugners of Catholic Religion.

Belief in one God appears plainly in building, adorning, and dedicating One
God.
the Temple with so great solemnity of the Priests, Levites, and all the
Tribes, and particularly by king Salomons prayer. 3. Reg. 7. and 8. 2. Paral.
2. etc. Also Proverb. 8. Eccle. 12. Isaie. 41. 44. 45. The Mystery of the B.
Trinity, Three Persons Christ.
Prouer. 12. Isaiae. 6. 48. 49. Ose. 11. Joel. 2. Of Christ our Redemer. Isaie.
7. 8. 9. 11. 28. 53. Ierem. 23. 30. 33. Ezech. 17. 34. 37. Dan. 7. 9. Osee. 6.
11. Sacrifices Sacraments to be changed by Christ.
14. Joel. 2. Sophon. 2. Aggoei. 2. Zachar. 2. etc. Sacrifices, Sacraments,
and other Rites the same as before. But more frequent Prophecies, that they
should be changed into better, and perfecter by Christ. Prou. 9. Isai. 12. 52.
55. 61. In the mean time for more signification of the singular virtue of
Christ's Sacraments, the effect of penitential works is often recorded. For
example, wicked Achab by hairecloth, fasting, and other humiliation escaped
part of his deserved punishment. Fruict of penance.
3. Reg. 21. Manasses recovered Gods favor, and his temporal kingdom. 2. Par.
33. Who yet was punished in his posterity. 4. Reg. 23. And the Ninevites by
such penance avoided destruction. Ione. 3. Yea nothing is more frequent in the
Prophets then preaching of penance. Isa. 1. 2. 3. 30. Iere. 3. 18. etc. and
others, al ascribing the cause of plagues, and afflictions to the want of
repentance. And false Prophets condemned of error and false doctrine, for
promising the people peace, and security in their sins. Ierem. 14. Lamen. 2.
Besides abstinence from diverse sorts Abstinence.
of meats, counted unclean (Isaiae 66.) and ordinary fastes, according to
Fastes.
the law, other fastes were appointed sometimes, upon occasions requiring, not
only to subdue, and mortify the flesh, but also to obtain mercy at Gods
hands in special distresses. 2. Par. 20. Joel. 1. 2. Ione 3. Elias fasting
forty days, 3. Reg. 19. prefigured Christ's fast. Which the Church imitateth
in Lent of forty days, according to humane ability, for the fastes Lent.
of Christ, Elias, and Moses were miraculous.

To the Feasts instituted before, was added the Dedication of the Feasts.
Temple. 3. Reg. 7. 2, Par. 3. Which was built in Mount Moria, 2. Par. 3. the
special place designed long before for this purpose, when Abraham Place of the
Temple designed long before.
was directed thither by God, and was there ready to sacrifice his son
Isaac. Genesis 22. where David also offered sacrifice. 2. Reg. 24. 1. Par. 21.

This being the only ordinary place for Sacrifice, there were for other uses
of daily prayer reading, preaching, and hearing the word of God other
Synagogues built (as it were Parish churches) in great number: in Synagogues.
Jerusalem it self four hundred and four score, and many more in the whole
kingdom, as the Hebrew Traditions testify. Of al which places, especially of
Sanctuary.
the Temple, there was venerable respect had. For which cause when Ioiada the
High Priest gave order to kill Athalia, he suffered it not to be done in the
Temple, but commanded first to draw her forth. 4. Reg. 11. 2. Par. 23. And as
peculiar places, so special Psalms, and Hymns were appointed Set form of
prayers.
for diverse purposes and occasions. 2. Par. 20.

The ministry of Angeles was very usual in this time. One was sent Ministry
of Angeles.
to comfort and direct Elias the prophet in his afflictions. 3. Reg. 19. 4.
Reg. 1. An Angel stroke the Assyrians whole camp, 4. Reg. 19. 2. Par. 32. Also
the Intercession of Angels is so evident, Tobiae 12. Raphael offering Tobias
prayer to God, that Protestants have no other refuge to avoid this point of
faith, but by denying the Book to be Canonical Scripture.

Honor of other Saints, and their Intercession is proved a Maiori. Honor
and Intercession of Saints.
For so much as honor was religiously exhibited to spiritual power and
excellency, in men yet living in this world. So a Noble man adored Elias the
Prophet, being far greater then he is civil, and worldly respects. 3. Reg.
18. Eliseus also was adored by his disciples, not for any worldly authority
or eminence, but for his spiritual power and superiority amongst them. 4. Reg.
2. Likewise al Prophets, and Priests were religiously honored for their holy
and spiritual functions. 3. Reg. 13. Much more Saints are rightly honored
being immortal, and in eternal glory. It appears also that Elias, seven
years after that he was translated from humane conversation (when Eliseus was
chief Prophet. 4. Reg. 3. which was in or before the eightenth year of
Iosaphat, who reigned five and twenty. 3. Reg. 22.) had care of Ioram, and his
kingdom, admonishing him by letters of Gods wrath, against him and his people
for their sins. 2. Par. 21. And the scripture says often, that God spared
and protected Jerusalem, and the kingdom of Judah for David's sake. 3. Reg. 11.
15. 4. Reg. 8. 19. 20. 2. Par. 6. 21. Isa. 37. we have also example of Saints
Relics Relics.
in the cloak of Elias. 4. Reg. 2. in Eliseus bones, 4. Reg. 13. and in an
other Prophets body buried in Bethel. Which Josias would not suffer to be
touched. 4. Reg. 23. Images were conserved in the Temple, Images.
3. Reg. 7. as before in the Tabernacle: when idolartie was most destroyed. 3.
Reg. 15. 4. Reg. 23. yea an abuse rising of the brazen serpent, for which
Ezechias destroyed it 4. Reg. 18. yet he touched not the Images of Cherubins in
the Temple. Which none but Infideles sought to destroy. And Osee the Prophet
(chapter 3.) bewayleth the want of Theraphim or Images, amongst other sacred
things, Sacrifice, Altar, and Ephod. VVherby the ancient Rabbis prove very
well, that Images of Angels ( and the same of other Saints) are not contrary
to the Decalogue, but the images of Idols. Good works were rewarded, and bad
punished, 3. Reg. 9. and the Good works me^itorions.
whole history of this age testifies the same. Where by the way may be
observed, that some inst men fell from their justice, as Solomon. 1. Par. 28. 3.
Reg. 11. Ioas, 4. Reg. 12. 2. Par. 24. Ozias, 2. Paral. 26. Others from
wickedness returned to piety. as Manasses 4. Reg. 23. 2. Par. 33. the
Euangelical counselles pre figured.
multitude of the people very often much following the disposition of their
kings. Special State of life not commanded by the law, was voluntarily
professed, and observed by some Prophets, and their disciples, called the
children of Prophets. Keeping particular Rules, and wearing distinct Chastity
of clergy men, and religious orders.
habit. 4. Reg. 1. 2. 4. The orders of Nazarites, and Rechabites instituted
before, continued still. Amos. 2. Ierem. 35. still which were very examplar Mat.
19* 1 Cor. 7. Act. 5. 1. Tim. 5.
figures of Religious State, and Orders in the new Testament, and perpetual
chastity of clergy men embraced by such, as follow Euangelical counsels.
proposed, and not commanded by our Savior. To which S. Paul likewise
exhorts, though there be no precept thereof to any, before they bind
themselves.

Exequies for the dead were continually kept, as the sacred history
witnesses, Solemn Exequies for the dead.
recording where and with what solennitie the kings were buried. which would
be ouerlong, and nedeles to recite: the like is also written of some Prophets.
3. Reg. 13. 4. Reg. 23. Holy Tobias by example, and fatherly admonition
exhorted his son, to do works of mercy, not only to the living, but also to
the dead. Put thy bread, and thy wine upon the sepulture of the just. c. 4.
Isaias, chapter 57. as the Jews both understood and Genesis 5.
practiced, prayed, that peace be given to the just, in his couch, or resting
place after his death. Of the general Resurrection, Elias translation
Resurrection.
is a figure, who yet living shows, that God can and will restore al men to
life again in their bodies, after death, as he conserueth him, and Enoch in
their mortal bodies without corruption. Ezechiel also prophecieth of the
Resurrection of the dead, applying it mystically to spiritual resurrection, and
restoration of Israel to former state. chapter 37. Of the last Judgment, and
Judgment.
eternal glory to the good, and everlasting pain to the wicked, Solomon
agreably to the doctrine of other Prophets, discourses* in his book of
Ecclesiastes, Eternal glory or pain.
namely chapter 3. 11. and in the last concludes thus. Let us al together hear
the end of speaking: Fear God, and observe his commandmentes: for this is
every man ( or, to this end man is created) and God will bring, into Judgment
al things, that are done, for every error ( or obscure thing) whether it be
good or evil.

Neither were these and other points of Faith and Religion interrupted, Church
without interruption.
but still believed and professed in the Church always visible and
incontaminate, notwithstanding some boughs an^ branches became vnstructsul,
and rotten: others brake of and were separated from this vine. For when Solomon
falling to luxury, multiplying many wives and concubines, was by them seduced
and brought to spiritual fornication, and idolatry, making altars, and
offering sacrifices to Idols, the Priests, Prophets, and people generally
perseuered in Gods law and service. 3. Reg. 11. After whose death Jeroboam his
servant, of the tribe of Ephraim, Ieraboams wicked policy
possessing Ten Tribes (called the kingdom of Israel) to maintain his new
state, fearing that if the people resorted to Jerusalem, for religions sake,
they would depart from him, and return to the right heirs of David and
Solomon, made an egregious Schism; setting up two golden calves in Bethel, and
Dan. 3. Reg. 12. made temples, altares, and priests to s^rue them, al opposite
to Gods ordinance. But not only the other Two Tribes, called the kingdom of
Judah, but also the greatest part of Israel, especially Priests, Levites, and
deuoutest people, repaired still to Jerusalem, not yelding to that schism and
idolairie. 2. Par. 11. Moreover God raised up and sent special Prophets, to
confirm the weak and recall the seduced.

For Jeroboam had no sowner set up his new altar in Bethel, and begun
Prophets inspired by God to resist Schism and Heresy.
to offer incense upon it, but a Prophet came out of Judah, in the word of our
Lord: and cried against that altar, foretelling that whereas for that present,
they burnt frankine^nse upon it, the time should come, when the false 4. Reg.
23.
priests should be burned there, confirming by present miracles that which he
auerred in words, the kings hand suddanly withering, and restored The often
change of Kings, and evil success in the kingdom of Israel.
again by the prophets prayer, and the new altar cleuing in sunder, that the
ashes fell out. 3. Reg. 13. Further an other Prophet called Ahias foreshewed the
destruction and utter extirpation of Ieroboams family, for his enormious
wickedness, and namely (which is most often inculcate) for making Israel to
sin, by devising and setting abroch a new religious. 3. Reg. 14. which ruin
happened very shortly. For himself reigning twenty two years The first
family reigned but 24. years
(3. Reg. 14.) one of his sons died presently according to the Prophets word.
v. 18. An other called Nadab succeding to his father, reigned only two years,
and was slain together with their whole race and kindred, The second new
family 26.
by Baasa of the tribe of Issachar. 3. Reg. 15. Likewise Baasa following the bad
steps of Jeroboam was forewarned by Iehu a Prophet, that his house should
also be destroyed. And accordingly when he had reigned four and twenty
years, his son Ela reigning but two years, was slain by his servant The
third but 7. days. The fourth* 48. years.
Zambri, and al his kindred destroyed. VVhish Zambri reigned but seven days.
For being forthwith besieged by Amri, of the tribe of Benjamin, he desperately
burned him self together with the kings palace. Neither did Amri then possess
the kingdom with peace. For he being chosen king by the army only, whereof he
was general, an other part of the people chose and followed Thebni. Whereof arose
civil War between the Antikinges, continuing three years: til ^hebni died,
and so Amri reigned alone, but wickedly as his predecessors, twelve years in all. Then succeeded his son Achab most wicked. Who married Iezabel a Sydonian,
and by her was persuaded to worship Baal. 3. Reg. 16. To him not withstanding
God sent many admonitions by sundry Prophets, and bestovved great benefits
upon him, whereupon he did some notorious penitential works; but not
perseuering in any good thing, returned to his wickedness. 3. Reg. 20. And
finally believing false prophets, and persecuting Micheas for prophesying the
truth, was slain in battle when he thought himself most secure. 3. Reg. 22.
having reigned twenty two years. 3. Reg. 16. His son Ochozias reigning but
two years fell through a window, and died of the hurt. 4. Reg. 1. His other
son Ioram; after twelve years was slain by Iehu of another family: who
then dispatched Iezabel, The fifth. 103.
and leaving her in the street, the dogs did e^te her carcass. He also
caused seventy sons of Ioram to be slain, and utterly destroyed al Achabs
house. 4. Reg. 10. For which service he was established in the kingdom, for
four generations, v. 30. So himself reigning twenty eight years, ^. Reg.
10. after hi^ reigned successively his son Ioachaz seuenetene years, his
son Ioas, sixtene years. 4. Reg. 13. his son Jeroboam one and forty
years. Last lie his son Zacharias, whom his servant Sellum of an other
race, killed The sixth, one month. The seventh, 12. years. The eight 20.
years.
when he had reigned but six months. 4. Reg. 15. And after one mon^th Sellum
was slain by Manahen of another progeny. Who reigned tenn^ years. Then his
son Phaceia reigning two years, was slain by Phacee of another generation.
He reigning twenty years, many of his people were carried captive into
Assiria, and himself was slain by Osee of another kindred. 4. Reg. 15.
Finally the Assirians taking Samaria by three years The ninthnine years.
Then overthrown and the kingdom never restored
siege, in the ninth year of Osee possessed the kingdom of Israel, and led all the principal persons captives into Ass^ria: about two hundred forty two
years after that Jeroboam first reigned over the Ten Tribes. Th^^ there were
in all ninetene kings. Besides Thebni, who only reigned in part against
another. Of which the first Jeroboam, and Iehu were advanced by Gods ordinance,
for punishment of others. Amri was chosen by the army, the rest of the people
chosing Thebni: Six invaded by mere force, killing their predecessors. The rest
succeeded* by such titles as their fathers had. And though some were better
some worse then others* al were wicked, and at la^^ ouerth ^w^^.

Contrariwise in the kingdom of Judah standing after the separation of The
kingdom of Judah for David's sake conserved in his sede.
ten tribes about four hundred years, though some kings were wicked, yet
some were good; and in them al God preserved David's seed, by the line of
Solomon, in this direct succession: Roboam, Abias, Asa, Iosaphat, Ioram,
Ochozias, Ioas ( in whose infancy, his grandmother Athalia usurped the
kingdom six years) Amasias, Ozias, Ioathan, Achaz, Ezechias, Manasses, Amon,
Josias, Ioachaz ( hitherto the son ever succeeding his father) then Ioakim
(brother of Ioachaz) Ioachin otherwise called Iechonias, son of Ioachaz. And
finally his Uncle Sedecias; who was carried captive into babylon. But
Iechonias by Gods special providence, was favored and exalted by a new king of
Babylon. whether he was led captive before. In whose line David's of spring
continued though not with title of kings, yet in eminent state, and
estimation. As rests to be noted in the sixth age of the world.

The progeny also of Aaron continued in their office and function of
Succession of Priests continued.
Priesthood, with succession of High Priests; as before from Aaron to Sadoc,
partly in the line of Eleazar, partly of Ithamar, both Aarons sons; so from
Sadoc, by the like succession of both families. For of Eleazar is recorded this
Genealogy 1. Parol. 6. Sadoc, Achimaas, Azarias, Iohanan, Azarias, Amarias,
Achitob, Sadoc, Sellum, Helcias, Azarias, Zaraias, and Iosedech. who was High
Priest in the captivity. (v. 15.) being carried into Babylon in the first
transmigration with king Iechonias, before the general captivity of al, as it
seems 4. Reg. 24. his father Zaraias yet living, who was slain nine years
after by Nabuchadonosor, 4. Reg. 25. And amongst these there were some High
Priests of Ithamars line. Towitte, Ioram, Ioiada (4. Reg. 11. 2. Par. 23.)
Ioathan, Vrias, (4. Reg. 16.) and some others; or else some of the above
mentioned, had other names. recited by Josephus. lib. 10. cap. 11. Antiq. and
Nicephorus lib. 2. cap. 4. Hist. Eccles.

Moreover besides this ordinary succession of Priests, there was an
extraordinary Extraordinary mission of Prophets.
mission of Prophets: to supply more fully the office of preaching the truth,
and admonishing offenders. And these God inspired and sent, most especially
when and where errors sprung, and sins most abounded: giving them
extraordinary grace and most excellent virtues, to conterpoise the enormities
of wicked men. Such were in the times of Achab and Iezabel, in the kingdom
of Israel, besides many others, the two famous Great effects of their
preaching and miracles.
great Prophets Elias, and Eliseus. whose admirable lives and holy
conversation were a mirror to the world, and great terror to the wicked,
Whose works and miracles meruelouslie confirmed the well disposed,
encouraged the w^ake, converted many transgressors, confounded false Prophets,
Elias his miracles.
justified their own preaching, and much glorified God. Elias 1. shut the
heaven, that it rayned not in three years. 2. was fed by ravens. 3.
Multiplied a poor widow meal and oil. 4. Raised her dead son to life
(3. Reg. 17.) 5. Brought fire from heaven, to burn his sacrifice: thereby
confounding four hundred and fifty false prophets of Baal. 6. By prayer
procured rain. (3. - Reg. 18.) 7. Fasted without eating or drincking forty
days and nights together. (3. Reg. 19.) 8. Procured fire from heaven, which
devoured two insolent captains, and their hundred men (4. Reg. 1.) 9. Divided
the river of Jordan with his cloak, that himself and Elisens passed over the
dry chanel. 10. VV as assumpted in a fiery chariote into some place, where he
yet lives. And parting a way Obtained of God, the like duble spirit ( of
prophecy and miracles) to Eliseus. In like manner Eliseus. 1. divided Jordan
again by Elias cloak, and so Eliseus his miracles.
returned to his disciples. 2. Amended the bitterness of certain waters, by
casting in salt. 3. Boys being cursed by him, for deriding him, were forth
with torn by bears (4. Reg. 2.) 4. He procured water without rain, for
three kings in the camp (4. Reg. 3.) 5. Multiplied a poor widow Oil. 6.
By his prayers barren woman became fruitful. 7. He raised her son from
death. 8. Made the bitter broth of his disciples sweet. 9. Fed maine with
few loaves (4. Reg. 4.) 10. Cured Naaman of leprosy. 11. Stroke Giezi with the
same (4. Reg. 5.) 12. Naaman of leprosy. 11. Stroke Giezi with the same (4.
Reg. 5.) 12. Made iron to swim. 13. Knew the secret counsels of the Syrian
king. 14. Made one see horsemen, and fiery chariotes, which to others were
invisible. 15. Made the Syrianes blind, that were sent to apprehend him, and
so led them into samaria. 16. For showed unexpected plenty of corn the next
day, With the death of a great man, that would not believe it. (4. Reg. 7.) 17.
And after his death an other man's dead body, touching his bones revived. 4.
Reg. 13.

Other Prophets wrought also miracles, but these for example may suffice to
she we, that God preserved religion also in the kingdom of Israel. Religion
not wholly destroyed in the kingdom of Israel.
Which himself further testified, even in most desolate times, when Elias
lamented that he was leift alone (3. Reg. 19.) For God ansvvered, that seven
thousand ( meaning thereby a great multitude) had not bowed their knees to Baal,
not so much as in out ward she we conformed themselves to infidelity, or
idolatry. Iehu in his time, destroyed all the worshippers of Baal. (4. Reg.
10.) But none at any time could wholly destroy true Israelites. For God would
not suffer it. 4. Reg. 14. v. 27.

Yea not vvithstanding diverse notorious heresies were preached, and followed
Heresies in the kingdom of Israel.
in that kingdom of the Ten tribes, yet ab did not fall, nor embrace them.
Iecoboam not only made and set up golden calves, but also taught, that they
were Gods, saying: Behold thy gods, O Israel, which Ieroboamites
brought thee out of the land of Egypt. 3. Reg. 12. making temples, altars,
and imaginary priests, which were not of the children of Leui. Also a feast
the fiftenth day of the month, after the similitude of the solemnity, that
was celebrated in Judah. Al which the holy Scripture says: He fourged of his
own heart. The very property of Archeretickes. But the true Priests, Levites,
and manic others, that Many constant in true religion.
had given their heart to seek our Lord, went into Jerusalem, to immolate their
victimes before our Lord the God of their fathers. 2 Par. 11. Yea Naaman a
stranger of Syria, and a Neophite in religion, taught by his example, that none
may yield conformity, nor otherwise communicate with Infideles, then Gods
Priests, or Prophets approve for lawful. 4. Reg. 5.

Unto this heresy of leroboam Achab, by Iezabels persuasion, added Iezabelites.
the worshipping of Baal, as God. 3. Reg. 16. making both temple and altar to
him in Samaria. Ieroboams priests serving fitly this purpose. Though all the
former heretics no more agreed to this new heresy, then Iutherans now admit
of Caluinisme. For Iehua Ieroboamite destroyed al Iezabilits that he could by a
stratageme get together. 4. Reg. 10. v. 28. 29. Muchlesse did al Israel serve
Baal.

Again after that Salmanazar king of Assyria had taken Samaria, and
Samaritanite^. divided into many Sects.
placed there a new people, 4. Reg. 17. they learning the rites of the
Israelits religion, mixed their Paganism there with, and made a new heresy,
or rather many new heresies. For being diverse nations they had in several
conuentieles, their particular gods, and so many diverse Sects. The
Babylonians, Cutheites, Emathites, Heueites, and Sapharuaimites. 4. Reg. 17.
But as the Priests, which taught them rites of true religion, allowed not of
this mixture, so doubtless some people harkened to their admonitions, and kept
religion simply and sincerely. And at this very time of the Ten tribes
captivity, holy Tobias who was carried captive with the Tobias neues yielded
to Schism.
rest, neither before nor after the captivity, leift the law of God. But went
to Jerusalem ( when others served leroboams golden calves) to the Temple of our
Lord, and there adored the Lord God of Israel. And in captivity bestowed
himself in works of mercy, toward the living and dead of his nation. Tob.
1.

As for the kingdom of Judah, it was more free from heresies. For The Kingdom of
Judah more free from herefie.
very few or none of those kings that fell to other gross enormities, yea to
manifest idolatry, became heretics, as is probably collected by that Isaias
the Prophet being sent to Achaz, admonished him, conuersed and dealt with him,
as with one that believed wholly and solely true religion: assuring him that God
would protect Jerusalem, bidding him not to fear the two smoking King Achaz.
firebrandes, in the wrath of Rasin king of Syria, and of Phacce king of
Israel. Isa. 7. Further bidding him ask a singe of God, he answered, though
frovvardli^, yet not as an infidel: I will not ask: and I will not tempt our
Lord. Yea though Vrias the High Priest by commandment Vrias high priest.
of the same king (4* Reg. 16.) made a new altar in place of Gods Altar, yet he
erred not in faith, nor in doctrine, as teaching in Moses chair, but in fact
onclie, and of frailty for fear of the king, a^ the king offended in his
external act, to slatter the king of Syria. And in this case God sent Isai^^
to admonish the king, which Vrias neglected, or durst not do. Likewise Ioram
King Ioram. and others committing idolatry in fact, many others still
professed true Religion.
(4. Reg. 8 2. Par. 21.) Ochozias (2. Par. 22.) Ioas in the latter part of his
life, 2. Par. 24. Manasses in the former part of his reign (4. Reg. 2. 2. Par
33.) and sow other kings of Judah committing idolatry, and making others to
fall with them, either were not wholly perverted, or at least drew not al with
them, For not only Prophets, in whose hand ( or ministry) God spoke, and
reproved these sins, but many others kept their Zele of true religion. as
appeared in their promptnes to serve God, when by good kings Asa, Iosaphat,
Ezechias, Josias and others, they were exhorted, or admitted so to do. 4. Reg.
18. 23. 2. Par. 15. 17. 29. 30. 31. 33. 34. etc.

Finally whereas diverse good princes disposed, things belonging to Divine
service in the temple, correcting faults, and punishing oftenders in that
behalf, (3. Reg. 15. 4. Reg. 18. 23.) they did the same without prejudice of
the High Priests suprem^cie in spiritual causes, and their godly acts make
nothing for the English Paradox of Laiheadshippe. Authority depending upon
divine ordinance, is not changed by factes or practice.
For superior authority, and ordinary power is not proved by factes good or
evil, but rather by Gods ordinance and institution. For as the factes of
usurpers make no lawful prescription; so neither the factes of good men, do
change Gods general ordinance and law: But are done either by way of
execution, or sometimes by dispensation. Often also by commission and special
inspiration of God. As king David by dispensation did eat the holy bread,
Good kings defended and promoted religion not as chief in spiritual causes,
but by way of execution, dispensation, o^ commission.
Mat. 1^.
which was ordained for Priests only. 1. Reg 21. He disposed of Priests and
Levites offices about the Ark of God. Par. 15. 19. by way of execution
according to the law. And of the like offices in the Temple (when it should be
built) 1. Par. 23. 24. 25. 26. by divine inspiration. And Solomon by commission
from God deposed Abiathar the High Priest, from his office and put Sadoc in his
place. 3. Reg. 2. Wherefore albeit good kings did excellently well in
calling together the Priests, and disposing them in their offices, for
execution of Gods service, yea in commanding what they should do 4. Reg. 18.
19. 22. and in punishing Priests (4. Reg. 23.) yet they did such things as
Gods Commissioners, not as ordinary Superiors in spiritual causes, and still
the ordinary subordination made by the law, Deuteronomy. 17. Number. 27. stood firm and
inviolable, the High Priest supreme Judge of all doubts in faith, causes, and
quarrels in religion, when other subordinate inferior Judges varied in their
judgments. Of which offices Malachias the Propher (cap. 2.) admonished
Priests in his time, that whereas they were negligent, not performing Priests
by their negligence do sin but lose not their authority.
their duty, their sin was the greater, for that their authority still
remained, and the perpetual Rule of the law, that the lips of the Priest
shall keep knowledge, and they ( other men generally) shall require the law of his
mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts. And al Princes and others
were to receive the law at the priests hand of Deuteronomy. 17. v. (...).
the Leuitical Tribe. This was the vvarrant of stabilitie in truth of the
Synagogue The Church of the old Testament conserved in truth. Much more the
Church of Christ.
in the old Testament. Much more the Church and Spouse of Christ, whose
excellency and singular privileges Solomon describes in his canticle of
canticles, has such vvarrant. Of this spouse all the Prophets write, and that
more pla^nlie then of Christ himself, forseing more adversaries ^^ Psalm. 30.
conc. ^. li. 3. ^. 32. de doctrine christ. ^. Tim. 3 4. Reg. 19.
bending their forces against her, as S. Augustine observes, then against
Christ her head. And the same holy father in many places teaches, that she
neither perishes, nor loses her beutie, for the mixture of evil members, in
respect of whom she is black, but fair in respect of the good, Canti^. 1.
Notwithstanding therefore sinners remaining within the Church, schismatikes and
heretics breaking from the Church, still she remains the pillar and
firmament of truth; the virgin daughter of Sion.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOKS OF ESDRAS.
ESDRAS a holy Priest and Scribe; of the stock of Aaron, by the line ^. Es^r.
7*
The two books of Esdras and Nehemias are but one in the Hebrew. The third and
fourth are not canonical.
of Eleazar, vvriteth the history of Gods people, in, and presently after
their captivity in Babylon: which Nehemias an other godly Priest
prosecuteth, whose book is also called the second of Esdras, because in the
Hebrew and Greek they are but one book, relating the acts of them both. The
other two books called the third and fourth of Esdras, touching the same
matter, are not in the Hebrew, nor received into the Canon of holy Scripture,
though the Greek Church hold the third book as Canonical, and pla^eth it
first, because it conteyneth things done before the other.

In the two here following, which are undoubtedly holy Scripture S. Ierom
Epist. ad Paulin.
This history has also a spiritual sense
says, that Esdras and Nehemias (to wit the Helper, and Comforter from God)
restored the Temple, and built the walls of the city; adding that all the
troop of the people returning into their country, also the description of
Priests, Levites, Israelites, Proselites, and the works of walls and to wres
divided by several families, aliud in cortice praeferunt, aliud in medulla*
retinent, show one thing in the bark, keep an other thing in the marrow:
signifying that this history has both a literal, and a mystical sense.
According to the First book divided into two parts.
letter, this first book shows the reduction of Gods people from Babylon;
In the first six chapters. In the other sour, their instruction by Esdras
after their return.

THE FIRST BOOK OF ESDRAS.
CHAP. I. Cyrus king of Persia moved by divine inspiration, releaseth Gods
people from captivity, with license to return and build the Temple in
Jerusalem: 7. restoring the holy vessel, which Nabuchodonesor had taken from
thence.
IN THE first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, The first part. The return
of gods people from Babylon.
Isaiae 44. 45* Ierem. 25. 29.
that the word of our Lord by the mouth of Jeremy might be accomplishd, our
Lord raised up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persians: and he made proclamation
in all his kingdom, yea by writing, saying: Thus says Cyrus king of the
Persians: Liberally gave such things into their hands.
did help their hands in vessels of silver, and of gold, in substance, and
beasts, in furniture, besides those things which they had offered
voluntarily. King Cyrus of gold thirty, goblettes of silver of the second
order,

CHAP. II. The names and number of special men, which returned under the
conduct of Zorobabel into lerusalem. 66. their substance of cattle, 68. and
their oblations for the reedifying of the Temple.
AND This enumeration of the Israelites, which aseended into Jerusalem,
signifies the Elect which ascend from the militant Chuch to the triumphant.
these are the children of the province, that went The men of Bethel and Hai,
two hundred twenty three. and Adon, and Emer. And they could not show the
house of their fathers and their seed, whether they were of Israel. The
children of Dalaia, the children of Tobia, the Such as say they are priests
and can not show their vocation, must not exercise, that functon... Al above
numbered of the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Leui, do not amou^t to 30.
thousand three hundred. So in this general number are contained above twelve
thousand of other tribes, not recited among the rest. as Rabbi Salomoa
explicateth the difficulty.
found it not, and they were cast out of the Priesthood. And Athersatha said to
them, that they should not eat of

CHAP. III. An Altar is built for sacrifice, 4 The feast of Tabernacles
solemnly celebrated 8. And in the second year (after their return) the Temple
is founded with great joy of the people, and mourning of some.
AND now the seventh month was come, and the children them Notwithstanding the
terror of infideles, Gods servants too (...) courage to offer sacrifice.
in fear, and they offered upon it holocaust to our Lord morning and evening.
And they made the solemnity of tabernacles, By the ordinance of David. 1. Pa^
25
by the hands of David the king of Israel And they sang together in hymns,
and confession By their weping they testified that the new temple was not so
excellent as the former. And therefore Agg^u* prophetie (c. 2.) can not be
understood of this temple, but of the Church of Christ. ^ Aug li. 18. ci^it. ^.
45.
they wept with a loud voice: and many shouting in joy, lifted up their voice.
Neither could any man discern

CHAP. IIII. The schismatical Samaritanes, because they are not admitted to
communicate With the jews, endeavor to hinder the building of the Temple. 5.
Which nevertheless proceeds, all the days of king Cyrus. 7. but is hundred by
Artaxerxes, til the second year of Darius.
BUT the enemies of Judah and Benjamin heard that the Schismatikes and
Here-tikes may not be admitte^ to communicate in sacrifice with Catholics.
even as you, so do we seek your God: Behold we have immolated victimes from
the days of Asor Haddan the king of Assure, which brought us hither. And
Zorobabel said to Jerusalem a rebellious and naughty city, which they build
making the rampyres thereof, and repayring the walls. Now therefore be it
known to the king, that if that city

CHAP. V. By the exhortation of Aggaeus, and Zacharias, the people proceed in
building the semple. 3. Which their enemies striving to hinder, 5. for
decision of the cause, both parties write to king Darius.
AND there prophesied Aggeus the Prophet, and Zacharias God giving corege to
his servants, stricke their enemies with terror, and so made them cease from
hinderuig his work as they before intended.
the the temple, that was in Ierusale^m, and had carried them into the temple of
Babylon, Cyrus the king brought forth out of the temple of Babylon, and they
were given to Sassabasar so called, whom also he appointed the chief, and said

CHAP. VI. Darius finding in the register, that Cyrus gave license to build the
Temple, commands that none binder it. 8. gives also money toward the
charges, and hosts for sacrifice.
Then Darius the king commanded, and they searched in given from me what must
be done of those ancientes of the Jews, that the house of God may be built, to
witre, that of the kings coffer, that is, of the tributes, that are given out
of the country beyond the River, the charges be diligently given to those men,
lest the work be hindered. And The heart of the king is in the hand of our Lord.
Proverb. 21.
Cyrus commanding, and Darius, and Artaxerxes the kings of the Persians. And
they were immolate the Phase for all the children of the transmigration, and for
their brethren the Priests, and them selves. And

CHAP. VII. Esdras, with many other Priests and Levites, ascends to
^erusalem to teach, and assist the people. 11. bringing Artaxerxes Edict,
declares it to the people, 27. and gives thanks to God.
AND after these things in the reign of Artaxerxes The second part* Esdras
instructs the people.
king of Persians, Esdras the son of Saraias, the son of Azarias, the son
of Helcias, the son of Sellum, the Esdras came with the f^^^^ from Babylon
(...). ^sd* 12* ^^ut returned thither and now ascended the second time ^o
Jerusalem.
came up from Babylon, and he was a quick scribe in the law of Moses, which
our Lord God gave to Israel: and the king gave him according to the hand of our
Lord his God upon him al his petition. And there came up Esdras the Priest, the
most learned scribe of the law of God of heaven, greeting. It is decreed by me
that who^soeuer it shall River, that is for them which know the law of thy God,
yea and the ignorant teach ye freely. And every one that shall

CHAP. VIII. Esdras recites those that came with him from Babylon. 21. the
fast which ^e appointed. 33. and how they brought the holy vessel into the
Temple.
THESE therefore are the princes of the families, and the This great number
which by Esdras persuasion came from Babylon, signified the greatfiuict of
souls converted from sin by the exhortation of holy preachers. S. Beaa. li.
2. in Esara. c. 10.
out of Babylon. Of the children the river, which runs down to Ahaua, and
we tarried there three days: and I sought among the people and among the
Priests for the children of Leui, and found none there. Therefore I sent
Eliezer, and Ariel, and Semeias, and Elnathan, It suffice not to part from
Babylon (that is, from sin) but we must also do works of satisfaction, and
therefore Esdras here proclaimed an extraordinary fast to those that were come
from captivity.
a fast of the Priests, and of the Levites, and the princes of the families of
Israel in Jerusalem, into the treasure of the house of our Lord. And the
Priests and the Levites received

CHAP. IX. For marriages and other association which the Jews had with
Gentiles, Esdr^s lamenteth, 5. and confessing the peoples iniquity, prays
God to conserve them from utter destruction.
AND after these things were accomplished, the princes Malachias the Prophet
complains also of this fault c. 2. v. 11. threatening Gods punishment both to
superiors and subjects for not correcting it. ^* (...).
are not separated from the people of the lands, and from the abominations of
them, to wit, of the Chananeite, and Hetheite, and Pherezeite, and Iebuseite,
and of the Ammonites, and Moabites, and the Egyptians, and Amorrheites. For
they have taken of their daughters sat mourning. And there assembled to me all that feared In respect o^ their greatiniquities Esdias presumes not to ask
the conservation of the whole people, but some relics or ^^ra^ lest part, as
it were a little post or a nail of a whole house toward the reedifying thereof.
a nail might be given us in his holy place, and that our God would
illuminate our eyes, and would give us a little life in our bondage. Because we
are bondmen, and in our bondage our God ^id Why art thou angry with us unto
utter destruction, not to leave us a remnant unto salvation? Lord God of Israel

CHAP. X Esdras calling the people together commands them to dismiss the
strange Women, which they have married: 14 appointing officers to see it
executed: 18 and recites those Which had married such women.
ESDRAS therefore thus praying, and beseeching, and weeping, ^Esdras being
extraordinarily sent by God, to correct the people, repayreth to the high
Priests son, by his authority calls the people together and so proceeds
to make reformation. ^o S. Paus conferred with other Apostles. Gal. 2
up, and adjured the Princes of the Priests and of the Levites, and al Israel,
that they should do according to this word, and they swear. And Esdras rose up
before the house Their ^inne was punished by over much rain. v. 13. And so
affliction gave them more feeling of their faults.
the rain. And Esdas the Priest arose, and said to them: You have
transgressed, and taken strange women to wife, to add upon the sin of
Israel. And now give confession to our Lord the And of the children of Bebai,
Iohanan, Hanamia, Zabbai, Amongst other inconveniences of unlawful marriages one
is that children are borne illegitimate.
children.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF NEHEMIAS.
THIS book bears Title both of the author Nehemias, who writ Duble title of
this book.
it, and of the second book of Esdras, who in the former writ the history of
the Israelites after their relaxation from captivity, to the building again
of the Temple, with other things done the same time. Whereunto The co^tentes.
Nehemias joins things succeding, especially the new erection S. Ierom.
Epist. ad Paulin.
of walls and towers about the city of Jerusalem. And it may be divided into
three parts. In the two first chapters, he shows his compassion Divided into
three parts.
of his countries misserie: and his coming to assist them. In the ten
following, he recites the good effects in repayring, and strengthening the
city with wall^s and people. In the last chapter, the correction of errors and
evil manners, which he found amongst them.

THE BOOK OF NEHEMIAS. which also is called: THE SECOND OF ESDRAS.
CHAP. I. Nehemias hearing the miserable state of his country men in Jury, 4.
lamenteth, The first part* Nehemias his co^miseration of his country.
fasteth, and prays God for their relief.
THE words of Nehemias by his legacy, being sent from a king* by his name
which signifies comforter from our Lord; and by his building again the walls
of Jerusalem; prefigured our Savior, who was sent from God the Father,
himself being the comforter of mankind, and the send^^ of an other comforter
the Holy Ghost, to remain with his Church. S. Beda. prolog in Nehemiam.
Nehemias the son of Helchias. And to the prayer of thy servants, which will
fear thy name: and direct thy servant this day, and give him mercy before this
man. for I was the kings cupbearer

CHAP. II. Nehemias obtaining commission from king Artaxerxes comes to
Jerusalem: 11. secretty vieweth the broken walls, and ruins of the city, 17.
and exhorts all the Jews to the reedifying thereof.
AND it came to pass in the month of Nisan, the twentieth Infideles and
Heretics are grieved, that others endeavor to repair the ruins of the Church
in any country.
were greiued with great affliction, that a man was come, which sought the
prosperity of the children of Israel. And I came to Jerusalem and was there
three days. and I arose in the night, I and a few men with Gods hand was
clearly showed in the effect of obtaining the kings favorable letters.
the hand of my God, that it was good with me, and the kings words, which he
had spoken to me, and I said: Let us rise, and let us build. And their hands
were encouraged in good. But Sanaballat the Horonite, and Tobias

CHAP. III. The High Priest and others begin to repair Jerusalem
streingthning it with The second part. How the city was repaired with walls
and people.
an uttermost, 19. middle, 28. and innermost wall with towers and gates.
AND Eliasib the high Priest arose, and his brethren the Finishing the gate
they dedicated it to Gods service, being for defense of his holy city and so
sanctified it
sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananeel. And besides him did the men of
Jericho build, and set up the doors thereof, and the locks, and bars. And
besides them built Marimuth the son of Vrias the son of Accas. And besides
him built Mosollam the son of son of Enadad, prince of the half part of
Ceila. And

CHAP. IIII. Notwithstanding the enemies rage and oppose against the building
of walls, 4. the Jews build with one hand, and hold their swords in the
other. Nehemias encorageth them, and the work proceeds.
AND it came to pass, when Sanaballat had heard that moved excedingly he
scorned the Jews. and said before his It was Gods providence that the enemies
mocking at the reparation of Jerusalem did not so furiously resist, til the
work was performed: so sometimes heretics scoff at the ende^^^^^^ of poor
priests laboring to restore Catholic religion: but whether they scoff or
rage, Gods holy work proceeds and prospers.
the silly Jews? Will the gentiles let them alone? Shall they sacrifice and
accomplish in one day? Why, are they able to build up the stones out of the
heaps of dust, that are burnt? Yea Tobias also the Ammanite his neighbor
said: Let them that built in the wall, and that carried burdens, and that laded
them: with one of his hands he did the work, and with the other he held a
sword: for every one of the builders

CHAP. V. Nehemias blames covetous richmen, for oppressing the poor. 14.
himself gives largely of his own to the needy.
AND there was S Beda in his time lamented that some spiritual Superiors
neglected to feed their flock, either spiritually or temporally, and yet
exacted temporal revenues, and oppressed the poor people, li 3. c. 21. in
^sd. How much more may we with him, wish an other Nehemias, that is a comforter
from our Lord to correct this fault, and to relieve poor Catholics
distressed?
a great cry of the people, and of their Jews, that were sold to the
gentiles, according to our ability: and will you therefore sell your brethren,
and shall we redeem them? And they held their peace, neither did they find what
to answer. And I said to them: The thing is not good,:: A right property of a
true pastor, to do that good which he preaches to others* S. Beda ibidem.
and my brethren, and my servants, have lent money and corn to very many:
let us not ask this again in common, let us remitte them the debt, that is
dew to us. Restore ye A good conscience has great confidence in God and
justly hops for reward.
Remember me my

CHAP. VI. The enemies guilfully offer to make league with the Jews 3. but
Nehemias proceeds in building the walls: 16. and al bordering nations fear
them.
AND it came to pass, when Sanaballat had heard, and When heretics and other
adversaries of the Church find them selves not able to suppress Catholics,
they offer conditions of peace, and liberty to al* so when protesta^tes
began and where they are weak, they would have none persecuted for any
opinions in religion; but where they are strong they hardly grant toleration to
Catholics,
let us make a league together in the villages, in the field of Ono: But they
thought to do me evil. I sent some evil to vpbraid me withal. Remember me Lord
for

CHAP. VII. Nehemias appoints watchmen in Jerusalem, 5. and calling the
people together recites the number of those, which came first from Babylon.
68. likewise of their cattle, 70. and the gifts of certain chief men toward
the reparations.
AND after the wall was built, and I had put on the doors, Three special
defenses of a city, are the strength of walls, shut^ing and opening the gates
in due time, and dilligent watchmen: so to the custody of faithful souls three
things are necessary; the grace of God, due regard of the outward ^enses, and
continual watch against out invisible enemies.
watchmen of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one by their courses, and
every man against his house. And the city was exceeding large and great, and
that came with Zorobabel, Iosue, Nehemias, Azarias, Rahamias, Nahamani,
Mardochaeus, Belsam, Mespharath, Begoai, Nahum, Baana. The number of the men of
the people of Israel. The children of Pharos, two thousand an childeren of
Ater, the childeren of Telmon, the childeren of Accub, the childeren of Hatita,
the childeren of Sobai: an hundred thirty eight. The Nathineites: The
childeren of hundred thirty five, asses six thousand seven hundred twenty.

Hitherto is reported what was written in the Register. From this place forward
goes on in order the history of Nehemias. S. Ierom here notes whence he
received eech part of this book, which is al Canonical Scripture being al
alike so declared by the Church.
And certain of the princes of families gave unto the

CHAP. VIII Esdras reads the law before the people. 9. Nehemias conforteth
them. 13. They celebrate the feast of tabernacles seven days: 13. and of
collection the eight day.
AND all the people was gathered togethor as it were The people requested
Esdras, to bring the book of the law, and he brought it, neither is there any
mention that he writ the whole law out of his memory or by miracle: which
makes it probable that al copies were not burned or lost, but some reserved by
Ieremias, Eze chiel, Daniel, Aggeus. Zacha rias, or by him self or others out
of which he collected one entire volume correcting faults committed by
scribes, and adding some things for explication sake and supplement of the
histories: and that either by tradition o^ revelation.
brought the law before the Maasia, Celita, Azarias, Iozabed, Hanan, Phalaia:
Levites made silence in the people to hear the law: and the people stood in
their degree. And they read in the book of the Athersatha priu^^eg^^, by
reason of his favor with king Artaxerxes. Chap. 2.
Athersatha) and Esdras the Priest and scribe, and the Levites interpreting to
all the people: It is a day sanctified to the Lord our God, mourn ye not, and
weep not. For 1. Esd. 2.
all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law. And he said to
them: Go, eat fat things, and drinck the

CHAP. IX. The people repenting in fasting and sakcloth, put away their wives
of strange nations. 5. Esdras confesses Gods benefits, and the peoples
ingratitude. 32. prays for them, and makes league with God.
AND in the four and twenteth day of the month the children of Israel came
together in fasting and sackeclothes, True repentance requires w^^kes of
penance, and especially the ren^ou^^g of occasions of sin: as separation from
evil con panie abandoning of evil cogitations, and of much wordly pleasure.
separated from every strange child: and they stood, and confessed their
sins, and the iniquities of their fathers. And they rose up to stand: and
they read in Changing of names imports ^ome beneficial mystery. Genesis ^7.
name Abraham. And by night, that the way might appear to them, by the which
they went. To mount Sinai also thou did descend, and Free will in sinners.
would not hear, and they remembered not thy Number 14.
servitude, as it were by contention. But thou a propitious God, and gracious,
and merciful, long suffering and of much compassion, did not forsake them.
Yea and when they fensed cities and fat ground, and possessed houses full of
al goods: cesternes made by others, vineyardes, and oliuetes, and many trees
that bare fruit: and they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and
abounded with delicious things in thy great goodness. But they provoked thee to
wrath, and sight, served not thee, nor returned from their most wicked devises.
Behold we our selves this day are bondmen: and

CHAP X. M^nie, in name of al, subscribe to the covenant made with God. 30.
Namely not to marry with strangers, 31. to keep the Sabbath day, and the
seventh year. 32. To pay oblations, 35. First fruits, 38. and Tithes.
AND the subscribers were Nehemias, Athersatha the co^mandments of the Lord our
God, and his judgments and his ceremonies. And that we would not give In all
leagues and couenantes of peace those articles are specially mentioned wherein
breach has been made in former times.
our daughters

CHAP. XI. New inhabitants of Jerusalem are recited. 20. likewise who dwelt in
other cities of Judah.
AND the princes of the people dwelt in Jerusalem: but Because Jerusalem was
most impugned by enemies few were willing to dwell there,
one part of ten that should dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts
in the cities. And the people blessed all the men that yet many valient men of
the tribes of Judah Benjamin and Leui offered them selves: of other tribes the
tenth part were chosen by lottes. whereby is gathered that many of the ten
tribes returned also into Chanaan, though the holy Scripture does not so
expressly record what became of them as of the other ten tribes, because
Jerusalem pertained to the lote of Benjamin, Judah was the Kingly tribe, and
Leui the Priestlie. S. Beda. lib. 3. cap. 31* in Esdr.
voluntarily offered them selves to dwell in Jerusalem. These therefore are the
princes of the province, which Zebedei, the son of Asaph prince to praise,
and to confess in prayer, and Becbecia second of his brethren, and Abda the
son of Samua, the son of Galal, the son of Idithum. All the Levites in the
holy city two hundred eighty

CHAP. XII The names and offices of Priests, and Levites, which came with
Zorobabel and Iosue to Jerusalem 27. with great solemnity of thanksgeuing* 31
watchmen are oppoynted on the new walls. 45. and K^peres of the holy treasure.
AND these are the Priests and Levites, that came up Esdras went again to
babylon, and obtaining a favorable commission of the King brought many with
him into Jerusalem. ^. ^^a^. 7.
with Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Iosue: Saraia, Ieremias,:: Esdras,
Amaria, Melluch, Hattus. Sebenias, Rheum, Merimuth, Addo Genthon, Abia, Miamin,
The genealogy o^ ^^gn P^^^^^s (...) Iosue to leddoa otherwise called Iaddus.
Iosue begatte Ioacim, and Ioacim begat Eilasib, and Eliasib begat Ioiada,
and Ioiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat they cleansed the people, and
the gates, and the wall. And the days of David, and Asaph from the beginning
there were princes appointed of the singing men in song praising, and
confessing to God. And al Israel, in the days of Zorobabel, As others gave
tithes to the Levites: so they gave to Priests. Number. 18. ^. 21. 28.
sanctified the Levites, and the Levites sanctified the children of Aaron.

CHAP. XIII. The law is read, 3. strange women are dismissed. 5. Faults in
distribution of the treasure are amended, 10. and due portions gueen to the
Levites. 15. Breakers of the Sabbath are corrected, 23. and those which married
women of strange nations.
AND in that day there was read in the volume of Moses The third part
Correction of faults.
the people hearing it: and there was found written Deuteronomy. 23.
in it, that the Ammonites and the Moabires should not enter into the Church of
God for ever: for that they met not Number. 22.
against them Balaam, to curse them: and our God turned the cursing into
blessing. And it came to pass, when they had This Tobias was an Ammo nite and
a persecuter, c. 14. to whom Eliasib being akine (by reason of unlawful
marriages) joined felowshipe with him for wicked lucre which therefore Nehemias
corrected, prefiguring therein ou^ Saviors zele, who threw buyers and sellers
out of the temple Mat. 21. And these persecuters prefigured heretics in their
words and acts, as venerable Beda expounds. li, (...) Esd. c. 19.
Tobias. He therefore made to himself a and said: Why have we forsaken the
heuse of God? And I assembled them, and I made them to stand in their
standings. And al Judah carried the tithe of the corn, wine, and and people. And
I rebuked them, and cursed them. And I A just man that has merited by good
works may pray with great confidence for reward.
Remember me my God unto good. Amen. THE THIRD, AND FOVRTH BOOKS OF ESDRAS,
WITH THE PRAYER OF MANASSES, follow after the MACHABEES.


ANNOTATIONS. Concerning the books of TOBIAS, IVDITH, WISDOM, ECCLESIASTICVS,
and MACHABEES.
PROTESTANTS and other Sectaries of this time deny these books to be divine
Scripture, because they are not in the Jews Canon, no^ were accepted for
canonical in the primitive Church. But in deed the chief cause is, Heretics
deny some scriptures because they convince their errors.
for that some things in these books, are so manifest against their opinions,
that they have no other answer, but to reject their authority. An old shift
Lib. de Praedest. Sanct. c. 14.
noted and refuted by S Augustine touching, the Book of VVisdome, which some
refused, pretending that it was not canonical, but in deed because it
convinced their errors. For otherwise who sees not, that the Canon of the
Church of Christ is of more authority with all true Christians, then the Canon
The Churches canon of more authority the^ the Jews.
of the Jews? And that the Church of Christ numbreth these Books amongst
others of divine and infallible authority, is evident by the testimony and
diffinition, not only of later general Councels; of Trent, Sess. 4. and
Florence Instructione Armenorum, of Pope Innocentius, Epist ad Exuperium, and
Gelasius, Decreto delibris sacris; but also the Council of Carthage. An. Dom.
419. S. Augustine lib. 2. Doct. Christ. cap. 8. Isidorus lib. 6. Etymol. cap. 1.
Cassidorus lib. 1. Diuinarum Lectionum. Rabanus, lib. 2 de Institutione
Clericorum, and others testify the same, as we shall further note severally of
every book, in their particular places. And for so much as our adversaries
acknowledge these Books to be Holy, and worthy to be read in the Church, but
not sufficient to prove, and confirm points of faith: the studious reader may
consider that the Council of Carthage calls them Canonical, and Divine, which
shows that they are of infallible authority. For a Canon is an assured rule
and warrant of direction, whereby (says S. Augustine lib. 11. contra Faustum.
cap. 5. et lib. 2. contra A canon is an infallible rule of direction.
Cresconium. cap. 32.) the infirmity of our defect in knowledge is guided, and
by which rule other books are likewise known to be Gods word. His reason is,
because we have no other assurance that the books of Moses, the four The
Gospel is known by the Church.
Gospels, and other books are the true word of God, but by the Canon of the
Church. Whereupon the same great Doctor uttered that famous saying: that he
would not believe the Gospel, except the authority of the Catholic Church
moved him thereunto. contra. Epist. Fundamenti. ca. 5.

True it is that some Catholic Doctors doubted whether these books were
Canonical or no, because the Church had not then declared that they Books
doubted of beiore the Churches definition are not doubtful after.
were; but since the Churches declaration no Catholic doubts. So S. Ierom
Praefat. in Judith.
testifies, that the Book of Judith (among the rest) seemed to him not
canonical, til the Council of Nice declared it to be. Likewise the Epistle to
the Hebrews, the Epistle of S. James, the second of S. Peter, the second and
third of S. John, S. Iudes Epistle, and the Apocalypse were sometimes doubted
of, yet were afterward declared to be Canonical. And most Protestants,
namely English admit them al, as the assured word of God, though they were
not always De viris illustrib. verbo. ^acobus.
so reputed by all, but as S. Jerome affirms of S. James Epistle, Paulatim
tempore procedente meruit authoritatem. By little and little in process of time
merited authority.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF TOBIE.
BESIDES the testimonies of Councels and Fathers before mentioned, S. Other
testimonies, that this Book is canonical.
Cyprian, de Oratione Dominica alleging this book (cap. 12.) says: Divine
Scripture instructs us, that prayer is good with fasting and alms. S.
Ambrose (li de Tobia, ^. 1.) calls this book by the common name of
Scripture, saying: he will briefly gather the virtues of Tobie, which the
Scripture in historical manner lays forth at large. Where he also calls
this history Prophetical, and Tobie a Prophet. And lib. 3. offic. cap. 14.
alleges this book as he does other holy Scriptures, to prove that the
virtues of Gods servants far excel the Moral Philosophers. chap. 1^*
S. Chrysostom ho. 15. ad Heb alleges Tobias, as Scripture denouncing curse
to contemners. S. Augustine made a special sermon of Tobias, as he did of Job,
which is the 226. sermon de tempore S. Gregory part. 3. pastor. curae admon.
21. alleges it as holy Scripture. And vene able Beda expounds Toma 4.
(...) in ^. Reg. 10.
this whole book mystically, as he does other holy Scriptures. S. Ierom
translated It was written in Chaldee.
it out of the Chaldee language, wherein it was written, judging it more ^e^e
to displease the Phari^aical Jews, who reject it, then not to satisfy the will
of holy Bishops, urging to have it. Epist. ad Chromat. and Heliodorum. to. 3.

The author is uncertain: but S. Athanasius (in Synopsi) reports the The
co^tentes.
contents at large. And S. Augustine (li. quest. ex v^roque testamento q. 119.)
delivers both the contents, and cause of writing it, briefly thus. The
servant of God, holy Tobias is given to us after the law, for an example, that
we might know how to practice the things, which we read. And if tentations
come upon us, not to depart from the fear of God, nor expect help from any
other then from him. Divided into three parts.
It may be divided into three parts. The first four chapeers show the holy
and sincere manner of life of old Tobias. The eight following relate the journey,
and affairs of young Tobias, accompained and directed by the Angel Raphael. In
the two last chapters, they praise God. And old Tobias prophecieth better state
of the commonwealth.

THE BOOK OF TOBIAS.
CHAP. I. Tobias of the tribe of Nephthali, never communicates in Ierobams
scisme. 9. This book is read at Mattins the third weke of September.
teaches his son to fear God, and flee sin. 11. Being in captivity
cateth not forbidden meats, as others do. 13 Amongst other works of mercy,
he lends ten talentes of silver to Gabelus. 2^. Is persecuted and spoiled.
24. Shorty the king being slain, he recouereth liberty and his goods. The
first part. Tobias his holy manner of life.

TOBIAS of the tribe, and cirie of Nepthali (which is in Not absolutely al, but
very many: for some of the same tribe and kindred did also fear God. c. ^. v.
2.
al went to the golden calves, which when in a great multitude of his kindred,
he saw Gabelus stand in need, who was of his tribe, under a bil of his hand he
gave him the said weight of silver. But after much time, Salmanasar

CHAP. II. Tobias to bury an Israelite that is slain in the street, leaves
his dinner and ghestes. 10. Is made blind by Gods permission, for manifestation
of his patience. 19. His Wife gets her living by work, 22. and for a
scrupulous Word, reprocheth his sincerity.
BUT after these things, when there was a festiual day of All the people of the
ten tribes did not serve Ieroboams golden calves, but some feared God and
consequently refrayned from evil. Prou. 3. at least from idolatry
that fear God, to make merry with us. And when he had Amos. 8. v. 10.
into lamentation and mourning. But when the sun escape the commandment of
death, and True zele is not hindered from works of mercy by fear of death:
because perfect charity casts out fear. I, Joan 4.
do thou bury the dead again? But Tobias more fearing God, then the king,
Both elder and younger sort of his kindred derided him, not his proper parents,
for he was deprived of father and mother when he was a child, as it seems. c.
1. v. 4.
parents and cosins derided his life, saying. Where is thy hope, for

CHAP. III. The prayer of Tobias, 7. and Sara, in their several afflictions,
24. are heard by God, and the Angel Raphael is sent to relieve them.
THEN Tobias lamented, and began to pray with tears, Because we have not
obeyed thy commandmentes, therefore In a province of the Medes whereof Rages was
the head city, for when they came where Raguel dwelt, Tobias stayed there, and
the Angel went to the city of Rages where Gabelus dwelt. c. 9. As one may say:
such a one dwells in Rome, that dwells in any part of Romania: in Yorck,
Lincoln, or Mum moth, that dwells in one of those shires.
Rages a city of the Medes, she also heard reproach of one of her fathers
handmaydes, because she had Asmod^os, signifying Destroyer is a captain or
king of those devils which specially destroy souls by the sins of the flesh,
and afterward tormenteth both souls and bodies for the same sins.
Asmodeus had killed them, forth with as they were entered in unto her. Therefore
when she rebuked the wench for her a tempest thou make a calm, and after
tears and weeping thou powrest in ioyfulnesse. Be thy name God of Israel Act.
10. An Angel showed Cornelius that his prayers were heard Apoc. 5. prayers of
the faithful are offered to God by Angels. and other Saints.
recited in the sight of our Lord.

CHAP. IIII. Tobias thincking he shall dye, gives his son godly admonitions.
7. especially exhorts him to give alms diligently. 13. to flee al
fornication, pride, and fraud. 21. And tells him of money lent to a friend.
THEREFORE when Tobias thought his prayer to be As Moses to the people Deuteronomy.
33. and David to Solomon. 3. Reg. 2. So Tobias gave holy admonitions to his
son: in all fourtene. noted in the inner margin.
Hear my son the words 1
*honor to thy mother all the days of her life: for thou must 2
be mindful what perils, and how great she suffered for thee in her womb. And
when she also shall have accomplished 3
not to sin at any time, and pretermitte the precepts of our Lord God. * Of
thy substance The same doctrine of good works, and reward, is taught* Daniel.
4. v. 24.
give alms, and turn not 4
away thy face from any poor person: for so it shall come to pass that
neither the face of our Lord shall be turned from thee. As thou shall be able;
so be merciful. If thou have 5
self my son of al fornication, and beside thy wife never abide to know
crime. * Never permit pride to rule in thy word: 6
for in it al perdition took his beginning. * Whosoever has 7
wrought any thing for thee, pay him his hyre immediately, and let not the hyre
of thy hired servant remain with thee at al. * That A notable rule, agreeable
to the law of nature.
which thou hate to be done to thee by an other, see 8
thou do it not to an other at any time. Eat thy bread with Works of
mercy exte^d also to the dead.
the burial of a just man, 9
and do not eat and drink thereof with sinners. Seek 10. 11
counsel always of a wiseman. At al time bless God: and 12
desire of him, that he direct thy ways, and that al thy counsels remain in
him. I tell thee also my son It perteyneth to good men amongst other things,
to give notice and to dispose of their temporal goods by their last will.
that I gave 13
ten talentes of silver, whiles thou wast yet a child, to Gabelus, in Rages a
city of the Medes, and I have a bil of his hand with me: and therefore enquire
how thou may come 14
lead in deed a poor life, but we shall have many good things if we fear
God, and depart from al sin, and do well.

CHAP. V. Young Tobias seeking a guide for his journey, Raphael the Angel in
shape of a The second part. The journey and affairs of young Tobias assisted by
the Angel Raphael.
man presents himself, and undertakes this office. 23. The mother lamenteth
the abscence, and danger of her son.
THEN Tobias answered his father, and said: I will do The Angel Raphael
appearing in form of a man prefigured our Savior who indede became a very
man. S. Beda.
goodly yongman, standing girded, and as it were ready to walk. And not
knowing that manner of joy shall be to me, which sit in darkness, and see not
the light of heaven? To whom the young man said: Be Raphael signifying med^^in^
of God. ^. Greg. ho. 34* calls himself Azarias, whose shape and vi^a ^e he
took upon him, which name also signifies the help of God.
Raphael the

CHAP. VI. By the Angels advise young Tobias apprehends a fish, that
ass^ulteth him. 5. reserueth the heart, gal, and liver for meaicines. 10. They
lodge at the house of Raguel, whose daughter Sara Tobias is to marie, 14. A
devil has heretofore slain her seven husbands, 16. but shall not hurt him.
AND Tobias went forward, and a dog followed him, and out with a loud voice,
saying: Sir, he inuadeth me. And the S. Paul also calls flesh of fish 1. Cor.
15. and Pliny lib. 9. c. 15.
flesh thereof, and they took it with them in the way: the rest they salted
which might suffice them, til they came to Rages the city of Medes. Then
Tobias asked the and liver. v. 19.
heart upon coals, the Devils who exalted them selves as equal with God, a^e
justly made subject to corporal creatures. God co^curring with natural causes,
whose good pleasure is sometimes to use instruments naturally unapt, as when
Christ gave sight to the blind by putting clay on his eyes. Joan. 9. sometimes
more apt, as when he fed many with few loaves. Joan. 6. So the Angel by Gods
appointment used this means to expel the devil.
smoke thereof drives out al kind of devils, either from man or from woman, so
that it comes no more unto them. And the Into the place where good souls
rested, none then having access into heaven. See Annotations. ^en. 37.
hell. Then the Angel Raphael said and heart v. 8.
liver of the fish The second night he asked and obtained this grace; for he
knew not his wife until the fourth night. v. 22.
second night thou shall be admitted in the copulation of the holy
Patriarchs. And the third night thou shall obtain

CHAP. VII. They are kindly entertained by Raguel. 10 Tobias demands Sara to
wife, which Raguel, encoredged by the Angel, grants. 15. and the marriage is
made.
AND they went to Raguel, and Raguel received them A just man (says S.
Ambrose. lib 3. Off. c. 14.) feared other men's harms, and would rather his
daughter should not be married then others should be in danger, preferring
honesty before profit.
gave no answer to him demanding, the Angel said to to thee. And taking his
daughter by the right hand, gave it

CHAP. VIII. Tobias bruling part of the fishes liver, Raphael binds the
devil. 4. Tobias and Sara pray. 11. Raguel fearing that Tobias is dead, makes
a grave for him, but understanding that he is well, fills it up again, 21.
prepares a feast, gives the half of his goods presently for Saraes dawrie,
the other half after her parents death.
AND after they had supped, they brought in the young See chap. 6. v. ^.
Mystically it signified Christ's passion whereby the devil was expelled out of
men's hearts. S. Aug ser. 28. de Sanctis. Prosper, li. de promiss. p. 2. c. 39.
the liver, and laid it upon live coals. Then Raphael the Angel took the
chance to him, as also to the other seven husbands, that went in unto her. And
when they had prepared the pit, In the one family there were no more
children but one son, in the other one only daughter.
only

CHAP. IX. The Angel Raphael goes to Gabelus, receives the money, and
brings him to the marriage. 8. They salute each other, and Gabelus wishes al
prosperity to young Tobias, and his spouse.
THEN Tobias called the Angel to him, whom he thought The Angel went to the
city i^ self called Rages, Tobias remaining in the ter ^i^orie or province
thereof, w^^ Ra^^e^, which place is also called Rages. c. v 7.
Rages the city of Medes: and render him his handwriting, and receive of him
the money, and desire him to come to my marriage. For thyself know that
Raguel has adjured me, whose adiuring I can not despise. Then Raphael taking
four of Raguels servants, and two camels,

CHAP. X. The parents lament the long absence of their son Tobias. 8* whom
when Raguel can not persuade to stay longer, 11. he wishes much good unto him,
and his wife, admonishing her to be dutiful in all things.
BUT when Tobias tarried long " because of the marriage, Such of the Jews as
believe in Christ, heartily lament that he ^a^^eth so long from their nation.
Some more assuredly with old Tobias, others more doubtfully with his wife,
expect his return. S. Beda ^n Tobiam Even so the remnant of Catholics in
countries fallen to heresy have great sadness and continual sorrow in their
heart (Romans 9.) vvishing (with what temporal loss soever) the salvation of
their brethren, kinsmen, and countriemen: some hoping more confidently and
comforting others, that Christ will again illuminate our whole nation, as sight
was restored to old Tobias.
they began both to weep together: because their son did not return to them
the day appointed. His mother therefore wept with discomfortable of, if it were
possible, coming. But Raguel said to his son

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VI. VII. VIII. IX. X.
1. Tarried long because of the Marriage.] Out of this example of a holy Marriage
between young Tobias and Sara, described in the five precedent chapters, some
Instructions to married persons out of the example of Tobias and Saras Marriage
special good lessons may be briefly gathered, for the instruction and
consolation of such as are to marie, or be already married. Not that either al,
or only the same observations perteyne now to christian Marriage, but that al
Christianes may see, how orderly godly persons proceeded in making, and
performing this holy contract in the old Testament, and thereby learn, that
more perfection is required in Christian Matrimony, being now (as then it is
was not) a holy Ephesians. 5. Mat. 19.
Sacrament, signifying the Union between Christ and his Church: and giving
peculiar True Marriage always a holy contract. Now a Sacrament. Proper
instructions for man and wife.
Grace to the parties (if themselves hinder it not) to bear more easily the
incident burdens, and rightly to fulfill the proper duties of man and wife,
according to the godly instruction of the Roman Catechism. All that we shall
part. 2 de Matrim. q. 22. 23.
here note, may be reduced to two heads, or principal parts. For in this
Marriage there were certain necessary, and as it were essential points,
without which it had not benne a lawful nor right contract: Other accessarie
ceremonies, and Rites were also very convenient, for the more solemnity and
better performance thereof. As the like of both sorts are now, but more perfect
in Christian Marriages. In the former kind, first of al, the end of Marriage was
proposed by the Angel, and desired by the parties. chap. 6. v. 22. c. 8. v. 9.
not for pleasure but for children, and posterity, by which God might be
blessed and served: Secondly Marriage must be between lavvful persons, For the
servants of God could not Three necessary points in Matrimony.
lawfully match, neither with Infideles, nor with over nere kindred, but in
convenient Exodus 34. Deu. 7. Leuit. 18. Nu. 36. v. 7.
degrees, and that ordinarily in the same Tribe. chapter 6. v. 11. chapter 7. v 14. as
the law of Moses prescribed. Thirdly, the parties must give, and express
their mutual consent, and the good will of parents was also requisite. chapter 7.
v. 10. 15. 20. These principal points premised; for the due solemnization
other Rites were also adjoined. First Raguel, the maids father, gave his
daughter taking her by the Ten godly Rites observed in the Marriage of Tobias
and Sara.
right hand, and so delivered her into the right hand of Tobias. chapter 7. v 15.
as with us the father, or nere friend of the woman, gives her to be married to
such a man. Secondly her father prayed that it might well succeed, ibidem. and
so do al freindes now, especially the Priest by the public prayers of the
Church. The third rite, the couenantes of Marriage were made, with assigment of
dawrie, 1. 2. 35 4. 5.
also written, chapter 7. v. 16 and sealed, as the Apud. Munst^rum. Genesis 29. v.
27. Iudic. 14. v. 17.
Hebrew and Greek text witness. The fourth, Inuitation of freindes to the
Marriage. chapter 8. v. 2. ch 9. v 3. The fifth* They made a feast, which commonly
dured seven days, but here fourtene* ch 8: v. 23. for the duble joy of the
marriage, and expulsion of the devil. But though the feast continued long, yet
was it most moderate and sober, with fear of our Lord they celebrated the
feast of the Marriage chapter 9. v 1^. Plato a heathen Philosopher, li. 6* de
le^ibus, prescribes what temperance in meat and drink, and what modesty of
behavior, are required in marriage feasts. Whose eccellent sentence, F.
Serarius in Tob. 10. recites The sixth rite, the bringing of the bride to her
chamber, 6.
chap 7 v 19* the Catholic Church has a particular form of blessing the
bridal chamber. The seventh, Tobias and Sara observed three days continency 7.
after the Marriage ch 6. v. 18. ch 8. v. 4. which now is commended by way of
counsel, not of precept. The eight, Tobias observed that which the Angel 8.
advised him, in burning the liver of the fish upon coals in their chamber. ch
6. v. 19. ch 8 v. 2. So devout persons commonly observe that which spiritual
men exhort them unto, though it be not a commandment. The ninth, Private 9. 10.
prayer of the new married persons, chapter 6. v 18. c. 8. v. 4. The tenth, the
sending away of the spouse to her husbands house, or dwelling place, with good
wishes, due payment of the promised dawrie, and godly admonitions by her
parents. chapter 10. v. 10. 11. 12. 13.

CHAP. XI. ^eauing Sara with the rest of the company, and the flock to follow,
the Angel Raphael and Tobias go before, 5. are joyfully received, 8. Tobias
annointeth his fathers eyes with the fishes gal, and he sees. 18. Sara
arriueth seven days after with her family and cattle.
AND when they returned they came to Charan, which said to Tobias* But when
thou art entered into thy house forthwith adore our Lord thy God: and giving
thanks to him go to thy father, and kiss him. And immediately annointe It
nothing disgraceth the sacred history that a small matter being also true is
recorded with the rest. As not one letter nor one title of the law may be
omitted, Mat. 5 S. Be^^ also expounds it mystically of Gods preachers. S.
Ierom. does the like, in. Isaiae. 56 and S Augustine li 22. c 56. c^^t. Faustum.
Manich.
the dog before, which God used this gal of a fish in curing Tobias eyes, in
like sort as the liver in driving away the devil. c. 6. v. 8.
he received sight. And they glorified

CHAP XII. Old Tobias and his son offer the half of all the goods which they
had newly received to Raphael, for his wages. 6. Who then declares to them
that he was sent from God to help them, 15. and that he is an Angel, ^0. He
parts ^ way, and they render thanks to God.
THEN Tobias called to him his son, and said to him: He has 1 2. 3 4. 5 6 7
led me and brought me again safe, he 1 2. 3 4. 5 6 7
caused me to have my wife, and the 1 2. 3 4. 5 6 7
evil spirit he chased from her, he 1 2. 3 4. 5 6 7
made joy unto her parents, my self he 1 2. 3 4. 5 6 7
delivered from being devoured of the fish, 1 2. 3 4. 5 6 7
thee also he has made to see the light of heaven, and we are replenished with
Gratful Tobias recounteth seven benefits received by the companion of his
journey, and that they have received (not many but) al good things by him.
al good things by him. What can we give him worthy for these things? But I
beseech Fasting and alms are as two wingues with which prayer flies into
heaven.
Prayer is good with fasting O how sweet (or excellent) a thing is it (says S.
Augustine ser. 3. de Natiuit.) when Angeles guardianes of our life offer our
vows (or resolution to flee vices and embrace virtues) before the sight of
Gods Majesty?
offered thy prayer to our Lord. And because thou wast acceptable to God, it
was necessary

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XII.
12. I offered thy prayer to our Lord.] Here the Angel Raphael reports
certain good offices, which he had done for Tobias. He did other like for his
Offices of Angels toward men.
son, and for Raguel, and his daughter, which are likewise recorded in this
book. And the whole world, especially Gods seruantos, receive continual great
benefits by holy Angeles, as partly may be gathered in this holy history,
and more else where. For first the office of Angeles is, to assist, or be
always Readic to help al.
ready, as most diligent seruitoures of God, expecting what his divine goodness
will appoint them, whither to go, and what to do for the benefit of men: as
holy Raphael was sent, when young Tobias wanted a guide. Secondly, Angels Offer
men's prayers and good works. Aid the godly.
offer the prayers of the faithful, or as the Greek text ^eadeth, v. 15 Angels
present the prayers of Saints, that is, of godly men and women to God: so
Raphael testifies here him self, that he offered Tobias prayers to our Lord.
Thirdly, Angeles aid and assist those that love purity of life, sincere
service of God, hate vice, embrace virtue, and do works of mercy; so Raphael
assisted Tobias, when he traueled to butie the dead, fleing from the kings
fury, and hiding himself, ch ^. v. 21. 23. Fourthly Angels exhort to good
works, as in this 12. Exhort to good. Instruct.
chapter. v. 6 8 9 10 18 Fifthly they s^^gest ^^d instruct what to do, ch 6. v.
4. 5. Raph^^^ ^^^ght young Tobias to ^ake the fi^h, v^b well him, reserve parts
thereof, (...) (...) a^^ised him to lodge at Raguels house, to demand S^ra to
wife, and v. 16. 17. i^structed him, against whom devils have power. Sixthly,
they Expel evil spirits. Deliver from evils and dangers. Procure temporal
commodities for the souls good.
expel devils from persons, and places, chapter 8. v. 3. Raphael took and bound
the devil Asmodeus in the desert of hiegher Egypt. Seventhly, they deliver men
from dangers and euiles, c. 6. v. 3 as when the great fish assaulted Tobias,
and Sara from molestation, and slander, and old Tobias from blindness. chap. 3*
v. 10. chapter 11. v. 8. chapter 12. v. 14. Eighthly. When it redoundeth to the honor
and more service of God, and good of the soul, Angeles procure riches, and
worldly commodities, chapter 12. v. 3. Young Tobias gratfully confessed the great
benefits received by his guide, concluding generally, by him we are
replenished (says he) with al good things. Ninthly, Good Angels also prove
men, for their more merit, so the Angel witnesses chapter 12. v. 13. Because thou
vvast acceptable to God, it was necessary, that tentation should prove thee.
Tenthly, and finally (for we Prove the good by trib^lations.
remite the reader to larger documentes of others) after proof of patience,
fortitude, and other virtues, holy Angeles comfort good men; so Raphael
encoraged old Tobias, saying, chapter 5. v. 13. his blindenes should shortly be
cured, chapter 12. v. 12. showed him how gratful his prayers with tears and
works of mercy were in Gods fight. He comforted Raguel and his family by
bringing Comfort the patient and a^ virtuous.
young Tobias to their house, chapter 7. v. ^. Much more, chapter 8. v. 16. both them
and al Tobias his family, by driving away the devil; and lastly by revealing
himself unto them. So holy Angeles, especially the proper guardian patrones of
every one, are always ready to help men; guard them, exhort them to good,
do instruct them, do expel evil spirits, and deliver men from many evils
Angeles guardians have special care of souls committed to their charge.
and dangers, do procure them temporal commodities, prove their virtues, offer
their prayers and good works, assist them al their lives, and at their
deaths, then also bring their souls to the Judgment seat, and (if they die
in good state) to eternal joy and glory, whereof the ancient fathers writings
are full. S. Gregory the great in his Dialogue, li. 4. c. 58* S. Athanasius li.
de communi essentia. S. Chrisostom. ho. 3. in Epist. ad Colloss. li. 6. de
Sacerdotio. Gregorius Turonen. li. de gloria Martyrum, and Confessorum. S.
Augustine Epist. ad probam. c. 9. Epist. 68. ad fratres in eremo. li. 11. c. 31.
ciuit. and octoginta trium. qq. q. 79. Our Savior himself testifies that
Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner. Luc. 15. and therefore, they know
and have care of men's states in this life, and finally Angeles carried the soul
of poor Lazarus into Abraham's bosom. Luc. 16.

CHAP. XIII. Tobias the father prayseth God, exhorting al Israel to do the
same, 11. prophecieth The third part. Old Tobias prayseth God, prophecieth
better state of Gods people.
the restoration and better state of Jerusalem.
AND Tobias the elder opening his mouth, blessed our Temporal affliction for
the spiritual good of others.
make them know, that there is no other God omnipotent besides him. He has
chastised us His body being in captivity, yet his spirit was free to praise
and thank God. S. ^^pr. li. de mortaluate.
in the land of my captivity will He prophecieth the reedifying of the temple,
and city of ^e^usalem.
reedefie his tabernacle in thee, and may call back all the captives to thee,
and thou may rejoice for ever and ever. Thou shall shine with a glorious
light: and all the coasts al be blessed, and shall be gathered together to our
Lord. Blessed Only celestial Jerusalem shall be free from al tribulations.
from al her tribulations, the Lord our God. Blessed shall I be if there shall
remain of my seed, to see the No Christian in ignorant ( says S. Augustine
Epist. 86.) that Alleluia is a voice of praise. In English it is. Praise ye the
Lord with joy.
Alleluia shall be song. Blessed be our Lord, which has

CHAP. XIIII. Old Tobias dies at the age of an hundred and two years, 5.
exhorts his son and nephews to piety, forshewing that Niniue shall be
destroyed, and Ierusal^m reedified. 14. younger Tobias returns with his
family to Raguel, and dies happily as he had lived.
AND the words of Tobias were ended. And after that This can not be understood
of the city of Jerusalem but of the Church of Christ.
all the kings of the earth shall rejoice in it, adoring Gods servants must not
only expect what shall be commanded, but also seek to know what they ought to
do.
seek to do the things that please him: and command your children that they
Now therefore children hear me, and do not tarry here: A notable commendation
of Tobias family and posterity. And a plain testimony that true Religion
never failed wholly in the ten tribes, much less in the kingdom of Judah,
least of al in the Church of Christ, and new Testament.
al his kindred, and al his generation continewed in

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF IVDITH.
S. Ierom sometime supposed this book, not to be canonical, but after ward S.
Ierom for the authority of the council of Nice, held this book to be
canonical, which before he did not.
Epist. 111 115. Prefat. in Judith.
finding that the Council of Nice accounted it in the number of holy
Scriptures, he so esteemed it; and thereupon not only translated it into Latin,
out of the Chaldeetongue, wherein it was first written, but also as occasion
required, alleged the same as divine Scripture, and sufficient to convince
matters of faith in controversy. For otherwise his opposing the authority of
the Nicen Council, should prove nothing at al against the Jews, seeing they
also acknowledge this book amongst Agiographa (or holy writtes) but less
fit (say they) to streingthen those things which come into contention.
whereby is clear that S. Ierom thenceforth held it for divine Scripture. As
further appears in his commentaries in Isai 14. more expressly Epist. ad
Principiam, he counted it in rank with other Scriptures, whereof none doubts,
saying: Ruth, Esther, Judith were of so great renoume, that they gave the names
to sacred volumes. And in this Preface doubted not to say: that the rewarder of
Iudithes chastity (God himself) gave her for imitation not only to women, but
also to men: gave her such virtue that she overthrew him, whom none could
overcome, and conquered the invincible. Also Before the Others Doctors both
before and after the council of Nice accounted this book canonical.
Council, Origin in c. 14. Judith. Tertullian de Monogamia. c. vlt. And diverse
whom S. Hilarie cites, and dissenteth not from them, Prologo in Psalmos, held
this book for Canonical. Many more writes likewise about the time of the same
Council, and after so account it. Prudentius in Phychomachia prudicitiae and
libidinis: Chromatius in c. 6. Mat. Paulinus. in Natali. 10. S. Chrysostom hom.
10. in Math. S. Ambrose. li. 3. Offic. c. 13. Epist. 82. et li. de viduis. S.
Augustine (or some other good author) written two sermons of Judith, 228. 229.
Cassiodorus diuini lect. c. 6. Fulgentius Epist 2. de statu viduarum. Ferrandus
Carthaginensis ad Regiu^ de re militati. Iumi^us Africanus li. 1. de partibus
divine l^gis. Sulpitius in hisstori^. S. Beda de sex aetatibus. Alredus writing
the life of S. Edward our king. More are not necessary to reasonabl^men.
Con^erning the time, and author, it s^m^th most probable tha^ these things
happened when When this his^orie happened An^ by whom it was written
Manasses king of Judah was e^t er in prison in Babylon, or newly restored to 2.
Para. 33.
his kingdom, who as it seems permitted the government to the high Priest
Eliachim (Chap 4) otherwise called ^oachim (chapter 15) (...) also writ this
book, as ^hilos Chronology, li. 2. reports. From which time they had no
war^es ^ilth. reign of Ioachoz, about 80* years, conformable to the long
pea^^ mentioned, chap. 6. v 30. In sum we have her, not a poetical Comedy
(as Martin Luther shameth ^ot to call it, in Simpos^ac^s, c. 29 and in his
German The co^tentes.
Preface of Judith, but a sacred History (as al ^for^mentione esteemed it, and
the Jews confess) of a most valiant Matrons fact, delivering the people of
God from persecution of a cruel Tyranne. The first three chapters show the
occasion Divided into four parts.
of this danger: the next four describe the dif^^culties and distresses
thereof: other seven with part of the 15. how Judith delivered them from it. In
the rest Judith is much praised, and she with the whole people praise God. This
book is read at Mattins the fourth week of September. The first part. The
occasion of the Jews persecution at this time.


THE BOOK OF IVDITH.
CHAP. I. Nabuchodonosor king of Assyrians ouercometh Arphaxad king of the
Medes: 7. summoneth many other nations to submit themselves to his Empire:
11. which they refusing he threatens revenge.
ARPHAXAD The author being resolved to write this history, joins his
narration to his internal purpose, saying: Arphaxad therefore etc. S. Greg. ho.
2. in Ezech.
therefore king of the Medes had to the height of the towers: and he Thou fool
this night they shall take thy life from thee, and these things whose shall they
be? Luc. 12. ^. (...).
gloried as mighty in defenderet se.
revenge him self of al those countries.

CHAP. II. Nabuchodonosor sends Holofernes his General to Waist al countries
of the West. 7. With a great army, and abundant munition. 11. They subdue
many places, and others are strooken With great fear.
IN the thirtenth year of king Nabuchodonosor, the two This cruel commandment
was as cruelly put in execution by Holofernes, chapter 3. ^. 11.
Thine eye shall spare no kingdom, men on foot, and twelve thousand archers
horsemen. And he made al his expedition to go before in a multitude

CHAP. III. Many kings and other princes submit them selves to Holofernes.
8. He receives them, and takes of their chief men to reinforce his army, 11.
nevertheless destroys their cities, and their gods, that Nabuchodonosor only
might be called God.
THEN the kings and princes of al cities and provinces* and hills, and
fields, and heardes of oxen, and flocks of sheep, and goats, and of horses,
and camels, and al our goods, and families are in thy sight: let al our
things be An express figure of Antichrist 2. These. 2. for whom al heretics
make way as precursers, for the singular man of sin will confess no God but
himself.
he only might be called God of those nations, which could be subdewed with the
might of Holofernes. And passing through al Syria Sobal,

CHAP. IIII. The children of Israel excedingly fearing Holofernes forces. 3.
provide to resist him, by the exhortation of the High Priest, using both
human, 8. and divine means.
THEN the children of Israel, which dwelt in the Land The second part. Gods
people are in great fear and distress.
of Judah, hearing these things, were sore asrayd of his presence. Trembling
also, and horror invaded their senses, The high priest managed also the
temporal afsayres of the common wealth, at this time, by consent and commission
of king Manasses, as is most probable these things happening shortly after his
repentance. 2. Paral. 33.
the priest wrote of the mountains, by which there might be way to Jerusalem,
and should keep watch, where the way was narrow between the mountains. And the
children of Israel did according Exo. 17.
his might, and in his army, and in his shieldes, and in his chariotes, and in
his horsemen, not by fighting, but with holy prayers: so shall all the enemies
of Israel be; if you persevere in

CHAP. V. Holofernes hearing that the Israelites prepare to resist him, in
great rage demands diverse particulars concerning that people, 5. Achior an
Ammonite tells the marvelous works of God toward them. 22. advises him not
to fight against them. 26 the chief capitanies are offended, and threaten
Achior.
AND it was told Holofernes the General of the wars Holofernes could not be
altogether ignorant of so famous a people as the Jews, but in his rage
marueling at their attempt dema^deth more particularly of their ability to
resist him. See* v. 27.
what is this people which besetteth the mountains: or what, and of what
sort, and how great their cities are: also what their power is, or what is
their multitude: or who is the king of their warfare: and why above Genesis 11.
would not follow the gods of their fathets, which were in the land of the
Chaldees. Forsaking therefore the ceremonies Genesis 12.
they went down into Egypt, and there for four hundred years were so
multiplied, that the host of them could not be numbered. And when the king of
Egypt oppressed Exodus 1.
them, and in the buildinges of his cities had subdewed them in brick and
claye, they cried to their Lord, and he stroke the whole Land of Egypt with
diverse plagues. And when the Exo. 7. etc.
Egyptians had cast them out from them, and the plague had ceased from them,
and they would take them again, made solid or firm. Exo. 14.
consolidated as a wall, on either side, and they walking through the botome of
the sea passed dry foot. In which place whiles an innumerable army of the
Egyptians Exodus 1^. 16. 17.
sweet for them to drink, and for forty years they received meat from
heaven. Wheresoever they entered without Iudie. 2. 3. 4. and ^.
that did insult against this people, but when they departed from the worship
of the Lord their God. But as often as beside their own God, they worshipped an
other, they were given to pray, and into the sword, and to reproach. And as Nu.
21.
the Heueites, and of the Amorrheites, and all the mighty in Hesebon they
overthrew, and they possessed their lands, and I^s. 12.
their cities: and as long as they sinned not in the sight of He seems to
speak of the captivity of king Manasees. Paral^ 33. See the argument of this
book page 1011.
these years also past when they had revolted 4. Reg. 21.
walk in it, they were destroyed in battles by many nations, and very many
of them were led captive into a strange land. But of late returning to the Lord
their God, from the dispersion As Holofernes v. 3. demanded that which he in
great part knew, so his men (knowing Achior well enough) in rage demand, who he
is that dare say such things*
who is this, that says the children of Israel can resist king

CHAP. VI. Holofernes in great rage sends Achior to Bethulia, that he may
there be slain with the Israelites. 8. He is leift bound to a tree, 10. from
whence the Israelites taking him, he tells them the cause. 14. They
entertain him courteously and earnestly pray to God for help.
AND it came to pass when they had ceased to speak, Nabucodonosors vassals
would have no other God but him. And God almighty is also ielous and will have
no God but him self.
that there is no God, but Nabuchodonosor: when we shall have for this that he
had said: The God of heaven is their defender. And when Achior had declared al
these God regards the pride of sinners;
their pride, and have regard to the humiliation of penitentes,
our humility, and attend the sanctity of his Church in general, as well holy
persons, as holy things.
the face of thy saints, and show that and true confidence in him, without
presumi^g of men's pour
thou forsakest not them that presumeof thee and, that thou humblest them that
presume of them selves, and glory of their power. Their weeping therefore being

CHAP. VII. Holofernes besieges Bethulia, 6. cutteth their conduite of water,
9. keeps their fountains. 12. the people murmr, and mutenie, 18. yet they
pray to God, 23. and the high priest determines, if aid come not within five
days, to deliver the city to the Assyrians.
BUT Holofernes the next day commanded his armies, that Gods servants first of
al before they fight, do works of penance, commend their cause to God, then
take wea pons in hand, and expect opportunity to encounter with the enemies.
the children of Israel, as they saw the multitude of them, laid them selves
prostrate upon the earth, casting ashes upon their heads, praying with one
accord, that the God of Israel would show his mercy upon his people. And
taking their A common frailty of people in distress to impute error to their
Superior: though in deed Ozias erred rather in yelding at last to their
suggestion v. 2^. then in withstanding thus long.
Ozias, al together with one voice, said: God judge the cirie into the hand of
Holofernes army, that our end may be short in the edge of the sword, which is
made longer in the drught of thirst. And when they had said these things,

CHAP. VIII. Judith a most veriuous, rich, fair, and renowned widow. 9.
rebukes the high priest and ancientes, for their determination to deliver the
city, if aid The third pare Judith delinereth her whole nation from
persecution.
come not in five days, 14. exhorts al to penance. 28. They al agree to her
godly advise, 30. praying for good sucesse of her intention, which they yet
know not.
AND it came to pass, when Judith a widow had heard In three special
obseruances this holy widow led a most religions life:: In much private
prayer:: in wearing hearecloth;:: and in much fasting: as it were a perpetual
lent, aldayes but Sabbathes, and feasts excepted.
a secret chamber, in which she abode shut up with her maids, and having::
cloth of hear upon her loins, she the first day of the month.
newmoones, and the feasts of the house of Israel. And she was In this
especially they offended, that they prefixed a ti^^, meaning then to yield the
city, for they should rather have fought against the enemy, then deliver Gods
people to a tyranne, holy things into profane hands, and by their example
put Jerusalem and the temple in like danger. Rabanus.
have set a time for the mercy of our Lord, and according to your pleasure,
you have appointed him a day. But because of our Lord, and uttered their
impatience and reproach of their murmuring against our Lord, were destroyed of
S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. v. 10. alleging that happened to the people of Israel in
the desert, adds this word destroyer, which is only in this place, and not
Number 11. nor 14 nor else in the old Testament. which is an other argument that
this book is Canonical.
the Some think Abra was a proper name, but whether it was or no, it
signifies an handmaide of more honor as we speak: A maid of honor.
abra: and pray ye, that as you have said, in five days our Lord respect his
people Israel. But I

CHAP. IX. Judith in hearecloth and ashes prays for the delivery of the
people, remembering like benefits of God. 12. craves power to overthrow
Holofernes.
WHO going away, Judith Of such private oratories as this our Savior seems
to speak Mat. 6. saying: F^ter into thy chamber etc. Of like oratories among
Christians read Card Baronius An. D 293. S. Cyp. ep. 56.
went into her oratorie: The zele of Simeon and Leui was commendable, but for
diuers' evil circumstances the fact was re proved by Jacob. Genesis 34. and 49.
thy zele: help I bebesech thee o^ lord God me a widow. For thou have done
when they ran armed after thy servants, trusting in chariotes, and in their
horsemen, and in a multitude of men Ixo. 14.
of war. But thou did look over their camp. and dark. She prayed, that
Holofernes should be moved with her beauty, and sweet speech: which he might
be and not sin, but he by his free will sinning God turned his sin to the
good of others. See Annot. Exodus 7. page 173. S. Aug. Ser. 228.
let him be caught

CHAP. X. Judith excellently adorned, and very beautiful goes with her
handmaide toward the camp, 11. is taken by the watch, 16. and brought to
Holofernes.
AND it came to pass, when she had ceased to cry to our See chapter 8. ^. 32.
abra, and going down self with the garments of her ioyfulnes, and put ^^nd^
(...)*
panto^^es on her feet, and took braceletes, and Lilies, and ^arele^es, and
ringes, and with all her ornaments she adorned her self. To whom also God by
this testify ^ her holy intention in adorning herself.
our Lord gave beauty: because all this Not only certain meats were forbid by
the law Leuis. 11. but in manner all the meats of the Gentiles were unlawful
being offered to idols, for which cause Daniel and the three children would
not eat of the kings meats in Babylon. Dan 1.
a bottel of wine, and a ve^ssel of oil, and Stiped barley.
polent, and dry figs, and bread, and cheese, and went foreward. And when
they were come to the gate of She told many things cuidently true, other
things conditionally, as it was like to come to pass, if God sent not better
meane^.
because I knew it should come to pass, that they should be given you unto
spoil, because that contemning you, they would not of their own accord yield
themselves, that they might find mercy in your sight. For this cause I thought
with my self, saying: I will guard said to him: who can contemn the people of
the Hebrews, which have S. ^ulgentius probably judges that Judith was now
about forty years old. Epist. 2. cap. 6.
so beautiful weme^, that we should not worthily fight against them for these?
Judith therefore seeing

CHAP. XI. Holofernes demanding Judith the cause of her coming: 4, she
deceives him with a probable narration.
THEN Holofernes said to her: Be of good chere, and All that Judith says is
true in her sense as she meant it, but not in the understanding of Holofernes
and his souldiars, yet was no less lawful then that Iosue did in de^euing the
citezenes of Hay. Iosue 8. S. Aug. q. 10. in Iosue.
Take the words of thy handmayde, they do these things, it is sure that they
shall be given into perdition. Which I thy handmayde knowing, am

CHAP. XII. Judith is brought into Holofernes treasurehouse, 2. has leave to
abstain from the Gentiles meats, 5. and to go forth in the night to pray. 10.
The fourth day she comes to Holofernes banquet; 16, he is taken with
concuspiscence, and drinks very much wine.
THEN he bad her go in where his treasures were laid See chap. 10* v. 5.
I can not eat of these things, which thou command to be given me, lest
there come displeasure upon me: but I will eat of these things, which I have
brought. To whom Holofernes said: If these things she might have license to
go forth, in the night and before day to prayer, and to beseech our Lord. And
he commanded This purity confisted in abstaining from meats forbid by the
Law, or offered to Idols.
pure in the tabernacle, until she took her own meat in the evening. And it
came to pass in the fourth day, Holofernes P^ell^.
young maid fear to go in to my Lord, that she may be honored before his
face, that she may eat with him and drink wine in ioyfulnes. To

CHAP. XIII. Holofernes lying in a drunken sleep, Judith cutleth of his head,
12. so returns with her m^^de through the guard, as it were to pray, comes to
Bethulia, 16. exhorts al to think God, and shows them the head. 22. She is
blessed of al. 27. Achior also praises God and Judith.
AND when it was waxen late, his servants made have to And Judith was alone in
the chamber. Moreover Holofernes The s^s^ing of one woman over ^h^ew an
innumerable host of dr^^ka^d^, ^ Amb. li. (...) (...) and El^^. c. 9.
drunkenness. And Judith said to her maid that she should stand without If
Bethulia had benne taken Jerusalem also had b^u^ in extreme danger: sor (...)
whereof God had made more special promise to David and others. Isa^^. 37 38. etc
Jerusalem thy city: and I may bring to pass that which I believing that it
may be done by thee, have purposed. And when she had Iudiths ^^ope^ Aug^^^^
defended her, as Iacob^ ^^gel delivered him from all euiles* (...). 48.
Angel has kept me, both going hence, and abiding there, and from thence
returning hither: and our Lord has not suffered me his handmayde to be
defiled, but without pollution of sin he has called me back to you,
rejoicing in this victory, in my escape, and in your delivery. Confess ye al
to him, because he is good, because his mercy

CHAP. XIIII. Holofernes head is hanged on the wall. 6. Achior is circumcised,
7. The Israeelites assault the Assyrians, 8. who going to awake their General,
14. find him slain, 17, and are al confounded with fear.
AND Judith said to all the people: Hear me brethren, beneath, but as it were
inuading violently. Then the watchmen Achior an Ammonite. ( chapter 5. v. 5.) being
truly converted and believing in God, was admitted into the Church,
notwithstanding that Ammonites and Moabites were excluded by name, Deuteronomy. 23. v.
3. which is therefore meant only of those that persist impenitent and obstinate.
Achior seeing the

CHAP. XV. The Assyrians flee for fear, 3. the Hebrews pursue them, 7. and
are enriched by the spoils. 9. The high priest with others come from Jerusalem
and praise Judith. 14. The goods of Holofernes are genen so her.
AND when all the army heard that Holofernes was beheaded, The fourt part The
praises of Judith, who with all the people praise God.
Bethulia with all his ancientes to see Judith. Who when Judith was a special
figure of the B. Virgin Marie, to whom these praises perteyne in more eminent
sort, then to anic other creature. S. (...)* bert^s Carnete^sis.
Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou the joy of Israel, thou the honor of
our people: because thou have goods of Holofernes, they gave to Judith in
gold, and silver, and garments, and precious stones, and al stuff, and all the
things were delivered her of the people. And al

CHAP. XVI. Judith sings a canticle of thanks giving to our Lord. 22. The
people go to Jerusalem and offer sacrifices. 25. She in great honor lives a
widow til her death in good old age. 30. the people have long peace, and a
fea^^^ual day is instituted in perpetual memory of her fact.
THEN sang Judith this song to our Lord, saying: Begin S. Ephre^^ ser. de 2.
A ^^ontu, cites this place as holy scripture so testifying this book to be
canonica^.
Our Lord confounds battles, Lord is his Such giantes as were before Noes
flood, Genesis 6.
Titan strooken him, neither did the high Nor such as were after, Number. 1^.
Deuteronomy. ^
giantes set them selves upon him, but Judith the daughter of Merari in the
beauty of her face dissolved him. For she put from her the garments of
widowhood, God. Adonai o Lord great art thou, and noble in thy power,
Everlasting torments of fire and worms perteyne to the damned bodies. S. Aug.
li. 21. c. 4. ets. ^^uit. and greater pains to the damned souls, especially
the loss of Gods vision
fire, and worms into their flesh, In the Greek ^ 11. Many de^red her to
marriage.
so that she knew not man all the days of her life, "after that Manasses her
husband was dead. And on festiual Living in all 105. years she was widow about
sixty nine* for when she slew Holofernes she was about forty years old chapter
10. v. 18 and her husband was then dead three years and a half before. ^h. 8.
v. 4.
an hundred five years, and dismissed her abra free, and she died and was buried
with her husband in Bethulia. And all the people mourned for her seven days.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI.
26. After that her husband was dead [As young Toblas and Sara were notable
patterns to married persons* so Judith is a like good example to devout Judith
an example of holy widowhood.
widows, excelling most partin many respects. For first she professed this
holy state of life in the old Testament, when it was most rare, the law
providing that the brother, or next kinsman, should marie the widow of him,
that Many incitementes concurring to the contrary made her widowhood more
excellent.
died without children, as it seems she had none, the Greek text affirming
that Deu. 25. v 5. Ruth. 3. v. 12.
she gave al her goods before her death to other kindred. chapter 16. v. 24.
Secondly* she was only once married, chapter 15. v. 13. chapter 16. v. 26. whereas, it is
also commendable after twice or oftenner marriage at last to abstain. Thirdly,
she was young, about 36. years: for three years and a half after that her
husband was dead, she was called a young maid, chapter 12. v. 12. Fourtly, she was
of excellent beauty, chapter 8 v. 7. Fifthly exceeding rich. ibidem. Sixthly, very
noble, especially after the delivery of the people from such distress. chapter
15. v. 10. Seuently, for this renowned fact, and for her other great virtue (
chapter 8. v. 8) many principal men desired to marie her, chapter 16. v. 22 Eighthly,
all the people wished much issue of so noble a stock. chapter 16. v. 25. Nintly, she
lived long in the state of widowhood, about threescore and nine years, from.
36. to 105, chapter 16. v. 28. Tently, there was great and long peace in all Israel,
after that she had relieved Bethulia. chapter 16. v. 30. Al which might easily have
invited an other to have married: but her great devotion, and fervent desire to
serve God in a retired widowhood an Euangelical counsel.
austere life, fasting. and praying, chapter 8. v. 6. cut of al incitements to
marriage, and made her before the Gospel, to embrace Euangelical counsel, not
commanded, but for better attaining to perfecton counseled by our Savior and S.
Paul. Mat. 19. 1. Cor. 7.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF ESTHER.
OF the authority of this book only two or three ancient writers, Melite S.
Atha. S. Greg. Nazian. Origin apud Eusebius. lib 6. c. 25. hist.
This whole book is canonical.
doubted, before the councels of Laodicea, and Carthage declared it to be
Canonical, All the rest did ever esteem it as divine Scripture. For albeit S.
Ierom in his time found not certain parts thereof in the Hebrew, and therefore
transposed the same to the end of the book, as now we have them: yet in the
Greek he found al these sixtenne chapters contained in ten. And it is not
improbable, that these parcels were sometimes in the Hebrew, as were diverse
whole books which are now lost. But whether they were at any time in the
Hebrew or no, the Church of Christ accounts the whole Book of infallible
authority, reading as well these parts, as the rest in her public office.
And the council of Trent (sess. 4.) For more express declaration defiueth that
all the books recited in the same Decree (amongst which is Esther) with all the
parts thereof, as they are accustomed to be read in the Catholic Church, and
be contained in the old vulgar latin Edition, are sacred and Canonical
Scripture.

It conteyneth a particular great danger of the people of Israel, hapening (as
The contents
is probable) shortly after their general relaxation, and return of some from
the captivity of Babylon; and their deliuere from it, through the godly Zele
and other virtues of Queen Esther, directed herein by Mardocheus, who being
also Written by Mardocheus
in imminent danger was delivered and advanced. and finally writ the history.
which may be divided into four parts, not by order of the chapters: as hey
are here transposed: but in order of time, first the author reports some
Divided into ^^ure parts.
things going before the peoples danger, in the 11. 1. 2. 12. chapters, and
part of the 3. Secondly their danger and distress, in the rest of the 3. and
part of 13. chapters. Thirdly their delivery: from the 4. chapter to the
mids of the. 9. and rest of the 13. and in the 14. 15. and 16. Fourtly, the
things that ensued hereupon, in the other half of the ninth chapter, the 10.
chapter, and first verse of the eleventh.

Who soever vvil please to read this history, in order of the time as the
things happened, adjoining the latter chapters, which are in the Greek, and
not in the Hebrew, may follow the letters of the Alphabet, as here we have
placed them in the margent, beginning at the second verse of the 11. chapter,
where he finds the letter A. and when he comes to B. return where the
same letter is noted. chapter 1. And so in the rest follow the same direction.

THE BOOK OF ESTHER This book is read at mattins the last week of September.

CHAP. I. King Assuerus celebrateth a great banquet to show his glory, 10.
calls queen Vasthi thereto. who refusing to come, is by advise of his counsel
deposed.
IN the days of Assuerus, who reigned from India The first part begins in
the 11. chapter A B
unto Aethiopia over an hundred twenty seven provinces: when he sat in the
throne of his kingdom, with marble pillars. Beds also of gold and silver,
were placed in order upon the floor paued with the emerauld, and the touch
stone: which paynting adorned with marvelous variety. And they that were
invited, drank in golden cups, Modesty and temperance amongst heathen
people condemns Christianes that urge men to drink immoderatly, and so cause
them to be drunk. S. Au. Ser. 231. ^32* de tempore.
Neither was there that compelled The end of immoderate feasting is commonly
browling. Here the king became furious, and the queen was divorced from him.
of a king were always present with him, and he did al things by their
counsel, which knew the laws, and rightes of the elders: (and the chief and
nearest him were, Charsena, Brentius approves the sentence of this parasice,
but Josephus. li. 11 c 6. Macrobius. li 7. c. 1. Saturn. S. Ierom ad Rustic.
and S. Ambrose. l. de. ^^h^ c. 14 judge the queens refusal lawful, and
agreeable to the Persians laws, which prohibited married we^^ to come in sight
of other men in great assemblies: neither had the king just cause to break that
law, for pleasing his fancy in his drunken humor. v. 10. Luther also
wresteth this example in fanoure of adultery, par. 2. de diuortio. folio 177.
Editionis ^^itenber. (...). 1553.
Queen Vasthi has not only hurt the king, but also al peoples, and princes,
that are in all the provinces of king Assuerus. For the word of the queen will
go forth to al wherefore the kings indignation is just. If it please thee, let

CHAP. II. Inquiry being made of the best and fairest virgins, (5. Esther the
unknow niece of Mardocheus a ^ew) is preferred, 18. and made Queen in place
of Vasthi; a marriage feast made, and presents given. 21) Mardocheus detecteth
traitors, and his service is recorded in the regester.
THESE things so done, after the indignation of king 4* Reg. 24.
of Babylon transported Iechonias the king of Judah, who father and mother being
dead, Mardocheus adopted her for his daughter. And when the kings commandment
was Deuteronomy. ^. v. 3. Israelites are forbid to marie with Gentiles, yet when there
was no danger to be perverted, and great hope of good, Esther by Mardocheus
counsel consented to marie king Assuerus, though otherwise she detested the bed
of the incircumcised, and of every stranger, ^h 14. v. 15. K. David also
married the kings daughter of Gessu^. 2. Reg. 3. v. 3.
Esther also among the rest of the maidens was delivered to him, that she might
be kept in the number of the women. Who pleased him, and found grace in his
king loved her more then all the women, and she had grace and mercy before him
above all the women, and he put the crown of the kingdom on her head, and made
her reign in steed of Vasthi. And he commanded a very magnifical Mardocheus
hearing suspicious words and observing their actions saw that they intended
euel and informed the King, whereby their ^^eson was disouered. Rab. ^alom. and
Iosep.
got C chapter 12. v. 1.


CHAP. III. Aman advanced by the king, is much offended that Mardocheus does
not adore him. 6. and therefore procures the kings decree, to destroy the whole
nation of Jews.
AFTER these things king Assuerus advanced Aman the D
son of Amadathi, which was of the stock of Agag: and he put his throne
above all the princes which he had. And Aman exacted such honor as heathen
people gave to their less gods, which was also idolatry. for Mardocheus was
willing to give him ciui^ honor, even to kiss the steps of his feet, but
feared (and refused) ^o give Godly honor to him. ch 13. v. 13. 14. S. The. 2.
2. q. 84. a. 1.
only Mardocheus did not bow his knee, nor adore him. To whom the kings
servants, that Mardocheus bowed not his knee unto him, nor adored him, he was
angry excedingly. And he counted it a matter of nothing Such is the
preposterous ^nrie of rancour, to appoint the day of executing his malice,
before he had got the kings decree.
in what day and what month the nation of the Jews should be slain: and
there came forth the twelfth month, which is called Adar. And Aman said to
king Assuerus: The second part. The Jews danger to be massacred.
king therefore took the ring that he used, from his hand, and gave it to Aman
the son of Amadathi of the progeny of Agag, the enemy of the Jews, and he
said to him: The E chapter 13. v. 1.


The letter at large is in the seven first verses of the 13 chapter of which this
is the sum.
the content of the letters was this, that al provinces F
might know, and prepare them selves against the day aforesaid. The posts that
were sent, made have to fulfill the kings commandment. And immediately the edict
hong in Susan, the king and Aman feasting, and all the Jews that were in the
city, weeping.

CHAP. IIII. All the Jews lament their imminent danger. 5. Mardocheus wills
Esther to entreat the king for their ^afiie. 11. She fearing to go to the
king contrary to his law uncalled, 15. yet they al fasting and praying for
her, she The third part The delivery of the Jews from danger.
does it.
WHICH things when Mardocheus had heard, he The first and best remedy in
distress is to do works of penance for sins committed. 1. Cor. 11. (...).
great mourning with the Jews, fasting, howling, and weeping, many using
sackcloth and ashes for their couch. And Esthers maids and the eunuchs went
in, thy own life only, because thou art in the kings house, above all the
Jews: for if thou will now hold thy peace, Great confidence in Gods help when
man's help fails: and in deed this means by moving the kings ha^t to grant
Esthers petition was Gods special work.
the G chapter 1. v. 1.


CHAP. V. Esther standing in the kings sight he calls her, 4. she requesteth
that he and Aman will dine with her. 7. Again she inuiteth them. 9. Aman is
more incensed against Mardocheus, prepares high gallows to hang him on.
AND the third day Esther put on royal garments, and H
stood in the court of the kings house, which was the inner against the kings
hal: but he sat upon his throne in the consistory of the palace, against the
door of the house. I chapter 15. v. 4.
And when he had seen Esther the queen standing, she K
which he held in his hand: who going near, kissed the top of his rod. And the
king said to her: What will thou queen This prudence in delaying to propose
her petition, increased the kings desire to know it, moved him to promise more
assuredly, and so bond him the more to accomplish it.
My petition, and requests are these: If king and Aman come to the banquet,
which I have prepared them, and to morrow I will open my will to the king. Aman

CHAP. VI. The king hearing the good service of Mardocheus in detecting
traitors, read in the chronicle (for which he had yet no reward) 4. commands
Aman to honor him next to the king, 11. which he performs.
THAT night the king Gods eye which never slepeth saw whath Aman intended: and
for execution of his own diuiue justice, used this means b^y subtracting
sleep that time from the king and inspiring his mind to hear the histories
read, and to reward good service, done. Joseph.
passed without sleep, and he court. And the king said: Let him come in. And
when he Ambicious men are most b^^nde in conceit of their own deserts, and
fortunes.
thinking in his heart, and supposing that the king would honor no other, but
him self, answered: The man, whom the Either they had read Gods promise to the
Jews. Gen 13* 15. etc. or coniectured this by human prudence.
If Mardocheus be of the Jews seed, before whom thou have begune to fall, thou
can not resist him, but thou shall fall in his sight. As they were

CHAP. VII. Esther entertayning the king and Aman again at a feast, is
promised to obtain, whatsoever she will ask. 3. she demands saftie for her
self, and all the people, against Amans cruelty, 6. and Aman is hanged on the
gallows, which he had prepared for Mardocheus.
THE king therefore and Aman went in, to drink with After threedayes fast of all the Jews with prayers and other works of penance, Esther asked and obtained
the saftie of the whole people more precious to her then half of the kingdom.
If give me my life for the which I make request, and my people for the which I
beseech. For we are delivered I and my people, Horror of a guilty conscience
is commonly the first torment of a sinner. S. Chrissocons. 4. de Lagaro.
forthwith was astonished, not enduring to bear the countenance of the king
and of the queen. But the king being wrath rose up, and from the place of the
What little trust in false freindshipe, when bad men once fall into disgrace.
one of the eunuchs

CHAP. VIII. Esther informs the king that Mardocheus is her uncle, he is
advanced in authority, 3. and contrary letters are sent that the Jews be
saved, 11. and their enemies slain. 15. Mardocheus is in high honor, and his
whole nation is esteemed and feared by other people.
THAT day king Assuerus gave unto Esther the queen Such honor is due to
kings, yea though they be Infideles, because they have terrestrial majesty
and authority from God. And the contrary opinion and behavior of heretics,
which despice Dominion and blaspheme Majesty, is condemned by S. Jude, in his
Epistle. v. 8.
fell down at the kings feet, and she wept and speaking to him prayed him,
that he would command that the malice of Aman the Agagite, and his most wicked
devises, which he had invented against the Jews, should be of none effect. But
he after the manner put forth the empire of king Assuerus, it should be
notified, 'the Jews to be ready to be revenged of their enemies. And there
Lch. 16. v. 1.


CHAP. IX. The Jews kill their enemies which would have killed them. 6. namely
the ten sonns of Aman are hanged on gallows, 13. more slain the next day.
17. the day following is made holy, and so to be kept every year.
THEREFORE in the thirtenth day of the twelth month, M
which we have said now before to be called Adar, when slaughter was prepared
for all the Jews, and their enemies gaped after their blood, " the case being
changed to the contrary, the Jews began to be superiors, and Where no more
danger remains remission of injuries is more commendable then revenge, but
where malice continues, and new danger may probably ensue, justice is
necessary, and afterward peace may be made more securely S. Bernad, ser. 2.
d^ verb. Apost.
to revenge them selves of their adversaries. And they were gathered Phoratha,
and Adalia, and Aridatha. and Phormesta, and In the ^i^a slaughter Amans ten
sons were slain and afterward also hanged. v. 14.
ten sons of Aman: how great a slaughter think thou do they make in all
the provinces? what ask thou more, and what will thou that I command to be
done? To whom she

And the thirtenth day of the month Adar was the first day The fourth parth.
Other things following their delivery from danger.
with them al of the slaughter, and the fourtenth day they ceased to kill. Which
they ordained to be solemn, so that in it at al times afterward they gave them
selves to good chere, mirth and bankets. But they that made the slaughter in
the city of The Jews in Susan kept the fiftenth day holy. v. 18, those that
dwelt in other places kept the fourtenth day.
the fourtenth and fiftenth in the same days the Jews revenged them selves of
their enemies, and mourning and sorrow were turned into mirth and joy, and that
these should be days of good cheer and gladness, and they should send one to
an other portions of meats, and should give gifts to the poor. And the A
feast instituted by Mardocheus was accepted and observed by all the Jews, as a
constitution agreeable and not contratie to the law Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2, and 12. v. 32.
took upon them selves and their seed, and upon al, that would be joined to
their religion, that it should be lawful for none to pass without solemnity
these days: which the writing testifies, and certain times require, as
years continually succeed one an other. These

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IX.
1. The case being changed.] In this whole history (as in many other passages
Psalm. 76.
Great, and marvelous changes by the power of God.
of holy scripture) we see the marvelous change of the right hand of the
highest. First in the very instant of extreme danger, the kings face with
burning eyes showing the fury of his breast chapter 15. v. 10. was turned into
mildnes toward Esther v. 11. Secondly proud Aman being advanced in honor and
office, above al princes of the kings court, chapter 3. v. 1. was suddenly forced
publicly to lead Mardocheus his horse, whom he most hated: chapter 6 v. 10.
Thirdly, he was constrained with loud voice to proclaim his honor, whom he
most despised and threatened. Fourtly, the same Aman, before called the father
(as it were the only governor) of the king, chapter 1^ v. 6 chapter 16. v. 11. was
forthwith condemned for a traitor. chapter 7. v. 8. chapter 16. v. 18. Fifthly, He that
could not abide to see Mardocheus, chapter 5. v. 13. afterward durst not look upon
the king, not could endure his countenance. ch, 7 v 6. Sixthly, He was hanged on
the same gallows, which he had prepared for Mardocheus. chapter 7. v. 9. Seuently,
VVheras he was not content with the death of Mardocheus alone, but procu^ed the
kings decree to destroy the whole nation. chapter 3. v 6 and so feasted with the
king, when the Jews mourned, v 15. shortly after the king sent new letters for
the Jews saftie, giving them leave to kill whom soever they would of their
enemies. chapter 8. v. ^. 11 Eighthly, the same day which was designed for
destruction, was made the day of joy and exultation to the children of God. chapter
9. v. 1. 17 chapter 16. v. 21. etc. By which literal sense Gods marvelous
providence is manifestly showed, never suffering his church to perish. It has
moreover D. Tho. prologo in Epist. Canonic.
two special mystical senses. First, as saftie of temporal life was procured to
Esther a figure of our B lady,
one nation by Esthers intercession to king Assuerus, so general salvation is
procured to al mankind by mediation of the blessed virgin Marie, crushing the
serpents head; and the sentence of death is changed by new letters, granting
And of the Church.
everlasting life, and glory to al Gods true servants. Esther also, as
likewise Judith, in figure of the Church (says S. Ierom, Prologo in Sophon)
killed the adversaries, and delivered Israel from danger of perishing.

CHAP. X. Assuerus subdueth many countries. 4. Mardocheus understands, and
declares his dream. 9. God separateth his people from other nations by a
better lotte.
BUT king Assuerus made all the earth, and all the islands

That S. Jerome here aduertiseth the reader that he found al hitherto in the
Hebrew. And the parcels which follow only in the Septuaginta Greek Edition which
either they translated out of the Hebrew, or added by inspiration of the Holy
Ghost.
which is in the Hebrew I have expressed most faithfully. And these things that
follow, I found written in The Greek of the 72. Interpreters.
the common edition,which are contained in the greek tongue and leetters: and
in the mean time this chapter was extant after the end of the book: which
according to our custom, we have marked with an Obelus before it, that is to
say, a broch. And Mardocheus said: These things are done of God.

CHAP. XI. An Appendix and conclusion of this history. 2. The dream of
Mardocheus.


This beginning was in the common edition, which is neither extant A
in Hebrew, nor with any of Except the 72.
the interpreters. In the second year, when Artaxerxes the greatest reigned,
The first part. The presage, and occasion of Esthers advancement and Amans
persecuting the Jews.
in the first day of the month Nisan, Mardocheus the son of Iairi, the son
of Semei, the son of Cis, of the tribe of Benjamin. A Jew which dwelt in the
city of Susan, a great man and among the first of the kings court, Mardocheus
had this dream before Amans advancement or his own and the peoples danger.
saw a dream. And he was of that number of captives, whom Nabuchodonosor 4.
Reg. 24.
the king of Babylon had transported from Jerusalem with Ieconias the king of
Judah: and this was his dream: Mardocheus was a good dragon, and Aman a bad one.
two great dragons, prepared one against an other into battle. At whose cry al
nations were raised up, to fight against Esther by her fountain of tears
and humble supplication, quenched a great flame of Gentiles against the Jews.
chapter 10.
a little fountain grew into a very great river, and abounded into very many
waters. Light and sun B chap. 1. v. 1.


CHAP. XII. The conspiracy of two eunuchs, detected by Mardocheus, is
repeted, 6. and Amans malice against him for the same.
AND he abode that time in the kings court with Bagatha C
of the palace. And when he understood their cogitations, Here it appears
that Aman was a favorer of traitors of perhaps of the same conspiracy.
for the two eunuchs of the king, which were put to death. D chapter 3. v. ^.


Hitherto the proeme. That which follows was set in that place, where it is
written in the volum: chapter 3. v. 3.
And should spoil their goods. Which we found in the common edition only.
CHAP. XIII. Acopie of the epistle which Aman sent to al provinces to destroy
the Iew^^ 8. And Mardocheus his prayer for the people.
AND this was the copy of the letter. The most great E
king Artaxerxes from India unto Aethiopia, to the princes of an hundred and
seven and twenty provinces, and to the captains, that are subject to his
empire, greeting. Whereas I reigned over many nations, and had subdewed Great
hurt to a king, that is ruled much by one counseler. Solomon teaches, that
Where are many counselors, cogitations are confirmed. ^ron. 15. v. 22.
one that excelled the rest in wisdom and fidelity, and was second after the
king, Aman by name, told me that there F chapter 3. v. 14.


Hitherto the copy of the letter. That which follows I found written after
that place, where it is read, chapter 4. v. 17.
And Mardocheus going forth, did al things, that Esther had commanded him. yet
it is neither in the Hebrew, nor extant with any of Excep^ the 72.
the interpreters. But Mardocheus besought our Lord, mindeful of al his G
works, and said: Lord Lord king omnipotent, for in thy The Epistle on
wenesday in the 1. weke of ^^n^. And in a votiue Mass against Paganes.
dominion are al things set, and there is none that can resist thy will, if
thou determine to save Israel. Thou madst heaven heaven. Thou art Lord of al,
neither is there that can resist

CHAP. XIIII. Esther prays in humility of spirit, that God will deliver the
people from the cruelty of Aman.
ESTHER also the queen fled to our Lord, fearing the mouths of them that
praise thee, and extinguish the glory of thy temple and altar, that they may
open the mouths of Idols are nothing in the world. 1. Cor. 8. but ba^e
imaginations of men.
that are not, lest they laugh at our ruin: but turn their counsel upon them,
and destroy him, that has begune to do cruelly against us. Remember o Lord:
and show thy self to The Church uses this prayer in the offertorie* the 22.
sunday after Pentecost: as a parcel of holy Scripture.
detest the bed of the uncircumcised, and of every stranger. Thou know:: Of
herself, nor for wordlie glory she desired not to marie a heathen king but
for the common good she married him, God dispensing with the law in this behalf.
See chapter 2.
wear it not in the days of my silence, and that I have not

CHAP. XV. Mardocheus causes Esther to go to the king and entreat for the
people. 10. She is terrified by this countenance, but God turns his heart, and
he calls her courteously to him.
This also I found added in the common edition. AND he commanded her ( no doubt
but Mardocheus commanded G
Esther) that she should go unto the king, and make petition for her people
and for her country. Remember H ch 13. v. 8.


Moreover this also which follows I found in the common Greek. And in the
third day she laid away Ves^im^nta oratus, not orn^^^s, her playing w^ede.
the garments which A notable example for Noble women, how to keep their
state, and remain never theles humble in heart.
hid her mind full of sorrow, and exceeding fear. She By this comparison of
angels she meant that the king excelled al or most part of men.
as an angel of God, and my heart was trubled for the fear of thy glory. For
thou, my lord, art K chapter 5. v. ^.


CHAP. XVI. Acopie of king Artaxerxes letters, which he sent for the saftie of
the ^ewes, 10. declaring the insolency of Aman, and dutiful service of
Mardocheus and Esther, 20. commanding al his princes to assist the Jews, and
with them to celebrate the day which is changed from sorrow to joy.
The copy of king Artaxerxes letter, which he sent for the Jews to all the
provinces of his kingdom: the which also is not found in the Hebrew volume.
THE great king Artaxerxes, from India to Aethiopia to L
the dukes and princes of an hundred twenty seven provinces, which obey our
commandment, sends greeting. Many have abused unto pride the goodness of
princes, and At last this king saw his own error in believing one false
counselor over much. chapter 1^. v. ^.
the enterprises of kings are depraved by the evil suggestions of certain men
Wherefore we must provide for (...). 1^. v. 6.
him, that he was called:: our father, and was adored of al second after the
king: who was puffed up with so great swelling the greatest, and always loving
God, by whose benefit the kingdom was given both to our fathers and to us, and
is kept unto this day. Wherefore know ye those letters, which he As Mardocheus
suggested, the. king confirmed the observation of a feast in memory of Gods
benefice* and so both Jews and Gen^^les kept it.
count you also this day M chap. 9. v. ^*


THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF JOB.
Holy Job otherwise called Iobab (Genesis 36.) as S. Augustine, S. Chrisostom, ^
18. c. 47. ciuit. conc. 2. de Lazar Romans 9. Praesat (...) Job.
Job of the race of Esau.
S. Ambrose, S. Gregory, and other fathers teach, the son of Zara, the son
of Rahuel, the son of Esau, was king (or absolute prince) of the land of Hus.
who being perfect in religion, sincere in life, Why God suffered him to be so
afflicted. The contents according to the history*
rich in wealth, and blessed with children, for an admirable example of
patience, and to show that a mortal man through Gods grace, may resist all the
devils tentations, by Gods permission, sudainly lost al his goods and
children, was stricken with horrible sores in all his body, reviled by his wife,
and in steed of comforth which his special freindes pretemted toward him, was
injuriously charged by them, with impatience, arrogancy, blasphemy, and other
crimes, for which they falsely supposed he was so afflicted, affirming, and by
diverse sophistical arguments, grounded as they pretended upon Gods justice,
wisdom, power, mercy, and goodness, would prove that God suffers none but
wicked men to be so afflicted. But Job constantly defends his own just
^^^^cencie, and that worldly calamities, and prosperity happen indifferently
to good and had in this lif^, and that the tru^r* ward of the just, and
punishment of the wicked, is to be expected in the other world. At last God,
with due reprehension of Job for some imperfections, sharply rebukes the
errors, and insolency of his adverse freinde^; gives sentence on Jobs side;
pardons ^^^m at his intercession; and restores al things to him duble, to
that he had before.

B^^i^e^ the literal sense Job in all his actions, sufferinges, and whole life,
was Job an especial figure of Christ.
a special figure of Christ, showing (says S. Gregory) by those Praf^^*
things which he did and sustained, what our Redemer should do and suffer yea
more particularly th^n most part of the Patriarchs, which S. Jerome (epist. ad
Paulin.) also admireth and testifies, saying: what mysteries of Christ does
not this book comprehend? Every word is full of sense. Moreover this history
is replenished with moral documents, Moral documentes in this book.
how to embrace virtue, and eschew vice: proposing the life of a right godly
man, neither insolent in prosperity, not desparing in adversity, always
resolute in Gods service, as well in his prosperous kingdom as in the miserable
dunghill. Here also we have the true manner of arguing, according to the rules of
Logike, with detection of sophistry, Job proving True logike and Philosophy.
and disprouing assertions by proposition, assumption, and conclusion, as S.
Ierom observes, with profound knowledge of natural things and causes, as
appears in very many places. Al which variety and abundance Hard and ea^ic
things to be understood are both profitable.
of matter, comprised in small rowme, make many things hard and obscure, yet
are the same so tempered with other things plain and easy, that here is
verified S. Augustins ob^^ruation (li. 2. c. 6. doct. Christ) certain places
of holy Scriptures serve as delectable meat to them that hunger and thirst
divine knowledge, and the obscure take away tediousnes from them, that loath
usual plain doctrine.

It is most probable that Job himself, inspired by the Holy Ghost, by whose
grace he excelled al in right simplicity (c. 1.) writ his own history; the
Written by Job himself most part in verse.
most part in verse, only the two first chapters and the last in prose, in the
Arabian tongue; which Moses translated into Hebrew, for the consolation of the
Israelites afflicted in Egypt.

And it may be divided into three general parts. First the change of Jobs
state from prosperity into affliction, with his lamentation for the same* are
Divided into three parts.
recorded in the three first chapters. In four and thirty chapters following
are sundry disputations, conflictes, and discourses between him and his
freindes, touching the cause of his so vehement affliction. In the five last
chapters God discusseth the quarrel, gives sentence for Job against his
adversaries, pardonteh them, and rewards him.

THE BOOK OF JOB.
CHAP. I. This book is read the two f^r^^ wekes of September.
Holy Job offers sacrifice for every one of his children, 6. whose good
estate Satan envying, by Gods permission spoil h^^m of al his goods, and
children, 20. for which he being pensive offends not, but thanketh God for all.
THERE was a man in the Land of Hus, named The first pa^^* The change of Jobs
prosperous s^a^^ into affliction.
Job, and that man was " simple, and right, and fearing God, and departing from
evil. And there were borne to him seven sons (...)
sons have sinned, and have blessed God in their hearts. So did Job all the
days. But on a certain day when the sons Devils appear not in Gods sight,
but sometime in presence of Angels which represent God S. Athan q. 8. ad
Anti^c^^^.
Satan also was present amongst them To whom our Lord said: From God does not
directly send evils b^t permits them to happen to his servants.
behold, al things that he has, are in thy hand, only upon him extend not thy
hand. And Satan went forth from the face of our Lord. And when upon a certain
day his By this holy example ancient fathers condeme the sen^^es Stoikes who
are never moved, S. Aug. li. 1. c. 9. ciuit. S. Paul also reproves men
without affection. Romans 1. v. 31.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. I.
1. Simple, right, and fearing God.] Moses, Samuel, Esdras, and other
Prophets Aswal Job as other prophets writ their own acts and praises. Good
works are both Gods works and men's works.
writ there own acts among others, also their own praises, speaking of
themselves in the third person: and so did holy Job, humbly, truly, and
simply, without vain glory, or arrogancy, as S. Gregory notes, saying.
Blessed Job, inspired Praef^^ in Job.
with the Holy Ghost, might well write his own acts, which were the gifts of
supernal inspiration. God being the principal cause efficient of al good men's
works, and men the secondarie cause of the same.

Moreover Jobs singular patience and other virtues are likewise commended in
other holy Scriptures and by ancient Doctores, Tobiae. 2. God permitted
tentation to happen unto Tobias, that example might be given to his folowers of
his patience, as of holy Job, S. James (c. 5.) exhorting to patience, says:
You Jobs patience invincible in ^l sorts of ^^^liction.
have heard the suffering of Job, and you have seen the end of our Lord.
Tertullian ( li. de patientia) admiring Jobs patience exclameth thus: o most
happy man whom neither the driving away of his flocks of catle, nor consuming
of the rest with ^ire, nor the loss of his children, nor terments of his
b^di^* could drive ^^^m patience but he stood immovable in the service of God,
for example to us, that we fall not for any wordlie damage, loss of dearest
friends or corporal afflictions. and blessed be God, by whose blessing we may
now y^o happy English Catholics, English Catholics lose their goods and
children, and are afflicted in body.
that patiently suffer the very same kinds of tribulation, (though not in so
great a degree) in our time* S Cyprian ( li deb^no patientie) Job examined and
proved by the virtue of patience was advanced to the very height of praise, a
rich lord in possession, and a more rich father in children, sudainly was
neither lord, nor father: was also most grievously afflicted in his flesh: and
that no tentation might be wanting the devil armed his wife against him, yet
was he not moved, but by victorious patience thanked God for all In like sorre
other holy fathers, for encoregement and consolation of the afflicted, write
much of holy Jobs invincible patience. Above al S. Gregory, our Apostle,
dilateth most excellently Great commendation to be good amongst the bad.
in thirty and fine whole books, describing and proposing his so great
virtues to be imitated by all Christianes, first of al (li. 1. c 5.) observing
how great a praise it is to be good in such a place, in the mids of a croo^ed
and perverse Philip. 2. Apoc. 2. ^^ntie.
nation, shining as a light in the world, dwelling in the gentiles, where
was the seat of Satan, a lilly amongst thorns.

5* Offered holocaustes for every one.] Albeit the virtue of Sacrifice as well
of Holocaust Sacrifice being of infinite virtue, yet the valor in application
is limited.
in the old Testament, as especially of Christ's Sacrifice in the New, is of
infinite valor in it self, yet the application thereof to particular persons,
and purposes is limited, and therefore holy Job offered not only once for all
his children, but many times, severally for every one. VVherof see Cardinal
Allan li. 2* de Eucharist. Sacrific. c. 35.

CHAP. II. Satan by Gods permission, 7. strikes Job with s^res from the sole
of his foot to the top of his head. 9. His wife also insulteth against him,
but he sins not. 11. Three freindes coming to visit and conforte him, sit
si^^n^ by him seven days.
AND it came to pass when on a certain day the sons A man of pl^ine (...)
true dealing mixed with meek^^^ with out al guile is called a simple right man
S. Greg. li. 1. Moral. ^. 2 and ^^^
simple, and right, and fearing God, and departing from evil, and yet reteyning
innocence? But thou have moved me against him, that I should afflict him in
vain. To therefore going out from the face of our Lord, stroke Job with a very
sore boil, from the sole of the foot even to the top of his head: who with
a shel scraped the corruption, sitting His wife persuading him to desperation
and blasphemy, signified carnal cogitions which corrupt the soul inwardly, as
afflictions do affault the flesh outwardly. S. Greg. li. 3. c. 24.
his wife said to him: Do thou yet Seven days together every day and night
some good part.
seven days and seven nights, and no man spoke to him a word: for they saw
the pain to be vehement.

ANNNOTATIONS. CHAP. II.
11. Jobs three freindes.] For better intelligence of these conflictes between
These visiters of Job were in deed his freindes, and professed true religion.
They erred in Jobs particular case.
holy Job and his freindes, it may here be observed, that they were in deed
his freindes, as the text simply calls them: that they believed rightly in God
Almighty, and were not idolaters: that they came of freindly good affection to
comforth him* though they fell into words of reproving him, (as S. Gregory
teaches) li. 3. ^. 24.
they alleged also many excellent divine sentences very truly, which therefore
Job reproved not. But they erred in their illations against Job: and that of
ignorance rather then of set malice, concluding that Job was guilty of some
enormious sins, because they saw him so grievously punished, and heard him
complain thereof; his own conscience known to him and hid to them (whereof
they rashly judged) testifying that he was innocent, in respect of so great
crimes. And in this their particular error, though they were not heretics,
being not obstinate after that the truth was sufficiently reveled And
prefigured heretics.
unto them, yet they prefigured heretics, endeavoring by one truth to destroy
an other, and by arrogating knowledge which they had not: promising also li. 5.
^* 18.
^evv things and unheard of, rather to drovv others to admire them, then to
edification.

CHAP. III. Job lamenteth, describing his own, and the general calamities of
man, 13. and shearing ho^^^ the^ escape many miseries which either are never
bornt or dye presently after their birth.
AFTER these things Job opened his mouth, and After so long ^^le^ce at last ^^b
expresses hi^^Spand^^ so(...) des(...) great(...) (...)the(...) (...)ly(...)
(...)ud (...)o(...) (...) by God bu(...) to m(...) bein(...) (...)nne* even
from his conception and (...) wishing that whatsoever concurred to his longer
afflictions in this life, and h^^d^r^^ his more spedie delivery from dangers
and calamities had not been, for so he had benne sowner at ^est as Gods goodness
should dispose of him Al which was a lawful desire and no sin at al. See 1.
Pineda. in c. 2. Job.
cursed borne, and the night wherein it was said: A man is conc^^^ed. Be that
day turned into darkness, God require it not from

CHAP. IIII. The second part. Diverse discourses and disputes about the cause of
Jobs afflictions.
Eliphaz blames Job as guilty of impatience, arguing thereupon that he was
not so perfect in virtue as he seemed. 7. and therefore is now punished by God,
who (as Ehiphaz falsely supposes) afflicts not innocent men. 12. alleging
for proof an imaginary vision.
BUT Eliphaz the Themanite answering, said: If we The first constrct, between
Eliphaz and Job.
shall begin to speak to thee, perhaps thou will take it grievously, but the
word conceived who can hold? Behold No innocent ever perished eternally: but
innocent Abel was slain temporaly, and innumerable others suffer calamities
for their greater merit.
perished? or when have the just been destroyed? Yea rather I have seen
Heretics pretend such obscure visions more to get credit then to edify
others. S. Greg. li. 5. c. 18.
to me there was spoken a secret word, and as it were by stealth has mine ear
received the veins of the whispering thereof. In the horror of a vision by
night, when deep Job easily grants that man may not compare not contend with
God chapter 9. v. 1. Yet men may be innocent and free from grievous sins.
shall man be justified in comparison

CHAP. V. Eliphaz prosecuteth his discourse to convince Job of great sins,
because he is sov^hemently afflicted. 17. exhorts him therefore to acknowledge
his sins, so al things shall succeed prosperously.
CALL therefore This disputer having pretended an imaginary vision from God
(...) Job, now he supposes that neither God no^ Angel no^ other holy person
will patr^^age his cause, nor judge of his case as he does, but that al will
condemn him of impatience, folly, envy, and other sins.
if there be that will answer thee, and " turn foolish, and envy slea^th the
little one. I have seen a fool This proves unporteth that a man must not
think to pass his life without travel, but must get his bread with sweat
of his brows, or suffer other calamities.
Man is borne to labor, and the bird to flight. Gods goodness delivers his
servants the space of this laborious life,
six tribulations And most especially in the hour of death. S. Org. li. 6. c.
18.
seventh evil shall not touch thee. In famine he shall deliver thee from death;
and

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. V.
1. Turn to some of the Sainctes] Eliphaz provoking Job to produce some of his
opinion, or to seek the help and patronage of some Saint in his cause,
^nuocation of Saints, especially Angels in Jobs time.
plainly shows the common faith and practice of inuocating Saints in that
time. Else it had benne a frin^lous speech, which is not to be imputed to a
sensible wise man as he was. For it appears by the drift of his reasoning,
that he supposed some of Gods special servants would maintain a good cause,
but that Jobs cause was such as neither God, nor holy Angel, nor good man
would defend, and therefore boldly provoked him to this trial, presuming that he
should find no such patron. Neither did he will Job in these words to call upon
God only, for he could not err so grossly, as to call God some of the Saints:
but must mean some other holy person. And it is clear by the Septuaginta
Interpreters, that Eliphaz willed Job to invoke the Angels. saying: Invoke
if any vvil answer thee, or if thou can behold any of the holy Angeles.
S. Gregory li. 5. c. 30.
expounds it to the same sense, that Saints were to be inuocated in a good
cause, but, that Eliphaz here* dispicing and deriding holy Job, said to him:
Thou can not find Saints thy helpers in affliction, whom thou would
not have thy fellows in prosperity.

CHAP. VI. Job answers the objections of Eliphaz, showing that in deed the
calamity which he suffers is much greatter then his sins deserve; and
therefore his lamentation is excusable. 8. wishes (if it so please God) that he
may dye. 13. complaneth that his freindes are become his aduerseries, 16*
gravely expostulateth that they reprehend him, 12. and help him not.
BUT Job answering, said: A man of sincere conscience confesses the sins
whereof he is guilty, yet acknowledges not al wherewith others may unjustly
charge him.
Would God my sins were spare not, not I gain say the words of the Holy
one. For S^nd^e ways without water.
of Thema, the ways of Saba, and expect a little while. They Jobs aduersa^ies
pre^^med to teach him, but because they erred in their applying of true
assertions in his case, which himself understood and not they, he acconted not
their discourses for good doctrine.
Teach ye me, and I

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. VI.
3. As the sand of the sea] Scarce any figure is more common in holy S^ipture
The use of Hyperbole in holy Scripture.
then Hyperbole. whereby ou^ understanding is drawn to conceive the greatness of
things that otherwise surpass vulgar capacity. So Job signifies here that
his calamity being weighed with his sins in balance, would appear
heavier, not precisely in proportion of the number of sands in the sea, but
exceeding much in true comparison. Of which superabundance of pains patiently
suffered Treasure of satisfactorie works in the Church.
by holy Job, and other Saints, more then their sins deserved, especially
of our B. Savior, who could not sin, and of our B. Lady, who never sinned,
remains an infinity treasure of satisfactorie works, appliable by the
supreme stuard of Gods Church, Christ's Vicar in earth, for satisfaction of
others which have need, and are in the communion of Saints, and perform the
conditions appointed. And so this high stuard may in due manner by his Pardons
do apply the suffering of some for the satisfaction of others.
authority, give limited, or plenarie pardones to penitentes, of the pains
which otherwise they should suffer in this life, or in purgaritie, for their
sins first remitted. Other Bishops can also give or dispense so much as the
Supreme Bishop allo^teth to their power, al to edification and necessity of
Gods servants, as dispencers, not dissipators of so holy treasure.

CHAP. VII. Job explicateth diverse calamities of man's life, and namely of his
own* 6. Suposing it not likely that he shall return to former prosperous
state, 15. desires to dye.
THE life of man upon earth is a A soldier must be always ready to endure
travel, to be promptly obedient, content to be beaten by his superior with out
al resistance, upon pain of his life, he is always subject to cares, and to
danger of death, and therefore must ever be ready to dye.
warfare, and his days, as Seol.
hell shall not ascend. Neither shall Just Job supposing he was at the point of
death, prayed God to spare or cease to punish him more, and to accept of that
affliction which he had already suffered. So the Church in behalf of souls
departed in state of grace prays God to spare and cease from further
punishing them, and to give them eternal rest.
Spare of men? why have thou set me contrary to thee, and I am become
burdenous to my self? Why do thou not take

CHAP. VIII. Baldad charge Job to have spoken, unjustly exhorting him to
turn to God, and so he shall prosper better then heretofore. 13. sh^wing that
hypocrites shall not prosper, 20. infers (falfly) that God afflicts not the
sincere, nor helps the malignant.
BUT Baldad the Suhite answering, said: The second confflict.
How long wilt:: This second disputer charged Job to be ob^^^^ate who in ded^
was constant (...) a true settled judgment.
of thy mouth be multiplied? Why does God supplant judgment? Even thus
heretics imagine Catholics to the ignorant, and therefore fill their mouths
and books with things that are not denied, and yet inserre much falsehood
sophistically applying one truth against an other being them selves ignorant
how to reconcile difficulties.
that thylippes with iubilation. They that hate thee, shall be clothed

CHAP. IX. Job approves that no man auouching his own justice before God is
justified. 22. Teaches that affliction of the innocent stands well with Gods
justice, wisdom, and power.
AND Job answering, said: Job here grants that which was truly said by his
adversary, and shows how he did wrong apli^ ^rue doctrine against him, and so
still defends his own in nocencie, and just quarrel
In deed I know it is so, and Angeles move the spheres of heaven.
carry the world. How great am I then, Even so S. Paul, though he was not
guilty in conscience of any crime, yet he would not therein justify himself.
1. Cor. 4.
but This is an assured true assertion, that God afflicts both good and evil
nn this life.
One thing there is that I have spoken, of innocents. This earth is given into
the hands of the Fear on man's part, and hope in God, do well consist together.
So both presumption and desperation are avoided.
feared al my works,

CHAP. X. ^ob scarce able to speak yet shows that there is no injustice nor
ignorance in God, neither is his sin the cause of so great afflictions. 9.
Acknowledges Gods love and benefits toward himself. 15. and dreadeth his
strict judgment.
MY soul is weary of my life, I will let my speech pass Holy Job knowing it
to be impossible that God calumniateth any man, inquireth what is the cause
why his goodness afflicts the just?
calumniate In that I am thy creature thou may justly destroy me: but in
deed because I am thy creature thou (...) spare me through thy m^^c^, (...) me
thy grace which if I use well thou will also give me eternal rest.
Thy thy visitation has kept my spirit. Although thou conceal Repentance is
always necessary, but most especially at the hour of death.
therefore, that I may a little lament my sorrow: Before I go, and return

CHAP. XI. Sophar imputes ^obs discourse, about the cause of his so great
afflictions, to insolency of mind, and loquasitie of tongu, persuading him to
acknowledge The third conflict
grievous sins, that so he may have the reward of a just man.
But sophar the Naamathite answering, said: Why, shall Sophar might have applied
the vice of much speaking to himself, and his fellows, alleging many things,
which proved not their opinion, whereas Jobs allegations proved directly that
which he affirmed.
shall a man full of words be justified? To thee only shall men hold Jobs own
conscience affirmed the contrary* c. 6. v. 3.
then thy iniquity deserves. Peradventure thou will comprehend the steps
does he not consider? A vain man is extolled into pride, He could not justly
confess iniqeitie which he had not committed.
that is in

CHAP. XII. Job shows the knowledge, which his friends much boast of, to be
the common known doctrine of Gods servants. He more truly, and more profoundly
discourses of Gods power and wisdom, still defending his own innocence in
respect of great sins.
BV^ Job answering, said: Are you then men alone, and shall God suffers his
simple true meaning servants to be scorned for the time, but afterward the
wicked shall be forced to confess, that those whom they derided are worthily in
honor before God. Sap. 5. ^. 3.
simplicity of the just man is scorned. The lamp contemned in the cogitations
man, there is none that can open. If he hold in the waters, Crafty plotters of
devises at last by Gods just punishment commit so great absurdites, that the
meanest may see their fo^lie.
counselers to a folish end, and judges to astonishment. He loses the belt of
kings, and girdeth their

CHAP. XIII. Of their own words Job confuteth his adversaries, that they have
spoken that which they know not. 13. defends his own innocence. 22.
desiring of God, if he be afflicted for secret sins, that he may know them.
BEHOLD mine eye has seen al these things, and mine Jobs state of sin or
innocence was best known to God, next to his own conscience, not at al to
his adversaries, that presumed to judge thereof.
to judge that I may speak, what soever my mind shall prompt me.:: Why do I
tear my flesh with my teeth, and carry my soul It seemed to his adversaries
that of desperation he would tea^ his flesh, and so kill himself, and to be so
nere death as if one held his soul in his hand ready to bet it s^l from him.
trust in He was in extreme anguish, but still trusted in God.
I know that I shall be He denies that he is guilty in conscience but desires
to know of God, if he have any hi^ sins which himself knows not.
show thou me. Why

CHAP. XIIII. Again Job describes the miseries of man's life. 3. Nevertheless
Gods great providence toward him. 7. professes his belief of the
Resurrection.
MAN borne of Al children taking their s^bstance from the mother, and having
only a temporal life, continually tending to death, can not but be subie^t to
^anie (...) ^^^s: (...) itself though it may some long is a limited thin^
(...) is very (...), yea (...) proportion, in respect of eternity, which is
infinite. yet God has care to bring this weak creature to life eternal.
woman, living a short time, is replenished first planted. But when man shall be
dead, and naked and The parents after death are not afflicted with the state
of their children, as they be in this life.
shall not understand But yet

CHAP XV. Eliphaz again charge Job to have spoken presumptuously, and
blasphemously. 14. avouches that no man is innocent nor just. 20. describing
the malediction of impious and hypochrites. The fourt conflict,

BUT Eliphaz the Themanite answering, said: Will a wise Eliphaz not able to
answer Jobs solid reasons, raileth against him, as if he were injurious to
God, or taught others to cast away fear.
reprouest him in words, both oldmen and ancientes among us, much elder then
thy fathers. Is it a great matter that God should comforth thee: It is a very
rare privilege to be without spot.
without spot, and that the borne of a woman should appear But spot of venial
sins may be in a just man.
just? Behold among his saints none is immutable, Al these miseries are
incident to the wicked, but are falsely applied to holy Job, who ^ndede was
just.
the number of the years of his tyranny is uncertain. The sound of terror
is always in his

CHAP. XVI. Job moved by his importune freindes, 4. expostulateth their
severity, 12. further describes his afflictions, and appealeth to Gods
judgment, that he suffers more then his sins deserve.
BUT Job answering said: I have heard often times such True and freindlie
comforters ought to hear the afflicted with patience, and not unmercifully
charge him with crimes which they neither know, nor his conscience is guilty
of.
heavy conforters you are al. Shall words full A great affliction, when one full
of pain and distres is also forced to defend his own innocence against
calumniators.
a false speaker is raised up against my face contradicting me. He has
gathered his fury upon me, As the adversaries still object great iniquity to
him so he yeldeth them the same true answer.
without the iniquity

CHAP. XVII. For the greuousnes of his pain Job expects speedy death, 4.
charge his freindes with folly for holding only remuneration in this life. 6.
himself hops happy rest in the other World.
MY spirit shall be extenuated, my days shall be shortened, Not having committed
such sins as he was charged withal, in this duble bitterness of corporal pain
and calumniation, his eye was still upon God, expecting to be delivered.
not sinned, and mine eye abides in bitterness. Deliver Se^l (...) Infernus.
This tex^ shows evidently that there was a place of rest called hell.
hell is my house, and in darkness

CHAP. XVIII. Baldad sets upon Job again, chargeing him with present
impatience, and former impiety, 6. and that therefore he suffers worthy
punishment. The fifth conflict.

BUT Baldad the Suhite answering, said: How long will Baldad perceiving Job to
speak confidently as the common doctrine of many opposes him self nevertheless
against him and all that think as he does, and so speaks as to many in the
plural number, vvil ye speak and of himself and his fellows: are we reputed.
etc. So holy Job a figure of the Church defended the common cause, his
adversaries a figure of here t^kes speaking some truths mixed false things
therewith S. Greg. li. 14. c. 1.
ye speak vaunting words? understand ye first, and so over him, shall be
extinguished. The steps of his power

CHAP. XIX. Job lamenteth of his freindes cruelty, 6* affirms that his so
great affliction is not for his sins. 25. and comfort himself with his
undoubted belief^ of the Resurrection.
BUT Job answering, said: How long do you afflict my Blessed Job (says S.
Gregory li. 14. c. 16. 17*) looking sincerly on his own life, saw that his
affliction was greater then his sins deserved, and in that respect was not
equal: yet it was just, for God, being just gives a just reward: a crown of
justice as S. Paul speaks of himself (2. Tim. 4*)
not with equal judgment, and has compassed me with his scourges. Behold I
shall cry suffering violence, fury is wrath against me, and he has so
accounted me as his enemy. His serian^es have come together, and have Al
refused holy Job in his affliction even those whom he had loved most: who
therefore ought most to have loved him again.
whom I loved most has turned against me. The flesh being consumed my An
express profession of his faith of the Resurrection.
I know We shall rise again, not as one tree rises in place of an other, but
the self same persons, changed in qualities not in substance*
none other: this my hope is laid up in my bosom. Why then do you say now:
Let us persecute

CHAP. XX. Sophar avouches that some wicked men flourish for a time, but are
afterward justly plaged. 29. thereupon condemns Job as an hypocrite.
BUT Sophar the Naamathite answering, said: Therefore The sixth conflict,
my diverse cogitations* succeed one an other, and my mind is rapt into
sundry things. The doctrine, wherewith since man was placed upon the earth,
That the praise of the Al man's life is short and as a moment in comparison of
eternity; but it is not always true that thewiked are shortly punished in
respect of this life, as this disputer applies it to prove Job to impious.
Therefore Job answers in the next chapter. ^. 13. That ordinarily the wicked,
lead their days (to wit their whole life) in wealth and (then) in a moment
go down to hell. So the rest of these men's assertions are for most part true
in some sense but il applied.
short, and the joy of the hypocrite as it were for a moment: If his pride rise
up even to the heaven, and his

CHAP. XXI. Job requiring his freindes to hear him, 7. discourses of the
cause, why some evil men prosper all this life.
BUT Job answering, said: Hear I beseech you my words, Though he disputed with
three men, yet it was concerning divine things not human but of Gods
providence, and justice, of the resurrection of eternal life and punishment.
against man, that I ought not worthily See chapter 20. v 5.
lead their days in The same word is in Hebrew Greek and Latin for hell as in
the 7 and 17. chap. and other places, which shows that besides hell of the
damned the resting place also of holy fathers in the old Testament was called
by the general name of hell.
hell. Who I know your cogitations, and unjust sentences against me. For you
say: Where is the house of the prince? and where a river of hell.
Cocytus, and after him he shall draw every man, and before him innumerable.
How therefore

CHAP. XXII. Eliphaz contendeth that God is not pleased with a just man's
afflictions. 5. falsely imputes enormious crimes to holy Job, 12. and gross
errors. 21. wishes him therefore to repent, that so he may prosper.
BUT Eliphaz the Themanite answering, said: Can man The seventh conflict
be compared with God, yea though he be of perfect knowledge. What does it In
deed when a just man has done his duty he is unprofitable to God; but he is
profitable to himself, which greatly pleases God, who desires man's good, and
it redoundeth to Gods glory that he has such servants. ^^at 5. v. 17.
profit God if thou be just? or After imputation of false crimes, this (...)
charge (...) also with (...) a (...) error of the Egyptians, that God has
no providence of men in this world Aristotel. li. d^ mundo. textu. 84. So some
heretics in their phrensic accuse Catholics of condemned heresies.
neither does he consider our things, and he walks about the poles of heaven
Do thou covet to keep were taken away before their time, and a flood has
euerthrowen their foundation: Who said to God: Depart from

CHAP. XXIII. Job expects help and sentence of God, 6. with just fear, yet
with good conscience maintains his own innocence.
BUT Job answering, said: VVhiles he expected some comforth of his freindes,
they still afflicted him more and more, chargeing him with fal^^ crimes and so
aggravating his grief both of body and mind
Now also my talk is in Therefore he appealeth to Gods judgment seat for
sentence.
his throne? I will set judgment me as gold that passes through the fire: My
foot has followed

CHAP. XXIIII. God in his providence knows when he will punish the wicked,
which his true servants know not, much less the impious.
TIMES are not hid from the Omnipotent: but they Gods servants know that he
will punish wickedness, but know not when* the wicked presume that he will never
punish them.
that Heretics doing and teaching against their own knowledge, are afterward
stricken with blindness* that they can not see the truth. S. Greg. li. 16. c. 26.
rebellious man: but by night he will be as a thief. The eye of the aduouterer
Sinners running into both extremes of defect and excess, are likewise punished
with contrary torments.
from snow waters to exceeding heat, and his sin even unto hell. Let mercy
forget him: worms his Man by power of free will often presumes to spend the
time in sinning which God grants him to do penance, for former sins. Romans 2.
abuses it unto pride: but his eyes be upon his ways. They are elevated for a
little,

CHAP. XXV. Baldad endeuoreth again to terrify Job, with Gods judgment, from
appealing thereto, and from auouching his own innocence.
BUT Baldad the Suhite answering, said: Power and terror The eight conflict.
is with him, that makes concord in his high ones. Is there any number of his
souldiars? and upon whom shall Job answered before. chapter 9. yet blind and
obstinate disputers still repete the same objections.
can man be justified compared with

CHAP. XXVI. Job refuteth his aduersariese needles and common arguments, by
more sound discoursing of Gods power, and wisdom.
BUT Job answering, said: Job shows that neither God needs man's help:
whose helper art thou? his perhaps to him, that has not wisdom, and Neither
is Baldads prudence able to help if there were need:
thy prudence have thou showed very great. Whom would thou teach? Giantes
were not able to wade in Noes flood, but were drowned with the rest.
gyantes groan under Not only great things before recited but also the very
least are made by God, and depend upon his providence.
winding serpent is brought forth. Lo, these things are said in part of his
ways: and where as

CHAP. XXVII. More and more ^ob confirms his innocence, auouching that God
not presently judging, 11. will in time condemn the wicked.
JOB also added, taking his parable, and said: God lives, God would not as yet
have Jobs cause judged, but reserved the sentence, for his greater trial in
patience.
taken away my judgment, and the Omnipotent, which has brought my soul to
bitterness. That as It were a lie to acknowledge such sins as he had not
committed.
lying. God forbid that I should judge you to be just: til I fail, I will not
depart from mine innocence. My justification which I have begune to hold, I
will Omnipotent. If his children be multiplied, they shall be in Some part of
Gods judgment falls on the wicked in this life, but especially at their
death. Psalm. 75.
when he shall sleep shall take away nothing with him: he shall oppen his eyes,
and find nothing. Poverty as water

CHAP. XXVIII. The maru^lous works of God, the author of nature, show his
power and wisdom, 12. and that true riches consist not in temporal creatures,
but in wisdom, 28. and fear of God.
SILVER has By these more precious and rare creatures, men ought to consider
the creator and so not set their rest in them, but in him, which is true
wisdom.
beginnings of her veins, and gold has Sudaine headie waters bursting out do
change the ways and passages of men.
torrent divides from the pilgrim people, them whom the foot of the needy
man has forgotten, and to whom there is no way. The land, out of which bread
True wisdom is not in natural things, but in supernatural virtues.
neither is it found in the land of them that live pleasently. The depth says:
It is not in me: and When man has considered Gods works, his duty is to
fear God
the fear Then to depart from evil and do good.
depart from evil understanding.

CHAP. XXIX. Again Job recounteth Gods former benefits, as Well his grace,
whereby he did good works, 5. as temporal prosperity. 9. and wisdom above
other princes.
JOB also added, taking Parables are not only similitudes of things but also
pithie and profound sentences such as Job, Solomon, and other wisest men
uttered.
his parable, and said: Who will throat. The ear hearing counted me blessed,
and the eye This particle (as) imports not here a similitude but rather that
he was a very king or supreme prince as having supreme authority. v. 7. royal
vesture and crown v. (...). Is^lorus, li. de vita sanct. Beda and alij.
as a king, with his army standing about him, yet was I a conforter of them
that mourned.

CHAP. XXX. Holy Job shows the great change of his temporal estate, from
welfare into great calamity.
BUT now they of younger time scorn me, whose fathers Men scarce fit to have
care of dogs derided Job in his affliction so he was contemned of the most
contemptible.
with the dogs of my flock: The force of whose hands was to me as nothing,
and they become a proverb with them. They abhor me, and flee Our Savior also
sustered this reproach. Mat. 26.
to spit in my face. For he In the Hebrew have put, in the plural number,
importing plurality of Divine Persons.
has put a bridle into my mouth. At the right hand of me rising, my Death is a
comforth to a just man in tribulation.
that thou Like to such beasts as seek solitary places to lament in.
brother of dragons, and fellow of Ostriches. My

CHAP. XXXI. Holy Job recites sincerly his own virtues, showing thereby that
he is not punished so gricuously for his sins, but by Gods providence for
some other cause.
I HA^^ whereas there is a continual war between a chaist mind and rebellious
flesh, holy Job made this condition of truce between these enemies* that his
eye should never give occasion to carnal concupiscence.
made a covenant with mine eyes, that I would By which means, he was also safe
from carnal cogitations. S. Greg. li. 21. e. 2.
think of a virgin. For what part should mouth. Which is By this demand he
provoked his adversaries to produce what they could to convince him of
idolatry or denving God wherewith they indirectly charged him,
most great iniquity, and a denial against

Job disputed no more with his freindes: but afterward submitted him self to
God, acknowledging some unadvised speech. c 39. v. 37. c. 42. v 3*
The words of Job are ended.
CHAP. XXXII. Eliu a young man being angry that Job persisted in his opinion,
and that his three freindes could not convince him, S. takes upon him to
confute Job which they could not do.
BUT these three men omitted to answer Job, for that he The ninth conflict.
seemed just to himself. And This youngman witty and learned, but proud withal,
was a figure of the hot and arrogant disputers who will seem to know more then
their elders. S. Greg. li. 23. c. 2.
Eliu the son of Barachel inspiration of the Omnipotent gives understanding.
They A notorious arrogancy to hold himself wiser then any man, either of his
own sect, or of his adversaries.
here is none of you that can reprove Job, and answer to his words. Lest
perhaps Those that neither credit Catholic Doctors, nor yet rely upon their
own elders, but every one upon his own private spirit, deny that to perteyne
to them which is spoken to others in the same errors. S. Greg li. 23. c. 8.
to me, and I will not answer him according to your words. They were afraid,

CHAP. XXXIII. Eliu endeuoreth to prove by Jobs speech that he is unjust: 13.
arguing that God (by afflicting him) has alreadly so judged. 23. but if by an
Angels admonition he repent, al shall be remitted.
HERE therefore Job my sayings, and harken to al my Arrogant men imagine their
own conceiptes, and utterance to be more marvelous the^ other men's, not
knowing how foolish their own pride is. S. Greg. li. 23. c. 16.
miracle ways. This therefore is it, wherein thou art not justified: I It is
true that Gods will once uttered ought to suffice al men, for he answers not
to each one by a particular speech, but by common speech (or fact) satisfies al
men's questions. whereof S. Gregory notes this general rule. vita praecedentium
sit form ^ sequentium. The l^se of them that go be fore is made a form (or
rule) of them that follow. li. 23. c. 18 and 19 But Eliu falsely supposed that
God by Jobs affliction had declared that he was a wicked man. For in deed God
declared the contrary. c. 1. v. 1. and 8. c. 2. v. 3.
speaks once, and repeateth not the self same

CHAP. XXXIIII. Again Eliu charge Job with blasphemy, and other crimes, 10.
shows the equity of Gods judgment: 20. and that al things are subject to
Gods power and knowledge.
ELIV therefore pronouncing, spoke these words also. to me: For the ear
proves words, and the throat discerns Job said not that God, ubuerted
judgment (or wrongfully judged) but God has taken away my judgment. cha. 27
v 2. that is, differred to judge my cause.
subverted my judgment. For in Neither did Job say this (c. 9. v. 22.) but
Eliu wrested his meaning that he might have something to reprehend S. Greg. li.
24. c. 25.
although he run with him Therefore both upon nations, and upon al men? Who
makes a man Eliu applies this to Job, as though he had made false show of
virtue which he had not, and that God had suffered him hither to to ^^igne, or
rather to tyrannize for just punishment of his peoples sin nes. But God at last
declared that Job was not such a one. chapter 42. v. 7.
an hypocrite reign for the sins of the people. Therefore because I have
spoken to God, thee also I will not

CHAP. XXXV. Eliu pretending that Job had said God to be vniusts, she weth
that man's piety nor impiety neither profits nor disprofiteth God: 13 and
that he judges al things rightly.
THEREFORE Eliu again spoke these words: Does Eliu insisteth much in this
calumniation. for Job never said, that he was just compared with God, nor
iuster then God. But that his affliction was greater then his sin. chapter 6. v.
3. c. 23. v. ^. etc.
I am These are strong sentences (says S. Gregory) but they agree not (or
^^e^^lapphed, to the blessed person of Job. li. 26. c. 7.
Look up to heaven and see, and behold the sky, that it is Therefore Job in
vain opens his mouth, and

CHAP. XXXVI. Yet further Eliu shows, that God by his power and wisdom
gives to every one that is just. 16. inferring (falsely) that al Jobs
affliction is for his sins. 22. discoursing still of Gods pour, wisdom, and
providence.
ELIV also adding speak these words: Bear with me No orator is so vain but
he promises al truth, and speaks some to get credit with his auditorie.
without lie, and perfect knowledge shall be proved to thee. God does not cast
away the mighty, whereas If kings reign well their praise remains for ever.
v. 11.
for ever, and there they are extolled. And if they The night is drawn long,
when tentations are not spedely resisted
Protract not the night, that whereby full worse and worse cogitations succeed in
place of the first. S. Greg. li 26. ^. 38.
peoples may come up for Above al other Lawgeuers God is most able to punish
transgressors, but most willing and most able to reward the obseruers. S.
Gregory ex poundeth this to be a prophec^e of Christ our singular lavvgeuer.
li. ^7 c. 1
among the lawgeuers. Who can search his ways? or who can say to him: Thou
have wrought iniquity? Remember that thou know not Christ will give the
glorious light of heaven which now is hidden to men that lost terrestrial
paradise. ibide^. c. 12.
he bideth the light, and commands

CHAP. XXXVII. Eliu continues his discourse, showing Gods wisdom, power, and
justice, by his marvelous works of Meteors, 14* and use thereof to man's
commodity. 18. which the wisest m^n sufficiently understand not, much less
may presume (as he unjustly charge Job) to contend with God.
UPON Consideration of heavenly rewards mentioned in the end of the former
chapter, comfort the afflicted: but thunder and other meteors being figures
of Gods judgment, strike the heart with terror.
this my heart is sore afraid, and is moved out of North wind. or north pole.
Arcturus. When God blows frost congeleth, God directs the ^loudes in the
air as a master mariner governs a ship.
the gouerner shall lead them, to all that he shall command them upon the face of
he whole earth Whether in one tribe or in his land, or in the raines, that they
show the light of his clouds? Know Man not able to praise God sufficiently,
p^ayseth him with fea^e.
fearful praising. We Job coruinced the former three with sound answers this
last and most arrogant with silence.


CHAP. XXXVIII. God after terror of a whirlewind, by way of examining his
client Job of diverse creatures about their nature, shows that no man has
perfect knowledge of them, much less of Gods immensitie.
BUT our Lord answering Job out of a whirlewind, said: The third part. For the
tenth and last dispute God discusseth the controuer sie, and gives sentence
for Job.
Who is this that wrappeth in sentences with unskillful Only the Creator has
absolute and perfect knowledge of al creatures. As may appear^ by induction, or
example:
answer Of the creation of the earth.
the foundations Of the sea.
sea with doors Distinction of lights.
the morning, and show the dawning his place. And did thou hold the
extremities of the earth shaking shall be broken. Have thou entered into The
depth of the sea.
the depthes of the Man's own nativity, and what shall happen after his death
Did thou know then that thou The suns light and heat.
light spread, is heat divided upon the Diverse Meteors.
gave course to the most vehement shower, Stars, and planetes.
stars Pleiades, or can thou dissipate the circuit of Acturus? Do thou
bring forth the day star in his Man has his knowledge from God.
wisdom in the heart of man? or who gave the And the cock has skill, which man
wants.
cock understanding? Who shall declare the manner of the heavens, or rest from
motion.
sleep. When was the dust powered on the earth, and the cloddes In some
Editions the 39. chap. begineth here. showing by induction of sensible things
(as before of insensible) that only God knows the nature of al creatures.
Shall thou take a pray for the liones

CHAP. XXXIX. God Almighty prosecuteth his discourse, showing his admirable
power and providence in living creatures. 34. Whereupon Job acknowlegeth his
own oversight in some light words.
HAVE By Gods marvelous providence appearing in the natural instinct of other
creatures man may consider that the same is greater toward him. And therefore
God here proposes the examples of.
thou known the time when the VVild goats.
wild goats Hyndes.
hyndes when they fawn? Have thou numbered the VVild asses.
wild ass free, and who has Unicorns.
Rhinoceres Ostriches,
Ostrich Falcons, or Ierfalcons, and other hawks.
Herodius, and of the hawke. When she leaves her eggs on the earth, thou
perhaps wilt Horses are of singular great corege.
horse, or put neying about his neck? Shall thou shall hear the trumpet he
says: Vah, he smells battle far of, the exhortation of the captains, and
the cry of the army. Does the Hawks whereof Aristotel says there be ten
kinds: pli^^e sixtene.
hawke wax fethered by thy wisdom, spreding Eagles, of most strong sight.
eagle mount at thy commandment, If we discuss al Jobs words ( says S.
Gregory, we shall find nothing wickedly spoken, but only small spe^ce of pride
in speaking too much of his own affliction and too little of Gods goodness
toward him li. 23. c. 1.
lightly what can I answer? I will put my hand

CHAP. XL. Our Lord further shows that man's power, nor justice, is not
comparable to Gods. 10. as appears in ouercoming Behemoth, 20. and Leuiathan.
AND our Lord answering Job out of the whirlewinde, Though Job had truly
avouched that his sins deserved not so great afflictions, yet he ought to
have acknowleged that God afflicted him justly, for some other cause known to
God, but unknown to him, which he not confessing seemed to make Gods judgment
unjust: or, of none effect. S. Greg. li. 32. c. 3.
judgment of none An Elephant the greatest of al beasts, of long life,
strong, meke, t^n perate, chaist, overcome by the Unicorn, or Dragon. or taken
by the nose and led away. How much more does Gods providence give man power
to overcome the devil?
Behemoth do protect his shadow, the willowes of the torrent An huge great
fish. perhaps, the whale, exceeding man's power to be managed, yet is subject (as
also the devil signified thereby) to Gods power, and providence.
Leuiathan with a hook, and

CHAP. XLI. Leuiathan is further described by the peculiar parts of his body,
and terrible composition of al his members.
NOT as God rules al his creatures, not with cruelty as a tyranne, but with
justice, ease, and power.
cruel will I raise him: for who can resist my contenance? God at last
destroys him whom man can not overcome.
he shall send lightnings against him, and he shall not be carried to an other
place. His heart shall be hardened as a stone, and shall be stiffly compact as the
smithes stithie. When he shall be taken away, the Angels with reverent fear do
honor Gods power. And valient mariners and other soldiars are terrified when
they see this so huge a fish. Mystically, Gods preachers and perfectest
servants shall naturally fear the terror of Gods judgment.
Angels shall fear, And the devil reigns over proud men. S. Greg. li. 34. c
4. and 17.
king over all the children

CHAP. XLII. Holy Job instructed and comforted by Gods discourse, acknowlegeth
his fault, and craves pardon for his oversight in speech, or cogitation. 7.
God justifies his cause against his freindes. 9. They offer sacrifice for
their offense. 10. Al things prosper with Job, duble to that he had before.
16. and he dies happily.
AND Job answering our Lord, said: I know that thou Job here simply ackowledged
his error in speaking so much in defense of his own innocence, and so little
of Gods providence in afflicting him, for his more merit, and Gods more glory.
unwisely, and the things that did excede my knowledge beyond mesure. Hear (I
beseech thee) Before he defended a truth against his opposite freindes, now with
more resignation he contented himself with his affliction.
I reprehend myself, and I do penance went, and did as our Lord had spoken to
them, and our Lord received the face of Job. Our Lord also was turned Job did
penance both for himself and others.
penance of Job, when he prayed for his freindes. And our Lord added al things
whatsoever had been Iobes, duble. And al his brethren came to him, and al his
sisters, In that he had al other things duble, and children in the same number
as before, it is a sign that the former perished not but died in good state.
seven sons, and three daughters.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLII.
7. You have not spoken right, as my servant Iob] Holy Job being thoroughly
tried God by his sentence condemned the error of Jobs freindes, and justified
his assertion.
in the furnace of tribulation, and by divine instruction confirmed in perfect
patience, and other virtues, God at last gave sentence, condemning the guilty,
and justifying the innocent: in plain terms prononcing that Eliphaz, Baldad,
and Sophar had not spoken right before him, as his servant Job. And so these
three being convinced, that notwithstanding their former pretense of defending
Gods cause, they had erred, and Job had maintained the truth, they submitted
themselves as faulty, and humbly did penance, bringing their oblations for
sacrifice to Job, as they were commanded. v. 8. and. 9

As for Eliu the last disputer, persisting more vehement in his error when
others ceased from contention, he was sufficiently condemned in his fellows.
And the rather for that true point of his own doctrine (chapter 33. v. 14) that
God speaks once, and repeteth not the same, the second time. For it was ever
a general rule, Errors ought not to beholden still, being once condemned. Much
less raised again being hertofore buried.
that when God once reueiled any thing by public fact, or unto competent
witnesses, it sufficed for ever, to al reasonable men, and so Eliu might apply
the sentence to himself, which God had denounced to his three freindes, in the
same cause. Much less are Protestants excusable, which not only persist S.
Aug. deside and oper S. Cyprian. li. 4. ep. 2.
in errors condemned in their own fellows, as in Luther, Calvin, Beza and
others, but also in other old heresies: as their doctrine of justification by
only faith condemned in the Apostles time: their denying the ceremonies of
Baptism, and the Sacraments of Confirmation: and of Penance, condemned in the
Nouatians: or that patient sustaining of worldly losses, and other
afflictions, such as Job Apud Eusebius. li. 6. c. 35. Genesis 2. 4 7 Exodus 23. Deuteronomy.
15.
suffered, are not satisfactorie, or meritorious works.

8. Take seven oxen, and seven rams.] In the number of seven is a mystery
Numbers mystical.
of perfection and fulness, often used in holy scripture. For God creating the
world and al things therein, in six days, rested the seventh. Seuenfold
punishment was required for Cain. Seven payres of clean beasts were conserved
in Great or many sacrifices for great offenses. Devotion of him that offers
sacrifice increases the effect. Prayers of holy men or Sainstes derogate not
from Christ.
in Noah's ark. And in the law the ground rested from tillage the seventh year.
with innumerable the like. As S. Gregory in this place, and other Fathers note
in their works. Also twice seven victimes offered in sacrifice, import the
greatness of these men's offense in accusing Job, and in auouching their false
opinion.

8. Job shall pray for you. Neither had so many sacrifices sufficed, as S.
Chrisostom observes, Orat. 5. in Iudaeos, unless Job also had prayed for the
offenders. Where we see that both Sacrifice, and the devotion of him that
offers it, have their effects: whereof comes the distinction used in
Schools, of Opusoperatum, and Opus operantis. As it is manifest likewise, that
mediation of one man for an other, did not derogate from Gods benign mercy,
in the law of nature, wherein these men lived. Nor now from Christ's mediation,
in the law of Grace. 2. Cor. 1. v. 11.

A BRIEF RECAPITVLATION of this strange and sacred history.
FOr avoiding prolixitie (this volume growing great) we have for most Why we
have made few annotations in this book.
part contracted our Annotations into the margen, making very few others in
this book, which otherwise offered much more occasion, as well for explicating
hard places, as of other doctrinal and moral instructions. Neither in deed can
ordinary Annotations well suffice for understanding of this, and other hard
books. But rather large Comentaries are required, such as S. Gregory, and
other ancient Fathers: as also F. John de Pineda, and others have lately
written. whereto we therefore remitte the learned readers. And for the benefit of
others of our nation, we shall here briefly recapitulate the sum, The argument
of this history.
and principal points of this holy and admirable history, consisting in a
singular holy man's conflictes, and glorious victory, against invisible and
visible adversaries, both in prosperous and adverse fortune.

First this holy man Job in all abundance of wealth and riches, blessed Job in
prosperity was tempted inuisibly more then ordinary men of lower state, or
less perfection.
with many children (chapter 1.) sitting in a princely throne, and royal dignity
(chapter 29.) in the land of Hus, was not only assaulted with common tentations of
the envious enemy, as al are that live piously in God, but so much 2. Tim. 3.
the more, as he was more godly, sincerer and perfecter then other men, yet he
never set his heart upon worldly or temporal things, but with all due fear so
served God, and parted from evil, that Satan himself (the calumniator of
mankind) could not charge him with any sin at al. Though he would not for all
that confess him to be just, or perfect but for further trial Much more by
loss of al his goods and children in one day. Most of al by bodily
affliction. And reuiling of his wife.
of him, demanded and obtained license of God to touch at his posssesions, and
so bereued him of al his goods, and children in one day. And when he
perseuering constant in virtue, thanking God for all, not sinning in his lips,
neither speaking any foolish thing against God, the devil getting more ample
permission to touch his bones and flesh (chap. 2) susudenly stroock him with
most grievous botch (or boil) from the sole of the foot to the top of the
head: who sitting on a dunghill, and scraping the corruption of his sores with a
shel in extreme pain, his own wife, by the devils suggestion, reviled him for
his sincerity, and provoked him to blaspheme God: but he severely reprehended
her folly, still keeping necessary patience.

Then came three special freindes, noble wisemen (or little kings) to visit,
and comfort him, who in seven days not speaking one word of consolation, nor
entering into any discourse with him, at last Job himself (chap. Holy Job
lamented his affliction, and the general miseries of man.
3.) broke this long silence (but not his patience) lamentably bewayling the
extremity of his pains, imputing al to the miseries of man's estate, corrupted
by sin, discoursed of certain penal euiles, or malades ensuing thereupon,
wishing for his own part (if it had so been Gods pleasure, for he sincerly
feared God) that either he had not been borne, or been shortly taken out of his
world, cursing sin and the proper effects thereof remaining in man, wishing
also to have wanted the ordinary Where Job expected comforth in tribulation,
the devil procured him more affliction.
benefits of education in his infancy, and al his former prosperity, so that
he might have escaped the calamities, wherewith he was now afflicted. Al which
he uttering in way of contemning al worldly things, and supposing his
freindes there present, would have so understood him, and had compassion with
him: they contrariwise (by art of the devil, God so permitting) fell into
indignation, and in stead of comforting their most afflicted friend, sharply
reprehended him, rashly judged his conscience, and falsely condemned him, not
only of impatient speech, as offensive to God, and his Angels, and to al good
men; but also of other enormious sins: as pride, Job sore afflicted in body
had nine several confflictes about the cause thereof before it was decided.
tyranny, presumption, hypochrisie, and blasphemy, because heretofore he
seemed to the world as just and holy, and now (as they imagined) in his
deserved punishment, charged God with injustice. whereupon grew diverse long
disputes between Job and his three freindes; a fourth also intruding himself,
when the others ceased. So that Job endured nine conflictes, and in the tenth
God judged him the victour, which shall yet better appear, if we repete the
sum of their arguments, and his answers, with Gods decision of the
controversy.

In the first conflict Eliphaz the chiefest of Jobs freindes (in the. 4. and 5.
The first conflict.
chapters) accused Job of great impatience, and insolency against God, also
both him and his family of tyranny, like to a cruel lion, and lions whelps,
alleging for proof the prosperity of good men, punishment of the wicked, and
a particular vision. Adjured him therefore to acknowledge and repent the same.
But Job (in other two chapters) auoched that in deed his afflictions were
greater then his sins deserved, The maine point of the controversy.
relying upon his innocence known to his own conscience. Described also the
manifold calamities of man's life, desired to die, and so to end his worldly
miseries.

Then Baldad the second opposite friend (in the 8. chap.) pretending to The
second conflict.
free Gods judgment from al show or resemblance of injustice, charged Job and
his children with former wickedness, and him as injurious to God in his
speeches, of which if he would repent, he should be healed, and prosper as
before: Arguing in general, that God never afflicts the The ground of these
men's error.
innocent, nor assisteth the malignant. Insinuating thereby, that Job was an
hypocrite. whereto Job answered (chap. 9. and 10) that in deed no man may
compare, nor justify himselse before God. Nevertheless it stands well with
Gods justice, power, and wisdom, that innocents be sometimes exercised with
tribulations, more then their offenses deserve.

Thirdly Sophar (the third disputer) assaulted Job (chapter 11.) imputing his The
third conflict.
speech, and defense of himself to loquacitie, and audacious temeritie, in that
he desired to know the causes of Gods providence, in so grievously afflicting
him. Of which faults holy Job purged himself (in the three next chapters)
still maintayning his innocence, according to his own conscience better known
to himself then to them, desiring God to instruct him, if he had any unknown
sins. Discoursed also much more profoundly of Gods power, wisdom, justice,
and providence, as we^ in general, as toward himself in particular: and
professed his faith, and great confidence of the Resurrection. Again Eliphaz
(chapter 15.) more bitterly then before, condemned Job The fourth conflict.
of presumption, and blasphemy, discoursed of man's corruptnes and prones to
sin, describing the manners of hypochrites, and other impious men, with their
miserable ends, and argued Job for such a one. Who (in the next two chapters)
expostulated with these his friends, that they coming with pretense to comforth
him, did so violently afflict him, by charging him with false and heinous
crimes, his own conscience better knowing, and testifying his former life, and
state of his soul, then that their imaginations could alter his judgment. And
so with contempt of this world, and desire of death and rest, appealed to Gods
judgment against his three freindes, touching the matter in controversy. In
the mean time comforted himself with meditation of the next world.

Baldad likewise replied (chapter 18.) with hot contention, accusing Job The fifth
conflict.
of insolent impatience, inculcating the grievous punishments both of him, and
others for their impiety. In answer whereto he lamented again the wan^ of
expected comforth, especially by such freindes. Still comforted himself with
assured faith of the Resurrection.

Sophar also (chapter 20.) attempted again to convince Job of impiety, The sixth
conflict.
and hypochrisie, by the miserable, and speedy fall of wicked men after
prosperity: for so he imagined Job to be fallen into irrecouerable misery.
But Job showed the contrary, that some wicked men prosper long, yea al their
life, and the same long, and then in a moment go down to hell, and so the
argument of present affliction proved not their opinion against him.

Eliphaz disputed the third time (chapter 22.) contending that the causes The
seventh conflict.
of affliction, are not to be attributed to Gods secret providence, but to
assured sins of the wicked. Upon whom only he supposed, that afflictions fall:
inferring that Job was guilty of enormious crimes, and gross errors. Urged
him therefore to return to God, that he might be restored to former
prosperity. Job again appealed to Gods sentence, not in his terror, nor
rigor of his justice, but against his adversaries in this quarrel, describing
Gods power, and wisdom, by which he permits the innocent to be afflicted,
and the wicked to prosper: no man knowing how soon, or how late, al shall
receive as they deserve.

Moreover Baldad disputed the third time, very briefly (chapter 25.) endeavoring
The eight conflict.
to terrify Job from further answering, and especially from appealing to Gods
judgment. But Job very largely (in six ensuing chapters) discoursed divinely
of Gods sovereign Majesty, Power, Wisdom, exact Justice, and infinite Mercy.
Also of wicked men's destruction; of his own former prosperity, and present
calamity, together with his good works, and innocence, which he still
anouched in respect of great iniquities.

After that Job and his three freindes ceased, nothing being agreed upon in
The ninth conflict.
the point of controversy, the devil yet ceased not, but sturred up a
yongman, called Eliu, proud and arrogant, but not unlearned, who abruptly
condemned them al; to wit, Job of pertinacie, the others of insufficiency.
And therefore took upon him to convince Job, though the others could not.
Newest Sectaries hold themselves the wisest.
Very like to late-rising Protestants, or Puritaines bragging that by new
arguments, and proofs never heard of, they will overthrow the Papists, or
Catholic Roman Church, and doctrine, which al former enemies, Jews,
Pagaines, Turks, and Heretics, nor Hell gates, could not overcome. This young
Eliu therefore, with his Private spirit, Especially these of our days, that
rely each one upon his own private spirit.
wiser in his own conceit then all that went before him, assaulted constant
Job (chapter 32. and five more ensuing) with many words, and bragges, often
chalenging and provoking, but not extorting any answer, from so grave a man to
his frivolous and idle arguments, largely discoursing of things either not
denied, or so manifest false, that every mean servant of God, could easily
convince them* and never approaching to the maine controversy, only railed
against holy Job, charging him more furiously then any had done before, with
impiety, impatience, ignorance, pride, blasphemy, and obstinacy, vices far
from Jobs sanctity, dilating also of Gods justice, mercy, wisdom, power, and
providence; and that no man ought to contend, nor expostulate with God, that
afflictions must be borne patiently, and that God is just, and marvelous in his
works, whereof no wiseman ever doubted; and so Job convinced him with silence.

But God himself for decision of al (from chapter 38. to the end of the Book) In
the tenth place God decided the controversy.
first by way of examining instructed Job more particularly, reciting many
marvelous works of nature, showing thereby his Divine Majesty, Power, and
wisdom, exercising Job in more patience, and withal perfecting him in
humility. So that with all reverent fear and subjection, he offered and
submitted him self to Gods only good pleasure. Then finally God gave sentence
that Job had defended the truth, and his three freindes had Penitentes
pardoned. Job rewarded.
erred. Whom after Sacrifice, and Jobs prayer for them, he pardoned; restored
Job to health, and to duble prosperity, of al he had lost before, giving him
also long life, and a happy end.

In this history besides the literal sense, showing that Job was just and
sincere, The literal sense of this history. Aliegorical.
and not for his sins (as his freindes falsely supposed) but for his more
mere^e was most extremly afflicted, and afterward restored to health and
wealth: we have also h^re in the Allegorical sense, an especial figure of
Christ. who as he was absolutely most innocent, and most perfect: so was he
without comparison most afflicted of al mankind. Likewise Jobs restoration to
better state then before, signified in the Anagogical sense, the Resurrection,
and Anagogical.
rest^uratio^ of better, and most glorious qualities in the blessed, with
fulness of Moral.
days, in eternal glory. Finally in the Moral sense (which S. Gregory most
especially prosecuteth) al Christians have here a most notable example of al
virtues, namely of patience, wherein Job proceeded by degrees to great
perfection. For he was first tried by the loss of al his goods and children,
and was Holy Job proceeded by degrees to perfect patience.
proved to be very patient. He was then most grievously tormented in body, and
being left without comforth, albeit he lamentably bewa led so great extremity,
wishing such days had been prevented: yet he neither spoke against God, nor
good man, nor his own soul, and according to truth avouched and defended his
own innocence. And at last by Gods inspiration, and sweet consolation, he
re^re^e^ded himself, of former imperfections uttered in some words, and with
full resignation to Gods will, sustained al his losses and pains, not only with
contentment, but also with joy.

THE END OF THE FIRST TOME.
TO THE CVRTEOVS READER.
We have already found some faults escaped in printing, but fearing there be
more, and the whole volume being ouerlong, to be examined again, we pray the
courteous reader to pardon al, and amend them as they occur.

Two Tables, one of the times of the old Testament: an other of the principal
matters in the Annotations thereof, shalfolow (God willing) with the other Tome:
which we desire, and hope to send you shortly. In the mean time, the gentle
reader may please to supply the want thereof, as he may, by the Recapitulations
of the History, and points of Religion, in the five first ages, already
contained in this Volume, in their proper places: in the pages. 29. 47, 196.
701. and 934.

You may please to amend the more especial errors, happened in printing, by
reading thus:

Page 57. line 29. SALEM Pa. 305. in the margent. much more in the Church of
Christ? Page 846: lin 39. rejoice, that Pege 1064: line 39: line 40. how they
escape many miseries, which are never borne, birth Page 1069: line 1. nor I
gainsay

If our selves, or others shall find more, we will gladly correct them.

THE SECOND TOME OF THE HOLY BIBLE FAITHFVLLY TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH, OVT OF
THE AVTHENTICAL LATIN.

Diligently conferred with the Hebrew, Greek, and other Editions in diverse
languages.

With ARGVMENTS of the Books, and Chapters: ANNOTATIONS: TABLES: and other
helps, for better understanding of the text: for discovery of CORRVPTIONS in
some late translations: and for clearing CONTROVERSIES in Religion.

BY THE ENGLISH COLLEGE OF DOWAY.

Spiritu Sancto inspirati, locuti sunt sancti Dei hemines. 2. Pet. 1. The holy
men of God spoke, inspired with the Holy Ghost.

Printed at Doway by LAVRENCE KELLAM, at the sign of the holy Lamb. M. DC. X.

APPROBATIO.
NOs infrascripti, in alma Duacensi vniuersitate Sacrae Theologiae Doctores and
Professores, hanc Anglicanam Veteris Testamenti translationem, quam tres
diuersieius nationis eruditissimi Theologi, non solum fidelem, sed propter
diuersa quae ei sunt adiuncta, valde vtilem fidei Catholicae propagandae ac
tuendae, and bonis moribus promouendis, sunt testati: quorum testimonia ipsorum
syngraphis munita vidimus; Cuius item Translationis, and Annotationum Auctores
nobis de fidei integtitate, and eruditionis praestantia probe sunt noti: his
rebus adducti and nixi, fructuose euulgari posse censuimus.

Duaci. 8. Nouembris. 1609. GVILIELMVS ESTIVS Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, and in
Academia Duacensi Professor. BARTHOLOMAEVS PETRVS Sacrae Theologiae Doctor and
in Vniuersitate Duacensi Professor. GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theologiae Doctor,
and eiusdem in Academia Duacena Professor.


PROEMIAL ANNOTATIONS upon the Book of Psalms.
THE authority of this Book was ever authentical, This book undoubtedly is
canonical Scripture.
and certain, as the assured word of God, and Canonical Scripture. But
concerning the author, there be diverse opinions. For although it be manifest by
the testimony of Philo, and Josephus, that in their time, Late Hebrew Doctors
and some Catholics hold diverse authors of sundry Psalms.
and always before, only King David was by all Hebrew Doctors holden for Author
of all the Psalms: yet after that learned Origin, and other Christian Doctors,
expounded many Psalms of Christ, the Jews being pressed therewith, begane to
deny that al were David's: alleging for their new opinion, the titles of
diverse Psalms, and some other difficulties, ministering occasion of much
needles dispute, still acknowledging the whole book to be Canonical. Whereupon
S. Ierom, and S. Augustine, sometimes Prefat. in Psalm. Epist. 134. 139.
admitted those as authors of certain Psalms, whose names are in the titles
thereof. S. Cyprian, S. Cyril, S. Athanasius, and others agree in general, that
David writ not al: but differ much in particular, touching other supposed
authors. In so much that Melchisedech; Moses, Asaph, Eman, Idithun, The
sons of Core, Solomon, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Esdras, Aggaeus, and Zacharias, are
al ( with more or less probability) reputed authors of several Psalms.
Nevertheless It is much more probable that David was author of al.
it seems that S. Ierom rather related other men's judgment, then showed his
own; as we shall note by and by. And S. Augustine ( li. 17. c. 14. de ciuit)
maturely discussing this doubt, says plainly, that their Judgment seemed
Proved by S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, and greatest part of Doctors.
to him more credible, who attribute all the hundred fifty Psalms to David
alone. Further explicating that whereas some Psalms have David's own name in
their titles, some have other men's names, some none at al, this diversity
imports not diverse authors, but signifies other things, either perteyning
to the same persons, or by interpretation of their names, belonging to the
present matter, as our Lord inspired him. Likewise S. Chrysostom resolutely
judges, that only King David was author of this whole Book. Moved especially
by this argument, for that Christ and the Apostles alleging the Mat. 22. v.
16. Act. 4. v. 24. To. 4. v. 6. To 11. v. 9. Heb. 4. v. 7.
Psalms, do oftentimes name David as author, and never any other. Also
Origin, S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Hilarie, The common voice of Christians and
some general councels, call it David's Psalter.
Theodoretus, Cassiodorus, Beda, Eutimius, and most part of ancient and late
writers, with the most common voice of Christians, call this book the Psalms
of David: and the General Councels of Carthage, Florence, and Trent, in the
Cathologue of Canonical Scriptures recite this book, by the name of David's
Psalter.

Moreover it is clear, Act. 2. that the second Psalm, though it want his name,
is David's. And other Scriptures Proved by other Scriptures.
2. Paral. 7. v. 6. and 1. Esd. 3. v. 10. say plainly, that David made the
Psalms, 104. 105. 106. 117. 135. beginning: Confess to our Lord, because he
is good, because his mercy is for ever. Which he appointed the Levites to
sing, or play on instruments: 1 Paral. 15. and. 16. and yet they have not his
name in their titles. Again, 2. Reg. 23. David is only entitled the egregious,
or excellent Psalmist of Israel. Neither were Asaph, Eman, and Idithun any
where called Prophets (as are all the writers of holy Scriptures) but only
masters of music, 1. Paral. 25. And the sons of Core were only porters. 1.
Paral. 26. Finally S. Ierom (whose judgment the whole Church singularly
estemeth, in all questions belonging to holy Scriptures) seems as much
inclined, that only the Royal Prophet David was author of this whole book, as
to the contrary. For in his Epistle to Paulinus, prefixed before the Latin
Bible, comprehending the principal arguments S Ierom attributes the sum of
this book to David only.
of several books, when he comes to the Psalms, without mention of other
authors, says: David our Simonides, Pindarus, and Alceus; Flaccus also,
Catullus, and Cerenus, sounds out Christ, with harp and ten stringed
Psalter, rising up from hell: so attributing the sum of this whole book to
the Royal Prophet David, as if he supposed no other author.

Touching therefore the argument, or contents of this The Psalms are a Sum
of al other Scriptures.
divine Psalter, al Catholic Doctors uniformly agree that it is the
abridgement, sum, and substance of al holy Scriptures, both old and new
Testament. As may first be probably collected, by that Christ himself often
comprehending all the old Testament by the terms of the Law and Prophets, in
one place ( Luc. 24. v. 44.) seems not Mat. 5. 7. 11. 22. Lu^. 16.
only to reduce al to the Law and Prophets jointly, but also to the Psalms
alone, or severally. But whether this be our Saviors divine meaning or no in
that place, out of this and many other places, all the ancient Fathers teach
expressly, that the Psalms are an Epitome of al other holy Scriptures. For
example, S. Denis, li de Eccles. Hierar. contemplat. 2. after brief recital of
the contents of other holy Scriptures, says: This sacred book of divine
Canticles, does exhibit both a general song, and exposition of divine things.
S. Basil calls the Psalmodie of David the common and most plentiful
storehouse of al sacred doctrine: the treasure of perfect Theology. S. Ambrose
accounts it the register of the whole Scripture. Origin, S. Cyprian S.
Ierom, S. Chrysostom, S. Greg. in Psalm. penitent.
S. Gregory, S. Beda S. Bernard, Cassiodorus, Eutimius, and others use the
same, or very like terms. S. Augustine particularly distinguishing all the
Scriptures into four sorts of books, shows that the Psalms conteyne They
co^teine the sum of Legal, Historical, Sapientiential, and Prophetical
doctrine.
al: The Law (says he) teaches somethinges, the History somethinges, the
Proverbs also and Prophets teach somethinges: but the Book of Psalms
teaches al. It proposes the law, recounteth things of old, prescribes the
due ordering of men's actions, and prophecieth things to come. Briefly it is a
common treasure of good doctrine, aptly administering that is necessary to
every one. And a little after, exemplifying in particular points: Is not here
(says he) al greatness of virtue, and is not here the right square of justice?
is not the comlines of chastity; the consummation of prudence? is not
whatsoever may be called good, learned in the Psalms? Here is the knowledge of
God; the clear prenounciation of Christ to come in flesh; the hope of general
Resurrection; fear of torments; promise of glory; revelation of mysteries.
Even al good things are here, as in a common great treasure, laid up and
heaped together.

See then and observe here (Christian reader) the admirable Gods providence in
sweetly drawing our consent and cooperation of freewil, which is necessary to
salvation.
wisdom, and goodness of God. The means of man's salvation being so disposed,
that his own free consent, and cooperation is thereto necessarily required,
according to that most approved doctrine of the same S. Augustine: Qui creauit te
sine te; non iustificat te sine te. He that created Ser. 15. de verb. Apost.
thee, without thee, does not justify thee without thee: to help our
weakness, and sweetly to draw our minds, otherwise auerse from travel and
pain, the Holy Ghost S. ^asil. in pr^log.
has ordained that in small rowme, and in pleasant manner, we may attain
necessary knowledge of God, and our selves, easily keep the same in memory,
and daily put in practice our chiefest duty, in serving and praising God, by
singing, reading, or hearing these divine Psalms. which one book (as every
one shall be able to learn it, more or less perfectly) opens and shows the
way, to understand al other Scriptures, and so to find, and enjoy the hidden
treasures of Gods word: in like manner as a key opens a lock. For the whole
sacred Bible is a sealed Book, and not rightly Apoc. 5.
Holy Scriptures a sealed book.
understood, til the seal, or lock be opened, by the key of Gods spirit,
giving knowledge; which the Holy Ghost, amongst other ways, inspireth very
often, by sacred Music or Psalmodie. As S. Gregory notes in holy Scripture
li. 4 dialogi, c. 42.
The Psalter is the key of other Scriptures.
(4. Reg. 3. v. 15.) where Eliseus not yet knowing Gods will in a particular
case, called for a Psalmist (or player on instruments) and when the Psalmist
sang, the hand of our Lord came upon Eliseus, and presently he prescribing what
should be done, procured plenty of water without rain, where was none
before, and prophesied victory against the enemies. Reason also and experience
teach, that as men of cheerful heart are apt to s^^g: so the exercise of
reading, singing, or Iac. 5.
playing Psalms, is a convenient and a special means, to attain quietness or
cheerfulnes of mind.

But as this holy Psalter is the key of other Scriptures, so it self is most
especially a sealed, and locked Book, requiring But it self is also sealed.
many keys. Every Psalm (says S. Hilarie) has a peculiar key, and
oftentimes there be so many locks and keys of one Psalm, as there be diverse
persons that speak, to diverse ends and purposes. For albeit diverse mysteries
are sometimes connected, But one principal key of each Psalm.
and so require sundry keys, yet there is but one principal, and proper key
of each Psalm: otherwise it should be divided into many Psalms. Our first
endeavor therefore must be, to find the proper key of every Psalm, that is,
Ten keys of the Psalter.
to know what is principally therein contained. To this purpose the learned
Expositers of this book, have observed ten general points, or several
matters, to which all the contents may be reduced, as it were, so many keys,
and means of entrance into the sense, and true understanding of all the
Psalms. And the same may likewise be called Also ten stringes.
the ten stringes of this divine instrument. Upon one of which, every Psalm
principally plays, touching the rest more or less, as cause requires, for
more melodious harmony, and perfect music.

The first key, or string, is God himself: One in Substance: 1. Key. One God
the B. Trinity.
Three in Persons. Almighty, Alperfect, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Majesty,
Justice, Mercy, and other Divine 2. Gods works.
Attributes. The second, is Gods works of Creation, Conservation, 3. Gods
providence.
and Governing of the whole world. The third, Gods Providence, especially
toward man, in protecting 4. The Hebrew people.
and rewarding the just: in permitting, and punishing the wicked. The fourth,
is the peculiar calling of the Hebrew people, their beginning in Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: their marvelous increase in Egypt: diverse estates, many
admirable and miraculous things done amongst them; with their ingratitude,
reiection, and reprobation. The fifth principal key, and string is Christ, the
promised 5. Christ our Redemer.
Redemer of mankind: prophesying his Incarnation, Natiuitic, Travels,
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Glory. The sixth is the
propagation of Christ's 6. Conversion of Gentiles, the Catholic Church.
name and Religion, with Sacrifice and Sacramntes, in the multitude of Gentiles
believing in him, even to the uttermost coasts of the earth, the Catholic
Church ever visible. The seventh is the true manner of serving God, 7. Faith and
good works.
with sincere faith, and good works. The eight, holy David interposeth many
things concerning himself. As 8. David's own acts.
Gods singular benefits toward him, for which he rendereth thanks, and
divine praises, recounteth his enemies, dangers, and afflictions of mind and
body, namely by Saul, Absalon and others, humbly beseeking, and obtaining Gods
protection. He also expresses in himself a perfect image, and pattern of a
sincere and hearty penitent: bewayling, confessing, and punishing his own
sins. The 9. General Resurrection, and Judgment.
ninth is the end and renouation of this world, with the general Resurrection,
and Judgment. The tenth is eternal 10. Eternal glory and pain.
felicity, and punishment, according as every one deserves in this life.
These are the ten keys of this holy Book; and ten stringes of this
Divine Psalter.

Moreover to find which of these is the proper key, and principal string of
every Psalm, learned Divines use four Four ways to find the proper key of
every psalm.
especial ways. First by the title, added by Esdras, or the Seventy two
Interpreters, for an introduction to the sense of the same Psalm. So it
appears that the third Psalm 1. By the title.
treats literally of David's danger, and delivery from his son Absalon:
which is the eight key. though mystically it signifies Christ's Persecution,
Passion, and Resurrection, which is the fifth key. Secondly, if there be no
title, or if it 2. Allegation in the new Testament.
declare not sufficiently the key, or principal matter contained, it may some
times be found by allegation and application of some special part thereof in
the new Testament. So it is evident Act. 4. v. 25. c. 13. v. 33. Heb. 1. v. 5.
and. Heb. 5. v. 5. that the second Psalm perteyneth to Christ, impugned and
persecuted by diverse adversaries. Which is the fiftkey. Thirdly, when greater
things are 3. Greatness of things affirmed.
affirmed of any person, or people, as of David, Solomon, Jewish nation, or
the like, then can be verified of them, it must necessarily be understood of
Christ, or his Church, in the new Testament, or in Heaven. So the conclusion of
the 14. Psalm: He that does these things, shall not be moved for ever, can not
be verified of the tabernacle, nor temple of the Jews; but of eternal
Beatitude in heaven. Which is the tenth key. Though the greater part of the
Psalm shows, that just and true dealing toward our neighbors, is
necessary for attayning of eternal Glory. Fourtly when, 4. Conference of
places.
both the title and Psalm, or part thereof seem hard and obscure, some part
being more clear, the true sense of al may be gethered, by that which is more
evident. According li. 3 c. 4. de pecca. merit.
to S. Augustins rule, li. 2. c. 9. and li. 3. c. 26. Doct. Christ. So the
title, and former part of the fifth Psalm, being more obscure, are explaned by
the last verses, showing plainly that God will justly judge al men, both just
and wicked, in the end of this world. Which is the ninth key. By these and
like means the principal key being found, it will more easily appear, what
other keys belong to the same, and what other stringes are also touched. At
least the studious may by these helps make some entrance, and for more exact
knowledge search the judgment of ancient Fathers, and other learned Doctors.

But besides this singular great commodity, of compendious handling much
Divine matter in small rowme, this The style of this book is Poetry.
book has an other special excellency, in the kind of style, and manner of
uttering, which is Meeter, and Verse, in the original Hebrew tongue. And though
in Greek, Latin, and other languages, the same could not in like form be
exactly translated, yet the number, and distinction of verses is so observed,
that it is apt for music, as well voices as instruments, and to al other uses
of Gods servants. Neither Abuse derogateth not from good things.
is musical manner of uttering Gods word and praises, less to be esteemed,
because profane Poets have in this kind of style uttered light, vain, and
false things. For the abuse of good things, does not derogate from the
goodness thereof, but rather commends the same, which others desire to imitate.
And clear it is, that this holy Psalmodie was David's Psalter more ancient then
any profane poetry now extant.
before any profane poetry now extant. For Homer the most ancient of that
sort, writ his poem, at least two hundred and forty years after the
destruction of Troy: as Apolidorus witnesses; others, namely Solinus,
Herodotus, and Cornelius Nepos say longer. VVheras kind David our Divine
Psalmist, reigned within one hundred years, after the Troianes wars. There
were in deed Amphion, Orpheus, and Muscus before David, but their verses either
were not written, or shortly perished, only a confuse memory remaining of
them, recited, altered, and corrupted by word of mouth: but before them were
the sacred History of Job, almost al in verse; and the two Canticles of Music
very ancient.
Moses, Exodi 15. and Deuteronomy. 32. It is moreover recorded that Genesis 4.
I^bal (long before Noes flood) was the father of them, that sang on harp, and
organ. Music therefore is marvelous Sacred poetry most excellent.
ancient. But sacred Poetry is in many other respects most excellent, and
most profitable. This holy Psalmodie (says Prefat.
S. Augustine) is a medecin to old spiritual sores, it brings present remedy
to nev vvvoundes: it makes the good to persevere in well doing, it cures at
once al predominating passions, which vex men's souls. A little after:
Psalmodie drives away evil spirits, iuuiteth good Angels to help us, it is
a shield in night terrors, a refreshing of day travels, a guard to children, an
ornament to yongmen, a comfort to oldmen, a most seemlie grace to women. Unto
beginners it is an introduction, an augmentation to them that go forvvard in
virtue, a stable firmament to the perfect: It conioyneth the whole Church
militant in one voice, and is the spiritual eternal svvete perfume of the
celestial Armies, al Saints and Angels in heaven.

To all this we may add other causes, which moved the Why King David w^^^te
divine poetry
Royal Prophet to write this divine poetry. First he had from his youth (by
Gods special providence) a natural inclination to Music; wherein he shortly so
excelled, that before The first cause his natural inclination to music.
all the Musicians in Israel, he was selected to recreate king Saul, whom an
evil spirit vexed. And his skill, together with his devotion, had such effect,
that when he playde 1. Reg. 16. v. 23.
on the harp, Saul was refreshed, and waxed better. For the evil spirit
departed from him: says the holy text. Wherefore he made these Psalms, that
him self and others might by singing them, employ this gift of God to his more
honor. 2. Verse more easy and more pleasant.
Secondly, verse being more easy to learn, more firmly kept in mind, and more
pleasant in practice (for as wine, so music does recreate the heart of man) the
Holy Ghost condescending Eccli. 40.
to man's natural disposition, inspired David to write these Psalms in meeter,
mixing the power of divine doctrine, with delectable melody of song, that
vvhiles the ear is S. Aug. S. Basil. in Prae^at
allured with svvete harmony of music, the heart is endued with heavenly
knowledge, pleasant to the mind, and profitable to the soul. Thirdly, David
singularly illuminated with knowledge 3. Most special great, and memorable
things writ in verse.
of great, and most divine Mysteries, endued also with most gracious
disposition of mind, the man chosen according to Gods own heart (1. Reg. 13.)
would utter the same Mysteries, with godly instructions, and praises of God,
in the most exquisite kind of style; that is in verse. For otherwise he was
also very eloquent in prose, as well appears by sundry his excellent, and
effectual discourses, in the books of Kings, and Paralipomenon. For which
cause Moses also described the passage of Israel forth of Egypt through the
read sea in a Canticle, after that he had related the same Exo. 1^.
whole history, more at large in prose; that al might sing, and so render
thanks with melodious voice, and musical instruments praising God. Likewise in
an other Canticle Deuteronomy. 32.
he comprised the whole law, a little before his death. So also Barac and
Debora: and after them Judith, song praises to God for their victories in
verse. Solomon writ the end of Iudic 5. Judith. 16. Prou 31. 1. Reg. 2. Isa.
38. Isa. 12. 26. Eze^h 38 Ia^. 2. Abac. 3. Dan. 3. Luc. 1. 2.
his Proverbs, and a whole book (entitled Canticles) and the Prophet Jeremy
his Lamentations in verse. Anna having obtained her prayer for a son, gave
thanks to God with a Canticle. The like did king Ezechias for recovery of
health. The Prophets Isaias, Ezechiel, Jonas, A bacuc, C^ticles in the new
Testament.
and the three children in the furnace: again in the new Testament, the B.
virgin mother, just Zachary, and devout Simeon gave thanks, and sang praises
to God in Canticles.

Fourthly, albeit the holy King was not permitted, to build the gorgious
Temple for Gods feruice, as he greatly 4. Both divine music and dirtie in Gods
temple.
desired to have done, yet he provided both store of mu^itians (four thousand
in number, of which 288. were 1. Part 23, 25.
masters to teach) and made these Psalms as godly dirties, for this holy
purpose, in all solemnities of feasts, and daily sacrifice, when the Temple
should afterward be built.

Fifthly, he made these Psalms not only for his own, and 5. The great use of
these Psalms in the Catholic Church.
others private devotion, nor yet so especially for the public Divine service
in the Temple, and other Synagogues of the Jews, but most principally for the
Christian Catholic Church, which he knew should be spread in the whole earth.
Forseing the marvelous great, and frequent use thereof in the Christian Clergy,
and Religious people of both sexes. As he prophecieth in diverse Psalms. All the
earth sing to thee: sing Psalms to thy name. Again, I vvil 56. 117. 65.
sing Psalms to thee (o God) in the Gentiles, in all peoples, and Nations.
Which him self never did, but his Psalms are ever since Christ, song by
Christians, converted from gentilitie, as we see in the Churches Service. For
the whole The whole Psalter in the ordinary office e^^^^^ weke.
Psalter is distributed to be song, in the ordinary office of our Breuiarie
every weke. And though extraordinarily, for the variety of times, and
feasts, there is often alteration, yet still the greater part is in Psalms.
Certain also Certain Psalme^ every day.
of the same Psalms, are without change, or intermission 4. (30. adv. 7) 53
62. 66. 90. 94. 118. 133. 148. 149 150.
repeted every day. And such as have obligation to the Canonical Hours, must
at least read the whole Office privately, Many Psalms in other Ecclesiastical
offices.
if they be not present where it is song. The Office also of Mass, ordinarily
begins with a Psalm. In Litanies, and almost al public Prayers, and in
administration of other Sacraments, and Sacramentals, either whole Psalms, or
frequent verses are inserted. Likewise the greatest part of the Offices, of our
B. Lady, and for the dead are Psalms. Besides the seven Poenitential, and
fiftene Gradual Psalms, at certain times. So that Clergy men's daly office
consists much in singing, or reading Psalms. And therefore al Bishops
especially, are strictly bond by a particular Conon ( Did. 38. cap. Omnes
psallentes) to be skilful Bishops bond to be skilful in David's Psalter.
in the Psalms of David: and to see that other Clergy men be well instructed
therein. According to the Holy Ghosts admonition, by the pen of the same Royal
Prophet Other Priests to have competent knowledge therein.
( Psalm 46.) Psallite sapienter; Or: intelligenter, that is. Sing Psalms with
knowledge, and understanding them. Not that every one is bond to know, and be
able to discuss al difficulties, but competently, according to their charge
undertaken in Gods Church. Otherwise every one that is, or intends to be a
Priest, may remember what God denounces to him, by the Prophet Osee ( c. 4.)
Because thou have repelled knowledge, I vvil repel thee, that thou do not the
function of Priesthood unto me. Thus much touching the Author, the contents*
the poetical style, and final cause of this holy Psalter.

As for the name, S. Ierom, S. Augustine, and other Fathers ^each, that whereas
amongst innumerable musical Why this book is called the psalter.
instruments, six were more specially used in David's time, mentioned by him in
the last Psalm. Trumpet, Psalter, Harp Timbrel, Organ, and Cimbal. This book
has his name of the instrument called Psalter, which has ten strings,
signifying the ten commandments, and is made in form (as S. Ierom, and S.
Bid suppose) of the Greek, letter L delta, because as that instrument renders
sound from above, so we should attend to heavenly virtues, Other instruments
make consorte with the Psalter.
which come from above: Likewise using the harp, which signifies
mortification of the flesh, and other instruments, which signify and teach
other virtues, we must finally refer al to Gods glory, rejoice spiritually
in heart, and render Al virtues are referred to Gods honor.
al praise to God.

Concerning interpretation of holy Scriptures.
AS Prophecy ( or other holy Scripture) was not at any time by Scriptures
are to be expounded by the common spirit of the Church, not by private men.
man's will, but the ( Prophets) holy men of God spoke, inspired by the Holy
Ghost: so no prophecy ( nor explication) of Scripture, is made by private
interpretation. 2. Pet. 1. but by the same Spirit wherewith it was written,
which our Savior gave to the Church, to abide for ever, the Spirit of truth;
to teach al truth. Joan. 14. 16. Neither perteyneth it to every one, to
discern the true spirit, but to some. 1. Cor. 12.

Holy Scriptures consist not in reading, but in understanding. They consist in
understanding. Holy Fathers do best expound them.
S. Ierom Dialogo aduers. Luciferianos.

The words of holy Scripture are so to be understood, as holy men, the
Saints of God, have understood them, S. Aug Ser. 18. de verb. Domini. Men
must learn of men, not expect knowledge immediately of God, nor only by Angels.
Idem, in prologo Doct. Christ.

There be some things, mentioned in holy Scripture, which Some Mysteries are
hidden.
God will have hidden, and those are not to be curiously searched. S. Amb. li.
1. c. 7. de vocat. Gentium.

By those things, which to us are hidden in holy Scripture, our They prove
our humility.
humility is proved, S. Greg. ho. 17. super Ezech.

THE BOOK OF PSALMS
PSALM I.
The Royal prophet David placed this Psalm as a Preface to the rest,
containing, The right manner of serving God. The 7. key.
1 true happiness, which consists in flying sins, and serving God. 3. The
good do prosper, 5. not the wicked: 6. as will appear in the end of this world.

He is in the right way to eternal felicity.
is the man, that" has not continued to evil suggestions.
not gone in Mat. 5.
the counsel of the impious, and has not continued in sin.
not" stood in the way of sinners, and has not finally persisted in wicked
life.
not" sit in the chair of pestilence:

He is wholly occupied and delighted in keeping Gods commandments.
his" will is in the way of our Lord, and in his law he ^os. ^.
will meditate day and night.

To him that uses Gods grace well, more grace is continually given.
the streams ^^^e. 17.
of waters, which shall give his fruit in his time:

Through such grace he shall persevere.
his leaf shall not fall: and al things work to the good of them that love God
sincerely.
al things whatsoever he shall do, shall prosper.

The wicked are carried with every light tentation.
as dust, which the wind drives from the face of the earth.

Al rising at the last day, the wicked shall not rise with hope nor comforth,
but in desolation.
not rise again in judgment: nor sinners in the the happy congregation of
the blessed.
council of the just.

approves and rewards.
knows the way of the just, and the way of the impious in eternal damnation.
shall perish.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. I.
1. Has not gone, not stood, not sit.] The Hebrew style, and manner of
discourse They are happy (in hope) that decline from evil.
differs here from other nations, in mentioning first the less evil, and the
greatest last. Whereas we would say in the contrary order: He is happy that
has not sit, that is, has not settled himself in wickedness, nor finally
persisted obstinate: more happy, that has not stood, any notable time
continued in sin: and most happy, that has not gone, not given any consent
at al to evil suggestions. Justice consists in fleing evil and doing good.


2. His vvil in the way of our Lord.] As one part of happiness consists in
declining from evil: so the other is in doing good; the will desiring, and
diligently endeavoring to walk in the way of virtue, and law of God. Which is
true justice, and right form of good life, proposed in this Psalm, for
attayning eternal beatitude. Of Christ. the 5. key. Also of his Church, the 6.
key.


PSALM II.
Christ's glory, the world repining thereat, 4. shall be propagated in all the
world. 7. His divine power as well spiritual in converting men's hearts, as
external, in severe justice, is prophesied.

Both gentiles.
Gentiles rage, and and Jews strive invaine against Christ.
peoples meditate Act. 4.
vain things?

Pilate and Herod.
kings of the earth stood up, and the Annas and Caiphas.
princes came together in one against our Lord, and against his Christ.

The voice of wicked men,
us break their bonds a sunder: and let us cast away their and especially
libertines striving to shake of al discipline.
yoke from us.

God for all this will turn the haries of many.
laugh at them: and our Lord shall scorn them.

seuerly reprehend,
wrath, and in his and justly punish the obstinate.
fury he shall truble them.

Christ shall reign in his kingdom the Church.
I am appointed king by him over Sion his holy hill, preaching his precept.

God the Father speaks to
Lord said to me; Thou art my God the Son.
Son, I this day have Act. 13. Heb. 1. and. 5.
be gotten thee.

Ask of me, and I will give Christ as man has the Church for his inheritance.
thee the Gentiles, for thine inheritance, Spread through the whole world.
the ends of the earth. Thou shall rule them " in Gods in^^exwi^ and power.
a rod of iron, and " as a potters Apoc. 2. and 19.


A prophecy that kings shall be converted, and submit themselves to Christ's
discipline.
now " ye kings understand: " take instruction you that judge the earth.

Serve our Lord in None is secure before death.
fear: and " rejoice to him with trembling.

Some fall from the way of salvation.
lest sometime our Lord be wrath, and you perish out of the just way.

God will judge justly in the end of this short life both the evil and good. So
this Psalm concludes with the ninth key.
shall burn in short time, blessed are al, that trust in him.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. II.
2. Kings and Princes against Christ.] When Christ, and his Apostles preached
Persecution cannot hinder the glory of Christ.
the Gospel, both Jews and Gentiles, with their Princes, Kings, and Emperors
most furiously resisted, but al in vain. For they could not hinder the will and
power of God. But the more they persecuted, the more was increased the zele,
and number of Christians.

8. The gentiles thyn inheritance.] By this promise of God to Christ, S.
Augustine The Church never fails.
convinced the Donatistes; and in them the Protestants, that say, the Church
in h^ne Psalm.
of Christ failed, and became small, or invisible; as though Christ the Son of
God, could sometimes lose his inheritance, which is the Catholic Church,
gethered of the Gentiles, and his possession extended to the ends of the earth.

9. As a potters vessel.] If a potters vessel (says S. Ierom in hunc Psalm.
tom. 8.) be broken whiles it is soft, it may easily be repared, but after it is
hard, it can Custom in sin more hardly cured.
not be made whole again. So sinners are more easily restored to grace,
shortly repeating, then long obdurate: yet that which is impossible to man, is
possible to God. Mat. 10. For as clay in the potters hand, so are you in my
hand, says our Lord. Iere. 18.

10. Ye kings vnderstand] Not only innumerable other people of al nations,
Kings converted to Christianity.
but also after a while, Kings and Emperors believed in Christ. And such as at
first persecuted, became most Christian, Catholic, Defenders of the faith.

10. Take instruction you that judge the earth.] Petilianus, Gaudentius, and
other Donatistes inueyghing against Christian Kings, for punishing heretics,
most Defend Catholics and punish heretics. Apostataes favor heretics and
schismatikes, because they hate al Christians.
falsely auoched, that Christianity never found kings but inuious, enemies,
and persecuters. To whom S. Augustine answers in several books, that
Christian Ad Petil. li. 2. c. 92. Ad Gaud li. 2. c. 26.
Kings, and Princes are not enemies to Christianity: but are enemies to
heretics, the rebels of Christ, and his Church. For according to this
prophecy of king David, Christian kings are instructed, and know it is their
duty, ^^ the service of God, to defend the Church against Heretics, and other
Infidelles. And it is the property of Apostataes to favor heretics. So good
Constantin the great maintained Catholic unity; and Julian the Apostata to
make greater division, took Churches from Catholics, and gave them to
Donatistes, to nourish dissension, and so to o^e^^^row al Christians But God
still protecteth the true Church, against al such subtle, and malicious d^ui^es:
because it is Christ's inheritance.

11. R^^oy^e with trembling.] Gods service is tempeted with two affections:
Joy and fear.
with joy, in consideration of his goodness, mercy, and meeknes; and with
fear, in respect of his justice, and ^euere judgment. The one is a remedy
against desperation: the other against presumption.

PSALM. III. David persecuted by his son.

King David recounteth his danger, when his son Absalom conspired against
him: 4. and thanketh God for his delivery. 9, acknowledging all The 8. key.
help to be from God. Mistically, Christ's persecution, Death, Burial, and
Resurrection.

Reg. 15.)

O God let me know how greuiously I have sinned.
why are they that al Israel (1. Reg. 15. v. 13.) with all their heart follows
Absalom. So against Christ, the Priests, the People, and Gentiles al conspired.
multiplied that truble me? many Joan* ^^
rise up against me.

my life
my soul: There is he can not escape
no salvation for him in his God.

But I avouch that God always defends me,
thou Lord art my protector, my giving me victory,
glory, and exalting and co^firming my kingdom.
my head.

heaven.
holy hill.

I lay down
slept, and have and rested in expectation of thy help.
been at rest; and have And am delivered. Christ dyed, was buried, and rose
again.
risen up, because our Lord has taken me.

I know thou will help me, and so I beseech thee to do.
arise Lord, save me my God.

The strength and fury.
teeth of sinners.

health and saftie comes from God.
is our Lords: and thy Abundance of grace promised to Gods servants.
blessing upon thy people.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. III.
1. Psalm of David.] Al Interpreters agreably teach, that king David made not
the titles, which are before the Psalms. Nevertheless they are authentical,
Titles of the Psalms added by ^^^^as and the Septuagint.
as endited by the Holy Ghost. And it is most probable Esdras added those
titles which are in the Hebrew: and the Seventy interpreters writ the other,
in their Greek Edition. Both which S. Ierom translated into Latin.

In these titles five things may be noted. First, the former two having no
title at al, the general name of Psalm, common to al, is particularly
appropriated to some, and other names to others. Which in all are twelve. to
wit: Psalm ^iue things to be noted ^^ the titles.
Inscription, Prayer, Canticle, Psalm of Canticle, Canticle of Psalm, Hymn,
Testimony, Understanding, Praise of Canticle, Alleluia, and Gradual Canticle.
Secondly, in the titles of some Psalms are the names of certain persons,
which by S. Augustins judgment, cited in the Proemial Annotations, and others,
proves not the same persons to be authors of those Psalms, but signifies
some other thing. Thirdly, in some titles the time is signified, when the
Psalm was made, or song. Fourtly, the matter contained in the Psalm, or upon
what occasion it was made, is expressed in some titles. Fifthly diverse other
terms are often used. in the titles of sundry Psalms, as To the end. For the
Octaue. For presses, Psalm. 4. 6. 8. 15. 16. etc.
and the like, al which we shall briefly explicate, where they first occur.
Why this is called the Psalm of David.


First therefore this third Psalm is called the Psalm of David, not because he
is author thereof, for he is also author of the former, where his name is not
expressed, as is evident by the testimony of all the Apostles. Act. 4. v. 25.
but because it treats particularly and literally of him.

1. When he ^^ed from the face of Absalon.] Here the time is signified, when
The time and occasion of making this Psalm.
this Psalm was made, to wi^e, immediately after the overthrow of his
rebellious son Absalom, mentioned. 2. Reg. 18. before his return to
lerusalem. For all beit of human, natural, and fatherly affection, he greatly
lamented the death of his son, yet he rendered thanks and praises to God, as
reason and duty bond him.

6. I have slept, and have benne at rest, and have risen up.] King David by his
sleeping in persecution, and by his resting, and delivery from his
persecuters, King David prefigured Christ.
prefigured Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection. As appears, Joan. 2. v.
22. Where the Evangelist ^aith: that after Christ's Resurrection, his disciples
believed the scripture, to wit, this and other like prophecies. For otherwise
the old Testament does not so expressly declare such Mysteries, as the Gospel
does: but one thing in the proper, and grammatical signification of he words,
and an The same Scripture has diverse literal senses.
other thing, in shadows and figures, and hoth literal. VVhereupon S. Gregory
teaches ( li. 20. c. 1. Moral.) that holy Scripture (amongst other
incomparable excellences) surpasses al other doctrines, in the very manner of
speaking: because by one and the same speech, it reports a thing done, and
proclameth a Mystery: so relating things past, that with the very same
words, it foresheweth things to come.

PSALM. IIII.
The holy prophet teaches, by his own example, to flee to God in all
tribulation Confidence in God necessary The 7. key.
3. that other refugies are insufficient, 9. and Gods help most assured.

Unto " the end, in In an instrument apt for verses.
songues, the Psalm This Psalm perteyneth to the beloved, signified by the
word David. S. Aug. li. 17. c. 14. ciuit. S. Beda in Psalm.
of David.
When Saul unjustly persecuted just David, God heard his prayers.
I inuocated, the God of my justice heard me: being straictly beseeged (1. Reg.
23. 26.)
tribulation thou have enlarged to me. Likewise help me when soever I shall
need.
Have mercy on me, and hear my prayer.

Why do you still harden your hearts?
heavy heart? why love you honor, and transitory glory,
vanity, and seek false and deceiptful riches?
lying? Ephos. 4.


Every godly soul.
holy one Rich with virtues.
marvelous: Every just soul has confidence in God, that he will hear his
cry.
our Lord will hear me, when I shall cry to him.

Just anger is good and necessary against sin.
angry, and but then is most need to beware not to excede in passion. have
therefore a continual purpose never to sin.
sin not: the things that you say in Evil cogitations.
your hearts, in your bewail and repent before you sleep.
chambers be ye sorry for.

Not only external but most especially internal sacrifice of justice, and
observation of Gods commandments is most necessary
justice, and hope in our Lord. Many say: The solid rewards promised by God?
Who shows us good things?

reason and grace are freely given to man, whereby he may know that God will
reward the just. Heb. II. v. 6.
light of thy countenance o Lord is signed upon us: thou have given VVherin a
just man inwardly rejoices.
gladness in my heart.

For example and in figure of heavenly rewards, God gave temporal wealth in
the old testament.
corn, and For example and in figure of heavenly rewards, God gave temporal
wealth in the old testament.
wine, and For example and in figure of heavenly rewards, God gave temporal
wealth in the old testament.
oil they are multiplied.

In In this confidence the just may rest contented.
peace in the self same I will sleep, and rest:

Because thou Lord have God so promises every just person in particular.
singularly settled me in hope.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. IIII.
1. Unto the end.) The Hebrew word Lamnatsea, signifies to him that
^uercometh. The signification of this phrase, To the end in t^ etitles of
Psalms.
And so the Hebrews interpret, that the Psalms, which have this word in
their titles, were directed either to him, that excelled others in skill of
music; or had authority over other musicians: or to him, whose office was to
1. Par. 15.
sing victories and triumphs. But the Latin, according to the Greek, has In
finem, Unto the end. which (most commonly signifying perpetuity, or
continuance unto the end of any thing) in the titles of the Psalms rather
signifies, that the matter contained in the Psalm, pertains to future
times, or persons; especially to the new Testament. And so S. Augustine
expounds it here of Christ, who is the end (or perfection) of the law. Not
that the principal contents belong Romans 10.
to Christ, in his own Person, but to his mystical body the Church, and
faithful people, whom the Prophet here teaches to have confidence in God,
moderation in their affections, and patience in tribulation, which is the
seventh key, proposing his own example, and prophetically Christ's. The same
whereto Christ exhorts, saying: Joan. 16. v. vlt. Have considence, I have
overcome the world. Signifying that his servants, through his grace, may also
overcome it.

6. Sacrifice of Justice.] Not only external Sacrifice of diverse kinds, were
necessary Three spiritual sacrifices necessary.
in the law of nature, and of Moses, and one most excellent and complement of
al, in the new Testament, but also spiritual sacrifice was ever, and is
required, and that of three sorts. First, Sacrifice of sorrow, and contrition
for sins ( Psalm 50.) An afflicted spirit is a sacrifice to God. The second
is sacrifice Of penance, Justice. Praise.
of Justice, here mentioned. The third is Sacrifice of praise (Psalm 49.)
Immolate to God the sacrifice of praise. Concerning the second proposed in this
place: He offers sacrifice of Justice, that rendereth to every one that is
due. First to God as our Creator, a resignation of our selves, even our lives,
at his divine pleasure; What is due to God.
as to our Master, we must render faith and belief, in all that he proposes;
as to our Father, hope, confidence, and reuerential sear; as to our Lord and
King, payment of tribute, that is observation of his law and commandments; as
to our Captain, the travel of warfare in this life; as to our Physician,
patience and toleration, when he cures our wounds, by chasticement for
sins; as to our Spouse, chastity of body and mind, fleeing al carnal and
spiritual fornication; as to our Friend, frequent conversation in all acts of
devotion We owe to our To our selves.
selves, that seeing we consist of soul and body, we keep due subordination,
that the soul and reason command, and the body, and inferior appetite obey:
To our neighbor.
as the servant must obey his master, and the handmaide her mistress. We owe to
our neighbor, love from the heart, inctruction also from the mouth; and
assistance by our help, according to his necessity, and our ability; yea
though our neighbor be our enemy. But to other enemies contrary things are
due. To our enemies. The world. The flesh. The devil.
To the world, contempt: because the goods of this world are small, few,
short, uncertain, deceiptful, not satisfying the mind, and mixed with many
evils and dangers. To the flesh we owe chasticement, and daily care, so to
seed it, that it serve the soul, and rebel not. To the devil we must render
the shame, that comes by sin, acknowledging our faults, and al truths, and
so return upon him al vanity and lying, wherewith he allureth and seduceth.
Finally to sin To sin.
it self, we owe hate, and revenge, because it is the only evil, that hurts
us; and due punishment with zele of justice, because it dishonoreth God. He
that thus offers sacrifice of justice, may instly (as it follows in the
Psalm) hope (yet not in him self but) in our Lord. And lest any should
pretend ignorance, Light of reason shows there is a God that rewards.
saying: who shows (or teaches) us good things? as though they lacked
instruction, the Prophet preuenteth this vain excuse, saying: The light of
thy countenance o Lord (the light of reason, which is the image of God, whereto
we are created like) is signed upon us, fixed in our understanding, that we may
see there is a God, that ought to be served, and that he will revvard his
servants. Heb. 11.

PSALM. V.
Just men in affliction appeal to God, the revenger of injuries. 5. knowing
and The general judgment. The 9. key.
prosessing that God hates iniquity. 9. therefore remitte their cause to him.
11. recite certain enormious vices of the wicked. 13. and expect Gods final
judgment of the good and bad.

Unto the end, for The faithful just soul that over comes. her enemies by
virtue.
her that obtains the eternal glory.
inheritance. The Psalm of David.
The prayer of the whole Church, or of any faithful (ever beloved) soul.
my words with thine ears, understand

Attend to the voice of my prayer, my king and my God.

Gods help is presently granted of his part, though it be sometimes differred
for the more good of his servants.
the morning thou will hear my voice.

Before al other affairs we must pray to God. S. Ciprian. in fine orat.
Dominicae.
the morning I will stand by thee and will see: because thou art" not a God that
wilt iniquity.

The wicked and wickedness have noe conversation with God.
dwell near thee: neither shall the unjust abide in the day of judgment.
before thine eyes.

by final sentence of eternal damnation.
destroy all that speak lie.

The bloody and deceitful man our Lord will abhor:

Not in man's power, but in Gods mercy must the just man trust.
thy mercy. I will enter into thy house: I will adore toward In the Church of God.
thy holy temple in thy with reuerential fear as in Gods presence.
fear.

Lord conduct me in thy justice: because of mine enemies direct my way in thy
sight.

No true nor solid goodness in the wicked.
no truth in their mouth: their heart is They think nothing but vanity, and
mischief.
vain.

Their throat is an yelding loathsome stin^h, bitterness, and rancor,
open sepulcher, they did yet they flatter with feaned good words.
deceitfully Psalm. 13. Romans 3.
with their tongues, Albeit the just desire the conversion of the wicked, yet
if they will not repent, then the just conform their desires to Gods just
judgment: which shall be manifested in the end of the world.
judge them o God. Let them fail of their cogitations, according to the
multitude

The just shall receive sentence of eternal glory.
bless the just.

Lord, as with a shield of thy good will, thou have crowned us.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. V.
5. Not a God that vvilt iniquity.] Seeing God vvil not iniquity, as these
words testify in plain terms, it follows necessarily, that he is not
author, nor cause God is not author nor cause of sin.
of any sin For God does nothing contrary to his own will. But he hates
iniquity, and in respect thereof hates all that work iniquities, as the
authors of iniquity, though he loves them as his creatures and of his part
requires their salvation.

PSALM VI. A pathetical prayer of a sinner and the first penitential P^alme.
the 7. key.

David's earnest and hearty prayer after he had grievously sinned. 5. which
being grounded in filial, not seruil fear, 9. concludes with assured hope,
and confidence in Gods mercy.

Unto This Psalm perteyneth also to penitentes in the new testament.
the end in songs, the Psalm of David for the octaue.
condemneme not eternally
rebuke me not in "thy fury; nor Spare me also for part of the temporal pain,
which I deserve.
chastise me in Psalm. 37.
" thy wrath.

Give me the medicine of grace.
heal me Lord, because al My sorrow has inwardly pierced me even to the bones.
my bones be trubled.

with fear of thyiust wrath.
trubled exceedingly: but thou Lord leauest thou me in this calamity?
how long?

Show again thy favorable contenance.
Turn thee o Lord, and from this fearful affliction.
deliver my soul: save me for Though my sins have deserved the contrary yet
show thy mercy.
thy mercy.

This life is the time of repentance, after death no cenuersion.
death, that is mindful of thee: and in In hell nothing but blasphemy.
hell who shall confess to thee?

I I have in part lamented.
have labored in my sighing, I I will add more sorrow and penance.
will every night was he I will persist in my penance, til I be thoroughly
watered with thy grace.
water my couche with my tears. My mine eyes are dim with weeping, for fear
of thy just judgment.
eye is trubled for fury: I have waxen my hears are gray with sorrow.
old whereat mine enemies rejoice.
among

After due sorrow the true penitent has confidence in God, against his enemies.
Depart from me al ye that work iniquity: because our Mat. 7. and 25. Luc. 13.
Lord VVil most certainly accept of true repentance.
has heard the voice of my weeping.



These are no^ imprecations, but threatninges, that the wicked ma yamend, or
else predictions if they persist in sin.
ashamed, and very sore trubled: let them be converted and asha med very quicly.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. VI.
1. For the octaue.] Literally it seems that the Psalms which have For the
The octaue signifies the world to come.
octaue, in their titles, were to be song on an instrument of eight stringes.
So the Caldee paraphasis translateth. In eitheris octo chordarum: in Citherus
of eight stringes. But prophetically S. Augustine, and others expound it, to
perteine to the Resurrection in the end of this world. So David, and al
penitent sinners bewail their sins, and do penance in this life, for the
octaue, that is for the world to come.

1. In thy fury, nor in thy wrath.] By fury is signified divine justice,
irreuocably condemning the wicked to eternal damnation: by wrath, Gods
fatherly Hell for some sinners. Purgatory for others.
chasticement correcting sinners, whom he saves. Whereupon S. Gregory
teaches, that the faithful soul not only fears fury, but also wrath:
because after the death of the flesh, some are deputed to eternal torments,
some pass to life through in Psalm. 37. 1. Cor. 3.
the fire of purgation. Which doctrine the same holy father confirms, by the
judgment of S Augustine more ancient. Who likewise affirms, that al those
which have not laid Christ their fundation, are rebuked in fury, because they
are tormented in eternal fire: and those which upon right fundation (of true
faith in Christ) have built vvood, hay, stubble, are chastised in wrath,
because they are brought to rest of beatitude, but purged by fire. Let therefore
the faithful soul (considering what she has done, and contemplating what she
shall receive) say: Lord rebuke me not, in thy fury: nor chastise me in thy
wrath. As if she said more plainly: This only with my whole intention of heart,
I crave, this incessantly with all my desires I couete, that in the dreadful
judgment, thou neither strike me with the reprobate, nor afflict me with
those, that shall be purged in barning flames. Thus S. Gregory, in 1. Psalm
penitent. v. 1.

PSALM VII.
David in confidence of his just cause, and unjust persecution. prays for
David's prayer in tribulation. the 8. key.
Gods help, 7. and just revenge of his enemies. 15. describing their malicious
intention, and ruin.

The Psalm of David which he song to our Lord, for the This Chusi defeated the
counsel of Achitophel. as S. Aug. S. Basil and S. Chris. expound it.
Chusi the son of Iemini. ( 2. Reg. 16.)
O Lord my God I have hoped in thee: save me from all that persecute me, and
deliver me.

Absalom, ^n any other enemy, if God do not resist and hinder him.
he as a Lion violently take my life.
my soul, whiles there is none to redeem, nor to save.

Such evil as mine enemies feign and object against me.
this, if there be iniquity in my hands;

Let me not have the victory of them.
empty from mine enemies.

Let me dye with ignominy.
tread down my life in the earth, and bring down my glory into the dust.

Show thy power.
be exalted in the coasts of mine enemies.

And arise o Lord my God in the Seeing thou did command to make me king, it
behooves thee to protect me.
precept which thou have commanded: and a many will serve thee the only true
God.
sinagogue of peoples shall compass thee.

And For this increase of faithful people.
for it return on high: our Lord judges peoples.

Judge me o Lord according to my just cause against my particular enemies.
my justice, and according to my innocence let fall upon me.
upon me.

1. Par. 28. Iere. 11. 17.
shall direct the just, which searchest the heart and raynes o God.



God is a just judge, strong, and patient: is he angry God does not punish al
sinners presently, but often differreth.
every day?

expecting if they will an^d
Unless you will be converted, he shall shake his sword, he has bent his bow,
and prepared it.

Isa. 59. Job. 15.


The injurious persecutor purposing injustice, conceiueth envy, and brings
forth iniquity.
he has bredde with injustice: he has conceived sorrow, and brought forth
iniquity.



Envy, and desire to hurt others turns to the ruin of the enuiers.
sorrow shall be turned upon his head: and his iniquity shall descend upon his
crown.



PSALM VIII.
God is magnified and praised for his marvelous work of creatures, 5. but
Christ's Incarnation. The 5. key.
especially of mankind, singularly exalted by the Incarnation of Christ.

Unto Belonging to the new Testament.
the end Suffering of Christ, and of Christians.
for " presses, the Psalm of David.
God the lord of al by creation, is our singular lord, that believe and trust in
him.
our Lord, how marvelous is thy name in the whole earth! Because thy
magnificence is elevated, above God more excelent then the heavens, he being
the creator, they a creature.
the heavens.

fulfilled when Christ coming into Jerusalem, children sang Ozanna Mat. 21.
infantes and sucklinges, thou have Mat. ^^.
perfected praise because of thine enemies, that thou may destroy the enemy
and revenger.





The Son in assumpted huma^e nature became less then Angels.
minished him a little less then Angels; with Heb. 2.
But in him man's nature is exalted above Angels.
glory and honor thou have crowned him:

and have appointed him Christ the Lord of al creatures.
over the work of thy hands.

yea of Angels. Heb. 2.
al things under his feet, al Not only al reasonable creatures, but al
beasts, and other things obey him. The sea and the winds obey him. Mat. 8.
sheep and oxen: moreover also the beasts of the field. Genesis 1. v. 27. 1.
Cor. ^^.




The same end and beginning signify that as God was marvelous in creating man
in so happy state, that if he would, he might have avoided both sin and
death: so he is marvelous in that he so rewards the blessed in the
resurrestion, that they can neither sin non dye.
O Lord our Lord, how marvelous is thy name in the whole earth!

ANNOTATIONS. PASLME. VIII.
1. Presses.] Most Hebrew Doctors say the word Gittith, may either signify the
place, where this Psalm was made, or the musical instrument, on which it
Presses signify Christ's Passion.
was song. But most Christian Doctors expound it literally of Christ's Passion,
who was stretched on the Cross, and al his sacred blood pressed, and drawn
out of his body. Which Metaphor Isaias also uses, demanding of Christ: Isa.
63.
Why is thy clothing read, and thy garments as theirs, that tread in the vine
press? and answers in Christ's person: I have trodden the press alone. S.
Augustine also applies it morally to the Church, where Christ is the vine, the
Morally i^ signifies the travels of the Church militant.
Apostles are the branches, and spreaders (that is preachers) of the Ghospel,
Christians are the grapes, Christian virtues are the wine. Namely patience, and
fortitude in afflictions. VVherby the good are purified, and severed from
amiddes the reprobate, as wine is pressed out of the grapes, barreled, and laid
up in sellers, and * the husks and carnels cast to hogs, or other beasts.
vin^ci^.
Gods providence in protecting the good and permitting evil. The 3. key.


PSALM. IX.
The Church prayseth God for her protection, 4. in repelling the enemies force,
8. in punishing the wicked, and rewarding the just.

Unto the end, for the Christ's coming in humility, and Christians afflictions,
are hidden from the world, in Gods providence.
secrets of the son, the Psalm of David.
give thank^
confess to thee o^ Lord with all my heart: I will tell

in mind.
glad and and body.
rejoice in thee: I will sing to thy name o^ most High.

God repelleth the enemy, when man is not able to resist.
turning mine enemy backward: they shall be weakened, and perish before thy
face.

A just man does his endeavor, not of him self, but by Gods grace ouercometh
the enemy.
my judgment and my cause: thou have sit upon the throne which iudgest
justice.

Al sinners called gentiles, because they were generally accounted wicked.
Gentiles, and the impious has perished: their The vain glorious fame of
sinners partly decays in this world but most especially in the world to come.
name thou have destroyed for ever, and for ever and ever.





Judicial seats of men are of^e^ corrupted but Gods never.
judgment: and he will judge the whole world in equity, he will judge the
people in justice.

God does not presently deliver the good from afflictions* but when (...)ir
spiritual profitie.
in opportunities, in tribulation.

And let them hope in thee that know thy name: because thou have not forsaken
them that seek thee o Lord.

His precepts which men ought chiefly to study.
studies among the Gentiles:

Because he God reuengeth the blood of Martyrs.
requiring blood remembered them: he has not forgotten the cry of the poor.

procured by mine enemies
by my enemies.

In the public view of the Church.
the gates of the daughter of Sion.

The wicked are entangled in the snares which they lay for others.
fastened in the destruction, which they made. In this snare, which they hid,
is their foot taken.



In zele of justice not in desire of revenge.
Let sinners be turned into hell, al nations that forget God.



By Gentiles is often understood al great sinners. For the Jews despised
Gentiles: as the Romans did al Barbarous nations.
Gentiles be judged in thy sight.

Suffer a tyrant to rule over them that thereby they may learn what it is to
use others unjustly. It seems to S. Augustine aprophecie, that such as receive
not Christ, shall believe Antichrist.
a lawgeuer over them: that the Gentiles may know that they be men. 2. These 2.


The 10. Psalm, according to The latter Hebrew Doctors.
the Hebrews.

In great per secution it seems to the weak, that God differreth his
assistance very long.
Why Lord have thou departed far of, despisest in opportunities, in tribulation?

Extremely vexed and tormented.
set on fire: The Prophet answers to the complaint of the just, that in deed
the wicked are caught in their own snares.
they are caught in the counsels which they devise.

Because the sinner is praised in the desires of his soul: and the unjust man
is blessed.

The sinner has exasperated our Lord, according to the multitude of his wrath
he shall not seek to recover Gods favor.
not seek.

The wicked does dominier for a time, and thinks he shall do so still.
rule over al his enemies

and never fall into any adversity but still remain without misery or any
evil.
without evil.

Romans 3.
under his tongue labor and sorrow.









The prayer of the just in tribulation.
Arise Lord God, let thy hand be axalted: forget not the poor.







ye vilest men.
Gentiles shall perish from his land.

The just ought always to be ready prepared in heart, to suffer patiently all that shall happen unto them.
preperation of their heart,

As the first works of Christ in all humility and patience were strange, and
hidden to the world: (v. 1.) so his last judgment shall be in majesty and
manifest to al in exalting the blessed and suppressing the wicked.
for the pupil and the humble, that man add no more to magnify him self upon
the earth.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. IX.
21. After the 21. verse the late Hebrew Doctors divide this Psalm, beginning
Some divide this Psalm into two. Sela a note of change, or of rest in music,
or rather of attention. All the Psalms ^^^ just 150.
there the tenth, without any new title: but only this word Sela: Which Epist
ad Marcel
the Septuagint, Theodotion, and Symmachus translate Diapsalma, that is, change
of meeter, or music, also pause or rest in singing. Aquila whom S. Iorom
rather approves, translateth semper ever. Some English Bibles omit it, Anno.
1577. 1552. 1603.
others leave it in the text, not translating it into English. It seems to
most Interpreters to be added as a note to stir up attention. And it occureth
often, not only in the end of Psalms, but also in other places. For it is
thrice in the third Psalm. And therefore makes no argument, that this Psalm
should be divided. And those which divide this into two, join two in the 147.
Psalm. So that al agree in the number of 150. Psalms in the whole Psalter.

PSALM X.
David's freindes aduising him to flee from the persecution of Saul, he
answers, Gods provident care of the just. The 3. key.
that his trust is in Gods protection. 2. Though the persecutor be very
malicious, 4. yet God will overthrow him, 5. and deliver the just.

Unto S. Augustine applies it to heretics, persuading Catholics to repare
unto their separate congregation, falsely calling it the montayne.
the end the psalm of David
Ye my freindes say thus.
ye to my soul: Pass over unto the mountain as a sparrow?

Persecuters using al rigor and force,
have bent the bow, they have prepared their arrows in the quiver, that they
may shoot in falsely pretend other causes against the innocent to destroy them.
the dark, at them that be right of heart.

It is the manner of persecuters, and especially of heretics, to destroy and
puldowne that others have built.
destroyed the things, which thou did perfect: but the just what has he
done?

Abac. 2.
heaven.

Though God seem to wink or sleep, yet his providence still watches, and
observes al men's actions.
eieliddes examine the sons of men.

Proves by tribulations.
examineth the just, and the impious: but he that Continuance in sin brings
damnation to the soul.
loves iniquity, hates his own soul.

God sparing for the time at last must needs of justice punish severely.
He shall rain snares upon sinners: fire and brimstone, and blast of storms
the portion of their cup.

Because our Lord is just and has loved justice: his countenance has seen
equity.

PSALM. XI.
The Prophet describes the paucity of just men, and abundanc of wicked, The
state of the Church in the first and of Christ. The 6. key.
both at Christ's first coming in flesh, 6. and second in majesty, in the end
of the world.

Unto Christ's first,
the end for and last coming,
the octaue, the will bring joy to the elect.
Psalm of David.
Christ calls his mystical body, him self. Act. 9. v. 4.
me Lord, because the holy has failed False and duble dealing hinder from true
faith.
because verities are diminished from among the children of men.



Insolent and arrogant.
great things



When sin most abunded Christ came into this world: and in like case will
come to judge.
a salvation: I will do confidently in him.

^reuer'^. 3^.


yet still there remain some just whom God preserves.
preserve us: and keep us from this generation for ever.

God sometimes suffers the wicked to do what evil they desire.
multiplied the children of men.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XI.
9. The impious vval^e round about J S Augustine expounds this of worldly
Temporal desires hinder the entrance into heaven.
men desiring temporal things, signified by the seven days, wherein this whole
life is turned about, as in a whele, not providing for the eight day, which is
li. 12. c. ^3. (...).
eternity, after the day of Judgment. In an other place he shows also, that
this sentence agrees aptly to the Platonistes, who taught, that this world
never ends, but passes and returns round about, in a revolution of many
years; Platonistes error.
so that al things should happen again even as they did before, contrary to
this, and many other Scriptures, affirming that God vvil preserve the just,
and keep them from this generation for ever. Whereas the reprobate, who set
their whole mind on temporal things, or expect a revolution of al, shall
eternally walk without the kingdom of heaven, and never enter in; though some
may call with the foolish virgins, says S. Ierom (or some other learned author)
upon this place: Lord Lord, open (the door) to us: but he vvil answer: that I
know you not. Mat. 25.

PSALM XII. A prayer in tribulation. The 7. key.

A general prayer of the Church, in tribulation, either temporal or spiritual.

Unto It more perteyneth to the new testament then to the old.
the end, the Psalm of David.


Carful and almost perplex cogitatios by reason of long persecution and man's
Weakness.
counsels in my soul, sorrow in my heart Very often every day.
by day?

How long shall mine enemies be exalted over me?

Regard and hear me o Lord my God.

Illuminate mine eyes that I sleep not fall not into mortal sin.
in death at any time: lest sometime mine enemy say: I have prevailed against
him.



My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation: I will sing to our Lord which gives me
Patience in tribulation, and reward for victory.
good things: and I will sing to the name of our Lord most high.

PSALM. XIII.
After general gross ignorance and impiety in the World, 7. Christ shall be Of
Christ's Incarnation. The 5. key.
incarnate, the Redemer of mankind.

Unto the end, the Psalm of David.
wicked men drowned in sin are at last so besotted in their understanding,
that they think in their heart (though they dare not utter it) that there is no
God: that is, none that has divine providence in governing the world, nor that
will judge al in the end.
fool has said in his heart: There is no God. They Psalm. 52.
are corrupt, and are become defiled withal sorts of sin.
abominable in their studies: there is not only the most Wicked, but also al
mankind were unable Without a Redemer to do good.
not that does good " no not one. Romans 5.


Al have declined, they are become Without faith in Christ none had meritorious
works.
unprofitable together: there is not that does good, no not one.

Their throat is an open sepulcher: with their tongues they did deceitfully,
the poison of aspes under their lips.

Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: their feet These three verses
being not in the Hebrew, nor Greek, yet are in the English. an. 1577. and are
three distinct verses in other psalms. 5. 9 and ^5.
swift to sheed blood.

They are wholly occupied in vexing others.
Destruction and infelicitie in their ways, and the way of Isa. 52. ^. 8.
peace they have not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes.

The Prophet speaks this in the person of God.
Shall not al they know that work iniquity, that devour my people With
greedines to hurt the good.
as food of bread?

Not believing in God, they feared Idols, that is, devils:
there have they trembled for fear, who in deed can not hurt Gods servants.
where no fear was.

Though innumerable be very wicked, yet some are just.
the just generation, you have mocked and derided those that trust in God.
confounded the counsel of the poor man: because our Lord is his hope.

The Prophet wishes, and withal prophecieth that Christ our Savior wilcome,
who is premised to Israel.
Who will give from Sion the salvation of Israel? when our Lord shall have
Redeemed man from the captivity of the devil.
turned away the captivity of his people, those that supplant vice
Jacob shall rejoice, and and contem plate God.
Israel shall be glad.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XIII.
1. No not one.] S. Paul by this place, and the like ( Isaie 59. v. 7.)
confirms Without Christ's grace no man is nor can be just.
his doctrine (Romans 3.) that both the Jews and the Gentiles (meaning al mankind)
were in that state, that none, no not one without the grace of Christ, were
just, nor could be justified, nor saved by the law of Nature, nor of Moses.
Which proves the necessity of faith. But neither that only faith justifies,
nor that the iustest are still wicked, as Calvin and Beza falsely expound these
Scriptures. For the Prophets and S. Paul speak in these places of men before
they be justified, teaching that al mankind was once in sin, and none could
be justified but by Christ. Nevertheless they teach also that men being
justified must, and may serve justice unto sanctification. And that their
works are not then The law showed the insufficiency of man's will. Grace cures
the will The will being cured cooperateth with g^^^e.
unprofitable. For being made free from sin (says the same Apostle to the
Romans. c. 6.) and become servants to God, you have your fru^ct, unto
sanctification, and the end is life everlasting. Which point of doctrine, how
man is justified, S. Augustine excellently, and briefly explicateth ( li. 1. de
Spirituet lit. c 9.) in these words: The just are justified freely by (Christ)
his grace, they are not therefore purified by the law: they are not justified
by their proper will, but justified freely by (Christ) his grace. Not that it is
done without our will, but by the law our will is shevved weak, that grace might
cure the will, and the will being cured might fulfill the law, not being under the
law, not needing the law.

Whereto we may here add (and so save labor of repeting this in other Venial
sins exclude not from heaven Good works done in mortal sins auail not to
salvation.
places) an other document of the same Doctor, in the same book (de spirit and
lit. c 27.) that the just do not live without some sins, and yet remain in
state of salvation: the wicked do sometimes certain good works, and full
remain in state of damnation. For even as (says he) venial sins without
which this life it not led, do not exclude the just from eternal life: so
certain good works, without which the life of the very worst is hardly found,
profit nothing the unjust man to eternal salvation, but in everlasting
damnation, some shall have more and somelesse torment.

PSALM. XIIII.
For attayning eternal glory in heaven, it is necessary to flee from sins,
Of eternal Beatitude. The 10. key.
and do good works.

"The Psalm of David.
LORD who shall dwell in In heave, as appears by the last verse.
thy tabernacle? or who shall rest in thy holy hill?

He that walks One requisite thing is to be free, or cleansed from sin.
without spot, and the second is to do good. d Sincerely in thought,
works justice.

d heart, that has not done guile in his word, and
tongue. Nor has deed:
done evil to his neighbor, and has not taken nor harkened to detraction.
reproach against his neighbor,

Glory is the reward of good works.
glorifieth: he that swears to his neighbor, and deceives not,

Usury excludes from heaven.
usury, and has not taken k gifts upon the innocent:

k Likewise doing wrong for bribes.

He that does "these things, shall" not be moved for ever.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XIIII.
1. The Psalm of Dauid] As the appropriating of the general name of Psalm
Why this and certain others are called the Psalms of David.
unto some, does not prejudice, but that the rest are also Psalms, though they
be called Prayers, Canticles, Testimonies, and the like: so the application of
David's name to certain Psalms, proves not other authors of the rest. But
the name of Psalm shows a spiritual songue, apt for musical instrument; and
the name of David by interpretation signifies, that it particularly perteyneth
to the beloved.

5. He that does these thinges] whereas this, or any other place of holy
Scripture, Both faith and good works necessary to salvation.
attributes salvation to certain good works, neither faith, nor other works
are thereby excluded, but presupposed as no less necessary, then those which
are mentioned. Especially faith is always requisite, without which it is
impossible to please God, and other virtues either in practice, or in purpose,
Heb. 1^.
and preparation of mind, when and where occasion requires.

5. Shall not be mou^d for euer] Al states of this world are mutable, and only
Only the state of glory is immutable.
eternal felicity in heaven shall continue for ever. Therefore this Psalm can
not be understood of the Tabernacle, nor Temple of the old Testament, which
were but figures of eternal glory. But if so much purity was then requisite,
much more al sincerity, and great sanctity are necessary for entrance into
heaven.

PSALM. XV.
Christ, by the mouth of David, declares his future victory, and triumph Of
Christ's victory. The 5. key.
over the world, 9. and death.

The Stylographiae signifies a thing most worthy to be noted, towitte, Christ
crucified.
inscription of the title and most worthy of the prophets consideration.
to David him self.
PRESERVE Christ as man did often pray, as appears in the Gospel.
me o Lord, because I have hoped in thee.

Christ's passion was not needful nor profitable to God, but to man.
need not my goods.

God speaks showing that Christ should make his marvelous charity known to
his Apostles, and other servants.
To the saints, that are in his land, he has made al my wills meruclous in
them.

Men feeling their infirmities and miseries,
multiplied: afterward they make have in seeking remedies.
made have.

I will not assemble their Sacrifices to idols shall ^ cease in Gentiles.
conuenticles of blood: neither will I be mindful of their Their names shall be
changed from heathen to be called Christians.
names by my lips.

Eternal glory consists in seeing God.
Our Lord "the portion of mine inheritance, and of my God is the reward of
suffering pains for Christ.
cup: thou art he, that will restore mine inheritance unto me.

In division of temporal inheritance, land is measured by cords: as Iosue 10.
so portions in heaven are given with large measure.
Cords are fallen to me in goodly places: for Christ also received al nations
for his inheritance.
mine inheritance is goodly unto me.

Wisdom to make good election of spiritual things rather then temporal.
given me understanding: moreover also even til Not only by day, but also by
night.
night, my Also my corporal pains give me instruction.
veins have rebuked me.

Christ had God continually before his eyes: cuerieman ought to think
frequently of God.
forsaw our Lord in my sight always: because he is for God still protecteth the
just.
at my Act. e. v. 25.
right hand, that I be not moved.



in limbo patrum.
hell: neither wilt give Christ's body corrupted not in the grave.
thy holy one to see corruption. Act. 2. and 13


Thou have made death and resurrection is the way to life.
the ways of life known to me, thou shall make me full of joy with Perfect
glory consists in seeing God.
thy countenance: delectations on thy right hand, even to in eternity.
the end.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XV.
5. Out lord the portion of mine inheritance] Christ whom the Jews expected as
Christ a King sometimes exercised temporal jurisdiction.
an earthly conqueror, that should advance himself and them temporally in
this world, was in deed, as the children and multitude called him, king of
Israel. (Joan 12.) At which time (as also before) he exercised temporal
Jurisdiction, in correcting abuses in the Temple ( Mat. 21. Joan. 2.) And when
Pilate demanded of him, if he were a king (Joan. 18. v. 37.) he answered: Thou
say, that I am a king* For this I was borne, and for this came I into the
world, that I should give testimony to the truth. And though he answered
withal, that his kingdom (to wit the possession, and use thereof) was not of
this world, yet Pilate by Gods providence, writ the title, and would not
alter it, JESUS of Nazareth King of the Jews. But Christ's chief inheritance,
and reward of his God the proper inheritance of Christ, and Christians. Clergy
men profess expressly to serve God, for God him felfe not for temporal profit.
merits is God himself, as here he professes by his prophet David: which is
also the only true and perfect inheritance of al Christ's seruates, wherefore
Clergy men more particularly profess the same, when they first enter into
their spiritual state, addicting and dedicating them selves to serve God in
Ecclefiastical sunct. on, not for temporal inheritance, but for a better lotte,
God himself, who is al Good, and most perfect goodness, true riches, and eternal
inheritance. In which election of state to live and serve God in, every
Clergy man says: Our Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup:
Thou art he that vvil restore mine inheritance unto me. Man calls it his
inheritance, because he was created to serve God, and for his feruice to
inherit God: which reward though he lost by sin, yet every one returning to
Gods service, and perseuering therein, recouereth by Christ, new right and title
to the same inheritance, performing their duties in their several vocations.
Some traueling in the world, but not psalm. ^^. v. 11. 2 (...) a. v. 4.
loving it: others sequestered from secular affairs, duly administering sacred
offices, more peculiarly called Divine service.

^ Net leave my (...) in hel] How Calvin and Beza sometimes corrupt this text,
always pernert the sense, and most absurdly oppose them selves against
Protestants denving that Christ de^^ended into limbus translate grave for b^^.
al ancient holy Farhets, concerning the Article of Christ's descending in
soul denving that into that part of hell called Limbus patr^, is largely noted
Genesis 37. Act. 2. and 1. pet 3 Only here we may not omit to advertise the
reader, that some Protestants 1552. 1577. 1603.
Bibles permitting the word hell to remain in the text, a latter Edition for
hell puts grave, with this only note in the former place, that thus is
chiesly meant of Christ by whose Resurrection al his members have immortality.
And Act. 2. they repete their new text by this paraphrasis: Thou shlat not
leave me in the grave. VV resting that which pertains to the body, rising
from the grave, to the soul, which was not at al in the grave, all the time the
body lay there.

PSALM XVI.
Aiust man's prayer in tribulation, 10. describing his enemies cruelty, 13. by
Gods providence protecting the just. The 3. key.
way of imprecation foresheweth their destruction, 15. and declares that the
just shall be satisfied in glory.

The " prayer of David.
HEAR o Lord my in my just cause hear my petition.
justice: attend my petition: With thine ears hear my prayer, seeing I pray
sincerly, not in feaned affection.
not in deceitful lips.

Thou that's see al thing declare my right against mine adversaries.
thy countenanee let my judgment proceed: let thine eyes see equities.

my inte^tion
my heart, and visited it most secret cogitations.
by night: by tribulations
by fire thou have examined me, Whose conscience is pure from grievous sin,
may pray with this confidence, otherwise repentance is first necessary. But
the whole Church may ever pray in this manner, because there be always some
just and holy, in respect of whom it is truly called holy.
and there is no iniquity found in me.

for thy precepts.
words of thy lips I have kept the the narrow way of virtue.
hard ways.

none can of them selves walk rightly, but by Gods help.
Perfect my pases in thy paths: that my steps be not moved.





against thy omnipotent power.
thy right hand keep me, as the apple of the eye.

Under the shadow of thy wings protect me: from the from their cruel and
furious countenance.
face of the impious, that have afflicted me. Mine enemies have compassed my
soul, they have shut up they have shut out al pity or commiseration.
fat; their mouth has spoken pride.

They intend utterly to destroy me even to the ground.
unto the earth.



Arise Lord, Except God prevent, ma^s industry is not sufficient.
prevent him, and supplant him: deliver my restrain their power, which they
have by thy permission, that they may not persecute so much as they intend.
thy sword from the enemies of

Lord from This is a prophecy, that the wicked from the elect
a few out of the land divide them, which judgment begins sometimes in this
life.
in their life: their belly is filled of the pleasures of this world, which
God approves not, nor acknowledges amongst good things.
thy secrets.

They are filled with children: and they have leaft their remnantes to their
little ones.

the just shall be approved.
I in justice shall appear to thy sight: I shall be Nothing does satiate man's
mind, but the sight of God in eternal glory.
filled when thy glory shall appear?

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XVI.
1. The prayer of Dauid] This Psalm of the matter contained is called a
prayer* This Psalm called a Prayer is both a sword and buck ^^r in affliction.
Which holy David so composed, as was both convenient for himself, being
molested with unjust afflictions by the wicked, and for any other just person,
or the whole Church in persecution, serving as a spiritual sword to strike the
enemies, and as a shield to bear of with patience and fortitude al their
forces.

PSALM XVII.
King David's thanks to God for his often delivery from great dangers, David
singularly protected by God. The ^. key.
first in general, 9. then more particularly describes Gods terrible manner of
fighting for him, 18. against his cruel, and otherwise potent enimie^ 22.
attributing the same to Gods good pleasure, and justice of his cause, 31.
praises God, 33. his only protector. 41. and depresser of his enemies.

Unto Though literally this Psalm perteyned to David, yet in figure of Christ:
and of the Church, or e^erie just soul.
the end, The Holy Ghost inspired David to render these thanks for his often
delivery from dangers.
to the servant of our Lord David, who spoke to our Lord the words of this
canticle, in the day, that our Lord delivered him out of the hand of al his
enemies, and out of the hand of Saul is specially named because he was his most
potent worldly enemy.
Saul, and he said: (2. Reg. 22.)
I will These first words (as also diverse others) are added, and many changed
in this and other Psalms by the Septuagint, who often leaving the Hebrew text
render the sense, and so this agrees in substance with the same Psalm
recorded. 2. Reg. 22.
love thee o Lord by whom I am strong.
my strength: Our Lord is my

My God is my helper, and I will hope in him. My protector H^b. 2.
and the high and firm salvation.
horn of my salvation, and my receiver.



This is aptly applied to al mankind after his fall, declaring our state in
sin, and inducing to penance, in the office of Mass on Septuagesima sunday.
sorrows of mortal flesh subject to death.
death have compassed me: and violent incursions of tentions to sin.
torrentes of iniquity have trubled me.

exceeding great afflictions of mind, like to torments of hell, which I also
fear.
hell have compassed me: the secret tentations have deceived me.
snares of death have prevented me.

Earnest prayer is the best remedy in all tribulations.
cried to my God:

And As it is certain that God heard David's prayers; so he assuredly hears
all that sincerly flee unto him.
he has heard my voice from his holy temple: and my cry in his sight, has
entered into his ears.

Gods anger against sin makes high and lofty things to shake, even the
most obstinate presumptuous sinners.
because he was wrath with them.

Divine wrath is like to smoke of the nosethrles, or flaming fire, and burning
coals.
Smoke arose in his wrath: and fire flamed up from his face: coals were kindled
from him.

Gods punishment sometimes comes so swiftly, as if the heavens bowed toward
the earth.
bowed the heavens, and descended: and Gods fury is as a dark desolate night,
or horrible wist.
darkness under his feet.

And he Yet when sinners repe^. God most speedely, as fleing with wings of
mercy, comfort and protecteth them.
ascended upon the cherubs, and flew: he flew upon the wings of winds.

God being in him self in co^prehensible, is also secret in his
determinations, and covert in his procedinges or acts.
covert, his tabernacle is round about him: darkesome water in the clouds of
the air.

Gods sple^dor oppressing ma^s sense, yet instructs him by his marvelous
works. Which mystically signifies, that Christ illuminateth the world by
his Apostles, and other preachers denouncing his justice, peace, and his vvil
in all things perteyning to man.
brightness in his sight the clouds passed, hayle and coals of fire.







At thy rebuke o Lord, at the blast of the spirit of thy wrath.

from tribulations.
waters.

From Saul, Absolo^, Moabites, Ammonites, and al temporal and spiritual enemies.
from my most strong enemies, and from them that hated me: because they were
made strong over me.

So in the rest of this Psalm the Prophet speaks for most part in proper
terms, without Metaphores or other figures. Yet in the mystical sense of
Christ, and Christians.
Lord was made my protector.

Of his good pleasure without my de^ertes.
would me.







by his grace
with him; and shall keep me from mine iniquity.

He repeteth the 21. verse, incultating that God will render to eueric one as
they deserve.
And our Lord will reward me according to my justice: and according to the
purity of my hands in the sight of his eyes.



And with the elect thou shall be elect: and with the perverse thou shall be
perverted.





pass over al difficulties.
go over the wall.

Gods precepts.
way is unpolluted: the words of our Lord are examined by fire: he is
protector of all that hope in him.

For One only God, Creator and Savior of al.
who is God but our Lord? or who is God but our God?

God that girded me with strength: and made my way immaculate.



Amongst other acts, David killed a lion, and abeare, and Goliath. 1. Reg. 17.
as a bow of brass. 2. Re. 22.




And thy discipline has corrected me unto the end: and thy discipline the same
shall teach me.









As God gives streingth to his servants; so he diminishes the natural
streingth and courage of his enemies.
mine enemies thou have given me their back, and them that hate me thou have
destroyed.







Conversion of Gentiles to Christ, as the Moabites, Idumeans, and others were
subdued by David. 1. Par. 11. 14. 18. 19. 20.
which I knew not, has served me: in the hearing of the ear it has obeyed me.

The The reuolting and reprobation of the Jews prefigured by Absolons
rebellion and others. 2. Reg. 15. 16.
children being alienes have lied to me, the children alienes are inueterated,
and have halted from their paths.



God still protecteth the Church of Christ, as he preserved David.
which geuest me reuenges, and subdewest peoples under me, my deliverer from
mine angry enemies.



2. Reg. 22. Romans 1^.
say Use of Psalms is most frequent in the Church of Gentiles. See the
proemial Annotations. page. 12.
a psalm to thy name,



PSALM. XVIII.
Gods perfect goodness and glory is showed by his great works, and by his
Propagation of the Catholic faith. The 6. key.
Apostles sent with heavenly commission, to preach in all tongues to al
nations. 6. Christ coming into the world, and return unto heaven. 8. his
immaculate Law: 13. Wherein notwistanding the just shall have need to pray for
remission of smaller and daily sins.

Unto perteyning to the beloved of the new Testament.
the end, the psalm of David.
The silent works of God declare his Majesty to them that consider thereof;
his preachers declare the same by words, to all that will hear.
heavens show forth the glory of God, and the

The constant course of times shows that the same was disposed by Gods power,
and daily propagation of faith, especially of Christian doctrine shows
Christ's power, and assured perpetuity of his Church.
Day unto day utters word: and night unto night shows knowledge.

Some of every language or nation have believed in Christ, receiving the
Catholic Religion.
no languages, nor speeches, whose voices are not heard.

S. Paul affirms that this has been fulfilled by the Apostles preaching in all the world. Romans 10.
Their sound has gone forth into all the earth; and unto the ends of the round
world the words of them.

By the sun a most excellent and superelemental creature, the Prophet
describes Christ, making his course through this world, illuminating,
comforting and streingthning the Church his tabernacle, wherein he perpetually
dwells.
the sun: and himself as a Christ the bridgrome, and the Church his bride are
never divorced; his love, wisdom, and power, ever conseruing her by his
immaculute law.
bridgrome coming forth of his bridechamber.

He has rejoiced as againt to run the way, his coming forth from the top
of heaven: And his recourse even to Luc. 24.
the top thereof: neither is there that can hide him self from his heat.

" The law of our Lord is immaculate The old law was likewise pure i^ it self
and holy, but the new also makes the obseruers immaculate.
converting souls: the testimony of our Lord is faithful, giving wisdom to
Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
little ones.







How sweet the law of God is, his servants find not by reading, or by hearing
only, but by keeping it.
keeps them, in keeping them is Conformably to this text the prophet
professes (Psalm. 118. v. 12.) that he kept them for reward, in which place the
heretics translation is corrupted.
much Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
reward.

Sins None in this life knows perfectly his own estate, whether he be
vvorthie of love or hate, Eccle. 9 but hops and fears.
who understands? from my secret sins cleanse

If If mortal sins have not dominion in the soul it is just: and shall be in
time immaculate from al sin.
they shall not have dominion over me, then shall I be immaculate; and shall be
cleansed from the greatest sin.



O Lord Gods helping grace is still necessary to persevere,
my helper, and my as his first grace redeeming man is nessarie for our first
conversion.
redemer.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XVIII.
^. The law of our lord is immaculate, converting souls.] Gods law in it
self God conuerteth and justifies souls instructing the^ by his law, and
sweetly drawing their free cooperation by grace.
being most pure, and immaculate, is the proper means, whereby the Holy Ghost
conuerteth souls from sins to justice. Not that every one is just. fied,
which reads, hears, or knows the law, but by keeping it, through grace
of the Holy Ghost. Who is the author and worker of ius^^e, by disposing the
soul to cooperate in manner, partly here described: Gods faithful and most true
testimony, by his law, gives vvisdome, faith and knowledge to the humble,
his right justices, comfort the hearts of the saithful, his clear precept
teaches them their duty; his holy fear perseuireth with them; his true
judgments are most delectable, and desiderable above al worldly riches or
pleasures. So by these and like spiritual motives the soul freely desiteth,
accepts, undertakes, endures, and by continual assistance of grace,
observes Gods law; and so meriteth the great revvard, which is promised for
keeping it. v. 12. 2. Tim. 4. v. 6.

PSALM XIX. The subjects prayer for their superior. The 7. key.

Faithful people join their prayer, for their Prince or Prelate, 4. with
sacrifice offered for his preservation, and prosperous success.

Unto Though such a prayer was very fitly made for David, Ezechias, or other
kings of Judah, yet it more properly serves for Christian Kings and Prelates.
the end, the Psalm of David.
The king, or other superior praying for him self, his subjects pray with him,
and for him. It may also be applied to Christ, praying whiles he was mortal,
or now praying for his mystical body the Church, but in both these cases, our
prayers are only necessary for his servants not for him.
thee in the day of tribulation: the name



The Hebrew word MINCA signifies sacrifice of flower, and unbloody, so
perteyneth to the Eucharist, in form of bread, and wine.
sacrifice: and be thy holocaust made be acceptable for him, for whom it is
offered.
fat.



in the prosperous state of thee our superior.
in thy salvation: and in the name of our God we shall be magnified.

his anointed king, or Priest. Mystically faithful people acknovvlege the
victory of Christ our Savior over death and al enemies.
his CHRIST.

He shall hear him from his holy heaven: the faluation of his righthand is, in
great streingth, or heavenly forces.
in powers.



men trusting in humane and worldly power fall into captivity.
They are bound, and have fallen: but we have risen and are set upright.

By protection of the head the body is also conserved.
save the king, and hear us in the day, that we shall invoke thee.

PSALM. XX. Christ's exaltation. The 5. key.

Praise to God for Christ's exaltation after his passion: 9. and depression of
his enemies.

Unto Perteyning to the new Testament, principally to Chrrist, partly to godly
and victorious kings, and generally to all the blessed, which overcome
spiritual enemies.
the end, the Psalm of David.
Christ our king as man ouercoming his enemies by his divine power, rejoices
in victory.
thy power the king shall be glad: and upon thy

Christ's most special desire was the salvation of his people.
desire of his heart thou have given him: and of the will of his lips thou have
not defrauded him.

This most principally verified in Christ, is also applied to Martyrs, which
suffer or are ready in preparation of mind to suffer death for the truth.
prevented him in blessings of sweetness: thou have put on his head a crown
of pre^ious stone.





Al Saincte^ receive blessing of glory, but only Christ imperteth such grace
to others: for in him al are blessed hat are eternally glorified ^^n. 21. Joan.
1.
to be a blessing for ever and ever: thou shall make him joyful in gladenesse
with thy countenance.



The just co^forming their desires to Gods vvil, do pray that the wicked may
be punished. It is also a prophecy, that ^o it shall come to pass.
thy hand be found of al thy enemies: let thy righthand find al, that hate thee.

And so it follows i^ the next verse: Thou shall put them etc.
shall put them as an oven of fire This also can not be understood of any but
of Christ, who in the general or particular judgment shall give sentence upon
the wicked
in the time of thy countenance: our Lord in his wrath And immediately hell f^re
shall devour them.
shall truble them, and fire shall devour them.

All the wicked, and namely the Jews who persecuted Christ, fail in their
devises.
fruit thou shall destroy from the land: and their seed from the children of
men.

counsels, which they could not establish.

Because thou shall put them back: in thy remnantes thou ^^ shall prepare
their countenance.

Be exalted Lord in thy power: Whiles the wicked perish, the just rejoice and
praise God in songue and Psalm.
we will chaunte and sing thy powers.

PSALM XXI.
Christ prays in his Passion, 7. describes the acerbitie thereof; 20.
foresheweth Christ's Passion and effects thereof. The ^ key.
by way of prayer his Resurection: 23. more clerly the fundation and
propagation of his Church (27. and 30. interposing the singular food of the
most blessed Sacrament) even to the ends of the earth in all nations.

Unto the end "for the Redemption of mankind vndertake^ by Christ, and
performed by his death, began to be showed by his Resurrection in the morning
of the third day. ^. Aug.
morning enterprise, the Psalm in figure of Christ the beloved of God.
of David.
God is God of al his creatures, but in more peculiar sort God of Christ by
personal union.
my God have respect to me: Thou neither deliuerest me from dying: nor yeldest
me such comforth, as thou voutsafelst to other Saints. v. 6. Mat. 27.
why have thou forsaken Mat. ^^.
me? I am neither delivered from dying, nor comforted in my passion, having
undertaken to dye for the sins of mankind, and reputed them as mine own
words or factes.
far from my salvation are the words of my sins.

Albeit I cry by day,
by day, and by night, on the cross and in the garden, to have the chalice of
death removed from me, and shall not be heard,
and" thou will not hear: and by night, and Yet there is no folly, nor fault
in this petition, which is with submission of man's will to Gods will.
not for folly unto me.

But Thou from heaven wilt hear when it is convenient.
thou dwell in the holy place, whose wisdom and goodness the Church
worthily praises.
the praise of Israel.

Patriarchs, Prophets, and other holy me^ praying in their distresses obtained
their requests.
our fathers have hoped: they hoped, and thou did deliver them.

Were temporally delivered by thy mighty hand from their persecuters.
saved: they hoped in thee, and were not frustrate of their humble prayer^^
not confounded.

God that comforted his servants in their tribulations, leif^ Christ without
his ordinary consolation, to suffer more then ever any other did.
But I am a wicked persecuters respected not Christ as a man, but contemned
him, as a very worm
worm and no man: a as most reprochful of al men.
reproach of men and as the basest of all the people.
outcast of the people.

Almost al became Christ's cruel enemies at the time of his passion, afflicting,
blaspheming, and scorning him, as the Evangelists record.
All that see me have scorned me: they have spoken with the lips, and wagged
the head.

The Evangelists write how al these things were fulfilled by wicked men
speaking these blasphemies, and reproaches.
He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver him: let him save him, because he God
seemed to be well pleased with Christ, as with his own Son: if it be so, let
him deliver him from these afflictions, say these blasphemers.
will him.

divine power without man formed me in the womb of my mother a virgin.
have drawn me out of the womb: my hope from the breasts of my mother.

Upon thee I As I have no father but thee O God: so without intermission from
mine incarnation to this time, I have had thee my protector:
have been cast from the matrice: leave me not now without comfort seeing I
must dye as thou have determined, and I freely consented: yet leave me not in
death but raise me again to life. Psalm. 15. v. 9. 10.
from my

Because tribulation is very nigh: because there is Almost al are become mine
enemies, and those few that would, can not help me.
not that will help.

Delicate lascivious yougmen,
calves have compassed me: and the scribes Pharisees and elders of the people
have al conspired against me.
fat bulls have besieged me.

condemning me and persuading the people to cry: Crucify, crucify him.
opened their mouth upon me, as a lion ravening and roaring.

As So weakened with pains of torments, as fluide water not able to consist.
water I am powered out: and al My bones and strongest parts of my body are
weakened, verified, when our Savior fell down under his cross.
my bones are dispersed.

the part that first and last lives is weakened as soft wax by heat of the
fire, and ready to fail.
My heart is made as wax melting in the mids of my belly.

al my powers, and radical humiditie is dried up, as a potters vessel is baked
in the furnace.
pot-shard, and my tongue Through exceeding great drught, which our Savior
professed on the cross saying: I thirst.
cleaued to my jaws: and thou have thus thou O God have suffered me to come to
the last breath of life, next to death. Yet finally ou^ Seuiour gave up his
spirit, before he should have died. v. 21.
brought me down into the dust of death.

Agane this royal Prophet recounteth by whom, and how our B. Savior should
suffer, even as clear as tho Evangelists afterward have written the history.
dogs have compassed me: the counsel of the malignant has besieged me.

^^^. 19.
Our Saviors body was so racked on the cross, that his bones might be seen
and counted.
numbered al my bones.

The persecuters vvittingly determined al ti^^ cruelty: beheld it with their
eyes, and without al compassion persisted in malice, rejoiced, and blasphemed.
considered and beheld me: they have the souldiars that crucified our Savior,
taking his garments for their pray:
divided my garments among them, and upon my yet in mystery of his Church,
divided not his coat.
vesture they have cast lot.

He prophecieth Christ's speedy resurrection.
prolong not thy help from me: look toward my defense.

Christ's saul was not separated from his body by force of the torments, but
he preventing death freely yielded up his spirit. Joan. 10. v. 9. and 10.
my soul from the sword: and mine the most pure, and sanctified soul, of
whose fulness al other just souls are sanctified:
only one from that it stay not in hell, which devoured al other souls in the
old Testament.
the hand of the dog.



The propagation of the Church of Christ in all nations.
declare thy name to my brethren:" in the mids of the Church I will praise
thee.

not the carnal but spiritual children of Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham. Romans 9. v.
8.
seed of Jacob glorify ye him:



the Church gethered both of Jews and Gentiles is very great and universal.
the great Church: I Our Savior promised to give his own body, the bread of
life Joan. 6, and performed the same at his last supper.
will render my vows in the sight of them that fear him.

those that be faithful, humble and poor in spirit participat the sruict of
this most excellent Sacrament.
poor shall eat, and shall be filled: and they shall praise our Lord that seek
after him: their hearts The effect of this B. Sacrament is the resurrection in
glory, and life everlasting.
shall live for ever and ever.

Gentiles which have been idolaters shall recollect themselves, when they hear
Christ preached, and shall turn to true Religion.
shall remember, and be converted to our Lord:

And all the families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight.

Although men can neither deserve to be converted, nor to persevere in justice;
yet Christ meriteth to have a continual kingdom; which is the perpetual visible
Catholic Church.
Because the kingdom is our Lords: and he shall have dominion over the Gentiles.

Not only the poor sort* but also the mighty ones of the world shall be
converted to Christ, participate his B. Body in the Sacrament:
fat ones of the earth have eaten, and and religiously adore the same.
adored: in his sight shall al fall, All that adore God, shad adore him in this
Sacraments.
that descend into the earth.

Death being once overcome, it shall have no more power.
my soul shall live to him: and my Again the prophet inculcateth the
continuance of the Catholic Church.
seed shall serve him.

Apostles, and other preachers of Christ.
heavens shall show forth his justice to the people that shall be borne, whom our
Lord has made.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XXI.
1. For the morning enterprise.] In respect of the end for which Christ
suffered, Christ's Resurrection. The Passion of Christ according to David.
this Psalm is entitled: for the morning enterprise: that is, for Christ's
glorious Resurrection, and other effects of his Passion. Which holy David by
the spirit of prophecy so describes here long before with diverse particular
cicumstances as the Evangelists have since historically recorded, that it may
not unfitly be called, The Passion of Jesus Christ according to David.

3. Thou vvilt not hear.] Our B. Savior seeing his most terrible death
imminent, prayde conditionally, if it pleased his heavenly Father, to have the
same removed Christ's conditional prayer was not heard.
from him; and was not heard, as the Psalmist here prophecieth. The principal
reason was, because God of his divine charity had decreed, that mankind should
be redeemed by this death of his Son. Christ also him self of his excellent
charity, consented here unto and therefore persisted not in his conditional
prayer, but added and absolutely prayed, that not his own will, but his Fathers
might be fulfilled. And in this he was heard, to his own more glory, and His
absolute prayers were always heard.
other infinite benefits of innumerable souls, as it follows, v. 25. when I
crie^d to him he heard me. S. Paul also witnesses (Heb. 5. v. 7.) that Christ
offering prayers and supplications to him that could save him from death, was
heard for his reverence: that is, in respect of his inestimable merit in
humane nature united in person to God. An other cause, why Christ was not
delivered from violent Christ's suffered for our example.
death, as many holy persons were, when they cried to God in distresses, as S
Augustine shows (Epist. 120. c. 11.) was for example to Christians, whom God
will have to suffer temporal afflictions, and death, for the glory of life
everlasting, according to S. Peter's doctrine, Christ suffered for us, leaving an
example ^. Pet. 2.
that you may follow his steps:

18. They have dug.] Of obstinate malice the Jews have corrupted this The
Hebrew text corrupted by the Jews.
place (and God knows how many others) in the Hebrew text of some editions,
reading caari, which signifies as a lion, without al coherence of the sense
for caaru they dug or pierced, to avoid so plain a prophecy of nailing
Christ's hands and feet to the cross.

23 I vvil declare thy name to my brethren.] Here it is evident that this
Psalm This Psalm is of Christ.
is of Christ, not of David, by S. Paul's allegation ( Heb. 2. v. 11. 12.)
saying: He that sanctifies (towitt Christ) disdaned not to call the sanctified
his brethren.

23. In the mids of the Church I vvil praise thee.] After Christ's Passion and
Resurrection, in the rest of this Psalm, other two principal points of
Christian Religion are likewise prophesied: His perpetual visible Church, and
the B. Sacrament of his body. The former is here prophesied by way of inuiting
all the seed of Jacob to glorify God (v. 24.) all the seed of Israel to fear
him (v. 25.) Prophecy of the visible and universal Church.
towit, innumerable Christians the true Israelites, the universal Church in the
whole world. As for heretical parts, or parcels in the world, such as the
Donatistes, which going forth from the Catholic Church say: Christ has lost
his great Church, the devil has taken the whole world from him, and he
remains only in a part of Africa, they do not praise God (says S. Augustine)
in hu^^ Psalm.
but dishonor God and Christ, as if God were not faithful in his promise, as
if Christ were dispossessed of his kingdom the Catholic Church. Lest any
should reply, that Christ is praised though the Church be decayed, or be very
small, the Holy Ghost has prevented such arguments, saying: v. 26 His praise
is in the great Church. Which could neither be verified in the part of
Donatistes S. Agustin proves the Church to be always visible and great by
this Psalm.
in Afrike, nor now in the part of Protestants since Luther in Europe. Further
S. Augustine explicateth, and urges the verses following in this Psalm, against
the same blind, deaf, and obstinate Donatistes, who did not, or would not see,
not hear, that all the ends of the earth shall remenber, and be converted to
our Lord. The holy Scripture says not, the ends of the earth, but all the
ends: well go too (says this great Doctor) peradventure there is but one
verse, thou thoughtest upon some thing else, thou talkedst with thy brother,
when one read this; mark, he repeteth and knocks upon the deaf; All the
families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight: Yet the heretic is deaf, he
hears not, let one knock again: Because the kingdom is our Lords, and he
shall have dominion over the Gentiles. Hold these three verses brethren. Thus
and more S. Augnstin against those that think the true Church may fail, or
become invisible or obscure. And though it be not in like prosperous state at
al times, and in all places, yet it is always conspicuous, and more general
then any other congregation professing whatsoever pretensed religion.

27. The poor shall eat.] Seeing this Psalm is of Christ, as is proved by S.
Paul's The Eucharist prophesied in this place.
allegation of 23 verse, and by the concordance thereof with the Evangelists, it
is necessarily deduced, that the vows mentioned in the former verse, and
these words, the poor shall eat and be filled, can not be referred to the
sacrifices of the old Testament, but to the blessed Sacrifice and Sacrament of
the Eucharist, which our Savior promised, after he had replenished the people
with five loaves, and which he instituted at his last supper in presence of his
Apostles. So S. Augustine doubts not to understand it, and to teach, as well in
his duble exposition of this Psalm as in his 120. Epistle. c. 27. The poor,
that is the humble and poor in spirit shall eat and befilled, the fat ones,
or the rich being proud, do also adore and eat, but are not filled. They also
are brought to the table of Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist.
Christ, and participate his body and blood, but they adore only, are not also
filled, because they do not imitate (Christ's humility) they disdain to be
humble Where it is clear, this holy father by Christ's body and blood means
not bread and wine as signs of his body and blood, for bread and wine can not
be lawfully adored: neither does he mean our Lords body as it was on the
cross, or is in heaven, for so it is not eaten, but as it is in forms of
bread and wine on Christ's table, the Altar.

PASLME. XXII.
A form of thankesgeuing for all spiritual benefits (described under the
Tha^ksgeuing for Gods protection. The 7. key.
metaphor of temporal prosperity) even from a sinners first conversion, to
final perseverance, and eternal beatitude.

The Psalm of David.
OUR Christ the good pastor, governs, protecteth,
Lord rules me, and nothing shall be wanting to Isa. 40. Iere. 23. Ezech. 34.
Joan. 10. 1. Pet. 2. and. 5.
me: in place and feeds his faithful flock.
of pasture there he has placed me.

Baptism of regeneration,
the water of refection he has brought me up: he has which is the first
justification.
converted my soul.

He has conducted me upon Gods precepts which the baptized must observe. Mat.
28. v. 20.
the paths of justice, Salvation is in the name and power of Christ, not in
man's own merits.
for his name.

in great dangers of tentations to mortal sin,
the mids of the shadow of death, I will yet by Gods grace we may resist.
not fear evils: because thou art with me.

Thy Gods direction and law is straight,
rod and thy and strong.
staff: they have comforted me.

Christ has prepared for our spiritual food the B. Sacrament of the
Eucharist. S. Cyprian. Epist. 63. Eutim. in hunc Psalm.
a table, against al spiritual enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil.
against them; that truble me.

Thou Christian souls are also streingthned by the Sacraments of Confirmation,
Penance, holie-Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction.
have fatted my head with oil: and my The B. Sacrament and Sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood.
chalice inebriating how goodly is it!

And thy mercy shall follow me continual and final peseuerance is by Gods
special grace.
all the days of my life:

And that I may dwell in the house of our Lord, in eternal life.
in longitude of days.

PSALM. XXIII.
Christ is Lord of the whole earth, being Creator, and Redemer of man. Christ
Lord of all the world. The 5. key.
3. Good life (with faith in him) is the way to heaven. 7. whither Christ
ascending with triumph Angels admire him.

The Christ rising from death the first day of the week, had al power given
him in heaven and in earth* Mat. 28.
first of the Sabbath, the Psalm of David.
THE earth is our Lords, and Not only the soil it self but all the fruict,
and all that dwell therein are Gods.
the fullness thereof: the round world, and all that dwell therein.



Though Christ created and redeemed al, yet only the just shall inherit heaven.
shall ascend into the mount of our Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?

not occupied himself in vain and unprofitable things, but in commendable
works.
in vain, nor sworn to his neighbor in guile.

Gods mercy goes before iustifications just works follow, and so glory is the
reward of al.
mercy of God his Savior.

This sort of people thus serving God, shall receive everlasting bliss.
the generation of them that seek him, of them that seek the face of the God
of Jacob.

The prophet contemplating in spirit Christ's Ascension, inuiteth Angels to
receive him, and (by prosopopeia) speaks also to the gates of heaven, by
which he is to enter.
ye princes, and be ye lifted up o eternal gates: and the king of glory shall
enter in,

Angels answer admiring, and demanding as in a dialogue, how Christ is become
so glorious!
Who is this king of glory? Our Lord The Prophet answers that Christ by his
power has overcome al enemies in battle.
strong and mighty our Lord mighty in battle.

Again he wills Angels to open the gates, and bids the gates to enlarge
them selves.
Lift up your gates ye princes, and be ye lifted up o eternal gates: and the
king of glory shall enter in.

the Angels demand as before:
Who is this king of glory? the prophet answers: that Christ is Lord also of
Angels, and al heavenly powers under God.
The Lord of powers he is the king of glory.

PSALM XXIIII.
A general prayer of the faithful against al enemies, 4. with desire to be
directed in the way of godliness, 7. and to be pardoned for sins past. 9. A
prayer of the faithful. The 7. key.
acknowledging Gods meeknes, 17. our weakness, necessity of help, and hope in
God: 22. concludes with prayer for the whole Church.

Unto This Psalm perteyneth more properly to the new testament. And is
artificially composed: the verses beginni^g with distinct letters in order of
the Hebrew Alphabet, to the last verse.
the end, the Psalm of David.
TO THEE o Lord I have lifted up my min^, to be atte^tiue.
my soul: my not be frustrate of my petition.
not be ashamed:

that patiently expect the time when God will assist.
that expect thee, shall not be confounded.

This manner of praying is frequent in the Psalms, signifying as a prophecy,
that so it will come to pass and the conformity of the just to Gods justice.
Let al be confounded that do unjust things in vain. Lord show me thy ways:
and teach me thy paths.

in true faith and religion.
in thy truth, and teach me: because thou art God my Savior, and thee have I
expected al our life we must desire more and more knowledge of true doctrine.
all the day.



from the first use of reason, at which time many are careless,
of my youth, and and negligent to learn how to serve God.
my ignorances do not remember.

According to thy mercy remember thou me: for thy goodness o Lord.

As God is sweet in giving good motions:
sweet, and so he is severe to them that resist his grace.
righteous: for this cause he will give a law to them that sin in the way.



God mercifully p euenteth with his grace:
mercy and and justly rewards good works.
truth, to them that seek after his Gods law is his covenant with man:
testament and his and testimon e of his will.
testimonies.

sin in respect of auersien from God is great and needs ^e grace.
it is much.

He that fears God which is the beginning of wisdom receives five spiritual
commodities here mentioned:
fears our Lord? he God iustructeth him by his law.
appoynteth him a law in the way, that he has chosen.

bestows al necessaries upon him:
shall abide in good things: and others shalimitate his good example.
his seed shall inherit the land.

God will protect him:
a firmament to them that fear him: etc. According to Gods covenant he shall
enjoy the manifest sight of God for his eternal reward.
his testament that it may be made manifest to them.

Mine eyes are always to our Lord: because he will pluck my fecte out of the
snare.

^mans weakness without Gods help.


Tribulatio^s can not be a^o^de^, but must necessarily be suffered: therefore o
God g^ue us grace to pass through them without sin.
my necessities.

mine affliction.
humiliation, and my labor: and take away the cause and affliction will be
mitigated.
forgive al my sins.

Joan. 15.
wicked men of ^^ured do end ^our to draw others into sin.
unjust hatred hated me.

Those that hope in God shall never be confounded.
not be ashamed, because I hoped in thee.



All The letters of the Alphebet being complete in this Psalm, this last verse
begins with Pere, Redeem, praying God to redeem and deliver Israel, that
is, the whole Church from tribulations.
Deliver Israel o God, out of al his tribulations.

PSALM. XXV.
David in banishment among the Philistimes, trusts in the justice of his
David's prayer distressed in persecution. The 8. key.
cause, 9. and prays God earnestly to deliver him, that he may with more
freedom and commodity serve him as he desires.

Unto This Psalm is also a counenient prayer for any Christian in tribulation.
the end the Psalm of David.
Be thou o God arbiter of the cause bet(...) Saul and me, thou know mine
innocence in this behalf, though I am uniustly charged by Saul, and his
freindes.
me o Lord because I have walked in my innocence: and hoping in our Lord I
shall not be weakened.

Lest perhaps I be not so innocent as I desire, and as in respect of Saul I
hope that I am, do thou O God prove me as thou will by tribulations.
Prove me Lord, and tempt me: burn my reins and my heart.



I David in confidence of a good conscience, and zele against the wicked,
alleges his sincere proceeding, more then ordinary men may do, God so
inspiring him extraordinarily.
have not sitten with the council of vanity: and with them that do unjust
things. I will not enter in



The rest of this Psalm every Priest recites in Mass, before he offer the
holy Sacrifice, professing, and putting him self in memory, that he must
only communicate with the innocent, or of pure conscience;
will wash my hands among innocents: and so approach to the Altar. prefigured
Leuit. 16. v. 4.
and will compass thy altar o Lord:

Shutting the ears of my heart from evil and vain thoughts I will attend to
godly inspirations
may hear the voice of praise, and and so with mental prayer, and external
voice (as the holy order of this sacred office requires) praise thee o God in
thy marvelous works.
show forth Epi. ^^^. c. 11.
al thy marvelous works.

I can not but singularly love the excellency of this place dedicated to thy
service: where is true faith, unity, and charity of thy people, the guard of
holy Angels, the administration of sacred mysteries, assistance of the Holy
Ghost, real presence of Christ our Lord, al replenished with Divine majesty.
the beauty of thy house, and the place of This represents unto me the
glorious heavenly kingdom of God and al Saints.
the habitation of thy glory.

Suffer me not therefore to be contaminate by the wicked, nor to be devoured
with them.
Destroy not o God my soul with the impious, and my life with bloody men.

They are still ready to commit more and more iniquities.
hands are iniquities: their themselves being corrupted, endeavor by gifts of
wordly commodities to corrupt others.
righthand is replenished with gifts.

Every one ought so to purge his conscience, that he may be innocent, or free
from great sin.
I have walked in mine innocence: deliver me from this necessity of dwelling
among the wicked.
redeem me, and have mercy on me.

I intend to walk right.
foot has stood in the direct way: in I desire ^^ praise thee amongst thy
true faithful servants.
the Churches I will bless thee o Lord.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XXV.
5. I have hated the Church of the malignant.] Holy David forced by reason of
A singular great affliction to be hindered from Gods true service.
persecution to dwell amongst Infidels the Philistians; after he had twice
spared king Saules life (1 Reg 24. v. 5. et. c. 26. v. 9.) lamented (v. 19.)
how great affliction it was to him, to be cast out, that he could not a well in
the inheritance of our Lord (where God was rightly served) and that his enemies
had done so much as in them lay, to make him fall into idolatry, by their fact,
as it were saying: ^o^ serve strange gods. Nevertheless his zele was such that
(as he here professes) Christians must abhor, and abstain from al
conuenticles of Heretics and other Infidels.
he hated the Church of the malignant: that is, the congregations of al
miscreants: and his immaculate religious purity was so perfect, that he would
not so much as in ex^e^^^l show, conform his actions to theirs, in matters of
religion, nor yield his (...) presence in their conuenticles: but said: With
the impious I vvil not si^^^ instructing us Christians (for the word to the
end, in the title shows that this (...) perteyneth also to us) that we must
both hate the Church or con-^^^^ (...) of the malignant, to wit, of Painims
Jews, Turks, and Hererikes, and ^^t ^i t^"60; nor personally be present with
them in the exercise of their false pretended religions.

PSALM. XXVI.
David being in great distress through persecution, and having assured
confidence An other confident prayer of David in tribulation. The 3. Key.
in God, describes the great security of Gods protection. 7. shows the same
experienced in him self. 12. prays for continuance thereof 13. and incorageth
his own soul, in hope of life everlasting, to persevere in virtue.

The Psalm of David Before his second anointing, as is probable. 2. Reg. 2.
before he was anointed.
OUR Lord is Against ignorance God illuminateth his servants.
my illumination, and against infirmity he gives streingth.
my salvation, so he needs not to fear anic man's malice, suteltie, nor force.
Luc. 21. v. 15.
whom shall I fear?

Our Lord is the protector of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?





How special a benefit David esteemed it to be in the Catholic Church the
only true house of God!
may dwell in the house of our Lord all the days of my life.

That I may see the pleasentnes of our Lord, and visit his temple.

Albeit the spiritual or carnal enemy seek to overthrow me, yet I am secure in
the Catholic Church.
hid me in his tabernacle: in the day of evils he has protected me, ^in God
either suffers not the enemy to find his servant.
the secret of his tabernacle.

or not to be able to hurt him spiritually
a rock he has exalted me: and now he has when a martyr or confessor dies,
then he gets the victory against the perse^ntors.
exalted my head over mine enemies. I Diligently recounting al thy benefits, I
render thanks by sacrifice and praise.
have gone round about, and have immolated in his tabernacle an host of
iubilation: I not only in heart, but also singing with loud voice and instrument.
will sing, and say a Psalm to our Lord.



In my inward sincere cogitation I desire, and seek that I may see thee,
heart has said to thee, my face has sought thee out: face to face 1. Cor. 13.
v. 12.
thy face o Lord I will seek.

In the mean time o Lord, grant me thy favor,
not away thy face from me: leave me not though thou be angry with me.
decline not in wrath from thy servant.

Be He speaks [in the person of orphans.
thou my helper: forsake me not, neither despise me o God my Savior.

Though carnal parents forsake the just man in tribulation, yet God has then
most special care of him.
my father and my mother have forsaken me: but our Lord has taken me.

Establish my heart in thy law.
a law o Lord in thy way: conserve me in the right way, which thou have already
taught me, and it is the more necessary, because mine enemies labor to
pervert me.
and direct me in the right path, because of mine enemies.

the wills.
the souls of them that truble me: because false witnesses accused David,
others accused Christ: Mat. 26. others do still accuse the just Mat* 5.
unjust witnesses have risen up against me, and iniquity has lied the wicked
please themselves in lying, but the chief hurt finally turns upon themselves.
to it self.

The prophet and al just men are comforted by God, and hope of reward in heaven.
believe to see the good things of our Lord, in the land of the living.

The just exhorts his own soul to patience
Expect our Lord, do manfully: and fortitude,
let thy heart take courage, and and longanimitie.
expect thou our Lord. Psalm. 30.


PSALM. XXVII.
David prays to be defended from the eternal destruction of the wicked, An
other prayer of David for delivery from evils The 8. key.
which (by way of imprecation, or conformity to Gods justice) he prophecieth
6. Feeling by inspiration that his prayer is heard, rendereth thanks to God,
9. and prays for all the people.

A Psalm to David him self.
TO THEE o Lord will cry, my God Omit not to comfort me.
keep not silence from me: lest at any time thou hold thy peace from me, and I
shall be like to them that go down into the lake.



Suffer me not to be overcome: for God tempts none to evil. Iac 1.
Draw me not together with sinners: and with them that work iniquity destroy
me not.

Which speak peace with their neighbor, but evils in their hearts.

The just in zele of justice pray that sin may be punished.
Give them according to their works, and according to the wickedness of their
inventions.

According to the works of their hands give unto them: render them their
retribution.

Ignorance does not excuse when men may and will not understand.
not understood the works of our Lord, and in the works of his hands thou
shall destroy them, and God saves not without our cooperation with his grace.
not build them up.





And being comforted in spirit my body is as it were refreshed.
my flesh flourished again: and freely and gladly.
with my will I will confess to him.

God protecteth and prospers the kings good endeuoures for his people.
the protector of the saluations of his anointed.

As Psalm. 19. and often elsewhere the subjects pray for their Superior: so
mutually the superior prays for the subjects.
thy people o Lord, and bless thine inheritance: and rule them, and extol them
for ever.

PSALM XXVIII.
The royal prophet seeing in spirit the most sacred Mysteries, brought by The
Church of Christ endowed with excellent mysteries. The 6. key.
Christ into this world, inuiteth al to offer their best things, even
themselves wholly, as sacrifice of thanks, for so excellent benefits,
preached with magnificence. 5. VVherby innumerable are gethered into his Church
here replenished with grace, and in heaven with glory.

2. Reg. 6. v. 17. 1. Par. 16. v. 1.
of the tabernacle.

ANNOTATIONS.
1. In consummation of the tabernacle.] The seventy Interpreters testify by
adding this title, that king David made this Psalm (as he did also some
others) ^04. 105. etc
Mysteries of the Catholic Church prophesied in this Psalm.
when the Ark of God was brought into the tabernacle, which he had pitched for
it in Sion. 2 Reg. 6. 1. Paral. 16. VVherin he saw by prophetical spirit, and
here utters other far greater mysteries, and more excellent benefits,
brought into the world by Christ, and preached by him, and his Apostles, then
agreed to the Arc, or the time of the old Testament; but are verified in the
admirable fruit of innumerable people of al nations, and of many great
Potentates converted to Christianity.
BRING Offer sacrifice of thanks for the singular benefits after recounted in
this Psalm.
to our Lord ye children of God: bring to our Lord Rams were of the more
principal things that were offered in the law of Moses. But the sons of
rams importe in mystical sense better hosts then rams.
the sons of rams.

The first thing in sacrifice is to glorify, honor, and adore God in
sincerity of spirit,
glory and honor, bring to our Lord glory unto his name: adore ye our Lord
in his holy Catholic Chu^h.
in his holy court.

Here is a greater matter intimated then happened in the bringing of the Arc
into a tabernacle prepared in Sion, when David danced, and offered hosts for
sacrifice, others joining with him in that solemnity. But this voice of our
Lord upon waters is rather verified of our Blessed Saviors own preaching with
upon waters, the God of majesty
majesty has thundering, and by his Apostles upon
thundered: Our Lord upon many waters, many nations:
many waters.

in power of miracles.
in power: the voice of our Lord in magnificence preaching as having in deed
power, not as the S^r^hes and Pharisees. Mat. 7. v. 29.
in magnificence.

breaking cedars among innumerable others, converting highest Potentates
breaking ceders: and our Lord shall break the of Libanus, Emperoures, kings
and greatest Princes of the world:
ceders of Libanus:

as a calfe of Libanas so meekly submitting them selves to Christ's yoke, and
spiritual obedience of his Church.
calfe of Libanus. Al which is done by Christ our Lord the beloved of God,
and the heloued as as the son of unicorns, is most tenderly beloved by the
parents.
the son of unicorns.

The voice of our Lord This voice of our Lord dividing the flame of fire* the
Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, came upon the Apostles, as
in divided tongues of fire.
dividing the flame of fire:

wherewith the d^^^rt, the Gentiles of the wide and wild world, were shaken and
moved, t the desert of Cades, some of the Jews also compunct in heart with
remorse of conscience hearing the voice of S. Peter, and other Apostles. v The
same voice of our Lord preparing hearts, inspiring the minds of men with
speed, like hyndes and does, to ascend the high hills of free and perfect
life, in contemplative virtues. vv So our Savior shall discover the thick
vvoodes, reueile the hidden Mysteries of the old Law, by preaching Christian
doctrine, and use of Christian Religion. x in his holy Temple, the Catholic
Church, wherein al true Christians shall glorify God. y making the great
abundance of people, who are like the sea when it ouerflovveth the land, to
dwell in the same Church. z Christ our Lord sitting, and ruling king over al
forever: a by his grace giving streingth to his people, to pass through the
tentations of this life; b and bless the just with eternal peace in heaven.
shaking the desert; and our Lord shall move t the desert of Cades.

(...).
hearts, and he shall discover thick woods: and in x in his temple al shall say
glory.



Our Lord a will give strength to his people: our Lord b will bless his people
in peace.

PSALM. XXIX. David rendereth thanks for his establishment in his kingdom.
The 8. key.

King David by voice and instrument rendereth thanks to God for his peaceable
state in the kingdom, 5. inuiteth others to rejoice in Gods benefits, teaching
by his own example that God sometimes gives more conforth sometimes shows
his wrath, but al for our good.

A The general name of Psalm common to this whole book containing in all 150.
is more particularelie appropriated to some, which more specially were playde
upon musical instruments as on the Psalter, Harp, etc. Others are called
Canticles, which were most usually songue with human voices. So this, called
a Psalm of Canticle, signifies that voices begane the music and instruments
were adjoined. As contrariwise others are called Canticles of Psalms, where
instruments begane and voices followed.
Psalm of Canticle, After many great tribulations, King David prospering
built an excellent house or palace. (2. Reg. 5. v. 11. Paralip. 14. v. 1.) And
at his first dwelling therein, made this Psalm, beginning himself to sing the
same with voice, other musicians joined with him in the praises of God and
thankesgeuing for his benefits.
in the dedication of David's house.
Though God in himself is most high, and neither needs, nor can be exalted by
men, yet the royal prophet knew it was his duty to sing thanks and praises
to him,
exalt thee o Lord, for his delivery from many trubles, and dangers. e not
suffering his enemies to be delighted in his ruin.
because thou have received me: e delighted mine enemies over me.

conserved my body in health amongst innumerable dangers.
healed me.

Preserved my soul from greater dangers of sins, and so from hell.
brought forth my soul out of hell: thou have saved me from them that go down
into the lake.

Ye that are just and holy praise God for it, from whom it comes, and not
from your selves:
ye his saints: and confess his mere goodness without your deserts.
confess to the memory of his holiness.

when he is angry,
wrath is in his indignation: yet he means well unto us.
and life in his will. At The state of a just man's life is often changed from
sorrow to comfort, and from comfort to sorrow.
evening shall weeping abide: and in the morning gladness.

Though we suppose our selves firmly established:
I will not be moved for ever.

yet God of his good vvil toward us sometimes gives strength, and corege,
in thy will, thou have given strength to my beauty. Thou have sometimes
suffers us to our own weakness,
turned away thy face from me, and I became trubled.

To thee o Lord therefore we must still cry and pray for Gods help,
I will cry: and I will pray to my God.

in manner here expressed of the like.
What profit is in my blood, whiles I descend into corruption?

Shall dust confess to thee, or declare thy truth?





That finally in this my good state
my glory may sing to thee: and I be not compunct: Lord my God for ever I shall
alvvayes confess and praise thee.
will I confess to thee.

PSALM. XXX.
A prayer of a just man excedingly afflicted still confident in God, 11.
describing How to pray in affliction. The 7. key.
his many calamities (in respect of his enemies) undeserved, 18. prays for
his own delivery, and their just punishment. 20. praises and thanketh God
for his goodness. 24. exhorts al others to do the same.

Unto Perteyning to the new Testament.
the end, the Psalm of David, for especially to the just trubled and almost
distracted in mind in great affliction. See v. 23.
excess of mind.
How grievously soever I am afflicted yet I trust in thee,
have I hoped, therefore I pray thus.
let me not be confounded (...). 70.








I offer and resign my self to thee.
thy hands I commend my spirit: thou have The first preceptis to learn of our
elders.
redeemed me o Lord God of truth. ^^^. 23.


Thou have hated them that observe vanities, unprofitably.

Because thou have respected my humility, thou have saved my soul out of
necessities.

not suffered me to be shut up.
have thou shut me up in the hands of the enemy: thou have set me feet in a
large place.



al my parts external and internal, body and mind are trubled.
my life is decayed for sorrow: and my years for gronings.

My strength is weakened for poverty; and by bones are trubled.

My freindes dare not converse with me, lest they incur displeasure for my
sake.
a fear to my acquantance.





In that whiles, they assembled together against me, they consulted to take my
soul.

But I have hoped in thee o Lord: I said: Thou art my God:

my lottes are in thy hands.

Deliver me out of the hands of my enemies, and from them that persecute me.

Make thy ^^^ht so ^hine in my soul, that I may understand that is right.
Illustrate thy face upon thy servant, and through thy mercy deliver me from
the force of mine adversaries.
save me in thy mercy:



Let the impious be ashamed, and brought down into hell: let the deceitful
lips be made mute.

Which speak iniquity against the just, (...)ly ^^hauing themselves ^^ if
they had no superior, neither in earth nor in heaven, to whom they shall at last
render account:
in pride, and and abusing their present power and authority, which they have
of God.
abuse.

How great is the multitude of thy sweetness o Lord, which thou As yet in this
present life the reward of the just is hid:
have hid for them that fear thee.

Thou have perfited it for them that hope in thee, but shall be made manifest in
sight of al men.
in the sight of the children of men.

In the mean time the just is in great estimation in the secret knowledge of
God.
shall hide them in the secret of title of honor, as we speak to a king;
your majesty: or to a noble man, your Lord^hippe.
thy face from the disturbance of men.

Thou shall protect them in thy tabernacle from the contradiction of tongues.



in mine extreme affliction being almost distracted in my mind I said that in
reason I would not have said. Holy Job spoke some things in such state of
affliction chapter 3. and 42.
the excess of my mind: I am cast away from the sight of thine eyes.

Therefore thou have heard the voice of my prayer, whiles I cried to thee.

the prophet, or other just person exhorts all the servants of God
Love our Lord al ye his saints: because our Lord will require truth, and will
repay them abundantly that do proudly.

to constancy.
manfully, and let your long animitie
heart take courage, al ye that and final perseverance to the end.
hope in out Lord.

PSALM. XXXI.
Forgeuenes of sins is a happy thing: 3. whereto many are brought by The
second poe^^tential Psalm. The 7. key.
affliction giving them understanding, so moving them to confess their sins,
6. pray for remission, 10, not despair, but hope in Gods mercy, and so
rejoice with sincere heart.

To This Psalm shows how David was brought to understand his sins, to
confess, bewail, and obtain remission of them.
David himself" understanding.
The first blessing of a sinner is the forgeuenes of his sins.
whose iniquities are forgeuen: and ^om. 4. ^. P^^. 4.
" whose sins by charity, which covers themultitude of sins. 1. Pet. 4.
be covered.

Satisfaction be^^g made.
our Lord has" not imputed sin," neither is there When sinners repent
sincerly without guile, then God forgeueth: without which cooperation non^ is
justified.
guile in his spirit.

Because because I acknowledged not my grievous sins, I was still sore
afflicted.
I held my peace, my bones are * inueterated, " Waxed as if they were old.
though otherwise I ceased notto pray but without any fruict or good effect.
whiles I cried all the day.

thy divine providence reducing me,
am turned in my anguish, whiles by remorse of mine own conscience which
tells me that I deserve all this affliction.
the thorn is fastened.

therefore I do no longer disse^ble with men nor am silent to thee, but expressly
acknowledge my sins.
have made my sin known to thee: and my injustice I have not hid.

I said: I will confess against me my injustice to our Lord: and thou have
forgeuen the impiety of my sin.

As I do now recall my self being stricken with Gods heavy hand; so must
every one that will be purged from his sins and sanctified pray to thee, when
he is afflicted.
shall every holy one pray to thee, in time convenient. But yet Though
calamities be marvelous great like to a diluge:
in the flood of many waters, they shall yet they shall not opresse him, that
relieth upon God.
not approach to him.



God speaks* promising by these tribulations to give his servants under
standing, and instruction:
will give thee understanding, and will instruct thee in the way, that thou shall
go; I with perpetual protection.
will fasten mine eyes upon thee.

Do Be not therefore careless, like to brute beasts, but consideratiue of your
actions.
not become as horse and mule, which have no understanding.

In The Prophet or any just soul besecheth God to held this straict hand of
discipline over sinners, for their conversion.
bit and bridle bind fast their cheeks, that approach not to thee.

Sinners deserve much punishment.
are the scourges of a sinner, but but repenting, and trusting in God shall
find his mercy.
him that hops in our Lord mercy shall compass.

The end of true penance is ioyto which therefore the prophet inuiteth al
penitents.
joyful in our Lord and rejoice ye just, and glory al ye right of heart.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XXXI.
1. Understanding.] When David had sinned and somewhile neglected to Vexation
gives understanding.
confess his fault, Gods mercy by affliction made him to understand his own
estate, who then repenting, confessing, and sorowing for his sins made this
Psalm which is therefore entitled Understanding: or, Instruction of David. It
gives Sin must be punished.
us also to understand, and to know, says S. Augustine, that we must neither
trust in our own merits, nor presume to escape punishment of sin. Thy first
understanding therefore or lesson, must be, to know thy self to be a sinner The
Good works are of gra^e
nex is, that when with faith thou beginnest to work well by love, thou
attribute not this to thyn own streingth, but to the grace of God.

1. Whose sins are covered. 2. not imputed.] Calvin and his accomplices gether
in epist. ad To. c. 4.
Protestants expound this place contrary to many other clear places.
poison of these holy words, denying that sins are truly taken away, but
only covered, and still remain say they in the iustest. Which sense would make
this Scripture contrary to other places Isaie 6. thyn iniquity shall be taken
away, and thy sin shall be cleansed. Joan. 1. The lamb of God which takes
away the sin of the world. Act. 3. Be penitent and convert, that your sins
may be put out. 1. Cor. 6 you are washed, you are sanctified, you are
justified. and the like, which show the true real taking away of sins, true
sanctification, and justification. As S. Ierom (or some other ancient
authentical author) explicateth contrary to the exposition of ancient fathers.
this place saying: Sins are so covered by baptism and penance, that they
are not to be reveled in the day of judgment not imputed in him that
diligently purges him self in this world, or by martyrdom. S. Augustine
teaches the same saying: Sins are covered, are wholly covered, are
abolished. Neither must you understand (says he) that sins are covered, as
though still they were, and lived. Why then did the prophet say; sins are
covered? they are not to be punished. More clerly, li. 1. c 13. cont. duas
Epist. Pelag. The Pelagians calumniating. Catholics, as if they taught, that
sins are not taken away, but shaven, as hears are cut with a rasor; the
roots remaining in he flesh. which (he answers) none affirms but an
infidel* Likewise S. Gregory teaches, that a sinner covers his sins well,
when with contrary virtues he ouerwhelmeth former vices, and with good deeds
blotteth out former evil deeds. He covers God covering or not imputing sin
does quite take them away.
them evil, when either for shame, or fear, or obstinacy, or desperation he
concealeth his sins, omitting to confess them. God covers sins, as a
physician covers wounds, by applying medicinal plaster, which in deed
cures them. Thus ancient, learned holy Fathers expound this text. Further
explicating, that albeit things covered, and only thereby hid from men, do
remain as they were before they were hid, yet whatsoever is hid to God, is in
deed utterly taken away, for nothing that is, can be hid from God. And the The
contrary doctrine is injurious to God. to Christ.
contrary doctrine of Protestants is injurious either to Gods power, if they
say he can not quite take away sins, or to his mercy, if he will not, or to
his justice, if he never punish sins ever remaining, and to his truth if he
repute otherwise, then in deed the thing is. It is also injurious to Christ,
to say, his blood and death is not effectual to take away sins. injurious to
innumerable places of holy Scripture, which affirm plainly that sins by
Gods grace are to holy Scriptures. to glorified S inctes.
utterly taken away Finally it is injurious to Saints in heaven, arguing them
as still infected with sins, if in deed sins yet remain in them. which is
most absurd, and blasphemy to speak And yet follows by necessary
consequence. For if the iustest lived and died in sin, they should remain
eternally in sin.

2. Neither is there guile in his spirit.] In remission of sins the penitent
necessarily Sincere repentance is a necessary dispotion to remission of
(...)e. After remission it is satisfactorie and meritorious.
must so cooperate, that he have no guile in his spirit, or heart, for if he
have, then he fails of the forsaide blessedness, and his iniquities are not
forgeuen, nor his sins covered to God, but to be imputed and punished Yet the
repentance of a sinner be it never so sincere, hearty, and without guile does
not merit remission of sin, but only disposes thereto. But after remission
it is satisfactorie for the pain due for sins, and meritorious of glory.
According as S. Augustine here teaches saying* Good (or meritorious) works go
not before faith, and remission, but follow the same.

PSALM XXXII.
The prophet exhorts to praise God, 4. describing his power, providence, The
perfection of Gods works described. The 2. key.
mercy, and wisdom. 16. no salvation but by him. 20. and therefore prays for
his help.

The Psalm of David.
not in your selves
in our Lord: praise is not comely in the mouth of a sinner. Eccli. 15.
praising becomes the righteous.

in mortification offering your bodies a living host, Romans 12.
the harp: on of this instrument this book is called the Psalter and it
signifies the observation of the ten commandments, without which no praise
pleases God.
a psalter of ten strings sing to him.

Sing ye to him praising God for the grace of Christ in the new testament.
a new song: sing well to him in iubilation.

Gods rules and precepts are most just and right.
word of our Lord is right, and al his works are he performs whatsoever he
promises.
in faith.

God ever joins these virtues together.
mercy and judgment: the earth is full of the mercy of our Lord.

Gods word i^ omnipotent.
the word of our Lord the heavens are established: and by the spirit of his
mouth all the power of them.

unknown, ^^ riches hid in secret places.
in treasures.





l dissipateth the counsels of nations: and he reproves As in Babylon he
confounded their tongues.
the cogitations of people, and he reproves the counsels of princes.

his absolute will is always fulfilled.
of his heart in generation and generation.

the people of Israel in the old testament: and Christians of al nations in the
new.
whom he has chosen for his inheritance,

Gods per petual providence.
Lord has looked from heaven: he has seen all the children of men.



Gods wisdom infinite.
made their hearts severally: who understands al their works.

No power in earth is of any force without God.
king is not saved by much power: and the giant shall not be saved in the
multitude of his strength.

of his master
to safety, or of him self.
and in the abundance of his force he shall not be saved.









O God which have al perfection, show thy mercy in protecting, and saving all that trust in thee.
Let thy mercy o Lord be made upon us: as we have hoped in thee.

PSALM. XXXIII.
King David by his own example being delivered from danger, exhorts Gods
providence. The 3. key.
al men to render thanks for Gods benefits. 12. showing wherein justice
consists, 16. and Gods special providence toward the just.

To David, when " he changed his countenance before His proper name was Achis
1. Reg. 21. but al kings of Palestina were called Abimelech, as pharao in
Egypt, N^huchodonosor in Babylon.
Abimelech, This Psalm is also composed in order of tho Alphabet.
and he dismissed him, and he went away. (1. Reg. 21.)
I praise God
WILL bles^e our Lord at both in prosperity and adversity.
al time: his praise always in

when I serve our Lord, my soul shall be praised in his service.
my soul shall be praised: let the mild hear, and rejoice.





Come ye to him, and be illuminated: and your faces shall not be confounded.

Every man be he how poor soever when he prays shall be heard.
poor man has cried, and our Lord has heard him: and from al his
tribulations he has saved him.

the proper guardian Angel of every one.
Angel of our Lord shall put in him self about them that fear him: and shall
deliver them.



with filial fear.
ye our Lord al ye his saints: because there is no lack to them that fear
him.

the rich of this world setting their mind upon their wealth, are poor in
spiritual gifts.
rich have wanted, and have been hungry: but they that seek after our Lord
shall not be diminished of any good.



Every one desires to be happy, but he in deed shall be happy, that flees
from evil, and does good.
that will have life: loves to see good days.







God seeing almens actions and intentions, will render as they deserve.
countenance of our Lord is upon them that do evil things: to destroy their
memory out of the earth.







Though the just some for a time to be forsaken, yet God that gives them
internal streingth, will at last reward and crow (...) them his own gifts.
bones: there shall not one of them be broken.

for their sin they are suffered to fall into more sin.
shall offend.

Our Lord will redeem the souls of his servants: and all that hope in him
contrariwise those that accept of his grace, shall finally not offend.
shall not offend.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XXXIII.
1. He changed his countenance*] S. Augustine by holy David's changing of his A
secret great mystery in the title of this Psalm.
countenance, and by changing the king of Geth his name, who in the book of
kings (where the history is recorded) is called Achis, and here Abimelech,
gethereth that here is an hidden, and great Mystery. Which he explicateth
partly by interpretation of the Hebrew names, but more especially by David's
changing of his countenance, which prefigured Christ, eternal God becoming also
man, and so making great changes in the world. For as David killed Goliath, and
for his good act got envy, so Christ killing the devil, and humility in
Christ's members killing pride, are persecuted by the wicked. For Christ was
both Iuc. 2.
Some become worse, some better by Christ. Sacrifice and Priesthood changed.
to the ruin, and Resurrection of many. He changed Sacrifice and Priesthood.
The Jews had sacrifice according to the order of Aaron, in victims of cattle,
and this was in mystery. For there was not then the Sacrifice of the body and
blood of our Lord: which the faithful, and those that have read the Gospel do
know, which Sacrifice is now spread in all the round earth. A^litle after: the
Sacrifice of Aaron is taken away, and the Sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedech begane to be. He therefore, I know not who, changed his
countenance, Let it not be, I know not who, for our Lord Jesus Christ is
known. He would have our health to be in his body and blood From whence did
he commend God most high is become low
his body and blood? from his humility. For unless he were humble, he would
neither be eaten nor druncke. Behold his highness: In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and God the word. Lo the everlasting
meat, and Angels eat it, supernal powers eat it, celestial spirits eat it,
and they eat, and are fatted, and the thing remains whole, which satiateth
and rejoices them. How then has the vvisdome of God fed us with He is our
sacramental meat. Christ leaft the Jews, and received the Gentiles.
the same bread, the word was made flesh and dwelt in us: It were too long to
recite this great Doctors whole discourse. He further shows that Christ
dismissed the Jews, and went from them to the Gentiles. Thou seek now
Christ (says he) among the Jews, and find him not: because he has
changed his countenance. For they sticking to the sacrifice according to the
order of Aaron, held not the Sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech,
and have lost Christ: and the Gentiles have begun to have him Again this
holy father wills us to remember the Gospel: When our Lord Jesus Christ
The real presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
spoke of his body, he said: Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you: because he had changed his
countenance, this seemed as fury; and madness unto them, to give his flesh to be
eaten of men, and his blood to be drunk, therefore David was reputed mad
before Achis, when he said: you have brought this mad man unto me. Does it
not seem madness: Eat ye my flesh, and drink my blood? He seemed to be mad,
thus S. Augustine. Never imagining the figurative interpretation of our new
Sacramentaries: who say Christ gave no more but a figure of his body and
blood, for then it had been easily understood by the Capharnaites, and no such
contradiction, nor murmuring had happened. Yet S. Augustine says more plainly,
Catech. R^. p. 2. ^ ^. q. ^4.
if more plain may be* Christ carried himself in his own hands. And how
this can be done (brethren) in man, who can understand? For who is carried in
his own hands? A man may be carried in the hands of others, no man is carried
in his own hands. We find not how it can be understood in David, according
to the letter: but in Christ we find it. For Christ was carried in his own
hands, when giving his very body, he said: This is my body. for he carried
his body in his own hands.

14 15. ^tay thy tongue, etc.] Both these verses, and frequent other places in
Not only faith but good works with faith justify.
the Psalms, show plainly that justice consists not only in faith, but in
abstayning from evil and doing good: yet requiring and presupposing true faith,
without which no works are aualable to justice, nor to everlasting life.

PSALM XXXIIII.
David, in figure of Christ, prophetically by way of inuocating Gods help*
forsheweth his persecution, and the just revenge upon his persecutors, Christ's
persecution. The 5. key.
9. with praise to God. 13. his charity toward his cruel adversaries. 17.
whom nevertheless God punishes, 20. for pretending peace in words, and in fact
persecuting, 23. rendering to al as they deserve.

To David signifies beloved desiderable, or strong of hand, that is Christ,
above al beloved of God, desired of man, the strong conqueror of death and
hell. S. Aug. in hunc locum.
David himself.
By way of imprecation heprophecieth that God will overthrow the persecutors of
Christ, and of Christians.
o Lord them that hurt me: overthrow them that impugn me.

Take Offensive
armor and denfensiue.
shield: and rise up to help me.

preoccupate and prevent the malice of the persecutor.
shut up against them, that perfecute me: say to my soul: I am thy salvation.

Such a punishment and confusion shall fall in the end upon all the malicious,
after that the just shall have overcome tribulations.
be counfounded and ashamed, that seek my soul. Let them be turned backward,
and be confounded that think evil against me









In the time of truble in hope*
my soul shall rejoice in our Lord: and shall be delighted upon after delivery,
in eternal salvation,
his salvation.

Al my bones shall say: Lord, who is like to thee* Delivering the needy from
the hand of them that are stronger then he: the needy and poor from them that
spoil him. such false witnesses did rise against Christ Mat. 26.
Unjust witnesses rising up, asked me things that things that were not; for
God himself, that knows althinges knows not that which neither was, is,
nor can be.
I knew

they made privation of my life, verified in Christ, not in David, for he was
killed by his enemies.
sterilitie to my soul.

Al our Saviors life was penance for others, needing none for himself.
did put on cloth of hear. I humbled my soul in fasting: and my prayer shall
be turned into my bosom.

Christ the good Samaritane that relieved the wounded man. Luc. 10.
neighbor, as our brother, so did I please: as mourning and sorrowful so was I
humbled.

all this was fulfilled according to the letter in our Saviors passion.
rejoiced against me, and all this was fulfilled according to the letter in our
Saviors passion.
came together: all this was fulfilled according to the letter in our Saviors
passion.
scourges were gathered together upon me, and I was Our Lord knows not any
just cause, why the Jews so persecuted him, for they had no just cause but
mere malice.
ignorant.



as Psalm. 21. and Mat. 27. God why have thou forsaken me? not delivered me from
temporal death, nor yielded me such consolation, as thou gave other Saints
in their agonies?
when will thou regard? a prophecy of Christ's resurrection*
restore thou my soul from their malignitie, mine only one from the lions.

Prophecy of the Catholic Church. as Psalm. 21.
the great Church, in a grave people I will praise thee.

This place is applied by our Savior to himself. Joan. 15.
that hate me without cause, and twinckle with the eyes.

The Pharisees and Herodians said: Master we know that thou art a true speaker
etc. meaning to intrappe him with treason. Mat. 22.
peaceably to me: and in the anger of the earth speaking they meant guiles.

The same Pharisees and Priests judged him worthy of death, and procured the
people to ^rie: Crucify him, crucify, him.
opened their mouth awide upon me: they said; Well, well, our eyes have seen.

Thou have seen o Lord, keep not silence: Again his Resurrection is
prophesied.
Lord depart not from me.







At the day of judgment the wicked shall receive sentence of damnation.
them blush and be ashamed together, that rejoice at my evils.

Let them be clothed with confusion and shame; that speak great things upon me.

the blessed of eternal glory.
them rejoice and be glad, that will my justice: and let them say always: Our
Lord be magnified, that will the peace of his servant.



PSALM XXXV.
The prophet describes the wicked malice of obstinate sinners 6. Against Gods
providence. The 3. key.
which he opposes Gods infinite goodness, 9. with his provident mercy toward
the worst, and just reward of the good; 12. praying to escape the dangerous
gulf of pride.

More specially describing the state of men in the new testament, then in the
old.
Unto the end, to instruction for David not as a king, or a prophet, but as the
poor servant of God.
the servant of our Lord David him self.
wittingly and resolutely preferring wicked life before virtuous.
would

God so ^ateth sin committed of mere malice, that he commonly rejects such
sinners, and more often offers new grace to those, that sin of frailitie,
or ignorance.
that his iniquity may be found unto hatred.

Some ignorance is invincible when one has a good will to learn, doing his
endeavor to know the truth in doctrine, and his duty in manners, but can not
get knowledge thereof, and then he is excused before God; though he err in
opinion, or in fact: others are negligent to learn, and their error is gross
ignorance and is a sin, greater or less, according to the importance of the
thing, which they ouhgt to know. Others are more willful, desiring to be
ignorant; that they may sin with the less remorse, or repining of their
own conscience, and this is affected ignorance, and most heinous, and odious
sin. For which God often leaving them destitute of ordinary grace, which he
gives to others, they fall into reprobate sense, and into more horrible sinner.
would not understand that he might do well.

He has meditated iniquity in his bed: he has set himself on every way not
good, and malice he has not hated.

God does not utterly shut up his mercy from the most wilful and wicked
sinners, but gives them sometimes good motions, and sufficient help, that
they may repent, be i^ stified and saved, if they do not wittingly harden their
own hearts, and still wilfully repel Gods grace.
thy mercy is in heaven: and For so God pomiseth (who is most faithful) that
he vvil forgive sinners, and receive them into his favor again, when so ever
they resolving to serve him, repent and cease to sin.
thy truth even to the clouds.



Thou o God that have care of al creatures, not only of men but also of brute
beasts, art ever ready of thy part to save both moderate men, in whom the
light of reason remains, and also gross senseles persons, which are become
brutish like horse and mule or other beasts.
beasts thou will save o Lord: as thou For so our Lord multiplieth his mercy.
have multiplied thy mercy o God.

But Yet with condition that sensles or brutish men, must become reasonable
men, the children of men, not coltes, whelps, pigges etc.
the children of men, Sinners thus converted shall not only have al necessaries
in this life, as al living creatures have in this world, but also shall hope of
spiritual, heavenly, and eternal glory prepared for Angels, and children of
men: as in the verses following.
shall hope in the covert of thy wings.







Le^t any impediment hinder the obtaining and possession of eternal revvard,
the just must specially pray not to be infected with pride:
not the foot of pride come to me: and let not nor be overcome by the forcible
tentations of other sinners, by persvvasion, not evil example.
the hand of a sinner move me.

The first sin, tovvit of devils, was pride, and man's sin was by
persvvasion of the devil.
have they fallen that work iniquity: they were expelled, neither of which
could escape punishment.
neither could they stand.

PSALM. XXXVI.
An exhortation not to envy nor imitate the evil, who for most part prosper An
exhortation to contempt of this world. The 7. key. This Psalm is composed in
order of the Alphabet, every distick beginning with a diverse letter, to move
the reader to diligent attention, which may serve in place of a larger
co^mentarie.
in this world, and are damned eternally: but to flee evil and do good, duly
considering that God diversely permits and punishes the wicked, and likewise
comfort and afflicts the just, al for their good.

A Psalm For David's and every just man's instruction.
to David him self.
Neither be thou offended that the wicked do prosper in this world, nor imitate
them that thou may also prosper.
no emulation toward the malignant: neither envy them that do iniquity.

For all this life, and consequently the prosperity thereof is short, and
uncertain.
they shall quickly wither as grass: and as the blossoms of herbs they shall
soon fall.

Put thy trust in God, living content in this world:
Hope in our Lord and do good: and inhabit the land, and thou and he will give
thee that is necessary.
shall be fed in the riches thereof.



Commend al thyn affaire^ to God.
Reuele thy way to our Lord, and hope in him: and he will do it.

And he will Partly making virtue appear to the comfort of the virtuous, and
example of others in this life, but especially in the next world.
bring forth thy justice as light: and thy judgment

Have no emulation in him, that prospers in his way: in a man that does
iniustices.



the land of the living.
the land.







Mat^
day shall come.

That they may deceine the poor and needy: that they may murder the right of
heart.

By way of imprecation (as in many other places) the prophet forsheweth that
wicked men shall fall into the evils, which they prepare for others.
their own swords enter into their hearts: and let their bow be broken.

Better is a little to the just, above much riches of sinners.





They shall not be confounded in the evil time, and in the

But the enemies of our Lord forth with as they shall be honored and exalted,
vanishing shall vanish as smoke.







Though the just fall of frailty orignorance into venial sin, yet Gods grace
shall stay him that he fall not into mortal. The just falls seven times in the
day, and rises. Prou. 24.
he shall fall, he shall not be bruised: because our Lord puts his hand under.

So king David observed: and it very rarely happens, that the just or their
children are ^^cle. 2.
destitute of necessary sustenance in this world. If it chance in some, it is
to their greater merit, and is manifestly recompensed in spiritual gifts. In
which sense S. Basil expounds, that it is always verified For God ever
rewards good works either temporally, or spiritually, or both ways. S.
Augustine also (conc. 3. in hunc Psalm.) exemplifieth in Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob with all his family, who were forced to go into other countries by
reason of famine* and by Gods providence were there susta ned, Genesis 12. 26* 46
and S Paul among his other tribulations mentions famine and thirst. 2. Cor.
11. v. 27. Seeing therefore these so just persons sought their bread in
necessity, he expounds this holy Scripture in the Allegorical sense, that
the Church from her beginning in Jerusalem to the end of the world, never
wants the true word of God, true faith and doctrine, which is the spiritual
bread vvher with the soul is nourished.
nor his seed seeking bread.



In these two pri^ciples, declining from evil and doing good, true justice
consists.
Decline from evil, and do good: and and he that finally observes these two
points, mer^teth and shall possess heaven.
inhabit for ever and ever.



The unjust shall be punished: and the seed of the impious shall perish.



Pro. 31. Isa. ^^.


The law of his God in his heart: and his steps shall not be supplanted.

to draw him to mortal sin, which is death of the soul.
murder him.









rewards.
remaynes for the peaceable man.



man's justice and well doing is not of his own power but of Gods grace.
of our Lord: and he is their potector in the time of tribulation.



PSALM XXXVII.
King David, or any other penitent, earnestly prays God to remitte his The
third penitential Psalm. The 7. key
sins, and mitigate the pains which he acknowledges him self to have
deserved, 12* lamenting the afflictions which he suffers by such as sometimes
were his freindes, 14. whose tentations h^ now resists, trusting in God,
resigning himself to Gods will, confessing his own iniquity, and humbly
praying for Gods help.

A Psalm of David, in In remembrance that by sin ^^ lost the rest and peace,
which man had in the state of innocence; secondly we lost the peace of
conscience; thirdly the rest and peace of eternal felicity.
recordation of the sabbath.
Condemn me not to eternal pain:
rebuke me nor in thy fury: nor punish me in purgatory fire; but purge me so
in this life, that the purging fite be not needful. By which fire (says S
Augustine) though some shall be saved (grau^or tamen er^t ille ^gnis, quam
quicquid potest homo pa^^n hac vita) yet that fire shall be more grievous, hen
whatsoever a man can suffer in this ^^ife. S. Grego^y also expounds this same
place, as if David said thus: I ^new it will come to pass, that after the end
of this life, some shall be cleansed by purging flames, some shall be under the
sentence of eternal damnation. But because I do esteem that transitory fire
more intolerable then al present tribulation, I desire not only not to be
rebuked in fury of eternal damnation, but also I fear to be purged in the
wr^th of transitory correption. Thou therefore o Lord whom I serve in my
sp^^i^^, whom I know to be the Savior of al men, rebuke me not in fury of
perpetual damnation, not chatise me in wrath of purging punishment. See
Annotat. Psalm. 6.
nor chastise me in

Afflictions of mind and body sent by thy just judgment.
thy arrows are fast sticked in me: and thou have thou have struck me with an
heavy hand.
fastened thy hand upon me.

I already feel in my flesh, in all my bones, and powre^ great affliction,
no health in my flesh, at considering thy justice,
the face of thy wrath: my bones have no peace at and my sins.
the face of my sins.

which are excedingly increased, almost ouerwhelming my spirit.
over my head: and as a sins not washed away by penance by their weight carry
the soul into more and more wickedness.
heavy burden are become heavy upon me.

still corrupting those parts which were whole before, as a pestered sore that
is not cured.
scarres are putrified and corrupted, because of my folishnes.

not able to go straight to do any good work, being guilty of grievous sin.
crooked even to the end: I went sorrowful all the day.

concupiscence striving in me.
my loins are filled with illusions: and there is no health in my flesh.

from the sorrow of my heart, my voice has broken out into clamor.
rored for the groaning of my heart.

Lord, ^ God thou know my desire, to be restored to thy favor.
before thee is al my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.



those that were my freindes and companions in sin are become mine enemies,
because I forsake them:
friends, and my neighbores have approached, and stood against me.



And they that sought me evils, sought by all means to entangle me again.
spoke vanities: and meditated guiles all the day.

I now renounce al sin
one deaf did not hear: and as one dumme not opening his mouth.



I now rely upon thee o God.
in thee o Lord have I hoped, thou will hear me o Lord my God.

for this cause I am returned to thee and do pray that mine enemies may not
preuail against me.
Because I said: Lest sometime mine enemies rejoice over me: and whiles my
feet are moved, they speak great things upon me.

I resign my self to thee.
am ready for scourges: and my sorrow is in my sight always:

though thou know al yet with mouth consession is made to salvation.
I will declare my iniquity: and I will and I meditate of that which my sin
has deserved.
think for my sin.



one kind of detraction is in reueling secret faults, an other in feaning and
imputing false crimes, the third (here mentioned) in calling virtue vice, as
penance, hypochrisie.
detracted from me: because I followed goodness.

Grant me Lord final perseuera^ce in thy grace, and service.
Forsake me not o Lord my God, depart not from me. Attend unto my help, o Lord
the God of my salvation.

PSALM. XXXVIII.
A just man in remediles persecution resolves to suffer al with peace and
silence: Gods providence. The 3. key.
5. praying God to take him from this world, confessing the vanity thereof. 8.
and relying on Gods providence (11. who punishes man for his sins) prays
for release.

Unto Some expound this Psalm of the Jews in captivity in Babylon, but this
title, and the matter contained show, that it rather peteineth to the new
Testament.
the end, to to be songue by Idithun and his scholars and successors, or rather
by Christianes.
Idithun him self, a canticle of David.
weak men in affliction not able to deliver them selves, seek revenge, by
murmuring and other evil speeches, but the perfect resolve to rule their
tongues:
HAVE said: I will keep my ways: that I offend not in my tongue. I have set a
guard to my mouth, when the sinner stood against me.

even to forbear sometimes from their own just defense:
from good things: and though thereby they endure more persecution.
my sorrow was renewed.

sorrow suppressed makes the heart to burn with zele, and indignation.
heart waxed hot within me: and in my meditation a fire shall burn.

If it may please thee let me know how long I shall live, desiring to dye; as
Elias desired. 3. Reg. 19.
make mine end known to me.

And the number of my days what it is: that I may know what is lacking to me.

my life and all that I have is as nothing compared to thy eternity.
substance is as nothing before thee.

Doubtless al things are vanity, every man living.

as a shadow or image appearing in a glass, which is quickly forgotte.
an image; yea and he is trubled therefore there is no cause man should be
trubled in mind for temporal miseries.
in vain.

He gathers treasure; and knows not to whom he shall gather them.



Thou have suffered me to be reproched by the foolish that prosper in this
world.
a reproach to the foolish thou have given me.

I was dumme, and opened not my mouth, I know my tribulation is by thy
providence.
because thou



And thou have made his my life decays as a spider having spent al her
moisture.
soul pyne away as a spider: but vaynly is every man trubled.

Hear my prayer o Lord, and my petition; with thine ears receive my tears.
Keep not silence: because I am a Almen are strangers in this life, heaven
being our home.
stranger with thee, and a pilgrim, as my fathers.

that I may recover spiritual streingth in this life:
be refreshed before I depart: and after which I shall not be in state to do
frceworkes of satisfaction nor merit.
shall be no more.

PSALM. XXXIX.
Christ's faithful members after long expectation congratulate his coming in
Christ's coming and redeming of manking The 5 key.
flesh. 6. He directing his speech to his Father, professes to perform the
Redemption of manking, and to denounce the same in the whole world: 12. prays
for his servants, undertaking to satisfy for their sins.

Unto perteyning unto the new Testament.
the end, a Psalm to David himself.
the faithful of the old and new Testament rejoice in the coming of Christ.
I expected our Lord, and he has attended



And has set my feet upon a rock: and has directed my steps.



Many shall see, and shall fear: and they shall hope in our Lord.



Christ by him se^^e and by others preached the Gospel of salvation.
have declared and have spoken: they the multiplication of Christians therb^.
multiplied above number.

^^ sacrifice of the old testament sufficed ^o satisfy Gods justice for the
sin of man.
Sacrifice and oblation thou would not: but Christ by the ear of obedience
performed the redemption of man by his death, as was determined from eternity.
S. Paul for [eares] ^aith [bodie] See Annotations. Heb. 10.
ears thou Heb. 10.
have perfited to me.



In the The sum of holy Scripture is of Christ's Incarnation and death for
redemption of man.
head of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will: my God I
would, and thy law in the mids of my heart.

Again Christ inculcateth the preaching and receiving of his Gospel in the
whole world.
declared thy justice in the great Church, lo I will not stay my lips: Lord
thou have known it.

In the greatest and wisest congregations of this world, Christ concealeth not
his mercy and truth. So himself professed before Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, and
their councels. S. Paul preached Christ at Athe^s, and in many nations, and so
the other Apostles. For their voice went into all the coasts of the earth.
great council.

The prophet now speaks in the name of Christ's mystical body the Church:
praying to be made partaker of mercy, and to be delivered from eu^les.
But thou o Lord make not thy commiserations far from me: thy mercy and thy
truth have always received me.

the sins also of those which believe in Christ are so many, that they can
not be fully seen in particular.
not able to see.

They are multiplied above the hears of my head: and I almost faint in
considering so many and so great iniquities amongst those that profess Christ.
my heart has forsaken me.

The whole Church prays in the name of al for the infirm members.
me: Lord have respect to help me.

The prophet foresheweth that the reprobate for their obstinate malice, seeking
to hurt others shall be confounded.
them be confounded and ashamed together, that seek my soul, to take it away.

Let them be turned backward, and be ashamed that will me evils.

that skornfully say: well, well: wishing al evil to good men.
say to me: Well, well.

which not only in mouth and outward profession, but also in sincerity of heart
seek thee, may with confidence rejoice, and praise God.
that seek thee, rejoice and be glad upon thee: and let them that love thy
salvation, say always: Our Lord be magnified:

But Christ speaks in the name of sinners truly repenting, whose sins he
undertakes to redeem, and wash away by his passion.
I am a beggar, and poor: Our Lord is careful of me.

Thou art The faithful of the old testament pray for Christ's first coming into
this world, and the faithful now pray for his second coming to purge his
Church, and to reward the good.
my helper, and my protector: my God be not slack.

PSALM XL.
The prophet pronounces them happy that will believe in Christ, coming in
Christ's Passion and Resurrection. The 5 key.
humility and poverty 5. Christ describes his own poor afflicted state in
this life, by reason he is to satisfy for the sins of the world; the malice
of his adversaries, 10. especially of Judas, 11. and by way of prayer,
prophecieth his own Resurrect. on.

Unto Perteyning to the new testament, as appears by the 10. verse alleged
by our Savior. This Psalm is also applied by the Church in the office of the
sick, whom whosoever assisteth in that case, may hope to have assistance in
their own like necessity.
the end, a Psalm to David him self. Io. 13. v. 18.

He is happy that is not scandalized in Christ (Luc. 7. v. 23.) coming in
poverty, and suffering extreme afflictions.
the needy, and the poor: in He that trusts in Christ, notwithstanding the
contrary motives of his wordlie misery, shall be delivered by him in all
distress.
the evil day our Lord will deliver him.

Our Lord will give to such servants more grace in this life, and glory in the
next.
preserve him, and give him life, and make him blessed in the land: and not
suffer him to be overcome in tentations.
deliver him not unto the will of his enemies.

when such constant servants are sick to death, Christ will most especially
comfort and help them.
upon the bed of his sorrow: thou have turned al his couche in his infirmity.

Christ in the behalf of his mystical body confesses their sins, and
prays for them.
Lord have have mercy on me: heal my soul, because I have sinned to thee.

After death suffered for mankind Christ rises, and his name and kingdom is
glorious.
and his name perish?

Those that came not of good will, but of malice to observe Christ's deeds and
words, carped at both, sometimes saying, he taught against the law, and
against Moses; sometimes that he ^ast out devils in the power of Beelse bub.
he came in to see, he spoke vain things: his heart has gathered together
iniquity to him self.

He went forth. and spoke together.



At last they resolved that he should die.
have determined an unjust word against me: But they could not so suppress his
power, for he rose again in glory.
Shall not he that sleeps add to rise again?

By our Saviors application of this verse, it is certain that the traitor
Judas is here described. Ioa. 13. v. 18.
the man also of my peace, in whom I hoped: who Io. 11. Act. 1.
did eat my breades, has greatly trodden me under foot

in the day of judgment Christ Judge of al will render to every one as they
deserve.
will repay them.



As before in respect of sinners, Christ Judge of al will render to every one:
so here in his own person he avouches his own innocence, which made him apt
to satisfy for others.
because of innocence: and thou have confirmed me in thy sight for ever.

For this mercy of Almighty God in saving the elect by his Sons death, he
is to be praised for ever eternally.
from the beginning of the world, and for evermore: All the blessed agree in
this, that God is eternally to be praised and thereto say Amen. So be it, so be
it. Some divide the Psalms into five books, supposing the first book to end
here with these words; Be it, be it: not observing that the last Psalm has
not this ending. S Ierom confuteth this opinion by our Saviors, and S. Peter's
naming it the book, not books of Psalms. Luc. 20. v. 42. Act. 1. Moreover if
this were the end of one book, then the Psalm following should not be called
the 41. Psalm, but the first Psalm of the second book.
Be it, be it.

PSALM. XLI.
The fervent desire of the just, 6. much afflicted in this life, 12. and
assured Eternal glory, The 10. key.
hope of eternal joy.

Unto the end, understanding to the sons of The sons of Core repented, and
departed from their fathers schism, and so escaped miraculosly the horrible
pit of damnation, in^o which heir father and his accomplices fell. Number. 26. v.
10. By which example al seduced, and deceived Christians are admonished, not to
persist in schism or other sins. And wordlie men, ^mbicious of honor be
warned to desire and seek God above al things, first of all the kingdom of
heaven ^o be living m^mbe^s of the Catholic Church) and the justice thereof:
to seek things wh^^h are above (...) which are upon the earth; lest hell
devour them, as it denoured the accomplices of Core Number 1^ v. 31.
Core.
A heart waxing old, and burdened with much hear, and great horns, draws a
serpent into his nosethrels, so being infected with poison, desires most
ardently to drink, and afterward casts his horns, and hear, and becomes
as it were young again
desires after the fountains of waters: with such fervent desire a true
penitent, feeling himself infected with poison of sins, seeks the water of
Gods grace.
so does my soul desire after thee o God.

My soul has thirsted after God God is omnipotent, and in deed the only true
living God* devils who are honored in idols, ca do no more then God permits,
and so they can kill the souls, that consent unto their tentation, but can not
restore spiritual fe again.
the strong God is omnipotent, and in deed the only true living God* devils who
are honored in idols, ca do no more then God permits, and so they can kill
the souls, that consent unto their tentation, but can not restore spiritual
fe again.
living: The soul being justified, and still assaulted with new tentations
desires to be with God.
when shall I come and appear before the face of God?

I have had no other refection, but to le^ifie my sorrow with weping.
tears have been breades unto me day and night: whiles it is said to me
daily: The wicked exprobate the just, as though God would never help them,
because he suffers them to be sometimes long in tribulation.
Where is thy God?

King David was not permitted to build the temple, much less did he enter into
any such marvelous tabernacle in his mortal life, but must needs be
understood, to speak here of the heavenly tabernacle, prepared by Christ for
his servants
of a marvelous tabernacle, even to the house of God.

In the yoyce of exultation, and confession: the sound of one feasting.

The prophet conforteth him self, or any just soul, in the hope of
everlasting joy.
art thou sorrowful my soul? and why do thou truble me?

Hope in God, because yet I render thanks and praises.
will confess to him: the salvation of my countenance, and my God.

My soul is trubled toward my self; therefore will I be mindful of thee from
the land All this life is like to the small straict place between Jordan and a
little hill called Hermoniim, but from this straictnes the hope of the just is,
to be placed in heaven.
of Jordan, and Hermoniim from the little mountain.

One tentation st^l succedeth an other:
calls on depth, in the voice of and the same so great, as if God opened the
gates, and suffered them to ouerflow like floudes of water.
thy flould-gates. Al thy high things, and thy waves have passed over me.

But God helps in opportunity, not suffering his servants to be tempted
above their streingth giving them fruit with tentations:
the day our Lord has commanded his mercy: and yea in the greatest
tribulation, he gives ordinarily most comfort, making them sing spiritually in
heart, if not also in voice.
in the night a song of him.

With me one special means to procure divine consolation is prayer in
distress.
is prayer to the God of my life: I will say to God: Thou art my defender.

Why have thou forgotten me? and why go I sorrowful, whiles mine enemy
afflicts me?



Whiles they say to me day by day: Where is thy God?

Still the just soul takes comforth in assured hope of salvation, the eternal
vision of God.
Hope in God, because yet I will confess to him: the salvation of my
countenance, and my God.

PSALM. XLII.
The just inuocateth Gods sentence against the deceiptful, that seek his One
God the B Trinity. The 1. key.
spiritual overthrow, 4. acknowledges his help, from almighty God the B.
Trinity, in whose vision glory consists.

A Psalm Holy David often prefiguring Christ, here represents every
faithful servant of God, and particularly when they begin a great and holy
work; as when Priests celebrate the divine Sacrifice, they with their
assistantes recive by interchangeable verses this Psalm.
of David.
After that we have examined, and prepared our selves to the most holy
Sacrifice and Sacrament, according to S Paul's admonition (let a man prove
himself, and so eat this bread, and drink this chal^ce, 1 Cor 11) we pray
God, to judge between our true sincere intention, and the unjust deceipful
endeuoures of our enemy:
me o God, and discern my cause from the nation not holy, from the unjust and
deceitful man and so to deliver and protect us from sutle malice.
deliver me.

With thee I can do any thing, without thee nothing,
my strength: thou semest sometimes not to regard ^e,
why have thou repelled me? and why go I sorrowful, whiles tentations are more
sensible then thy grace.
whiles the enemy afflicts me?

As thou have sent Christ the light and truth into this world, gr^nt us the
same now in particular.
thy light and thy truth: These two gifts of God, the light of knowing our
duties and truth with sincere intention to perform the same have brought us
into thy Church, and unto thy Altar.
they have conducted me, and have brought me into thy holy hill, and into thy
tabernacles.

Accompanied with light of truth, and sincere intention, we confidently approach
to thy^ Altar o God,
I will go in to the altar of God: to God, which who changest our old
corruption into newnes of li^e.
makes my youth joyful.

I'wil confess to thee But to this purpose we praise God on the harp,
mortisying our affections.
on the harp The former word is of the plural number in hebrew, Eloim, the
other of the singular, signifying the Blessed Trinity, one God.
o God The former word is of the plural number in hebrew, Eloim, the other of
the singular, signifying the Blessed Trinity, one God.
my God: Thou need not therefore my soul, be pensive, or desolate.
why art thou sorrowful o my soul? and do thou trubel me?

But trust in God,
Hope in God, because yet praise him,
will I confess to him: the salvation whom I hope to see face to face,
of my countenance, and the true eternal God.
my God.

PSALM. XLIII.
The prophet describes the first calling, and difficulte state of the Jewish
The state of the Jews. The 4. key.
nation, 6. their prosperity at other times. 10. Again their afflictions in
captivity, and persecutions.

Unto Though this Psalm does first and literally pertayne to the people of
Israel, yet al things happening to them, were in figure of the Christian
Catholic Church, which begane with difficulties, afterward prospered, and
again suffers much persecution
the end, for the sons of Core signifies caluus, bauld; also caluar^a a
scul, or place of sculles: the name of the place where our Savior was
crucified, so the children of Core signify the children of Christ. S. Aug.
Core to understanding.


The The particular calling of Abraham out of Chaldea, protection of him, and
Isaac, and Jacob, the delivery of al Israel out of Egypt, and establishing
them in the promised land of Chanaan, with innumerable, great, and strange
things done for them.
work, that thou have wrought in their days: and in the days of old.



The Israelites conquered not by ordinary power, but by the miraculous hand
of God. See Iosue 2^.
not by their own sword did they possess the land, and their own arm did
not save them:

But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the illumination of thy countenance:
because Not that this people deserved of themselves, but of Gods free election,
all the world being wicked, he gave peculiar grace to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob
and some others, and then for their ^akes protected the whole people, in them
conseruing a visible Church.
thou wast pleased in them.



As in former examples, so in David's time, not man's streingth, but Gods hand
gave them great victories.
thee we shall turn out our enemies with As an ox with his horn casts a
small thing into the vvind.
the horn, and in thy name we shall contemn them that rise up against us.

For I will not hope in my bow: and my sword will not save Ios. 24. ^ R^. 17. 2.
Reg. 8.
me.





The prophet for^eile^h that after prosperity God would suffer the Jews to
sa^^e into captivity, and many afflictions, which also sign fied
allegorically diverse states of Christ's Church.
now thou have repelled and confounded us: and thou will not go forth o God in
our hosts.



The Jews are now meruelously dispersed, and depressed.
have dispersed us among the nations.

In the destruction of Jerusalem the remnant of the people were sold for small,
as it wree for no price. They had sold Christ for thirty pence;
without price: and there was and now no multitude, nor number of money at al
was given for them, but thirty of them were sold for one penny, Josephus de
bello Iudaico.
no multitude in the exchanges of them.









Until Christ's passion the Jewish people did not wholly fall from God, and true
religion. And of them were chosen the Apostles, and many others, that founded
and propagated the Church of Christ.
neither have we forgotten thee: and we have not done wickedly in thy testament.

The negative particle is here understood by zeugma, according to the hebrew
thus: our heart has not revolted backward, neither have thou suffered our
paths to decline from thy way.
thou have declined our paths from thy way:



An other hebrew phraise, If we have, for, we have not.
If we have forgotten the name of our God, and if we have spread forth our
hands to a strange God:

Will not God enquire of these things? For he knows the secrets of the heart.

Because The Prophets and others persecuted partly before Christ, much more
the Apostles, and other Christians in the new Testament.
for thee we are killed all the day: we are esteemed as Romans ^.
sheep of slaughter.

A prayer in affliction.
Arise why sleep thou o Lord? Arise, and expel us not to the end.



We are at death; door, ready to become dust.
our soul is humbled in the dust: our lying as groueling sorowing on the earth:
belly is gl^wed in the earth.

til thou deliver us from these tribulations.
Arise Lord, help us: and redeem us for thy name.

PSALM. XLIIII.
David singularly moved in heart and tongue, 3. prophecieth Christ's excellency,
Christ most excellently indowing his Church. The 6. key.
indowing his Church with most worthy dowries. 11. by way of exhortation
forshewing her internal and external beauty. 17. with perpetual succession of
Pastors feeding the flock even to the worlds end.

Unto Perteyning to the new Testament.
the end, for them, Gentiles converted from paganism to Christianity:
that shall be changed, and al others returning from schism, or other sins,
to the sons of Core, for their instruction,
for understanding, this Psalm is a marriage songue of the beloved bridgrome
and bride: Christ and his Church.
a Canticle for the beloved.
I have received by divine inspira^ion in my heart and cogitation,
heart has uttered a most high Mystery.
a good word: I tell my works To the honor therefore and glory of this king
(whom I secretly see in my heart) I utter and refer al my works, and this
particular Ca^t^cle.
to the king.

My From the abundance of my heart, my tongue also speaks,
tongue is the pen of a scribe, that and that presently without delay
writes swiftly.

Description of Christ, most excellent in all internal and external gifts.
Goodly of beauty above the sons of men, grace is powered abroad in thy
lips: therefore has God blessed thee for ever.

Be The prophet seeing in spirit the perfections which he wishes in Christ, in
manner of congratulating, describes his fortitude, fighting against the devil
for the Church.
girded with thy sword upon thy thigh, o most mighty.

With thy beauty and fayrnesse purposing,
intend, prosecuting,
proceed prosperousely, and and perfecting the conquest, and so establishing
thy spiritual kingdom.
reign,

Because of Not with warlike armor of this world, but by assaulting the
adversary with truth:
truth, and defending thyse^fe and thy soldiers with the shield of mildnes,
mildness, and and striking the enemy with the sword of justice Which right
force of spiritual fight has marvelous good success.
justice: and thy right hand shall conduct thee meruelously.

Preaching of Christ's Gospel, his grace moving the hearts of the hearers, is
lively and forcible, more pearcing then any two edged sword.
sharp arrows, the The example of people converted, shall move the hearts of
the adversaries to come also unto the truth.
peoples underneath thee shall fall into the hearts of the kings enemies.

Christ's kingdom shall have no end. Luc 1. v. 33.
for ever and ever: a rod of direction the rod of thy kingdom.

Thou defendest and rewardest the good, finally forsakest and punishest the
wicked.
have loved justice, and have hated iniquity: therefore God, more peculiarly
the God of Christ, by hypostatical union.
thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness Diverse kings (as David
him self, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias) were as godly as Solomon, and
perseuered good to the end, which is doubted Solomon did not: but Christ
incomparably was anointed, and endued with all graces above al kings.
above thy fellows.

Mortification which conserueth from putrefying,
Myr^he, and humility aswaging pride,
Aloes, and being small in the first spring grows great,
Cassia from thy humanity assumpted; and sanctified persons, in whom Christ
dwells as in clean, shining, odoriferous houses;
garments, sincere faithful souls more dear to their spouse Christ, then
daughters of temporal kings
the daughter of

The Catholic Church, in faith purified as gold:
Queen stood on thy right hand in golden raiment: compassed with with
variety of states* as Clergy, Laity and diverse sorts of religious Orders,
and other professions, al united in the same faith, hope, and charity.
variety.

carifully all that Christ thy spouse speaks to thee by his Spirit
Hear daughter, and diligently put the same in practice:
see, and with al obedience and readiness, and return not to former
infidelity, no^ to corrupt life.
incline thine ear: and forget thy people, and the house of thy father.

Christ loves the Church adoined with his gifts,
will covet thy beauty: because he is the Lord thy God, and and mutually his
true children love and serve him.
they shall adore him.

And the daughters Many of al nations submitle themselves, and all that they
have to Christ.
of Tire with gifts, all the rich of the people shall beseech thy countenance.

All the glory of that daughter of the king is Internal virtues are most
especial ornaments:
within, in exterior are required to edify others in diverse sorts of virtues.
borders of gold clothed round about with varieties.

By this means many more are converted to christianity:
Virgins shall be brought to the king after her: her and one country inuiteth
and draws another.
neighbors shall be brought to thee.



As Apostles came in place of Patriarchs and Prophets: so still Bishops, and
Priests succeed in the Church, pastors, and governors thereof.
thy fathers there are borne sons to thee: thou shall make them princes over
all the earth.

These pastores shall still teach the true Christian doctrine.
be mindeful of thy name in all generation and generation.

Therefore shall and still there shall be Christian people that will follow and
profess the same.
peoples confess to thee for ever: and for ever and ever.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XLIIII.
7. Thy seat O God for ever and ever.] Seeing S. Paul (Heb. 1. v. 8.) affirms
expressly that these words are spoken of the Son of God, Christ our Savior,
Calvin expounds this Psalm contratie to S. ^aul.
and thereby proves his excellency above Angels: John Calvin is wonderful bold
to avouch that in the simple and proper sense, David spoke of his son
Solomon, and the daughter of Pharao, as if that were the literal sense, and S.
Paul only expounded it mystically. But first the solemn preface in the two
first verses imports far greater things, then agree to any terrestrial
king Secondly, this excellent beauty described (v. 3.) above the sons of
men, can not be verified of Solomon, for Absalom (2. Reg. 14. v 25.) and
Adonias were also very beautiful. (3. Reg. 1. v. 6.) As for Salomons wisdom, or
other virtues, he perseuered not therein, and so he was not blessed for ever.
Thirdly, the prophet here calls the person of whom, and to whom he speaks,
God. v. 7. and 12. Fourtly, not only the ancient Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church, but also the Hebrew Rabbis, and the Chaldee paraphrasis, expound this
Psalm literally of the promised Messiah, and his kingdom the Church.

16. They shall be brought into the temple of the king.] The temple of the king,
says S. Augustine, is the Church, the temple of the king is in unity, the
temple of the No salvation out of the Church.
king is not ruinous, not cut insunder, not divided* the joining of living
stones is charity. Nothing is more euidenr. Attend now the very temple of the
king, for from thence he speaks, because of the unity spread in the round
earth. For those that would be virgins (faithful souls) unless they be brought
into the temple of the king (the Catholic Church) they can not please the
bridgrome.

17. For thy fathers there are borne sons to thee.] The Apostles begotte thee
(o Christian Church) they were sent, they preached, they are the fathers. But
could they be always corporally with us? Could any of them tarry here til
this time? could they tarry to the time yet to come? But was therefore the
Church Perpetual succession of Bishops in place of the Apostles.
leaft desolate by their departure? God forbid. For thy fathers, sons are
borne to thee. What is this for thy fathers, sons are borne to thee? The
Apostles were sent fathers, in place of the Apostles sons are borne to thee;
Bishops are appointed. For whence were the Bishops borne, that are at this day
through the world? the Church herself calls them fathers, ^he begat them,
and appointed them in the seats of the fathers. Do not therefore think thy
self desolate (o christian Church) because thou see not Peter, see not
Paul: for thou see not them by whom thou wast borne, but of thine issue
fatherhood is sprung to thee For thy fathers, sons are borne to thee, thou
shall make them princes over all the earth. This is the Catholic Church. Her
children are made princes over all the earth: her sons are constituted for
fathers. Let them acknowledge this that are cut of: let them come to the unity,
be they brought into the temple of the king. Thus S. Augustine.

PSALM. XLV. The Church prospers also in persecution. The 6. key.

The Church in persecution acknowledges Gods perpetual defense, 5. making her
thereby more glorious, 10. sometimes granting rest (11. God himself ckecking the
persecuters) and ever protecting her.

Unto Belonging to the Church of Christ.
the end, to the sons of Core, for As well the cause, why God suffers his
Church to be persecuted, at his assured protection in difficulties, are hidden
secrets to the world.
the secrets.
Al refuge is not secure for one man is not able always to defend an other:
but God is a sure and strong refuge.
and strength: an ever able and in convenient time vvilling to help
helper in tribulations, This whole world is full of tribulations, but the
Church suffered the greatest in the first persecutions, and shall suffer as
great in the time of Antichrist. English Catholics suffer most of al nations
in this age, and can not be suppressed, but still increase in number and
fortitude.
have found us excedingly.

Therefore al Catholics may assuredly know, that the whole Church can not fail
not fear when though very many, as now in England,
the earth shall be trubled: and and very eminent persons, as some noblemen, and
some Priests have revolted, yet al vvil not.
mountains transported into the heart of the sea.



Such bad examples make the good to recollect themselves more diligently, and
to rei^yc^ in Gods grace, by which they stand fast.
makes the city of God joyful: the Highest has sanctified his tabernacle.

before the heat of persecution shall invade al, for the elect the days of
tribulation are shortened.
in the morning early.

Nations are trubled, and Sometimes one nation or kingdom rebelleth against
the Church, but can not destroy it*
kingdoms are inclined: he gave by the spirit of Christ, Antichrist, and al
his members shall be destroyed.
his voice, the earth was moved

The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our defender.

Come ye, and see the works of our Lord, what wonders he The Church sometimes
has great peace, and tranquillity.
taking away wars even unto

He shall destroy bow, and break weapons: and shields he shall burn with fire.

God himself restrayneth the wicked, suddenly abating their fury, or cutting
of their forces.
Be quiet, and see that I am God: I shall be exalted among the gentiles, and I
shall be exalted in the earth*

The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our defender.

PSALM. XLVI. Vocation of Gentiles* The 6. key.

Gentiles are called, and invited to praise God for his magnificence: 6. for
Christ's Ascension, and power.

Unto the end, for For Christians that leave the sins of their fathers, and
rejoice in Christ crucified: See Annotation. Psalm. 41.
the sons of Core.
True joy of the heart shows it self both in voice of exultation, and also in
gesture of body, by clapping of hands, dancing (as king David did before the
Arc. 2* Reg ^*) likewise with instruments.
clappe hands: make iubilation to God in the voice of exultation.

To all the wicked,
terrible; a great king over not only of one or few kingdoms, but of all the
earth.
all the earth.

When kings, and countries become Christians* they are made subjects to the
Church* that was before, not heads and rulers therefore.
to us* and gentiles under our feet.



Christ God and man, after his Passion, rose from death and ascended:
God is ascended in not leaving his Church desolate, but making her joyful by
an other comforter the Holy Ghost.
iubilation* and our Lord in the voice of trumpet.

Sing ye to our The same Christ is our God, by his Divinity:
God, sing ye: Sing ye to our and our king by his Humanity.
king, sing ye.

Because God is king of all the earth: sing ye Do your endeavor to understand
what you sing, read, or hear in Gods word. At least to know the principal
Mysteries, and points of Christian doctrine, every one according to their
capacity and state or profession.
wisely.



The faithful of the old and new Testament are united in the service of one,
and the same eternal God.
the God of Abraham: because the strong In respect of the Blessed Trinity,
holy Scripture here, and in many places uses names of the plural number as
Eloim Gods, not dividing Gods substance, which is one, but insinuating
distinction of Divine Persons. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Which Mystery is more expressly mentioned in Baptism, and professed by
Christian gentiles, then it was by the people of the Jews.
gods of the earth, are excedingly advanced.

PSALM XLVII.
God most, and every where laudable, is especially praised in the Church of
The Church founded and protected by God The 6. key.
Christ (prefigured by Sion, and there begun) 9. Al things being fulfilled
in the Church, even as they were prophesied, and promised, 12. the faithful are
exhorted to consider and congratulate the same.

A Psalm Voices beginning the music instruments prosecuted;
of Canticle to the sons of Core, the especially for the second day of the
weke, the day after the sabbath, which is our Sunday, called Dominica, our
Lords day.
second of the Sabbath.
Jerusalem, and mount Sion were most obliged to praise God, for greatest
benefits received, so the Catholic Church thereby prefigured, and having
received far greatter* is most of al bonden to be gratful.
the city of our God, in his holy mount.

This can*not be affirmed of Sion, or Jerusalem, but is only verified of the
Catholic Christian Church:
the whole earth, whose coasts do extend to the North, and to al quarters of
the round earth.
the sides of the North, the city of the great king.

The same one God* one Christ, one Faith, and one Religion in all particular
Churches of the whole militant Church*
the houses thereof, And this Universality, and Unity shall be, after that
Christ taking man's nature shall be ascended, and shall send the Holy Ghost, to
found and begin this Church.
when he shall receive it.

For the assured certainty of that is foreshewed, the Prophet speaks in the
prete^^ence* as if it were already done in his time, which he then savv in
spirit.
were gathered together: they assembled in one.

They seeing it so, were in admiration, were trubled, were

Nothing more moves he heart, and affects all the body and soul, then
spiritual cogitations of faith and religion, and therefore it is compared to a
woman traueling with child, who has mo^^ careful and grievous pains.
as a woman traueling, In a vehement spirit In which great confflict of man's
spirit, God by his grace gives force, to break through the contrary
assaults of our enemy, to remove al impediments, and to overcome the
difficulties.
thou shall break the ships of Tharsis.

This consideration that al is now done, that was of old prophesied, is a
marvelous confirmation and consolation to Christians.
As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the
city of our God: God has founded it for ever.

Grace and mercy is only granted to those that are within, or come unto the
Catholic Church.
in the mids of thy temple.

As God is praised for his mercy, so also for his justice; which do never
prejudice the one the other.
justice.



Compass Sion, and embrace ye her: Consider the fortresses of the Church,
which are the holy Fathers, and Doctors, that watch and defend her wales.
tell ye in her towers.

So rest you assured for all matters of faith in this pillar of truth.
on her strength: and observe and mark diligently how many particular
Churches were spedely founded in the world,
distribute ye her houses, that you and declare this to other generations, that
they may also hold fast the same faith, or return unto it, if they be
relapsed; or at last embrace it, if sowner they have not.
may declare it in an other generation.

Christ God incarnate that works all this, is our very God and Savior, not
for a few years, an hundred, six hundred, or a thousand, but for ever and ever.
this is God, our God for ever, and for ever and ever: he he shall rule as a
king, and consequently have a kingdom his militant Church evermore, to the very
end of this world. As he shall like wise have his triumphant Church in
eternity.
shall rule us evermore.

PSALM. XLVIII.
The royal prophet inuiting al states and sorts of men, to hear him
attentively, Exhortation ^o flee from sin for fear of hell* The 7. key.
6 shows that al ought to fear eternal damnation, that live wickedly* 9.
vainly and foolishly seeking (13. even like brute beasts) carnal pleasures,
which they can not long enjoy, nor long escape hell. 16. confidently animating
him self, and al good men, that trust not in this world.

Unto the end, In this and diverse other titles, both before and ye: ensuing, is
said, To the sons, or, for the sons of Core, a Psalm, or Canticle, or
understanding and the like; but in no place, a Psalm, Canticle etc. of the
sons of Core, which no way proves that they were the authors of such
Psalms, but rather the contrary.
to the sons of Core a Psalm.
Al ye nations and sorts of people,
al ye Gentiles: receive with your ears al ye, that that dwell upon the earth,
learn this lesson which I will teach you.
inhabit the earth.





Holy David harkened to God inspiring him,
incline mine ear unto a parable: I will and declared to others that which he
received from God,
open my proposition not only by his pen or tongue, but also for better
instilling it into their minds he sounded it upon the instrument called the
Psalter, which had t^nne stringes, signifying the observation of the ten
commandments.
on a Psalter.

What especial thing is there in this life, why or for which I or any have
cause to fear ^he dreadful day of judgment?
Why shall I fear in the evil day? Marry this we must fear, iniquity, by
which any supplanteth, defraudeth, oppresses, or any way wrongeth others,
for that vvil inuolue the offender in the sentence of eternal damnation.
the iniquity of my heel shall compass me.

Such be they that trust in their present power, riches, or other wordlie thing.
that trust in their strength: and glory in the multitude of their riches.

A man's own brother can not help a sinner in that day,
brother does not redeem, much less any other man; so the Hebrew phraise by
zeugma, understands an other negative particle.
man shall redeem: he shall not give unto God his reconciliation.

And the price of the redemption of his own soul: and he still suffer pain,
labor for ever, and and not dye, but live in eternal torments.
shall live yet unto the end.

Al both wise and foolish do dye temporally: but the wise living in eternal
joy, the foolish live in eternal pain,
the wise dying those that believe not any other life after this,
the unwise, and and those that believing an other life, yet live badly in this,
shall perish in eternal damnation.
the fool shall perish together.

They shall never return from their sepulchers,
sepulchers their to enjoy again their houses and earthly possessions.
houses for ever.

Their Tabernacles in generation and generation: they have renowned their which
vainly they labor to establish in their posterity.
names in their lands.

And A most pithie and brief consideration, for man to think, how absurdly, he
being endewed with reason, understanding, and free will, like unto Angels, and
capable of eternal glory, sets his whole study, and care upon corporal
and temporal things, so making himself like unto brute beasts.
man, when he was in honor, did not understand: he was compared to beasts
without understanding, and became like to them.

This care of wordlie things is the stumbling block, and cause of eternal
ruin:
a scandal to them: and yet they shall be obstinate, and praise their own
desires, still persisting therein.
afterward in their mouth they shall take pleasure.

Amongst other creatures a sheep can least help her self in misery: even so
the damned in hell are altogether unable to deliver themselves from thence, or
to get any relief,
sheep they are put in hell: death shall feed upon them. And the just shall rule
over them in the general resurrection they shall be most of al in misery, as
ever dying and never dead: the just whom they vvronged, shall be their judges,
al freindes shall fail them, after they have passed their glory, and pleasure
in this world.
in the morning: and their aid shall wax old in hell from their glory.

The confidence of the just.
God will redeem my soul out of the hand of hell, when he shall take me.



He shall leave al worldly things and take nothing with him.
al things: neither shall his glory go down with him.

temporally:
blessed: he will confess to thee so long as he enjoys wordlie profits he
will seem gratful to God;
when thou shall do him good.

but they shall not see the true light of heaven.
not see light for ever.

Remember and consider o worldly man, that God made thee an excellent
creature: which thou neglecting make thyself like to a beast. As, v. 13.
Man, when he was in honor, did not understand: he was compared to beasts
without understanding, and became like to them.

PSALM. XLIX.
Christ in his first coming calls al Nations. 3. in his second will judge the
General Judgment. the 9. Key.
world. 7. In the mean time God exhorts al men to serve him in purity of
virtue, which he much prefers before external sacrifice of the old law. 17.
reprehending such as profess or teach the right way, and live wickedly.

A Psalm To be songue or tuned by Asaph a master of music.
to Asaph.
God almighty, who is greater then are al falsely supposed gods, or holy
persons, that patticipating of his goodness are called gods (as Kings,
Priests, Judges) coming into this world in man's nature, calls al men to
salvation.
God of gods our Lord has spoken: and he

Out The Church of Christ began in Sion.
of Syon the beauty of his comelines.

Christ that came in humility, and more obscurely to suffer, and to redeem us,
vvil come i^ majesty, and manifestly to judge.
manifestly: our God and he will not keep silence. Immediately before the
general judgment, fire shall burn al transitory things.
Fire shall burn forth in his sight: and round about him a mighty tempest.

Give signs in the firmament,
call the heaven from above: and and in earth.
the earth to discern his people.

Which know that to keep Gods commandments in following virtues, is above the
oblation of external sacrifice.
above sacrifices.



God instructs his people.
Hear o my people, and I will speak: Israel, and I will testify to thee: God
thy God am I.

Sacrifices are gratful to God.
are in my sight always.

but in regard that God needs not these earthly things, he rather requires
a gratful mind. For otherwise man in deed can give nothing to God: seeing all that is in the whole world is Gods own in propriety
not take calves out of thy house: nor buckegoats out of thy flocks.









Spiritual sacrifice of praise.
Immolate to God" the sacrifice of praise, and and due payment of voluntary
vows made in honor of God,
pay thy vows to the Highest.

and praying to him for help in tribulation are most grateful.
invoke me in the day of tribulation: I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

He that will teach others, must especially flee from sin, and serve God
sincerly.
Why do thou declare my justices, and take my testament by thy mouth?

But thou have hated discipline: and cast my words behind thee.





Sitting thou spakest against thy brother, and against thy mothers

Thou have thought unjustly that I will be like thee: I will reprove thee, and
set it against thy face.



God is honored by man's gratitude, and other good works.
shall glorify me: and there is the way, by which I will show him the salvation
of God.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XLIX.
14. 23. The sacrifice of praise.] For better and more due performing of
external Sacrifice of praise disposes men to the fruit of external sacrifice.
sacrifice, it is requisite, that those which offer it, or desire to
participate, do bring with them necessary internal virtues, or disposition; as
sorrow and repentance for their sins, which is a kind of improper sacrifice
(mentioned in the next Psalm) the sacrifice of justice, which rendereth to
every one that is due (Psalm. 4.) and sacrifise of praise, or thanks giving,
for all Gods benefits received or expected; which kinds of internal and
improper sacrifices, do nothing prejudice, but rightly prepare men to the
fruict of external sacrifice, ever used in the law of nature, the law of
Moses, and of Christ. This place also has an other higher and prophetical
sense, of the Sacrifice of Christ's body in the Eucharist, which is both
propitiatory, and Sacrifise of praise and thanks giving. So S. Augustine
(orat. aduersus Iudeos. c. 6.) teaches, that here certainly is a plain change
of the old sacrifices. The same he affirms Ep. 120. c. 18. God foreshewing
that the old sacrifices should be changed, which were offered The Sacrifice of
the Eu harist prophesied.
in shadow of a sacrifice to come. I will not take (faith God to Israel) calves
nor goares at thy hand, etc. but appoints that al Israel (al nations from the
rising of the sun to the setting) shall immolate the sacrifice of praise, the
same Christ, whom old Simeon knew an infant, whom he received into his hands:
Likewise, li. contra aduers. legis and prophet. c. 20. The Church offers to
God in the body of Christ the sacrifice of praise.

PSALM. L.
King David in great sorrow for his sins of adultrie and murder, most
seriously prays God of his manifold mercies to remitte and purge all The
fourth penitential Psalm. The 7. key.
his offenses, and pains due for them. 12. to restore unto him the grace of
the Holy Ghost, lost by his sins; 15. that he may teach others (as in deed
his singular example may teach the whole world true penance) 19. contrition of
heart, worthily to offer sacrifice, for the whole Church.

Unto Pertaining not only to David, but also to al penitentes, especially of
the new testament*
the end, a Psalm of David, " when Nathan the Reg. 12.)
My sins being very great, need thy great mercy.
according to thy great

And according to Yea many sorts of thy mercies: not only remission of the
crimes, but also mitigation of the pains due for, the same. Thy merciful grace
to be truly sorry, to make some part of satisfaction, to beware hereafter not
to fall again, to give better example of penance, and of virtuous life, and to
persevere to the end.
the multitude of thy commiserations, take away mine iniquity.

O God thou have forgeuen me, and taken away my sins, as thy prophet has
told me (2. Reg. 12. v. 13.) but my soul so foully polluted, needs yet more
washing.
more amply from mine iniquity: and cleanse also the dregs that remain, and
al habites and inclinations to sin. So our Savior afterward taught. (Joan.
13. v. 10.) He that is washed needs not saving to wash his feere (il
affections and relics of former sins) but is clean wholly.
cleanse me from my sin.

VVhiles I did not know; not consider nor acknowledge my sins, I could not be
forgeuen, but now I know and acknowledge them:
Because I do know mine iniquity: and my sin is and I cease not to consider
of them with sorrow.
before me always.

Principally (for so this particle [only] here signifies) the enormities of my
sins consist, in that I have offended thy Divine Goodness and Majesty, the
King of the worlds, immortal, invisible, only God, to whom is due al honor
and glory for ever and ever. 1. Tim. 1. v. 17.
only have I sinned, and have done evil before thee: that thou may Thou
which have promised forgeuenes to al sinners that truly convert, shall herein be
justified by receiving me again to grace:
be justified in thy words, and may and overthrow thy calumniators, that
judge wickedly of thy proceedings, as if either thy justice or mercy were
perverted.
overcome when thou art judged.

I and al are burn in original sin, the relics whereof, concupiscence and
weakness incline us to other sinne^, which we have added. In regard of which
our infirmity, thy mercy is ready to recall us, and help us.
was conceived in iniquities: and my mother conceived me in sins.

For behold thou Besides thou have also given me knowledge of true faith, and
right doctrine, which thou ever love, and art accustomed to reduce, and
direct such into the true way of penance.
have loved truth: yea thou have moreover showed to me things uncertain, or
unknown to many others, given me the gift and spirit of prophecy, to know
hid mysteries, and to every one God gives some particular benefits, which
he loves in him, and is ready of his part to confirm and maintain the same,
that they be not lost.
the uncertain, and hidden things of thy wisdom thou have made manifest to
me.

Most merciful Lord thou will (as I see in the spirit of prophecy) sprinkle
me, and al men with thy blood, from the Cross, where they shall give thee
vinegre about hyssoppe to drink. (Joan. 19.)
hyssope, and I shall be cleansed: thou shall wash me, and I shall be made by
which washing I shall be clean from sin, and become in time pure, yea whiter
then snow. A figure of this hyssope was observed in Moses Law. Number. 19.
signifying the lively heat of Christ's infinite charity.
whiter then snow.

When mine affections shall be clean purged, I shall take singular great delight
to hear of thee,
my hearing thou shall give joy and gladness, and and al my powers of mind and
body, which are now afflicted, shall rejoice.
the bones humbled shall rejoice.

Leave of thy cogitation of punishing, to which purpose first take away mine
iniquities, ^o^ otherwise if they remain, Gods justice can not but punish them.
Turn away thy face from my sins: and wipe away al

Create in me new grace, whereby my heart shall be pure. So S. Paul calls a just
soul a new creature. Galat. 6. v. 15.
Create a clean heart in me o God: and renew a right spirit in my u bowels. v
In my inward thoughts.


suffer me not so to fall again, that thy grace depart from me.
take not from me.

which I had before my fall, of Christ promised of my seed, and alter not the
same for my ^^n^es. David also and other penitents pray here, that God will
restore unto them the joy, which they had in the state of grace, of eternal
salvation promised;
the joy of thy salvation? and confirm and conserve in ^e hereafter, a strong,
constant, and willing spirit to persevere.
confirm me with the principal spirit,

No way can a penitent better show him self gratful to God, for remission of
his sins, the^ by instructing, exhorting, and persuading other sinners to
repentance, to leave their former il ways, and turn to God.
Will teach the unjust thy ways: and the impious shall be converted to thee.

From the guilt and punishment of murder, causing Vrias and others with him to
be slain. Other penitents pray to be delivered from what sins soever they
have committed, by sheding blood, or other ^^^^gs and injuries; promising to
praise Gods justice, in offering and giving grace, accord^^^ (...) promise to
sinners, that they may repent.
from bloudes o God, the God of my salvation: and my tongue shall exult [ for]
thy justice.

Lord, thou Thou ^ God first s^^rring me up, opening my lips, which of my
self I can not do, then my tongue and (...) will praise thee.
(...)lt open my lips: and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

If thou would especially legal sacrifice, I would easily have offered great
store:
would have had sacrifice, I had verily given it: with holocaustes thou will
but the best of that kind is not sufficient:
not be delighted.

true contrition of heart pleases thee far better.
an afflicted spirit: a contrite, and humbled hait, o God thou will not despise.

After a penitent has remission of his own sins, he must pray for the whole
Church.
with Sion: that the walls of Jerusalem may be built up.

The Church prospering, her faithful children shall offer
Then shall thou accept sacrifice of the sacrifice of justice, rendering to
every one that is due;
justice, also free offeringes without obligation, k yea holocaustes, which is
the chiefest, ^ca^^es, and like hosts upon the altar, according to the state
of the old law: but in the law of Christ, the most B. Sacrifice by him
instituted.
oblations, and k holocaustes: l then shall they lay calves upon thine altar.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. L.
2. When Nathan came to David.] As Nathan denouncing to David that our
Temporal punishment is due after remission of sins.
Lord had (upon his repentance and confession) taken away his sin, added
nevertheless that because he had made the enemies of God to blaspheme, his son
should dye: so David knowing that more was required then only confession, for
that the bond of satisfaction remained after his sins were remitted,
persisted in penance, praying, lamenting, and beseching God according to his
great and mainfold mercies, to take away his iniquity, albeit the prophet
Nathan had now told him, that our Lord had taken away his sin, because there
yet remained temporal pain due for the same. He prays also v. 4. that God
will, vvash him more amply, from his iniquity, and cleanse him from his sin.
Custom of sin makes more pronnes to fall again.
For albeit the guilt of mortal sin be washed and taken away, yet besides
temporal punishment that is due, the soul that was so polluted, needs to be
washed, and cleansed from the evil habit, or pronnes to fall again, gotten by
the former custom, or delectation in sin.

7. I Was conceived in iniquities.] An other reason why sinners after
remission Concupiscence remains after original sin.
of al mortal sins, need to be washed, and cleansed, is, because being borne
in original sin, after remission thereof, there remaneth concupiscence, that
^^riueth against virtue, and inclines to sin, from which we must pray, and
labor to be more and more washed and cleansed.

19 Sacrifice] Holy Scriptures make often comparison between two kinds of
Spiritual sacrifice prefe^red before external.
sacrifices, preferring internal before external, as more gratful to God. And
of spiritual sacrifices, this of a contrite spirit is first in order, and
makes the way to the sacrifice of justice, because justice presupposes
repentance, and finally succedeth sacrifice of praise, and thankesgeuing.

PSALM. LI.
Holy David inueigheth against wicked Doeg a traitor. 7. prophecieth his
David's inuectiue against Doeg. the 8. key.
ruin. 10. and his own exaltation.

Unto the end, understanding to David, when Doeg Of the race of Esau, half a
Jew, but either an Infidel, or fautor of Infidels, a spy for Saul, a
persecutor of David, and a murderer of Innocents. 2. Reg. 22. v. 9. 18.
the High priest, slain with 84. more Priests and others, because they were
supposed to favor David. ibidem.
Achimelech. (1. Reg. 22.)
Thou persecutor Doeg, why art thou so malicious, to abuse thy credit with
king Saul, to the murdering of innocents?
glory in malice, which art

playing the part of a spy, in betraying to Saul, that I was with Achimelech?
have done guile.

Though he told a truth, yet it was iniquity to betray innocents.
iniquity rather then to speak equity.



Thou shall utterly be destroyed.
pluck thee out, and remove thee out of thy tabernacle: and and al thy race.
thy root out of the land of the living.

The just shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him, and they

But has hoped in the multitude of his riches, and has for a short time in
this world.
preualed in his vanity.

David prophecieth his own exaltation, and conservation of his seed in the
kingdom of Israel.
a fruitful olive tree in the house of God, have hoped in the mercy of God for
ever: and for ever and ever.

Sing praise, and ^a^kes to thee.
confess to thee for ever, because thou have done it: and I will expect thy thy
Goodness, which agrees to thy name.
name, because it is good in the sight of thy saints:

PSALM. LII.
As in the thirtenth Psalm, Christ's Incarnation is prophesied, after that The
general Judgment. the 9. key
sin abunded in the world: so here is foreshewed that after general
wickedness, 5. Christ will come to judge the bad, 7. and deliver the good.

Unto the end, for Weakness, or mourning,
Ma^leth; S. Augustine expounds this Psalm as an instruction to those that
suffer persecution and injuries, especially nere the end of the world.
understandings of David.












Because God has God will overthrow all the counsels, and forces
dissipated the bones of them of worldly politiques.
that please men: they are confounded, because God has despised them.

The true Church afflicted desires Christ's coming to deliver the oppressed.
Who will give out of Sion the salvation of Israel? when God shall convert the
captivity of his people: Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

PSALM. LIII.
David in distress cries to God for help, 6. considently trusting therein, A
prayer in distress. the 7. key.
8. and promising sacrifice of thankesgeuing.

Unto Though historically this Psalm
the end, was song by David the author thereof, showing how he prayed in danger,
and rendered thanks for his delivery,
in songs understanding for David when when upon notice given that he abode in
the mountains, Saul straictly beseged him, with a great army, but the
Philistims inuading the country, Saul was forced to leave David, and to turn
his forces against them, 1. Reg. 23 yet i^ perceyneth also literally to al just
men in distress, especially to the Church of Christ, praying in like dangers,
and God by his like providence, delivering his servants in extremities.
Is not David hid with us? (1. Reg. 1. 23. and 26.)
O GOD save me For the glory of thy name
in thy name: and in thy strength for the iustnes of my cause defend me.
judge me.



Barbarous highland men have betraide the place of mine abode to the
persecuters.
strangers have risen up against me, and the strong have sought my soul: and
they have not set God before their eyes.

But I fear them not, because I am in Gods protection.
behold God helps me: and our Lord is the receiver of my soul.

A just prayer, that God will turn intended mischief, upon the deuisers heads,
Turn away the evils to mine enemies: and in according to his promise, that he
will defend the innocent.
thy truth destroy them.

Offering voluntary sacrifice, more then is commanded:
I will voluntarily sacrifice to thee, and and praise thee o God,
will confess to thy name o Lord, because it is good:

as I am bond
Because thou have delivered me out of al tribulation: and I rejoice in thy
just judgments against the wicked.
mine eye has looked down upon mine enemies.

PSALM LIIII.
The prophet (as well in his own, as other just men's person) describes great
Gods providence toward the good and bad. the 3. key.
calamities suffered, 10. prays against the wicked, 13. lamenting especially
that those which profess frendshipe, are adversaries. 17. and declares Gods
providence in protecting the good, and destroying the bad.

Unto A song as well for king David himself, as others of al times;
the end, to sing,
in songs, and consider Gods providence, in suffering one man to afflict an
other in this life.
understanding to David.


This life is awarefare, and a continual combat.
exercise: and am trubled at the voice of the enemy: and at the tribulation of
the sinner.

Because they have calumniated me,
wrested iniquities upon me: and and persecuted me in great fury.
in anger they were trublesome to me.

so inwardly afflicted, as if death were at hand.
the fear of death is fallen upon me.

Fear and trembling are come upon me: and I have scarce sense, or discourse of
reason, being almost overwhelmed with trubles.
darkness has covered me.

would God I could fly, that in the simplicity of a dove, I might spedely
part away from these afflictions.
Who will give me wings as of a dove, and I will fly: and rest?

I have fled so far as I could from trubles:
Lo I have gone far flying away: and I abode in the wilderness.

for the rest I remitted to Gods will and good pleasure,
expected him, that and he suffered me not to be overthrown,
saved me from though I am weak,
pusillanimitie of spirit, and and the tentations are great.
tempest.

O God abate the pride of arrogant persecuters,
Precipitate o Lord, and suffer them not to agree amongst them selves.
divide their tongues: because I have seen They are full of al iniquity,
iniquity, and they have also contentions among themselves, turn the same to
our good.
contradiction in the city.

With their continual great iniquity, they have their trubles,
labor in the midst thereof, and but leave not their injustice.
injustice.

They are still usurers, and deceiptful oppressors of the poor.
usury, and guile.

It is a greater grief to suffer injuries of those that seem to be freindes.
if mine enemy had spoken evil to me, I would verily have borne it.

And if he that hated me had spoken great things upon me:

I would perhaps have hid myself from him.

A man that was, or seemed of the same mind, faith, and religion,
thou a man of the same mind: my whom I so trusted, that I would have gone,
whithersoeuer he should have led me.
guide, and my familiar.

Thou that did participate the same holy sacraments with me,
take sweet meats together with me, in the in the Catholic Church.
house of God we walked with consent.

As Core and his accomplices: spoken of just zele, not of desire to revenge:
verified in those that sin wittingly and knowing, for they descend, as it
were, alive into hell.
death come upon them: and let them go down quick into hell.

Because there is wickedness in their habitations, in The whole crew of the
wicked conspire in iniquity.
the mids of them.

But I have cried to God, and our Lord will save me.

The prophet alludeth to three more specially appointed hours of Divine
service, the daily sacrifice at morning, and evening, and other sacrifices
commonly about midday. Which also are the three principal times of Divine
Service in the Church of Christ. Martins, Euensong, and the Sacrifice of Mass.
Which Eutyn^ius and other Grecians call Lyturgiam. S. Clement also (li 7. c.
25. Apost. Instit) testifies that the Apostles ordained three set hours of
common prayer every day.
the evening, and morning, and at midday, I will ^r pr^^
speak, and declare, and he will hear my voice.

Many enemies combined together approached unto me, to overthrow me.
they were with me.

Eternal God.
which is before the worlds will humble them.

They will never repent of their wickedness.
no change with them, and they feared not God: he has streached forth his hand
in repaying.

They harden their hearts against his threatened wrath:
divided by the wrath of his countenance; and but Gods prouidente illuminateth
others to know and teach the truth, when it is impugned, or contemned.
his heart has approached.

Gods words, which in them selves are meke and sweet,
His words are made softer then oil: and are hard to the incredulous, and as
darts that wound them. Christ said (Joan. 6.) Unless one eat my flesh, and
drink my blood, he shall not have life in him, which the Capharnaites not
understanding said one to an other: This is a hard speech, who can abide it?
which S. Augustine here says was the first heresy against our Saviors,
preaching. It was not hard to S. Peter, who in the name of the rest, answered,
that Christ had the words of eternal life. He yet understood not the secret
of our Lords speech, but he piously believed that the words were good, which
he understood not.
the same are darts.

Therefore in all doubts of doctrine, in all distresses of persecution, and other
difficulties which surpass thy weakness, cast thy care upon our Lord, and he
vvil nourish thee.
Cast thy care upon our Lord: and he will nourish thee: he will not give He vvil
not suffer the just to remain alvvayes in fluctuation, that is, in doubtful,
dangerous, and vvaue^ing thoughts or perplexities, as when a ship is tossed
in the waves of the sea, but vvil give quiet repose of mind, as in a sure
haven without danger of drowning.
fluctuation to the just for ever.

Contrariwise, the wicked and obstinate shall fall into destruction.
them down into the pit of destruction.

Often or for most part, bloud-suckers dye before the course of nature
requires, as Saul, Absolon, Achitophel, Achab, Iezabel, and the like.
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live half their days, but I will hope in
thee o Lord.

PSALM. LV.
David being in danger before Achis king of Geth, confidently implereth David's
prays in danger, the ^. key.
Gods help, against the great malice and power of his enemies; 8. foretheweth
their ruin, his own exaltation, 12. and offers praises and thanks.

Unto This Psalm perteyneth also to future times,
the end, for the use of any just persons, or people, that are against their
will separated from the public divine Service of holy Church:
for a people, that is made far from the Saints, David in mo^^ worthy to be
noted with tule, for perpetual memory
the inscription of the title, made by David when the Philistims detected him
to their king in Geth.
when the foreners held him in Geth. (1. Reg. 12. v. 12.)
Now one sort of il disposed men, now another,
man has trodden never cease to seek my destruction.
all the day impugning he has afflicted me.

Saul with his great army, the Philistim^s, and other strangers, some in
manifest hostility, others detecting and betraing me to mine adversaries. So all that live godly in Christ have many enemies visible and invisible.
many that war against me.

Of these most eminent great dangers I am in deed afeard,
the height of the day I shall fear: but so that my trust and assured
confidence is in thee o God.
but I will trust in thee.

Words and promises made to me; or the good which I speak or do by Gods grace.
my words, in God have I hoped: I will not fear what flesh may do to me.

They calumniate whatsoever I say,
detest my words; against me, wresting al my words to evil sense.
al their cogitations are unto evil.

They meet together, and secretly conspire to intrappe me or catch me tripping.
inhabit and keep secret: they will observe my heel.

to take my life:
my soul, for this their vain purpose to destroy me, thou will save them, as
they deserve, that is,
for nothing shall thou save them: thou will break them in pieces.
in wrath thou will break peoples.





In what day soever I shall invoke thee: lo I have known that thou art my
God.

I will always gratfully acknowledge thy promises, and sayings, for they are
assured.
the word, in our Lord will I praise thee saying, I have hoped in God, I will not
fear what man can do to me.

I have purposed and vowed to offer sacrifice of praise, and by thy help will
perform it.
are thy vows, which I will render, praises to thee.

do that pleases God,
please before God, in in true faith and pious works.
the light of the living.

PSALM. LVI.
The Prophet prays in tribulation, 4. testifies Gods help, 6. praises his
David's great patience. the 8. key.
greatness: 8. promising, and inuiting al nations to praise him.

Unto The heroical facts of David are for examples to al Christians.
the end, Innocent David having opportunity to kill his unjust persecutor,
obeyed the motion of God, suggesting unto him, not to destroy his enemy;
contrary to the counsel of his freindes:
destroy not, to David in a thing most worthy to be recorded for perpetual
memory,
the inscription of the title, being in so great and unjust truble, as to lie
in the cave of a mountain, yet spared to kill, or hurt him, that drive him into
such straictes See the history 1. Reg. 24.
when he fled from the face of Saul into the cave. 1. ^^^. 22. 24.



And I will hope in the shadow of thy wings, until iniquity pass.

I will cry to God the highest: God that has done me good.

Extraordinary divine help, passing man's power.
from heaven, and delivered me: he has given into It fell reprochfully to Saul,
that David might have slain him if he would, yet did neither hurt him, nor
insult upon him, but meekely and piously admonished him of his error, and
injurious persecution.
reproach them that trod upon me.

my life.
soul out of the mids of from most mighty and ravenous persecuters.
Lions whelps: I slept trubled.

The sons of men, their Though they have not lions natural teeth, yet they
exercise cruelty by artificial weapons,
teeth are weapons and arrows: and their and with their cruel tongues incite
their folowers to the same fury. 1. Reg. 22. v. 16.
tongue a sharp sword.

Be exalted above the heavens o God: and thy glory upon all the earth.



They Saul endeavored many ways to overthrow David, amongst other means
provoked him to set upon the Philistims, thincking they should have slain
him, 1. Reg. 18. v. 17. but the same Philistims overthrew Saul. 1 Reg. 31.
dug a pit before my face: and they are fallen into it.

Psalms more in use with Christian Gentiles, then they were with the Jews. See
page, 12.
a Psalm.

Arise my glory, arise psalter and harp: I will arise early.

Gods benefits bestowed upon David, and upon faithful Christians prefigured by
him, are for ever to be praised by all peoples and nations.
peoples o Lord: and I will say Psalms more in use with Christian Gentiles, then
they were with the Jews. See page, 12.
a Psalm to thee among Gods benefits bestowed upon David, and upon faithful
Christians prefigured by him, are for ever to be praised by all peoples and
nations.
the Gentiles.





PSALM. LVII.
Holy David inueigheth against dissembling wicked men. 7. describes Gods
providence in suffering evil. the 3. key.
their manifold punishment, 11. wherein the just shall be comforted.

Unto This Psalm was made upon the same occasion, and to the same purpose as
the former,
the end, to exhort the just and innocent to patience,
destroy not, to David in, by David's memorable example.
the inscription of the title.
Few are so wicked, but they speak and pretend just things:
in very deed you speak justice: judge right things

but neither think well,
the heart you work iniquities: in the earth your nor do well, but both
contrary, which feaned sanctity is duble iniquity.
hands forge injustice.

g These wicked sinners that flatter and incite king Saul, seem to have spent
al their life from their infancy in malice.


Their fury is unquiet, til they may wound the innocent with their poisonful
sting,
a serpent: as of the aspe that is deaf, and stops his ears. i neither will
they harken to good admonitions, but stop their ears like an aspe, that
lays one ear close to the ground, and stops the other with his tail.


Which will not hear the voice of the inchanters, and of the sorcerer
enchanting wisely.

But God will break their cruel force,
teeth in their mouth, the though it seems most strong, and in superable.
check tooth of the lions, our Lord will break in pieces.

Gods just determination of punishing the wicked still remains bent and
ready, though execution be some while differred.
bent his bow til they be weakened.

That force and power which is now invincible, hard and strong like a lions
strongest teeth, shall then be as impotent and soft as wax:
wax that melts, shall they be taken away: Gods wrath, like fire, the most
forcible element, shall fill upon them, and they shall be cast into utter
darkness, deprived of the sun and al comfortable light.
fire has fallen on them, and they have not seen the sun.

Before their malice can bring to effect, the great mischieffes which they
plotte and purpose, God suddenly cutteth them of before they fully understand
of, either sickness or death, casts them as it were alive into hell.
thorns did understand the old bryar: as living so in wrath he swalloweth them.

The just rejoice in the punishment of the wicked for three causes, first in
zele of justice, conforming his will and mind to Gods judgment; secondly, for
that himself through Gods mercy has escaped that terrible damnation;
thirdly, for that he is now delivered from molestation, and continual
tribulation.
shall rejoice when he shall see revenge: he shall wash his hands in the blood of
a sinner.

The just seeing, or by faith knowing what punishment remains for the wicked,
is thereby assured that the good shall reap fruict for his well doing, and that
in the mean time God rules and judges on the earth, though as yet it
appears not so evidently.
there is a God certes judging them on the earth.

PSALM. LVIII.
Holy David (being beseeged in his own house by m^n sent to kill him) An other
prayer of David in danger. the 8. key.
confidently prays God to deliver him, 6. and al faithful nations in like
danger: 7. and praises God.

Unto the end, destroy not, to David in the inscription of the title, King Saul
having thrice attempted in vain to kill David, (1. Reg. 18 v 11. etc. 19. v.
9.) seen some of his guard to fe^ch him, from his own house, that he might be
slain: but God moved the mind of Michol, to admonish him of the danger, and to
help him away in saftie, though Saul thought she would have been a scandal
unto him (or cause of ruin) by the hands of the Philistians 1. Reg. 18. v.
21. Upon which occasion David made this Psalm. As he also made others, for
perpetual memory of Gods like benefits, in delivering him in iminent dangers,
When Saul sent three troops of serieants to kill him, and solowed them
himself. 1. Reg. 19. v. 20 likewise when he was known and bevvrayed
before Achis king of Geth 1. Reg. 21. also in Ceila, in the deserts of Ziph,
and of Maon. c. 23, in Engaddi, c. 24. in Hachila. c. 26. and again amongst
the Philistians c. 27. and 30.
when Saul sent, and watched his house to kill him. (1. Reg. 19.)
DELIVER me from mine enemies o my God: and from



They have so straictly beseged me, that it is now in their haudes, to take
away my life.
have taken my soul: the strong have fallen violently upon me.

Of my part I have committed no sault against mine enemies, for which they can
have a^ie just cause to persecute me.
without iniquity have I run, and gone directly.

The prophet soreseing in spirit, that the Catholic Church shall be unjustly
persecuted, prays, and teaches others to pray, that God will mercifully
visit his faithful people of al nations:
al nations: have and not spare obstinate persecuters.
no mercy on all that work iniquity.

Persecuters laboring how much, or how long soever, shall at night, that is, in
the end of al their wicked endeuoures be unsatisfied in their desires,
at evening: and they shall suffer famine as hungry dogs that run hunting
all the day, and night also, still seeking and not finding wherewith to fill their
ravenous mouths and devouring bellies.
as dogs, and shall compass the city.

They threaten and determine to use al cruelty,
will speak in their mouth, and a sword in their lips: as if there were no
God, that hears, and will punish it.
because who has heard?



I will keep my strength to thee: Through Gods grace the Church is still strong
and the virtuous do persevere.
because thou art my

God suffers afflictions to fall upon his servants to keep them exercised,
lest in prosperity they forgete their duties to him.
lest sometime my peoples forgete.

Disperse them in thy strength: and Deprive them of power, that they may not do
so much evil as they desire.
depose them my protector o Lord.



And for After that their iniquity is complete
cursing and lying they shall be they shall be accused and punished for their
blasphemies and lies.
talked of in consummation: in wrath of comsummation and they shall not be.

And they shall know that God will rule over Jacob: and over the ends of the
earth.

As. v. 7.
shall be turned at evening, and shall suffer famine as dogs: and shall compass
the city.

They shall in vain seek oil for their lamps with the foolish virgins,
repent with Judas, and finding no help,
dispersed to eat: and if they be not filled, they shall continually blaspheme
in hell.
will murmur also.

In the resurrection.
the morning.

Because thou art become my receiver, and my refuge, in the day of my
tribulation.

My helper, I will sing to thee, because thou art God my receiver: my God, my
mercy.

PSALM. LIX.
King David after his own and the peoples many tribulations, 8. rendereth
King David's thanks for victories. the 8. key.
thanks for their renowned victories, 11. atchiued by Gods only power.

Unto the end, for them, The change of state from adversity to prosperity in
the people of Israel, was a figure of the like change in the Church of Christ,
that shall be changed, in worthy to be remembered,
the inscription for the instruction,
to David him self, of Gods beloved,
for doctrine, as the same are more largely recorded in the books of kings.
when he set fire on Mesopotamia of Syria, and in Sobal, and Ioab returned, and
stroke Idumaea in the valley of saltpittes twelve thousand. (2. Reg. 8. and 10.
and 1. Paral. 18.
God suffers his people to be afflicted, as well for their sins, as for
exercise in virtue,
have repelled us, and have destroyed us: thou after shows his mercy in
pardoning, and favor in advancing them.
and have had mercy on us.



by punishi^g sinners.
hard things: thou have made us drink the wine of compunction.

Warning them to amend.
given a signification to them that fear thee: they flee from the face of the
bow.

and then restores them to former good state.
may be delivered, save me with thy right hand; and hear me.

God has spoken in God also as he has promised by his holy oracle,
his holy: I shall rejoice, and has advanced king David, in his temporal
kingdom, and does much more advance him, and other elect in everlasting life,
shall divide Sichem: and shall mesure the valley of tabernacles.



Judah my king: Moab As a vessel for meaner uses.
the pot of my hope.

Into Edom will I Bring it under my dominion.
stretch out my shoe: the foreners are subject to me.



As God does sometimes punish:
that have expelled us: and so he also rewards.
wilt not thou o God go forth in our hosts?



strongly* with fortitude.
strength: and he shall bring to nothing them that afflict us.

PSALM. LX.
Faithful people of the whole earth pray, and acknowledge that God mercifully A
confident prayer for Christ's Incarnation. the 5. k. ^y.
hears their prayer. 6. expect the eternal kingdom of Christ, in which they
shall praise him for evermore.

Unto the end, In songues of praise and thanks to God.
in hyms to David.


From al coasts of the earth faithful people pray to God,
the ends of the earth I have cried to thee: whiles my heart was in anguish,
thou the Church builded upon an assured fundation, is exalted to great power
and dignity.
did exalt me on a rock

God conducteth, defends, and delivers those that confidently trust in him.
conducted me, because thou art made my hope: a toure of strength from the face
of the enemy.

in the Church, a place of assured protection.
thy tabernacle for ever: I shall be protected in the covert of thy wings.



Christ^ kingdom the Church perpetual to the end of this world, and eternal
after the general Resurrection.
days upon the days of the king: his years even unto the day of generation
and generation.

He is permanent for ever in the sight of God: his Who is able to understand,
or explicate how great Christ's mercy is in redeming us,
mercy and and his truth in performing his promised rewards?
truth who shall require?

For so imestimable benefits, I will always praise thee with Psalms,
Canticles, or other thanks in this life:
will I say a Psalm to thy name for ever and ever: that I may render my vows
and eternally in the life to come.
from day to day.

PSALM. LXI.
A just man encoregeth his own soul to serve God in sincere humility, 9.
Exhortation to good life, in respect of reward, or punishment. the 7. key.
exhorts also al others to trust in God, not in false and worldly policy,
or wealth, because Gods power and mercy will render to every one as they
deserve.

Unto the end, for Directed to Idithun, one of the masters of music, to sing
it, or to make tune for it.
Iduthun a Psalm of David.
The wicked threating to ruinate others, David, or any just man, fears them
not, because his soul is subject to God.
not my soul be subject to God? for of him is my salvation.

Therefore I firmly purpose never to be moved from God.
I shall be moved no more.

In vain do you mine adversaries still assault me,
How long set you violently upon a man: though ye be al confederate to kill me,
you al do kill: as it were upon supposing me to be like a ruinous, or shaken
wall, that is easily thrown down.
a wall, that is leaning, and a wall shaken.

They thinck still to deprive me of my reward, the price of my labors and
merits,
yet they thought to repel my price, but I run so much more diligently, as
thirsting after righteousness in this life, and glory in the next, to finish my
course.
I ran in thirst: they A most dangerous tentation, when after threats and
cruelty, persecutors endeavor by sweet words, and promises to perswaed the
just to fall into sin.
blessed with their mouth, and cursed with their heart.



I resolutly purpose not to yield to any tentations.
I shall not remove.



Gods faithful servants are not only constant themselves, but also exhort and
persuade al others, as much as in them lies, to serve God and trust in him.
al ye the congregation of people: power out your hearts before him, God is our
helper for ever.

But yet the children of men are vain, the children of men are Using false
weightes they defraud one an other.
liers in balances: that they may deceive by vanity together.



God having nce spoken it is most assured.
Once has God spoken, these Two especial attributes of God.
two things have I heard:

God is Omnipotent, so that he can both reward, and punish infinitely;
power is Gods, and and Merciful, that he is ready to receive al sinners into
his favor, if they will repent and turn unto him.
mercy o Lord is to thee: because Mat. 16. Romans 2. 1. Cor. 3. Gal. 6.
thou will render to every one according to his works.

PSALM. LXII.
David in banishment with great affection desires to unite himself with
David's devotion in banishment. the 8. key.
God in meditation, 4. purposing and promising ever to praise him: 10.
prophicieth the vain endeuoures, and condemnation of his enemies; and his own
advancement.

A Psalm Holy David made this devout meditation when he was in the forest of
Haret, or desert of Ziph 1. Reg. 22. and 23. and could not come to the
tabernacle of God, nor to Jerusalem, where he especially desired to be, in the
inheritance of our Lord, which was to him a great affliction. As the like is
now to Catholics, when they are put in close prison for their faith, or
otherwise hindered, that they can not be present at the most holy and daily
Sacrifice. In which ease we must supply as we may, this great loss, and
comfort ourselves with this, or like Psalm, or prayer, saying: O God my God,
to thee I watch.
of David when he was in the desert of Judah (1. Reg. 22.)
Even from the first downing of the morning,
from the morning my soul thirsts after thee,
My soul has thirsted to thee, yea also my very flesh, and whole body
feels great pains, by this affliction of mind, and desires relief and rest.
my flesh to thee very many ways.

Being now in case that I can not serve thee, o God, as I would, yet I exhibit
myself present in spirit, before thy holy place,
so in the holy have I appeared to thee, meditating thy power, and thy glory.
that I might see thy strength, and thy glory.

This consolation in banishment from thy divine Service, is sweeter to me then
many temporal lives, or any worldly prosperity.
thy mercy is better then lives, my lips shall praise thee.

For as the Passions of Christ abound in us (says S. Paul 2. Cor. 1.) so also
by Christ our comfort abounds.
So will I bless thee in my life: and in thy name I will lift up my hands.

As with Replenish my soul o God, with the abundance of thy grace,
marrow and fatnes let my soul be filled: so shall I be more able to praise
thee.
and my mouth shall praise with lips of exultation.

Seeing in the night, also in my bed I meditate of thee;
If I have been mindful of thee upon my bed, I will more diligently do the
same in the morning.
in the



My temporal and spiritual enemies:
they in vain have sought my soul, and they shall be damned for their sins.
they shall enter into the inferior parts of the earth.

It happened l^terally to Saul, that he was slain in battle, which he made
against his enemies*
shall be delivered into the hands of the sword, they shall be and his dead
body was hung on a wall (1. Reg. 31.) exposed to wild beasts, or birds,
though it was after wards bu nt and buried.
the portions of foxes.

David was presently after Saul's death exalted to the kingdom, in figure of
Christ, whose name and glory was exalted, after the destruction of the Jews
by Pagane Emperors.
the king shall rejoice in God, al shall be praised that swear by him: because
the mouth is stopped of those that speak wicked things.

PSALM. LXIII.
A prayer of the just reposing their whole trust in God: 7. and rejoicing A
confident prayer in trih^lation. the 7. key.
that the enemies machinations are frustrate.

Unto the end, a Psalm of David.


By example of thy former protection,
have protected me from the from the conspiracy of wicked men, I trust most
assuredly in thy help.
assembly of the malignant: from the multitude of them that work iniquity.

Because they have sharpened their tongues as a sword: they

They are resolved to intrappe me,
have confirmed to themselves a wicked word.

They have talked to hide snares: they have said, who shall see them?

They have search(...) they But as they have failed: so (...), and be
ouerreached in their bad counsels, as Achitophel. 2. Reg. 17.
have failed searching with scrutani^

Man shall come to a (...): and God shall be exalted.

God has chosen the weak of this world ^o confound the strong.
Childrens arrows are made their wounds: and their tongues are weakened
against them.

All that saw them much merueled, seeing the wicked so punished.
were trubled: and every man feared.

And they showed forth the works of God: and they understood his doings.

The just shall be praised, for rightly serving God.
shall be praised.

PSALM. LXIIII.
God is rightly praised in Sion and I erusalem (in his Church only) for his
Conversion o^ Gentiles* the 6. key.
benefits bestowed and promised. 8. Unto which also in the time of grace, al
nations shall be called.

To the end, a Psalm of David, The seventy interpreters seeing David here
prophecy of the peoples return from Babylou, added the names of Jeremy and
Ezechiel, who being in that captivity, prophesied the same more largely. As
likewise these and other Prophets, foresavv in spirit, and more especially
prophesied the going forth of al nations from Babylon, that is, forsaking
Idolatry, and embracing true Religion ^n the Church of Christ, so S. Augustine,
Eutymius, and others.
the Canticle of Jeremy, and
Not in Babylon, nor else where, but only in the Church, praises and vows are
gratful to God.
in Sion: and a vow shall be rendered to thee in Jerusalem.

Hear my prayer: Alnations shall know thee.
al flesh shall come to thee.

The wicked are insolent in threatening,
have prevailed upon us: and thou will be but thou mercifully pardoning our
sins, they shall not hurt us.
propitious to our impieties.

They are happy to whom thou have prepared grace, and glory.
Blessed is he, whom thou have chosen, and taken: he shall dwell in thy courts.

The voice of the faithful, rejoicing in the hope of eternal glory. Romans 5
We shall be replenished in the goods of thy house: holy is thy temple, nothing
polluted shall enter into heaven. Apo. 21.
marvelous in equity.

Hear us o God our savior, the hope of all the ends of the earth; and in the
sea far.

Preparing Thou which art al powreful, as appears by the huge montaines,
mountanes in thy strength, girded with might: seas, and other thy workc^.
the depths of the sea, the sound of the waves

Thou will by thy omnipotent power move the hearts of obdurate men, and so
convert innumerable of al nations to thee.
be trubled, and they that inhabit the borders shall be affraide of thy signs:
Thou will draw many to thee, with joy and gladness, from the uttermost coasts
of the east and weast.
the outegoinges of the morning and evening thou shall delight.



The God wrought diverse miracles in waters (Genesis 7. Exo. 7. 14. 15. Iosue. 3.
4. Reg. 5. 6. etc.)
river of God is replenished with waters, thou have prepared their likewise in
providing meat for his people. (Exo. 16. 3. Reg. 17. 4. Reg. 4. 7. etc.) which
were figures of Baptism, Eucharist, and other Sacraments of Christ, washing
from, sins, and augmenting grace,
meat: because so replenishing the Chureh with most sacred Mysteries.
so is the preparation thereof.

Endewing the Apostles and other preachers with spiritual grace and lerning,
her rivers, continuing the succession of pastores to watter and feed the
faithful people.
multiply her fruits: in her dropps she shall rejoice springing.

God blesses the whole course, or circle of time, of the Church militant in
this world,
bless the crown of the year of thy goodness: and the crown, or happy end
of every just persons life.
and thy fildes shall be replenished with plenty.

u beautiful places of the desert shall be fat: and the those which are more
eminent shall particularly rejoice in their own, and others spiritual
progress in virtue.
little hills shall be girded about with exultation. v Even those which before
had only a show of beauty, but in deed were barren, shall yield abundant
fruict.


The principal pastores shall in proportion rejoice above the rest, for the
grace and glory of al their flock.
rams of the sheep are clothed, and the subjects also and inferior people
shall be satiate with their happy lotte.
the valleis shall abound with corn: Al together, prelates and people, higher
and lovver shall with un. form voice sing praises to God, and perpetual hymns.
they will cry, yea they will say an hyme.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. LXIIII.
12. God vvil bless the crovvne] Under the Allegory of the land of Jury,
Perpetuity of the Church.
whereunto the people of God were to be restored, after their captivity in
Babylon, the Psalmist here prophecieth greater things, then can be verified S.
Aug. Eutym.
of the temporal state of the Jews, that the militant Church shall still be
blessed from the beginning to the end, yelding expected fruict; and all the
just, that persevere to the end of their lives, shall receive most happy and
glorious Reward of the just.
rewards of their labors. As S. Paul after his meritorious travels
confidently expected his glorious revvard, when he said (2. Tim. 4.) I have
fought a good fight, I have consummate my course, I have kept my faith:
Concerning the rest, there is laid up for me, a Crown of justice, which our
Lord vvil render to me Saints crowns are of Gods benignity.
in that day, a just Judge. And not only to me, but to them also that love his
coming. And this is called the crown of the year of Gods benignity, because
God of his own benignity, without man's former desert gives grace, and in
the end for merit following, gives a crown of glory. So our Blessed
Savior according to his fulness of grace, which was in his soul, and
infinite merit, received a crown of glory, in the consummation of his
temporal life, after the space of thirty three years. And our Blessed Lady
the mother The Corones of our Lord, and our Lady.
of God, received an answerable crown to her excellent grace and merits, in
the consummation of her life, at the end of sixty three years. In memory of
which numbers of years, devout men have piously instituted certain forms of
prayers, called the Crowns, or Corones of our Savior, and of our Lady.

PSALM. LXV.
The prophet inuiteth al men to praise God for his marvelous works, and
Gentiles succeed the Jews. the 6. key.
benefits done to the Jews. 7. Who being vngratful, 8. Gentiles are called,
16. and bring forth better fruict.

Unto the end, a Canticle Mystical resurrection, Gentiles succeding in place of
the Jews.
of resurrection.
Show your internal joy by external words and deeds.
iubilation to God all the earth, say a psalm

In drowning the world, in confounding the tongues in Babel, in burning Sodom
and Gomorrha with brimston, in plaging the Egyptians, in drowning Pharao and
his whole army in the read sea; in destroying the Chananites and other
infideles, in punishing the ten tribes, and afterward the other two by
captivity, and innumerable other punishments, al for sins,
How terrible are thy works o Lord! in the multitude of thy strength thine
enemies for which even the wicked, though not sincerly converted, yet of
servile fear, feaned and falsely promised to amend, but performed it not: as
Pharao afflicted with plagues, was forced to promise liberty to the children
of Israel, which he afterward denied.
shall lie to thee.





Who turns The read sea,
the sea into dry land, in when Iosue brought the people over Jordan,
the river they shall pass on foot, in remembering and reciting these singular
benefits.
there we shall rejoice in him.

Gods chosen people the Jews did often exasperate God by their ingratitude,
murmuring, and other sins: whom the prophet therefore admonishes,
they that exasperate him let them not to be proud, lest they be subdued, and
brought low.
not be exalted in themselves.

By way of inuitation the Psalmist prophecieth the conversion of Gentiles.
Gentiles bless our God: and make the voice of his praise heard.

The voice of the whole Church: confessing Gods providence and protection, that
she never fails; for the Jews falling from Christ the Gentiles believed in
him; and some nations, or countries falling from Religion, others are converted.
my soul in life: and has not given my feet to be moved.

God suffers his Church to be persecuted with all kinds of tribulation, as
some are here recited.
have proved us o God: by fire thou have tried us, as silver is tried.



But through Gods assistance his servants pass through, and overcome al
tentations.
We have passed through fire and water: and thou have brought us out into
refreshing.

I will go into thy house with Sacrifice of thanks,
holocaustes: I will render and voluntary vows,
my vows: which my lips have distinguished. that which any promises to God
in tribulation, they must perform accordingly.
my mouth has spoken in my tribulation.

Th^se were the best external sacrifices of the old law.
Holocaustes with marrow will I offer to thee, with incense of rams: I will
offer to thee oxen with bucke goats.

But both then and now the internal sacrifices of contrite heart, of justice,
and of divine praise best please God
Come ye, hear, and I will tell al ye that fear God, what great things he has
done for my soul.

from the heart, which is under the tongue, and directs the tongue what to
speak.
under my tongue.

Whosoever will be heard in prayer, must repent of his sins.
If I have beheld iniquity in my heart, our Lord will not hear.

Therefore has God heard, and has attended to the voice of my petition.



PSALM LXVI. Propagation of the Church the 6. key.

The prophet prays for (and withal foreshoweth) the propagation of the Church
of Christ.

Unto the end, in hymes, a Psalm This Psalm beginning to be songue by voices,
instruments were adjoined.
of Canticle to David.
God first remitte our sins:
have mercy upon us, and then give us thy manifold graces,
bless us: grant faith and repentance,
illuminate and so forgeuenes of sins.
have mercy on us.



Al nations shall be converted.
let al peoples confess to thee.



Let peoples o God confess to thee, let al peoples confess

God the Fater,
God, God the Son,
our God bless us, God the Holy Ghost, save the peoples of al nations, by
Euangelical preaching of thee, the most Blessed Trinity.
. God bless us: and let all the ends of the earth fear him.

PSALM LXVII.
Notwithstanding great persecutions the Church prospers. 10. Especially The
Church still conserved. The 6. key.
in the new testament, by Apostolical function, 18. ministry of Angels,
Christ's Ascension, coming of the Holy Ghost, 31. confirming the faithful,
repressing the insolent, and converting many. 35. For all which the prophet
inuiteth al men to praise God.

Unto the end, a Psalm of Canticle, to David himself.
In manner of praying that God will vouchsafe to defend the Church, the Psalmist
prophecieth that God will arise,
God arise, and let his enemies be dispersed, and let and the enemies shall flee
away, not daring to abide the combat.
flee from his face.



As God is terrible to the wicked: so he is comfortable to the just.
let the just make merry, and rejoice in the sight of God: and let them be
delighted in mirth.

Sing to God, say a Psalm to his name: Resist not Gods inspiration, but
receive it with joy and thanks.
make way to him, who who triumphs over death
mounteth upon the west, God is Lord, not only of these or those nations,
countries or other creatures, but absolutely and universally of al.
Lord is his name.

Rejoice ye in his sight, they shall be trubled at the presence of him: the
father of orphans, and judge of widows. That is the true holy Church, which
has
holy place: God that makes men to inhabit unity in doctrine, touching faith
and ma^ers.
of one manner in a house.

That brings forth them, That be bond in sin
that be bound, in strengh, S. Cypr. ep. 76.
likewise them, that even rebellious wills are altered by Gods mercy, and
freely embrace his law
exasperate, that dwell also the dead and dry hearts that cared not for
spiritual things, are softened, and quickened with new grace.
in sepulchers.

The benefits bestowed on the Israelites, are written in the books of Moses,
Iosue, and Judges.
when thou wentest forth in the sight of thy people, when thou did pass
through the desert.



Not man's deserving, but Gods mere good will, and free grace caused Christ to
come, and by himself and his Apostles to preach the Euangelical doctrine, which
waters the whole world,
Voluntary rain shall thou seperat o God to thine inheritance: and it was God
chose the weak, but made them strong.
weakened, but thou have persited it.

Those whom thou have chosen, and so made thyn own peculiar people, shall enjoy
this grace.
living creatures shall dwell in it: thou have prepared Thou gave Manna in the
desert, the B Sacrament in the new testament.
in thy swetnes for the poor, o God.

God gives to the preacher what to speak,
the word to them that euanglize, and to some he gives also power to work
miracles, in confirmation of their doctrine. Mar. 16.
with great power.

Some potent king, or (as it is in the Hebrew) kings being beloved, of the
beloved of God, the only Son of God, shall yield themselves to the same beloved
Son of God:
king of hoastes the beloved of the beloved: and which shall redound to the
glory and beauty of his Church, gayning such spiritual prays from the devil.
to the beauty of the house, to divide the spoils.

If you be in such danger, that the adversaries cast dice, o^ lottes for your
persons, and goods, yet you shall be delivered, as if a dove, with her
glistering feathers, like silver and gold, fly away into a secure place,
without loss or diminution, but rather with increase of virtues.
sleep among the midst of the lottes, the wings of a dove laid over with
silver, and the hinder parts of her back in the palenes of gold.

Whiles When the heavenly king determines thus of earthly kings,
the heavenly discerns kings over her, they shall be purged from their
sins, and made white like snow, that falls in mount Selmon, which is a
shadowed hill, thick with trees, in mount Ephraim nere to Jordan.
with snow they shall be made white in Selmon.

" The The Church of God is visible, and durable like to a mountane.
mountane of God a fat mountane.

Combined, or joined together, as when milk is turned into curde, and so into
cheese.
crudded as cheese, a fructful, enriched by spiritual gifts of the Holy Ghost*
fat mountane: " why ye that are not of this Church, do in vain and
erroniously imagine, that any other mountains are united.
suppose you crudded mountanes?

A mountane, in which it has well pleased God to dwell therein: for in deed our
Lord will dwell even to the end.

Innumerable Angels ministers of Gods will, do continually attend upon his
Divine Majesty, as if he (who otherwise needs no service) were carried by
them, as in a chariotte of infinite magnificence. Dan 7.
chariote of God is ten thousand fold, thousands of them that rejoice, our
Lord in them, So God appeared in Majesty, when he gave his law in mount Sinai.
in Sina in the holy place.

Christ ascended with innumerable Angels attending upon him,
ascended on high, thou carried with him the fathers of the old testament, that
had benne captive,
have taken captivity: Ephesians. 4.
thou as man he received gifts of God, in and for men, his faithful servants,
have received gifts in men: for even those yea also he received for his
merit, that innumerable, which before were incredulous, were converted, and
God dwelt in their souls.
that do not believe, our Lord God to inhabit.



Our Lord, I say, our Lord, and none but he could overcome death by dying.
the issues of death are of our Lord, our Lord.

Though Christ died to deliver al men from death yet he will give capital
sentence of eternal death to all that obstinatly remain his enemies, and
multiply sins upon sins, to the end of their temporal life.
still break the heads of his enemies: the hearie croune of them, that walk in
their sins.

Even of the iudest barbarous nations, many shall be converted to Christiantie
of Basan I will convert, I will convert namely Gods grace is extended into the
Islands of the Ocean, and other seas.
into the depth of the sea.

But such severe slaughter shall fall upon the obstinate contemners of this
grace, that men's feet shall be defiled in their blood, and dogs shall lap it.
may be dipped in blood: the tongue of thy Exi^i^^^^ ab ^^^.
dogs [ made redde] with * the same [ bloud] of the enemies.

They Many have seen, or known in general, but the faithful more exactly know
how Christ came into this world, his conversation therein, and his going forth:
have seen thy entringes in o God, the entrings of my God: of my King Who is
his reigning now in heaven our Mediator, by whom al other intercessors have
access to God.
in the holy place.

The Apostles sowing the first seed of Euangelical doctrine,
Princes came before with whom other Apostolical men,
joined with them that sang, in the mids and other souls of al nations
converted by their preaching, most joyfully sing together in heart, voice, and
instruments: especially in good works, show their gratful affections to our
Redeemer.
of young women plaing on tymbrels.

And all this in the particular Churches of diverse Kingdoms, and parts of the
world;
churches bless ye God our Lord, of beginning with the Israelites in
Jerusalem, and so proceeding into al fury, and Samaria, and to the vt most of
the earth. Act. 1.
the fountains of Israel.

There S. Paul of Jacobs youngest son Benjamin, last called to Apostleship,
was chiefly sent to the Gentiles.
Benjamin a youngman, in excess of mind.

Other Apostles of diverse tribes sent first to the Jews, secondarily to
Gentiles.
The Princes of Judah: their leaders: the Princes of Zabulon, the Princes of
Nephthali.

As the Church begane by the omnipotent power of God; so by the same only power
it is conserved.
confirm this o God, which thou have wrought in us.



Chastise therefore o God, al persecuters of thy Church, who are but as weak
wavering reeds, in comparison of thy power:
the wild beasts of the reed, the congregation no better then bulls, with
kyne, that is, captains and popular people,
of bulls in the kine of thy peoples: endeavoring to alienate the constant
proved confessors from their faith.
that they may exclude them, which are tried with silver.

A prophecy that many should be converted to Christ in Egypt, and Aethiopia:
as appears by the innumerable multitude of religious Monks, and Nuns in
those countries, shortly after the Apostles days.
out of Egypt: Aethiopia shall prevent his hands to God.

Ye kingdoms The like afterward in all other nations, whom therefore the
prophet inuiteth to praise God, for so inestimable benefits in the whole world.
of the earth sing to God: sing to our Lord:



Behold he will give to his voice Christ will come to judge, in terror of voice,
and with magnificence, accompanied with holy Angels and other Saints.
the voice of strength, give you glory to God upon Israel, his magnificence,
and his power in the clouds.



ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. LXVII.
16. The mountain of God.] For better discerning the true Church from other
Marks of the Church: Visibilitie. Sanctity.
congregations, the Prophet here describes certain proprieties thereof, for he
calls it a mountane, because it is most visible to al men Secondly a fat
mountane, that is, replenished with al virtues, and gifts of the Holy Ghost;
vvherof it is called Holy. Thirdly it is crudded, or consolidated in unity of
Unity.
faith and Religion, which conioyne the whole body, making it solid and
firm, as the ruen turns liquide milk into curde, and so into cheese.
Fourtly, Perpetuity. Assured verity.
it is the Congregation, vvherin God alvvayes remaneth, even to the end, for
ever; which shows two other proprieties; that the Church never fails;
nor erreth in doctrine: God still dwelling therein, and consequently conserueth
it from error in doctrine.

17. Why suppose you crudded montaines] As for other congregations, it is
certain No other pretended Church has the mark of unity or the rest.
and evident, that they are not the Church of God, because they are not
crudded, that is, not united, in the same points of faith, but only in
negative points, and in general opposition against the Catholic Church, and
among themselves notoriously disagreing and divided. As they also want the
other marks of the true Church.

PSALM. LXVIII.
Christ in mids of afflictions (as one in dangerous waters) 5. describing the
Christ's afflictions and victory, the 5. key.
malice of persecutors, and his own true zele, 14. prays his heavenly
Father for help. 23. By way of just imprecation, forsheweth the severe
punishment of his adversaries, 30. his own glorious Resurrection, and
prosperous building of his Church. For which he inuiteth al creatures to praise
God.

Unto Perteyning to the new Testament,
the end, for gentiles converted to Christianity, and from vice to virtue,
for them that shall be changed, prefigured in David.
to David.
Vehement afflictions inuir on my heart.
waters are entered into my

I am as one entangled with quickesand, or quadmyre in the bottom of a great
vva^^^.
stick fast in the mire of the depth: and there is no sure standing.

I am come into the depth of the sea: and a tempest has overwhelmed me.

Our Lord sweat blood for anguish in his prayer, and was not delivered from
his Passion, neither are his servants presently delivered from tribulations,
but as is most to Gods honor and their own good.
labored crying, my jaws are made hoarse: my eyes have failed, whiles I hope
in my God.

Joan. 15.
me without cause.

Mine enemies are made strong, that have persecuted me unjustly: Our Savior
who had no sin, pay de the ransom for all sins.
then did I pay the things that I took not.

O God thou know, that this which seems folly to worldly men, is true
wisdom;
foolishnes: and and though men charge me with offenses, thou know that I
am innocent.
mine offenses are not hide from thee.

Suffer not the weak to be scandalized in my passions.
Let them not be ashamed upon me, which expect thee o Lord, Lord of hosts.

Let them not be confounded upon me that seek thee, o God of Israel.





The zele of seeking God honor, in propagaring and advancing his Church, is
the cause of persecution. As we see those are less persecuted, which have
less godly zele.
the zele of thy house has eaten me: and the Joan. 2. Romans 15.
reproaches of them that reproched thee, fell upon me.

The wicked do reproach those that mortify themselves.
was made a reproach to me.

And I put hear cloth my garment, and I became a parable to them.

The great men and judges, also the drunkards and rascalitie of the people.
that sat in the gate; and they soong aganst me that drank wine.

But I direct my prayer to thee.
my prayer to thee o Lord: a time of thy good pleasure o God.

Expecting the time of thy good pleasure.
In the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation:

^ribulations.
waters.

Let not the tempest of water drown me, nor the depth swallowe me: Though
Christ died and was buried, and in soul descended into hell, yet he could not
be holden in his sepulcher, nor in limbo, but rose again.
neither let the pit shut his mouth upon me.





That they may either be converted, or confounded, and so do no more hurt.
because of mine enemies deliver me.

Thou know my reproach, and my confusion, and my shame.



And I expected some body that would be sorry together with me, and there Not
any that could mitigate our Saviors affliction, would show compassion
toward him.
^at. 27.
was none: and that would confort me, and I found not.

But contrativvise when he complained of thirst, they gave him gal and vinegre
to drink.
gal for my meat: and in my thirst they gave ^an. 19.
me vinegre to drink.

A prophecy of the destruction of the Jews, at the time of Pasch, when they
should think^ to eat their paschal lamb with joy.
Let their table be made a snare before them, and for retributions, ^om. 11.
and for a scandal.

They are also blind in heart, that they vvil not see the truth of Christ's
doctrine:
Their eyes be darkened that they see not: and make but bovv themselves to
earthly things, and worldly gains even to this day.
their back crooked always.



(...). 1.


Christ, whom God of this mercy designed to suffer death, for redemption of
mankind, the Jews of mere envy and malice persecuted to death.
whom thou have stricken, they have persecuted: and upon the sorrow of my wounds
they have added.

A prophecy that God would suffer them, to fall from one iniquity to an other.
iniquity upon their iniquity: and let them not enter into thy justice.

In the end of their lives, they shall not be found in the book of life, where
they suppose themseelues to be written.
Let them be put out of the book of the living: and with the just let them not
be written.

The voice of Christ, humbling himself to death, even to death of the Cross:
I am poor and sorrowful: from which he rose again.
thy salvation o God has received me.



Devout praise and thankesgeuing please God more then sacrifices of the most
tender calves, which were otherwise also gratful sacrifices.
it shall please God more then a young calfe: that brings forth horns and
hoofes.



God does assuredly comfort al such, as are imprisoned for professing the truth.
his prisoners.

All the creatures of God.
the heavens and earth praise him, the sea, and all the creeping beasts in them.

God will alvvayes establish and protect the Catholic Church:
Because God will save Sion: and and particular Churches, members of the
universal shall also prosper.
the cities of Judah shall be built up.

And they shall inhabit there, and by inheritance they shall get it.

Perpetu^l succession of the Catholic Church.
the seed of his servants shall possess it, and they that love his name shall
dwell in it.

PSALM. LXIX.
An other prayer of David, when he was persecuted by Absalom: made in David's
prayer in persecution. the 8. key.
a Psalm after his delivery.

Unto An apt prayer also for the afflicted in the nevvv Testament,
the end, a Psalm of David, in remembrance, that our from the danger of
Absalom. (2. Reg. 18.) or from any persecutor.
Lord saved him.
Al men at al times need Gods help:
intend unto my help: Lord but most present need, in present dangers. The rest
of this Psalm is contained in the 39. Psalm, from the 15. verse. but there
the whole Church prays for help, the world being almost drowned in sins;
here David, or other particular persons, or peoples pray in their several
distresses,
make have to help

Let them be confounded, and be ashamed, that seek my Psalm. 39.
soul.



Let them be turned away forthwith ashamed, that say to me: Well, well.





PSALM. LXX.
King David, or any other just person, prays God to continue his grace, A
prayer for perseverance in virtue. the 7. key.
and protection against the malice of the enemy. 5. Recounteth Gods mercy in
delivering him from falling into tentations. 6. prays for the same in old
age, or weakness of body and spirit, 20. and promises perpetual gratitude
and praises.

A Psalm Though this Psalm (as also diverse others) is entitled to, or for
David, it proves not that some other was the author thereof, but the Seventy
Interpreters in sinuate hereby, that it perteyneth in more particular sort to
David, growing old;
for David, they add also the sons of Ionadab a most holy family,
of the sons of Ionadab, and who for their singular piety, were suffered to
remain in Jerusalem, in the first captivity. Ierem. 35.
the former captives.
The words of David, or any faithful just person.
I have hoped, let me not be confounded God of his justice reuengeth the
injuries Psalm. 30.
done to his servants.
thy justice deliver me, and receive me.

Incline thine ear to me, and save me.



Because thou art my firmament, and my refuge.



Through thy grace I have patience to expect thy pleasure, when I shall be
relieved.
my patience o Lord my hope from my youth.

Upon thee have I been confirmed from the womb: from my mothers belly thou
art my protector.

It seems strange to most men, why the just have more trubles then the wicked.
a wonder: and thou art a strong helper.

A necessary prayer for perseverance, which none can have without special and
continual help of grace.
all the day thy greatness.

Against this special danger, and last assaults of the enemy, Christ has
instituted the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.
when my strength shall ^aile, forsake me not.









But I will always hope: and The best means to conserve virtue, is to exercise
the same, adding good works toward our neighbors, and praises to God.
will add upon al thy praise.

My mouth shall show forth thy justice: all the day thy I profess not exact
knowledge of natural things;
I have not known lerning, but I consider and contemplate the infinite power
of God, which appears in his works,
I will enter into the and his just judgments; as partly have appeared in
punishing, and rewarding some in this life, but especially will be manifest in
the end of this world.
powers of our Lord: o Lord I will be mindful of







How great tribulations have thou showed me, many and evil: and turning thou
After tribulations recreated me.
have quickened me: and from the depthes of the earth thou have brought me
back again.





I will praise thee with mouth and heart.
lips shall rejoice when I shall sing to thee; and my soul, which thou have
redeemed.



PSALM. LXXI.
By way of prayer the Psalmist prophecieth Christ's coming, our King and Christ
our king and Judge. the 5. key.
Judge: 4. the deliverer of mankind from the thraldom of the devil. ^. the
greatness of his spiritual kingdom in the Gentiles. 16. and his continual glory
and praise.

This Psalm is of Christ, perfigured by Solomon, whose kingdom was most
glorious of all the kings of Gods people; for of king Solomon himself many
things in this Psalm can not be truly understood. S. Aug.
Concerning Solomon.
O God most blessed Trinity, give power and authority, to the Son of Man,
God incarnate, King of al kings,
the king: and thy justice the Son of king David, to judge for mankind
against the devil.
the son of the king.

To judge thy people in Christ paying ransom for all mankind, and so man
renouncing the devil, and serving God is justly, not injuriously delivered from
captivity of sion^, and of the devil.
justice, and thy poor in judgment.

A prophecy of the Apostles receiving power to preach Christ's Gospel, of peace
and reconciliation of men to God by penance;
the mountains receive peace for the people: and and of other Apostolical men
that follow the^^ steps.
the little hills justice.

Solomon in figure of Christ was for a time a just and good king.
shall judge the poor of the people, and shall save the children of the poor:
and he shall humble the calumniator.

And he shall But only Christ, not Solomon, nor any other king of that people,
contineweth, or reigns for ever.
continue with the sun, and before the moon in generation and generation.

The manner of Christ's Incarnation most silent, sweet, and gratful.
shall descend as rain upon a fleece: and as drops distilling upon the earth.

Agane the prophet inculcateth that Christ's kingdom, his Church, shall continue
for ever.
until the moon be taken away.

The Church is not only universal in all times, but also in places.
from sea unto sea: and from the river even to the ends of the round world.

Isaiae 6^*
shall lick the earth.

The three Sages or Kings, which adored our Savior, and offered gold,
frankencense, and myrrh, were the first that fulfilled this prophecy: and
afterward Constantin the great, and other Emperors, Kings, and Princes.
kings of Tharsis, and Amongst other Islands great Bryttannie (the greatest of
Europe) was converted to Christ, according to this prophecy: first some few in
the Apostles time (Metaphrastes apud Surium, Theodoret, epist. ad Timoth.
Sophronius, Ser. de Not. Apost, and alij.) More in the time of Eleutherius.
Lastly our Englisc nation by S. Augustine and others sent by S. Gregory.
the Islands shall offer presents: Mat. ^.
the kings of the Arabians, and of Saba shall bring gifts.









How is this prophecy verified* except the Church be always visible?
he shall live, and there shall be given him of the gold of Arabia, and they shall
adore it always: all the day they shall bless him.





And all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed in him: al nations shall
magnify him.

Blessed be our Lord the God of Israel, No miracles can be done but by Gods
power.
who only does marvelous things.

Above al other desires the holy prophet wished Gods glory, and praises in all
the earth, as it is in heaven.
Be it, be it.

It seems by this appendix added by Esdras, that this Psalm was last
composed, though not put in the last place, but as it came to his hands.
The praises of David, David the natural son of Iesse, made no more Hymns,
that is, no more musical praises of God after this Psalm, but the prefigured
David Christ our Savior, the Son of God, in his body the Church, sings
full new praises S. Aug* in enarrat. Psalm. sequentis. 72.
the son of Iesse are ended.

PSALM. LXXII.
The royal prophet, first professing the unspeakable goodness of God, 2. in
Affliction in this world is recompensed in the end. the* 9. key.
the person of the weak complains, that the wicked prosper, and the just are
afflicted. 15. reprehendeth the murmuration, for though we can not comprehend
the secret judgments of God. 18. yet they are most just. 25. So with desire
to rest in God, he promises ever to praise him.

A Psalm To be songue by Asaph the master of music, and his company.
to Asaph.
God is so excellent good, as no tongue can express, no heart can conceive.
good is God to Israel, to them, that are of a right heart! Psalm. 39.


The peace and prosperity of the wicked tempted me, to leave the right narrow
way, and to go the broad easy way with them.
my feet were almost moved, my steps almost slipped.



Because there is They never think of death;
no respect to their death: and and if they suffer some affliction, they
quickly remove it from them.
stabilitie in there plague.

They travel not so much as good men do, neither are they so often punished.
the labors of men they are not, and with men they shall not be scourged.

Which makes them proud, and so they run into al sorts of iniquity.
has pride held them, they are covered with their iniquity and impiety.

Their iniquity has proceeded as it were of fat: they have passed into
Whatsoever mischief came in their mind, they feared not to commit it in fact.
the affection of the heart.

boldly extolling their own words and works, and despising others.
on high.



For this prosperity of the wicked, some of Gods people will fall from the
right way,
return here: and and their days will abound with calamities.
full days shall be found in them.

The voice of the weak, inclining to diffidence, and doubt of Gods knowledge,
and providence.
How does God know, and is there knowledge in the highest?







The prophet in his own person answers, that if he should say such things,
he should reprove Gods children, as faulty, unworthy of his protection, and
to be neglected; whereas it is Gods providence to chastise his children whom he
loves.
I reproved the nation of thy children.

I In this life we can not know the particular causes, why the just are
afflicted, and many wicked prosper in this world.
thought to know this thing, it is labor before me:



But only in general we are taught, that evils are prepared for the guiles, or
deceptes,
for guiles thou have put it to them: thou have cast them down whiles they
pride, and other sins of the wicked.
were elevated.



Not real but imaginary felicity.
image to nothing.

Because my heart is Almost burned up with afflictions.
inflamed, and my reins are changed:

And I am brought to nothing, and knew not.

Charged with heavy burdens, without knowledge how long, or to what end,
a beast am I become with thee: and I yet not destitute of thy protection.
always with thee.



Nothing to be desired in heaven, nor in earth but God.
in heaven? and besides thee what would I upon the earth?

In body and mind I thirst after thee, my true inheritance.
flesh has fainted, and my heart: God of my heart, and God my portion for ever.

Men by their freewil make themselves enemies to God.
that make them selves fair from thee, shall perish: thou determined their
damnation, forseing their final sins.
have destroyed al, that fornicate from thee.



That I may show forth al thy praises, in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

PSALM. LXXIII.
Faithful people pressed with persecution lamentably complaining, besecheth A
prayer in long affliction. the 7. key.
God to respect his own inheritance, cruelly afflicted; ^^. and leift long
without help, 12. whereas heretofore he relieved his people in like distresses.
18. And therefore confidently hops he will renenge the blasphemers of his name,

Understanding Instruction for the congregation of the faithful in distress,
not to seek temporal toward and prosperity, but to expect spiritual and
eternal. S. Aug.
to Asaph.
In long persecution the weak begin to fear, or suspect, that God has
utterly abandoned them.
repelled for ever: is thy fury wrath upon the sheep of thy pasture?

But the stronger pray with confidence,
mindful of thy congregation, being assured that God who has conserved his
Church hitherto, from the beginning of the world, will conserve it st(...) the
end.
which thou have possessed from the beginning.

Thou have An other reason why God will conserve his Church is, because he has
delivered it often
redeemed the rod of thine inheritan^^e: mount Sion, in which thou have dwelt.

Thirdly the pride of the enemies moves God to revenge their wickedness, and so
to deliver his own people.
their prides for ever: how great things has the enemy done malignantly in
the holy place*

They pretend to keep solemn feasts like to thine.
thy solemnity.

They set up altars against thyn altares, or some new devised external show,
against the holy Rites of the Church:
their signs, for signs: and have not known, and that in public places, in
the ends of high ways, or po^^es, and pinnacles.
as in the issue on high.

The prophet describes the manner how persecutors destroy temples, and al
sacred things.
in a wood of trees they have with axes cut out the gates thereof together: in
hatchet, and chippeaxe they have cast it down. 4. Reg ^




The whole crew, or band of persecutors.
kindred together have said in their heart: Let us make all the festiual days of
God to cease from the earth.

The weak complain that God shows not w^^ted signs, nor sends succourse
to his people, by raising some prophet* or other means to help them.
signs we have not seen, there is now no prophet: and he will know us no more.



Luc. 1* 70.


The perfect do answer, that God both has, and will relieve his people.
God our king before the worlds: he has wrought salvation in the mids of
the earth.

Made the red sea like waves*
the sea: thou have drowned Pharao and his host.
crushed the head of Dragons in the waters.

Thou have broken the heads of the dragon: thou have given him for meat to the
peoples of black devils.
of the Aethiopians.

given water out of rocks,
broken up fountanes, and torrentes: thou have dried the rivers made passage
over Jordan.
of Ethan.









Ignorant, blind, and barbarous infidels, lodge al kinds of iniquity in their
consciences.
obscure of the earth, are filled with houses of iniquities.

and therefore it is unmeet, that faithful people should be in bondage under
th^^.
Let not the humble be turned away being confounded: the poor and needy shall
praise thy name.

These foolish audacious men do continually blaspheme al holy things.
from the foolish man all the day.

Omite not to punish them,
Forget not the voices of thine enemies: the seeing they are obstinate and
obdurate in pride, and ^^ hatred.
pride of them that hate thee, has ascended always.

PSALM LXXIIII.
Christ (with his Assessors) will judge the whole world, at the last day: in
General judgment. the 9. key.
the mean time exhorts sinners to amend their life; 7. for none shall escape
just judgment. 1^. The wicked shall be punished, and the good rewarded.

Unto the end, Either this was the beginning of a songue, to the tune whereof
this Psalm was song; as some Hebrew Rabbis testify; or, as S. Augustine and
other fathers explicate, the Septuagint do admonish us, by occasion of this
Psalm, not to fa^le in our hope, for that God will in no case violate his
promise no^ purpose, but will render to every one in the day of Judgment, as
they deserve.
Corrupt not, a Psalm of Canticle to Asaph.
WE Christ with his Apostles, and other assessorie judges, will praise and
thank God, for his admirable good providence, and government of this world.
will confess to thee o God: This duplication of the same word, confirms us
of the assured performance of that, which is here prophesied.
we will confess,

Christ our singular, principal, and proper Judge only, and no mere creature,
knows the determinate time of general judgment.
I shall take a time, I will judge justices.

The earth at that time shall be purged with flaming fire:
The earth is melted, and all that dwell in it: yet shall not be destroyed, but
changed in qualities.
I have confirmed the pillars thereof.

An epitome, or brief sum of Christ's doctrine, to f^ee from sin.
do not wickedly: and to them that offend: be not proud, abuse not the power
you have, to do what you please.
Exalt not the horn.



For neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the When other Judges
sit on tribunales, some may be absent, or escape from their sentences* but al
without exception shall be brought in persons, when Christ God and Man shall
judge.
because God is Judge.

Some shall have sentence of eternal pain in hell; some of eternal reward in
glory,
This man he humbles, and him he exalts, though (partly in this world,
partly in particular judgment of every soul) God has alreardy, and will
before the last day punish sinners, yet there rests more punishment, and no
impenitent sinners shall escape, but al shall drink of the bitter cup of
eternal damnation.
because there is a cup in the hand of our Lord strong wine not delayde with
water, but mingled with bitter sharp things, as gal, vinegre, brimstone etc.
and so powered into festered wounds, so they shall suffer intolerable endless
pain, mixed with the worm of conscience, loss of glory, rancor of heart, and
eternal desperation*
of mere wine full of mixture.

And he has powered it out Variety of hellish torments, from one extreme to an
other: as from snow waters to exceeding heat. Job. 24.
of this into that, but yet the dregs thereof are not emptied: all the sinners
of the earth shall drink.

But I will shewforth for ever: I will sing to the God of Jacob.

The just for well using their power of free will, and of al power given them in
this life, are rewarded in heaven.
the horns of the just shall be exalted.

PSALM. LXXV.
The royal prophet sings Gods praises, for his particular providence Gods
providence toward his people the 3. key.
toward the Jews: 10. further to be extended to all the meek of the whole
earth.

Unto the end, in praises, a Psalm For the congregation of faithful and godly
people
to Asaph, a Canticle to Amongst others, one notorious example of Gods
providence is recorded of an hundred fourscore and five thousand Assirians,
slame in one night by an Angel. 4. Reg. 19.
the Assirians.
God was not only known in general, as to pagane Philosophers, and some
others, but more particularly to the Jews, the issue of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, by his special benefits toward them.
in Iewrie: in Israel his name is

God suffering al other nations to err for their sins, in their fond
phantesies of false gods, reserved the Israelites for his Church,
his place is made in peace: and establishing the principality thereof in Sion.
his habitation in Sion.

For obtaining and conseruing of Sion from wicked Infidels, God ouerthrewe al
sorts of contrary forces.
There he brake the powers of bows, the shilde, the sword, and the battle.

Thou God not only gave his people temporal victories over their enemies, but
also illuminated their minds with knowledge of true religion:
do illuminate meruelousely from the eternal others are often trubled in
mind, hearing the truth, but are not converted through their obstinate folly.
were trubled.

They Worldly men in supine carlesnes as in a sleep, pass over this life,
and afterward find themselves excluded from heaven, for lack of merits, and
good works, with the foolish virgins.
slept their sleep: and all the men of riches found nothing in their hands.

God undertaking the defense of his people, and threatening the adverse part,
thy reprehension o God of Jacob, they they failed in courage, as men overcome
with drowsines of sleep.
have al slumbered that mounted on horses.

Even from the first notice of thy will, the adversaries were dejected, fearing
thy po^e^^ wrath.
from that time thy wrath.

From Terrible signs from the firmament appearing before the day of judgment,
heaven thou The Prophets ^^ often speak in the pretertence, for the
assurance of the things to come.
have made thy judgment heard: persecuters and others being terrified shall be
astonished and silent.
the earth trembled and was quiet.

God vvil come to judge the world, more especially for the iusts sake.
that he might save all the meek of the earth.

Men that shall seriously think and meditate upon these things, vvil praise
and thank God for them:
the cogitation of man shall confess to thee: and and the effect, and svvere
repast of such meditation, shall make as it were a great festiual day, in the
devout soul spiritually joined with God.
the remanes of the cogitation shall keep festiual day to thee.

The soul thus inflamed with Gods love, is then apt of gratitude, for his
goodness toward man, to make vows of things whereto we are not obliged,
Vow ye, and but most necessary it is to be maturely advised, and not rashly,
nor lightly to vovv; for being once vowed, we are strictly bound to
whatsoever we have lavvfully promised. And it is great sin to v^vv
indiscreetly.
render to our Lord your God: al ye that round about him bring gifts.

Remembering that for vows, and al other works we must answer to God, who
is a terrible judge, ready to punish in body and soul., sparing none for
their greatness, not princes, nor kings, nor vulgar sort, for all are to him
alike.
the terrible, and him that takes away the spirit of princes, terrible to the
kings of the earth.

PSALM. LXXVI.
Any faithful devout person meditating Gods benefits, 7. examineth his Gods
special protection of the Jews. the. 4. key.
conscience, that nothing be in his soul, that may offend God. Who is always
ready to forgive: 11. and therefore he still renews his purpose to serve God
sincerly, 15. particularly remembering the delivery of Israel from Egypt.

Unto the end, for For Idithun to sing, or to make tune for it.
Idithun, a psalm For the faithful congregation to consider Gods benefits.
to Asaph.
Having heretofore prayed,
my voice I have cried to our Lord: with my Psalm. 14^.
voice to God I have obtained.
and he attended to me.

Especially being in tribulation, and praying with heart and hands lifted up,
as well in the night as day:
in the night before him: and I I was not frustrate of my prayer.
was not deceived.

My I was sometimes in such anguish that nothing seemed comfortable,
soul refused to be comforted, I but I (...)d upon God so firmly,
was mindeful of God, and was delighted, and was exercised: and that my spirit
came in^o an ex^asie, o^^^aunce.
my spirit fainted.

I arose early before the ordinary time of away king,
prevented the watches: I was my heart being attentive inwardly, I uttered
nothing with my tongue
trubled, and spoke not.



I diligently examined my conscience.
swept my spirit.

Assuredly God vvil not reject for ever, but he vvil be pleased with his Church.
will God reject for ever: or will he not add to be better pleased as yet?





VVhiles I thus thought, I erred greatly, now I see and confess that God
suffers al calamities for the good of his servants:
Now have I begune: and this I knevv not by my self, but by the inspiration of
God, making this change in me by his gracious hand.
this is the change of the right hand of the Highest.





O God in the holy is thy way: what God is great as our

The progeny of Jacob, received and nourished in Egypt for Joseph's sake, as
his adopted children.
Jacob, and Joseph.

The read sea, and Jordan felt thy divine power, and obeyed thy will.
saw thee o God, the waters saw thee: and they were afraid, and the depthes
were trubled.

A Noise of waters meeting after the Israelites were passed, thunders and
lightninges also hapened, to the terror of the persecutors, though not
mentioned in Exodus.
multitude of the sounding of waters: the clouds gave a voice.



Thy lightenings shined to the round world: the earth was moved and trubled.

Ex^. 14


By the ministry of Moses and Aaron.
in the hand of moses and Aaron.

PSALM. LXXVII.
The royal prophet exhorting the people to attend, 5. recites many great Gods
great Benefits bestovved upon the jews, and their ingratitude. the 4 key.
benefits of God toward their forefathers (whose ingratitude, often
rebellion, and chatisement he still notes) 9. as in their entrance into the
land of Chanaan: 12. also before the same in Egypt, and in the desort. 42. How
God plagued the Egyptians: 52. protected, and conducted his people into the
promised land. 56. where likewise they often offended. were punished: 65. yet
were still conserved: 69. and the tribe of Inde exalted in king David.

Understanding Commended to Asaph a* chief musician, that the people might
understand and consider Gods benefits.
to Asaph.
Neither the law, not the people was David's, but presenting Gods person, he
speaks in his name or authority, with whose inspitation he was
replenished. S. Greg. Prefat: in Job. c. 2.
my law: incline your ear unto the words of my mouth. Mat. ^^ 5. 35.


Albeit the prophet recites historically things done, yet the same were
parables, similitudes, and figures of other things:
parables: I will speak yea of secret hidden Mysteries, obscurly signified in
the old Testament, and reveled in the new.
propositions from the beginning.

which partly we know by written holy Sriptures:
have known them, and partly by Traditions.
our fathers have told us.

They were not hid from their children, in an other generation.

Telling the praises of our Lord, and his powers, and his marvelous works
which he has done.

God of his mercy without precedent merit, raised up a peculiar people of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
raised up a testimony in Jacob: and and gave them a particular law, first of
Circuncision, and more largely by Moses.
made a law in Israel.

So Abraham instructed his children and his house after him, Genesis 18.
to make the same known to their children: that in like sort others taught
their children.
an other generation may know.

The children that shall be borne, and shall rise up, and shall tell their children.

For three causes God gave his law, that his people may have confidence in him,
he showing his care to instruct and govern them;
put their hope in God, and may that they remember his benefits;
not forget the works of God: and may and keep his commandmentes.
seek after his commandmentes.

The Jewish nation very often, and in great numbers murmured, rebelled, and
committed other great sins, and therefore David exhorted the people of his
time, not to do the like. And this exhortation perteyneth more especially to
Charistianes. as S. Paul teaches. 1. Cor. 10.
a perverse generation and exasperating.

A generation, that has not directed their heart, their spirit has not been
faithful toward God.

They first (trusting in their own strength) without Gods commandment (Number.
14.) went forth to batle and were overthrown. 1. Par 7 v.21.
children of Ephrem bending, and shooting with ^. Par. 7. ^^^.
bow: were turned in the day of battle.





Tanis the principal city in Egypt nere the river Nilus, where Moses wrought
his great miracles.
of Tanis.

(...). 14.
the waters to stand as in a bottle.

And he This cloud shadowed them from the heat of the sun in the day, and
the fire shined in the night, all the time that they were in the desert.
conducted them in a cloud by day: and all the night by light of fire.

In mount Horeb: and there was continual water in all the camp, which occupied
nere four miles in length and breadth.
the desert: and gave them water to drink as in a great depth.



Which naturally wanted water: but by miracle had abundance.
without water.

Not content with Manna, they demanded to have flesh.
meats for their lives.

Still incredulous, not believing Gods omnipotency, they thought that, albeit he
had given them manna, and water, yet he could not give them flesh.
Can God prepare a table in the desert?



Can he also give By bread in general is understood al competent meat usual
for a table.
bread, or prepare a table for his people?

For this incredulity, murmuring, and other sins God kept the children of
Israel forty yares in the desert, t^l al hat were of age, when they came from
Egypt, were dead, except only Iosue and Caleb.
made delay: and In the mean time amongst other punishments, many mutmurers
wo^c burn^^o death with strange fire. Number. 11.
fire was kindled in Jacob, and wrath ascended upon Israel.

Because they believed not in God, nor hoped in his salvation.





Manna made by Angels.
of Angels did man eat: he sent them victuals in abundance.

God so changed the wind, that it brought abundance of quails and other
birds, into their camp. Exo. 16. Nu. 11.
transported the Southwinde from heaven: and in his power he brought in the
Southwestwinde.

And he rayned upon them flesh as dust: and as the sand of the sea fethered
fowls.

And they fell in the mids of their camp: about their tabernacles.



They were not defrauded of their desire.

Immediately after a month (for so long they had abundance of these birds
ibid. v. 20.) they were stricken with a plague, and many died, for their
concupiscence.
As yet their meats were in their mouth:

The most fresh strong men died, and so were hindered from possessing the
promised land of Chana an
the chosen of Israel he hindered.



And their days failed in vanity: and their years In forty years above six
hundred thousand died.
in have.

They offered morning sacrifice.
early they came to him.



But were not sincere in their hearts.
with their mouth, and with theirtongue they did lie to him.



Howsoever multitudes of people commit great sins, and are severely
punished, yet Gods mercy preferueth some by his effectual grace, and never
suffers the whole Church to fail, nor to be destroyed.
But he is merciful, and will be propicious to their sins: and he will not
destroy them.

And he abunded to turn away his wrath: and he kindled not al his wrath.

Man's life is like the wind, that still passes, and the same returns not. As
Aristotel teaches. Here the Hebrews note the mids of the Psalter, in 1263.
verses. and so many in the rest.
spirit going, and not returning.

The people of Israel murmured so often in the desert, that it was not easy to
tell how often See the Annotation.
often have they exasperated him in the desert: provoked him to wrath in the
place without water.

And For ef^soones repenting they offended God again and again.
they returned, and tempted God: and the holy one of Israel they exasperaed.



The first sign was in turning a rod into a serpent, which was a miracle,
but no plague, the other signs were also plagnes to the Egyptians.
his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the filde of Tanis.

The first plague.
their rivers into blood, and their Pooles, lakes, and al sorts of water, yea
showers, or rain water* which seldom happens in Egypt.
showers that they might not drink.

The fourth plague, in order as they are recited in Exodus.
a C^^^my^am.
swarm of flies, and it eat them: and The second plague.
the frogge, and it destroyed them.

This was a less plague, not mentioned in with the greater.
the blast, and their labors to The eight plague.
the locuste. Exodus.


The seventh plague.
hail: and their mulberie trees with This also is omitted in.
horefrost. Exodus.


Not only al trees, and plants, but also beasts were subject to the hail.
their beast to hail: and their possession and to fiery leghtnings.
to fire.

In these general terms, of wrath, indignation, and tribulation, the Prophet
comprehends all the other plagues, to wit, the third of scinies, the fifth
of pestilence, the sixth of boyles in men and beasts, the ninth of darkness
three days together.
the wrath of his indignation: indignation, and wrath, and tribulation:
immissions Al which God sent by the ministry of devils, evil angels.
by evil angels.



The tenth and greatest plague, 11. v. 5. and. c. 12. v. 29.
he stroke all the first borne in the land of Egypt: the first fruits of al
their labors in the tabernacles Egyptians also descended from cham, by his
son Mesraim. Genesis 10. v. 6.
of Cham. Exodus


After that Egypt was thus plagued, God brought Israel out of their servitude,
as a shepherd leddeth his sheep, and defends them.
took away his people as sheep: and led them as a flock in the desert.

And he brought them forth in hope, and they feared not: and the sea covered
their enemies.

Judea a hilly country.
the mount of his Into that country which God chose, and endewed with many
blessings.
sanctification, the mount, which his right hand purchased.

And he cast As is written in Iosue.
out the gentiles from their face: and by lot he divided the land of them in a
cord of distribution:

And he made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tabernacles.

After the conquest and quiet possession, the Israelites often fell into gross
sins, especially in the time of Judges.
they tempted, and exasperated God the highest, and they kept not his
testimonies.

A crooked bow deceives the archer, so this people failed to serve God, and
deceived them selves.
crooked bow.

In their altares erected in hills to Idols.
hills: and in their Scuptilibus.
grauens they provoked him By graven imagies of Idols, they provoked God to
indignation.
to emulation.

Not absolutely to nothing, but punished them exceedingly, til they repented;
and then spared and delivered them from tribulation, as appears in the book
of Judges.
excedingly.

The Ark of God sometime kept in Silo, Iosue 18. in the tribe of Ephraim, was
taken by the Philistims. 1. Keg. 4. and never returned thither agane.
of Silo, his tabernacle, but whersoeuer the Arc was, there God more
especially heard their petitions, and gave answers.
where he dwelt among men.

For their sins God suffered the Arc to be taken.
their force into captivity: and their beauty into the hands of the enemy.

And the Israelites to be sore afflicted by their enemies.
shut up his people in the sword: and he despised his inheritance.

The zele, and just wrath of God suffered these calamities to happen.
Fire devoured their young men* and their virgins were not lamented.

Ophni and Phinees the sons of Heli slain and Heli himself hearing that the
Arc was taken fell from his stool and broke his neck. 1. Reg 4.
Priests fell by the sword: and their widows were not wept for.

And Nevertheless God plagued the infidels, and conserved his Church. 1. Reg. 5.
our Lord was raised up as one that sleeps: ^ as a mighty man having
surfited of wine.



As before. v. 60.
of Joseph: and the tribe of Ephraim he chose not.

After a time the Arc was brought into the tribe of Judah.
of Judah, mount Sion which he loved.

The Church was firm, and ever preserved in the old testament til Christ, and
from Christ's time to the end of the world.
his sanctuary as of unicorns in the land, which he has founded for ever.

Gods particular grace in choosing, and exalting David, was a special benefit
to the Israelites.
he chose David his servant, and took him from the flocks of sheep: from
after the ewes with young he took him.

To To rule and govern the people of Israel.
feed Jacob his servant, and Israel his inheritance.

Prudently using his power and authority.
his hands he conducted them.

ANNOTATIONS PSALM: LXXVII.
40. How often have they exasperated?] Moses (Deu. 9. v. 7.) repeting what had
The people of Israel often murmured in the desert.
passed in the desert, charge the people that they had still provoked our lord
to wrath, from the day, that they came out of Egypt, and always contended
aganst him. And our lord himself expostulating their ingratitude, and often
murmuring says (Number. 14. v. 22.) in the beginning of the second year, that
Ten times more notori ously.
they had then tempted him ten times; either by this certain number
signifying an uncertain, or else chiefly ten times: for so often we find
recorded that they tempted him, and murmured within that small time more
notorionly. First nere, unto the red sea (Exodus 14. v. 11.) where seeing the
Egyptians 1.
pursuing them, they murmured against Moses, for bringing them out of Egypt,
saying: It had benne much better to have served the Egyptians, then to 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
die in the wilderness. Secondly, for want of sweet water. Exodus 15. v. 24.
Thirdly. for lack of meat, Exodus 16. v. 3. Fourtly, keeping Manna for the next
day, contrary to Gods commandment. ibid. v. 20. Fifthly, going on the Sabbath
day, also contrary to Gods commandment, together Manna. Ibid. v. 27. Sixthly,
for want of water in Raphidim. Exodus 17. v. 2 Number. 26. v. 2 Seuently in Horeb,
adoring a calfe and the image thereof Exodus 32 Eighthly, repyning for their
travels in the wilderness Nu, 11. v. 1. Nintly, loathing Manna, and burning with
desire to eat flesh. Ibid. v. 4. 5 6. Tently desparing to possess the
promised land of Chanaan, after that the discouerers had reported the
difficulties, with the force of the people, and of the cities against which
they must fight. Nu. 14. v. 1. Al which and the rest, says S. Paul, happened
to them in figure of us: and are written for our correption (or admonition)
that we murmur not as they did. 1. Cor. 10.

PSALM. LXXVIII.
The Prophet, in person of the Church, lamenteth the cruelty of persecutors
The Church suffers very great persecutions. the 6. key.
(both in the old and new testament) 5. prays for release, with just revenge
against Gods enemies, that blaspheme his name, 3. and promises to be gratful
in divine praises.

A Psalm to be sungue by Asaph and his company, in the behalf of people
united in faith.
to Asaph.
O God Cruel infidels have invaded those things, which perteyne to thy Church.
the Gentiles are come into thine inheritance, they even possessed and
profaned the holy temple of the Jews, and Churches of Catholic Christians.
Fulfilled by Antiochus, in Jerusalem; by the Vandals in Afrike, by Protestants,
and Puritanes, in diverse parts of Europe, and will be more universally by
Antichrist in all Christendom.
have polluted thy holy temple: they have made Jerusalem Instead of great and
fare Churches, Gods servants are fane to use mean houses, yea poor cotages.
as a watch toure of fruits.

Some persecutors suffer not Martyrs bodies to be buried, but hang them on
polles, and pinnacles, where birds may eat them.
the carcases of thy servants, meats for the fowls of the air: the flesh of
thy saints for the beasts of the land.



Christianes Gallileans, Catholics Homousians, and now Papists, in spite and
reproach.
become a reproach to our neighbors: a scorn and mock to them that are round
about us.

Sins provoking Gods wrath, are one cause why he suffers his people to be
persecuted.
be angry for ever: shall thy zele be kindled as a fire?

Though the faithful commit some sins, yet in respect that they believe
righly, have zele in Gods cause, and deny not God, they are nerer to grace and
favor.
that have not known thee: and upon the kingdoms, that have not inuocated thy
name.

Because they have devoured Jacob: and his place they have made desolate.

Especially when they repent, and confess their sins, then those that
neither know not will know God; but obstinatly impugn and resist the truth.
Remember not our old iniquities, let thy mercies quickly prevent us: because
we are become exceeding so much afflicted, and despised, that none will regard
the truth which we profess.
poor.



Albeit o Lord, thou suffer us to be punished, yet suffer not thyn enemies to
insult, as though thou were not our God; and consequently thou had no
people at al in the world.
where is their God? and Therefore we pray, that the revenge of thy servants
blood may be so notified, that it can not be denied, nor doubted of. Which is
also here prophesied, that it will so come to pass in the end.
be notified in the nations before our eyes.

The revenge of the blood of thy servants, which has benne shed: let the
groaning of thefettered enter in thy sight.

According to the greatness of thine arm, possess thou Preserve also, o God,
the relics of thy servants, the successors of thy Martyrs.
the children of them that are put to death.

This also is a prophecy, that God will most severely revenge the blasphemy of
persecutors.
render to our neighbors seuenfold in their bosom: their reproach where with
they have reproched thee o Lord.

Gods people delivered from persecution, and perpetually conserved, will always
praise God for the same.
we thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture, will confess to thee for ever:

Unto generation and generation we will show forth thy praise.

PSALM LXXIX.
The Prophet prays for the release of Israel in great tribulation. 15.
forsheweth Christ our Redemer from sin and captivity. the. 5. key.
the coming of Christ to redeem man from sin, and from thraldom of the devil.

Unto Perteyning to the new Testament,
the end, for especially to Gentiles, that shall be converted to Christ.
them, that shall be changed, testimony to for perpetual memory to the
congregation of faithful.
Asaph, a Psalm.
Thou that rulest Israel, attend: that By Joseph the prophet understands al
Israel; because the first birthright being taken from Ruben wa^ given to him,
to wit duble portion of enheritance, two tribes of twelve.
conductest Joseph

Appear, and show thy mighty hand before thy people:
be manifest before whereof Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses following the Arc,
when they marched or camped, should most directly see what appeared therein, the
other nine tribes being placed before it, and on both sides. Number. 2.
Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses.

Raise up Thou which always can help us, now use thy power in delivering us
from this temporal misery.
thy might, and come, to save us.

O God Set us in a better state
convert us: and show Show thy benign countenance and favor, Mystically,
send the promised Messiah, Christ, the essential Image of God. 2. Cor. 4. v. 4.
Collos. 1 v. 15.
thy face, and we shall be saved.

How long will thou differ to hear our prayer?
upon the prayer of thy servant?

Thou do justly punish us, but thou temperest the same with measure, that it
exceed not to our ruin.
in mesure.



God first preventing with his grace,
convert us: and show thy face, and we man may cooperate therewith to his
justification, and salvation.
shall be saved.

Thy Church and people,
the vineyard out of Egypt: thou did cast out the Chananites.
the Gentiles, and plantedst it.

The cloud, and pillar of fire were visible guides.
in the sight thereof: thou did plant the roots thereof, and it and it
multiplied mightily.
filled the earth.

Hyperbolical speech to signify the great multiplication of the Israelites.
The shadow of it covered the mountanes: and the bowghes of it the ceders of
God.

from the mediterranean sea of Palestin,
the sea; and her boughs unto to the river Euphrates. Exo. 23. v. 31. Beut,
11. v. 24.
the river.



The eruel enemies more like to most cruel beasts then to men.
boar of the wood has destroyed it: and yea so cruel, as none else in the
world are like unto them.
the singular wild be has eaten it.

The Prophet now prays for the coming of Christ, which he saw in spirit.
from heaven, and see, and visit this vineyard.

The Church of the old testament, in her best state, wanted the perfection,
which the Church of Christ has.
perfect it, which thy right hand has planted: and upon Christ our Messiah
most commonly calls by this title: The Son of man.
the son of man whom thou have confirmed to thee.

So thy vinyard can not endure if it be still afflicted, and trodden down.
Things burnt with fire, and dug down at the increpation of thy
countenance shall perish.

Christ working by Gods power redresseth almiseries.
thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the son of man, whom
thou have confirmed to thee.



The same is the 8. and the 15. verse (with little alteration) and here repeted
the third time, In which we also pray for three things first to be purged, and
converted from sin, second to be illuminated by Christ, the Image of God,
Thirdly to be sanctified, and saved in eternal glory to have the fruition of
the most blessed Trinity.
O Lord the God of hoastes convert us: and show thy face, and we shall be saved.

PSALM. LXXX.
Al men are invited to celebrate festiual days, 6. which were instituted
Inuitation to celebrate festiual days devoutly. the 7. key.
in memory of benefits received. 9. the deuent shall be protected, and the
negligent leift in distress.

Unto This Psalm perteyneth not only to the old testament, but also to the new,
the end, for Gods servants oppressed with tribulations,
wine presses, a Psalm to to be songue by Asaph a chief master of music.
Asaph him self.


Make ready al these musical instruments.
give timbrel: pleasant Psalter with the harp.

Sound ye with trumpet in In the Calendes, or first day of every month, in
remembrance of Gods providence, and perpetual government of al creatures:
the The feast of Neomenia.
new moon, in and most especial solemnity in the first day of the seventh
month, in memory of Isaac conserved from death, in whom God promised Abraham,
to multiply his seed, and to blesle al nations. Genesis 17 v. 21. c 21. v 12. c
22. v. 18.
the Feast of trumpetes.
notable day of your solemnity.



The people of Israel signified by Joseph, as. Psalm. 79. v. 2.
Joseph, when he came out of the Land of Egypt: he heard a tongue which he
knew not.

In memory of this benefit Pasch was instituted.
turned away his back God delivered the same people from their intolerable
bondage of carrying burdens in baskettes, from geathering straw, making brickes,
and other servitude. Exo 1. v. 14 c. 5. v. 7.
from burdens: his hands served in baskettes.

The admonition of God to the people:
tribulation thou did invoke me, and I heard thee: I heard thee in the
secret of the tempest: I yet after so great benefits thou did murmr, and
contradict me. Exo. 17. Number. 20.
proved thee at the water of contradiction.

Seriously admonish thee.
will contest thee: Israel Man by free will may choose whether he will obey or no.
if thou will hear me.

The feast of Pentecost in memory of the law.
There shall be This was an other great benefit, to give an express law, for
their instruction.
no new God in thee, neither shall thou adore a strange God.

Observing my commandments, ask what thou will, and I will give it thee.
dilate thy mouth and I will fill it.



Pom. 1.
they shall go in their own inventions. ^. 24.




Very easily.
for nothing, of my freewil and liberality, without necessity or obligation.
perhaps humbled their enemies: and had laid my hand upon those that afflict
them.

The enemies of our Lord have lied to him: and The wicked that promise to serve
God, and do it not shall be in eternal torments:
their time shall be for ever.

In the mean time God bestowed these benefits upon them, for the iusts sake.


PSALM LXXXI.
The Prophet declares, 2. that God reprehendeth unjust Judges and Magistrates:
Admonition to Magistrates. the. 7. key.
premonisheth them of his severe and eternal punishment: 8. whereto the prophet
conforming his will prays for the same.

A Psalm to Asaph.
The words of the prophet, admonishing al magistrates, that when they sit in
judgment, or determine any cause, God who is there, and every where present,
of gods, and in the mids he attends their process: and therefore it
behoneth them to be advised what they do: even as if they heard God speaking
as here follows:
judges gods.

The words of God, though not uttered sensibly, yet in effect intimated by his
law, according whereto he will proceed in judgment against unjust Judges.
How long judge ye iniquity: and accept ye the persons of sinners.





Such judges proceed in gross ignorance, not caring to understand, but content
to walk in darkness.
knew not, neither did they understand, they walk in darkness: Ye are so
evil disposed, that you would turn al vpside down, instifying the wicked, and
condemning the just.
all the fundations of the earth shall be moved.

I said: You are For your office which you participate of me, you are certain
gods upon earth:
gods, and the sons of the highest al.

But when you die you shall find that you are men, subject to Gods judgment.
But you shall die as men: and fall yea your punishment will be grievous, and
importable: for the mighty shall mightily suffer torments.
as one of the princes. Sap. ^


Again the words of the prophet praying God,
Arise o God, judge the earth: that eing he is Lord of al he will judge al.
because thou shall inherit in all the Gentiles.

PSALM LXXXII.
The Church impugned by all sorts of enemies 10. prays God to confound
Persecuters of the Church confounded. or converted the 6 key.
them, as the has done diverse the like, 17. whereby some shall be converted.

A Canticle of Psalm to Asaph.
Seeing none is like to thee o God,
who shall be like to thee? show thy power and majesty,
hold not thy peace, be not silent.
neither be thou appeased o God:

The cruel persecuters are most insolent,
thine enemies have made a sound: they that hate thee, and proud.
have lifted up the head.



That there be no more any faithful people,
the nation: and let any Catholics leift alive.
the name of Israel be remembered no more.



The progeny of Esau,
the Idumeians, and the seed of Ismael.
the Ismahelites descending from the elder son of Lot.
Moab, and the issue of Abraham by Agar, who falsely call them selves Sarascens,
as if they were of Sara.
the Agarens.

People of Gebal a city of Syria,
Gebal, and of the other son of Lot.
Ammon, and those that first oppugned the Israelites, after they were parted
from Egypt. Exo. 17.
Amalec: The Philistians,
the for eners, with and Tyrians, al nere neighbors, and some of them nere
akine to the Israelites, were their great enemies.
the inhabitants of Tire.

Others also coming further of, joined against Gods people, in figure that al
heretics, and other infidels conspire together against Catholics.
Assure also is come with them: they are made an aid to the children of Lot.

The Psalmist therefore prays (and withal prophecieth) that God will at last
destroy them, as he did Madian. Number 31. Iudic. 6. and 7.
to Madian, and Sisara captain general,
Sisara: as to for Iabin king of Asor nere Cisson. Iudic. 4. v. 7. and 23.
Iabin in the torrent Cisson.

Within the territory of Manasses (Ios. 17.) which they invaded.
in Endor: they were made as slain and not buried.
the dung of the earth.

Put their princes as These four princes of the Madianites were slain by
Gedeons forces Iudic. 7. and 8.
Oreb, and Zeb, and Zebee, and Salmana.



By four similitudes the prophet describes the punishment that shall fall upon
persecuters.
as By four similitudes the prophet describes the punishment that shall fall
upon persecuters.
a wheel: and as stubble before 1. 2.
the face of the wind.

3. 4.
the mountains:



God by punishing seeks the conversion of sinners, not their eternal death.
they will seek thy name, o Lord.

But such as be still obstinate, and finally impenitent do perish for ever.
them be ashamed, and trubled for ever and ever: and let them be confounded,
and perish.

God only the creator of heaven and earth is properly called LORD: Whose
essential, and incommunicable name is WHICH IS. Exo. 3. v. 14. and. 6. v. 3.
Lord is thy name, thou only the Highest in all the earth*

PSALM LXXXIII.
Devout persons fervently desire eternal glory, 6. accounting it, in the mean
Eternal glory. the 10. key.
time, a happy state to be in the militant Church, 12. where God first giving
grace, will give glory in the triumphant.

Unto the end, For men afflicted in this vale of misery.
for wine presses, t By the children of Core not being musicians (but porters
in the temple, 1. Par. 26.) S. Augustine here and in other titles of Psalms,
understands the faithful children of Christ.
the children of Core, a Psalm.
The glorious mansions in heaven, which God has prepared for the just:
thy tabernacles o Lord of hoastes* Vehement desires do sometimes deprive us of
external sense.
faints unto the courts

My heart, and The mind rejoicing in hope, the body is also recreated,
relieved, and revived, which before was dulle and heavy.
my flesh have rejoiced toward the living God.

For As sparowes by natural instinct seeking habitations, find houses to dwell
in,
the sparow also has found her an house: and and turtles have nestes, wherein
to lay their young ones: so faithful souls seek to dwell in heaven, and in the
mean time to lay up good works within the Catholic Church; out of which
(says S. Augustine in this place) how good soever works do seem (as when
paganes, and heretics feed the hungry, cloth the naked, receive strangers
into their houses, visit the sick, comfort prisoners) being not laid in the
nest, conculcabuntur, and conterentur: non seruabuntur, non custodientur: they
shall be trodde under foot, they shall be bruised in pieces: they shall not be
conserved, they shall not be kept: but (that such works may be profitable and
be conserved) they must be done in true faith, in the Catholic faith, in
society of the unity of the Church.
the turtledoue a nest for her self, where she may lay her young ones.

Thine Works are good, and rightly laid up when they are done in unity,
and participation of Gods Altares, the most proper places of Divine Service, of
external Sacrifice in this life, and spiritual sacrifice of per^ect praises in
eternal glory; whereal Saints without ceasing sing: Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of hoastes. Isaiae 6. Apoc. 4.
altars o Lord of hoastes: my King, and my God.

The Catholic Church.
thy house o Lord: for ever and ever they shall praise thee.

Blessed is the man, whose help is from thee: he The just by Gods grace and
help, may resolve to ascend by steps and degrees, from virtue to virtue (v.
8.) even to heaven,
has though he be now in this veil of tears, by reason of man's sin, who
otherwise was before sin in paradise, a place of delight:
the veil of tears, in

Christ our lawgeuer;
the lawgeuer shall give gives abundance of graces,
blessing, they shall go with continual increase.
from virtue into virtue: but our only omnipotent God, is to be senne by this
effect of his grace, in the Church and not elsewhere*
the God of gods shall be seen in Sion.



Agreably to this the Church makes al her petitions, concluding al prayers, By
Christ our Lord.
look upon the face of thy Christ.

Because In respect of the future retribution, which every one shall receive
according to their deserts, one day in Gods Church is better then thousands
out of it.
better is one day in thy courts, above thousands.

I have chosen to be And better to be in the poorest state of Catholic
Christians, t then in greatest palaces or hieghest dignities amongst sinners.
an abject in the house of my God: rather then to dwell t in the tabernacles of
sinners.

Because God The Divine wisdom so uses mercy, and verity, that neither may
prejudice the other:
loves mercy and truth: our Lord will give and so gives grace in this life,
grace, and glory in the ^ext.
and glory.

Besides innocence conserved without sin, there is also innocence after
remission of sin, of which the prophet here speaks.
walk in innocence: o Lord of hoastes blessed is the man, that hops in thee.

PSALM. LXXXIIII.
With commemoration of Gods former benefits, 5. Christ's Incarnation is
Incarnation of Christ. the 5. key.
prophesied, 9. bringing peace and salvation, 11. mercy and justice concurring
together.

Unto the end, to the children of Core, a Psalm.
God bestowed many great benefits upon the people of Israel:
have blessed thy land: thou he brought them out of the bondage of Egypt.
have turned

Remitted their manifold sins:
have forgeuen the iniquity of thy people: thou pardoned also a great part of
due punishment.
have covered al their sins.



As thou have soared thy peculiar people, so we beseech thee o God creator and
general Savior of al mankind,
Convert us o God our savior: and mitigate thy wrath toward us al
auert thy wrath from us.



Til God first show his mercy, sinners lie dead in guilt of sin, but by his
grace they are sturred up, and quickened:
being turned shall quicken us: and thy people and joyfully return to God.
shall rejoice in thee.

Show us o Lord thy mercy and give us thy salvation.

The words of the prophet,
hear what our Lord God will speak in me: signifying that God had reveled unto
him the redemption of mankind.
because he will speak peace upon his people.

And upon Not al men are justified, and saved, but those that are heartily and
sincerely converted.
his saints: and upon them, that are converted to the heart.

But yet his salvation is nigh to them that Though al be not saved (because
many will not cooperate to Gods grace) yet very many having the fear of God,
which is the beginning of godly wisdom, freely accept of Gods mercy, and so
^he Church is gloriously propagated.
fear him: that glory may inhabit in our land.

VVheras Gods mercy would save al, and his truth, or justice requires that
sins be duly punished, by Christ's Passion and death, sufficient satisfaction
is offered for all sins, and those that will be partakers by penance, and
conformity to Gods law, may have remission,
Mercy and truth have met each other: and so justice is observed, and peace
made between God and his subjects.
justice and peace have kissed.

Integrity of conscience reigns in good men,
Truth is risen out of the earth: God sending just means from heaven to save
them.
and justice has looked down from heaven.

God gives grace,
our Lord certes will give benignity: and and so men yield fruict.
our land shall give her fruit.

Yea they walk in justice, and right path of Gods law.
Justice shall walk before him: and shall set his steps in the way.

PSALM. LXXXV.
In consideration of his own imperfections, the royal prophet, or other
faithful A prayer for continual grace. the 7. key
person prays God, 5. according to his mercy and goodness, 9. showed in
converting Gentiles, 13. and in delivering the supplicant him self from the
state of damnation, 16. that he will still direct and defend him against al
enemies.

A prayer A form of prayer for king David, and for any faithful person.
to David him self.
There be sundry just causes which move God to hear our prayers:
hear me: first our necessity requires Gods help
because I am needy and poor.

Secondly because we profess, and promise to lead a holy life.
I am holy: save thy servant my God, that Thirdly, because we trust and hope
in God.
hops in thee.

Have mercy on me o Lord, because I have cried to thee Fourtly, because we
persevere in prayer.
al Fifthly, if we pray with attention of mind.
lifted up my soul.

Because thou o Lord art Sixthly because God of his own nature is benign,
ready to bestow benefits.
sweet, and Seuently, he is meek to remitte offenses,
mild: and Eighthly, he is merciful to mitigate the punishment, to those that
make recourse unto him.
of much mercy to all that invoke thee. For these causes we pray as follows.
.







Vocation of Gentiles.
Al nations what soever thou have made, shall They shall come by faith.
come, and shall adore before thee o Lord: and they shall and glorify God by
good works. Mat. 5. v. 17.
glorify thy name.





Cofession of praise.
confess to thee o Lord my God with all my heart, and will glorify thy name for
ever:

From the state of eternal damnation.
the lower hell.



In performing al promises.
true.

A digression (usual to prophets) of Christ's Empire and Kingdom the Church,
given to him, being the son of an immaculate virgin, the handmaide of God.
give thine empire to thy servant: and save the son of thy handmaide.

The chief and principal sign of Christ's, and his Churches glory, is his
Resurrection, praefigured in Jonas
a sign unto God, that they may see which hate me, and may be confounded:
VVherby al enemies are confounded, either to their conversion, or to eternal
damnation. See 6. Augustine.
because thou o Lord have helped me.

PSALM LXXXVI.
The Church of Christ beginning in Jerusalem, 3. is extended to al Nations The
Catholic Church glorious. the 6. key.
5. glorious, 6. and permanent, 7. in holy joy.

To the children of Core, a Psalm of Canticle.
Christ's Church was first founded in Jerusalem on whitsunday, Act. 2. in mount
Sion, which has two tops, in one of which the Temple stood, in the other
David's tower o^ palace.
mountains: our Lord loves the gates of Sion, above all the tabernacles

Glorious things are said of thee, o city of God.

The Prophet in the person of Christ, says he will commend unto his Apostles,
and other Apostolical men, that they convert al nations (as our Savior gave
express commission and commandment. Math. 28. Luc. 24. v. 47. Act. 1. v. 8.)
I will be mindeful of naming here Raab (which is Egypt) and Babylon:
Raab, and Babylon knowing me.

Behold The Philistims, Tyrians, Aethiopians,
the foreners, and Tire, and the people of the Aethiopians, these and the rest,
shall be regenerate in this Church, which for the assured certainty thereof
(after the prophets manner of speaking) is affirmed in the pretertence, as if it
were then done.
were there.

It shall be reported, or one shall say to an other: Lo this and that man, al
these and al these men are regenerate by Baptism in the Church of Christ.
Man and man, is borne in her; and God himself, Christ God and Man, founded
this Church.
the Highest himself founded her?

The multitude of the elect is so great, that only God knows the number,
in scriptures of peoples, and and the qualities of al sorts, of Princes,
Prelates, and Peoples.
of princes: of those that have been in her.

The Great spiritual joy with peace of conscience, is in true Christian
Catholics in the militant Church; but the blessed have the most absolute and
secure joy of al, in the Church triumphant.
habitation in thee, is as it were of al rejoicing.

PSALM LXXXVII.
A faithful person sore and long afflicted, lamentably complains, praying A
prayer in long affliction the 7. key.
God, 15. not still to repel him, being leift desolate, 19. without al
consolation of freindes.

A Canticle of a Psalm, to the children of Core, unto the end, for An
instrument of music apt for lamentable songues Not expressed in the title of
any other Psalm. Perhaps because this Psalm mixteth not any consolation
with mourning, as other Psalms do, which are also prayers in affliction. As
the 30. 53. 63. 73.
Maheleth Neither is this word in any other title. It is added here to
admonish us, that as this Psalm, and some others were songue by two quires,
one answering the other, so we must in answer and imitation of Christ, suffer
long and great afflictions with patience, seeing he in his passion was leift
without ordinary consolation.
to answer, By some interpreted [his bretheren] For Christ (says S. Augustine)
voutchsaffeth to make them his brethren, which understand the mystery of his
Cross, and not only are not ashamed thereof, but also faithfully glory therein.
of understanding to Eman the Ezrahite.
O Lord the God of my salvation: I have cried to thee very often both by day,
and by night.
in the day have I



I am almost dead.
my life has approached to hell.

I Accounted as dead, and ready to be buried.
am accounted with them that descend into the lake.

If I were dead, I should be free from these afflictions. Especially it agrees
to Christ, who was free, yea of infinite power amongst the dead.
free among the dead, as the wounded sleeping in the sepulchers, of whom thou
art mindeful no more: and they are cast of from thy hand.

Mine enemies have endeavored not only to believe me of temporal life, whereby I
should go into limbus, but also to kill my soul spiritually, whereby I should
descend into the lower hell of the damned.
the lower lake: in the dark places, and in the shadow of death.

Thy just wrath also o God has excedingly afflicted me.
fury is confirmed upon me: and al thy waves thou have brought in upon me.





I cried to thee o Lord all the day: I stretched out my hands to thee.

O God deliver me whiles I am yet living, for I may not look for
extraordinary, and miraculous help, as to be raised again after death.
do meruels to the dead: or shall phisicians raise to life, and they confess
to thee?

When I shall be dead and buried, I can not denounce thy praises as now I can to
mortal men.
in the sepulcher declare thy mercy, and thy truth in perdition?

Much less shall the damned praise thee in eternal perdition.
in darkness: and thy justice in the land of oblivion.



Why do thou o Lord reject my prayer: turnest away thy face from me?

As well young,
from my youth: and being as waxing elder I have been still afflicted.
exalted, humbled and troubled.





My miserable estate has alienated al freindes, neighbors, and acquantances
from me.
have made friend, and neighbor far from me: and my familiars because of
misery.

PSALM LXXXVIII.
Gods mercy and truth, with his great promises to David, 6. his power in The
Church of Christ never fails. the 6. key.
the whole world, and just judgments, are the true joy of his servants. 20.
Christ's kingdom shall remain for ever: 31. yea many offending yet al shall not
perish, 39. but after great affliction, 47. God will respect man's infirmity,
50. his own promise, and the enemies reproching his servants and himself:
53. who is blessed for ever.

Of understanding Otherwise called Idithun. 1. Paral. 25. or rather Ethan, who
was very wise, mentioned with others, to whom Solomon is preferred for wisdom.
3. Reg. 4. v. 31, and signifies strong, applied here to those that are strong
in assured hope of Christ's promises, notwithstanding it seems sometimes to the
weak, that his promises are not performed.
to Ethan the Ezrahite.
In all generations.
and generation I will show forth thy truth, in my mouth.

The heavens shall rather fall, then Gods truth fa^le. Mystically, in the
Apostles, and by their preaching, the Church of Christ is built for ever.
in the heavens: thy truth shall be prepared in them.

I have ordained a testament with mine elect, I have sworn David's seed
conserved til Christ was borne of his virgin mother: and in his spiritual
seed, his kingdom the Church is for ever conserved. Otherwise not verified of
David's temporal kingdom, which decayed in the captivity of Babylon, and is now
wholly destroyed.
for ever will I prepare thy seed.

And I will build thy seat unto generation and generation.



For who in the clouds shall be equal to our Lord: shall be like to God among
The Angels.
the sons of God?







The prophet aludeth to the plagues and miracles in Egypt, and in other
enemies.
humbledst the proud one, as one wounded: in the arm of thy strength thou have
dispersed thine enemies.

The heavens are thine, and the earth is thine, the round

Conversion of Gentiles.
Thabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name: thy arm is with might.

Let Whether God punish, as with the left hand,
thy hand be confirmed, and thy or bestow benefits, as with the right hand, al
is to his glory, and according to mercy, and truth.
righthand exalted: justice and judgment is the preparation of thy seat.

They are spiritually happy, that do thus consider of Gods marvelous
procedings, praise the same, and rejoice therein.
blessed is the people that knows iubilation.



power, and kingdom.
horn be exalted.



Thus God promised to establish the kingdom of the Jews in David and his
family 1 Reg. 16. 2. Reg. 5. and other places. which was performed a^ in a
figure but more fully in Christ. Act. 13. v. 22.
I have put help on the mighty one: and have exalted an elect one of my
people.









And my truth, and my mercy with him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted.













If they shall profane my justices: and not keep my commandmentes:







Once I have sworn in my holy, I vvil not lie.
if I lie to David:

his seed shall continewe for ever.

Christian just souls as the sun,
his throne as the Sun in my sight, and as the Moon perfect for ever: and a
faithful witness in heaven. n and as the perfect, or full moon. See the first
Tome. page 716. S. Augustine also expounds this verse in the Anagogical sense,
of the just after the Resurrection in glory, where the soul shall be like the
sun, and the body, which now is mutable, shall be like the moon, not as now
always changing, but as the full moon, always perfect.


God having promised all the aforsaide the prophet in the person of the weak,
lamenteth that the contrary shall happen as well in the temporal kingdom
oppressed by the Assirians Babylonians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans: as in
the Church impugned by innumerable sorts of Heretics and other Infidels.
thou have repelled and despised: thou Amongst many pensive things, this one
word does comfort us, thy promise remains, thou have not denied to send
Christ, but differred him,
have differred thy Christ.







Thou have exalted the righthand of them that oppress him: thou have made al
his enemies joyful.



From the use of Sacrifice and Sacraments, whereby sinners were wount to be
cleansed.
emundation: and his seat thou have broken down to the ground.



The Psalmist prays and prophecieth that God will respect the weakness of man,
maintain his Church in mante nations, and save many souls.
How long o Lord do thou turn away for ever: shall thy wrath burn as a fire?









As though Christivere changed and turned from us.
the commutation of thy Christ.

Blessed be our Lord for ever: So we wish and pray that al may bless and
praise thee. Amen.
Be it, be it.

ANNOTIONS, PSALM LXXXVIII.
34 My mercy I vvil not take away from him.] Although, Christians signified
by the Though Christians do sin yet Christ loses not his Church.
children or successors of David, sin most grievously, yea suppose they will
sin with desperation (says S. Augustine) and obstinatly persist in sin,
that they offend the eyes of their Father, and deserve to be disenherited: etc.
Yet for these Christ shall not remain without inheritance, the corn shall not
also perish for the chafe, some fishes shall be geathered out of the net into
vessels, notwithstanding the evil fishes are cast away. And a little after, the
same Doctor discoursing of eternal glory both in body and soul, of those
that dye in Gods favor, says; These things are promised concerning Christ,
very certain, very firm, very plain, and undoubted. For albeit some things
are covered in Hard places explicated by the clear.
mysteries, yet some things are so manifest, that by them the obscure things
may most easily be cleared.

39. But thou have repelled etc.] Again S. Augustine, adds upon the next
verses following: God performed not these promises in David, that when thou
see Gods Promises to David were not fulfilled in Solomon, but in Christ.
they were not fulfilled in David, which necessarily must be fulfilled, thou
may seek an other, in whom it may be showed that they were fulfilled. God
promised some thing (a kingdom) for ever of David's seed: and Solomon was
borne: and became of so great wisdom, and so great prudence, that Gods promise
concerning David's ^eede, seemed to be fulfilled in him But Solomon fell, and
gave place of expecting Christ; that because God neither can be deceived, nor
deceive, he put not his promise in him, whom he knew would fall, but thou
should rely upon God, and exact his promise. A little after Defectes in the
jews supplied in the Gentiles.
Thou seek the kingdom of the jews, it is not: thou seek the altar of
the Jews, it is not: thou seek the sacrifice of the Jews, it is not: thou
seckest the priesthood of the ^evves, it is not. Whereupon he concludes: Al
these defectes came to the ^evves: yet was not Christ taken from them, but
differred. Some ^evves believed in him, and many Gentiles. As the Psalmist
prophecieth from the 47. verse to the end of this Psalm.

PSALM LXXXIX.
Under the form of prayer, the psalmist describes the shortness of man's life
Man rightly created fell by sin into miseries. the 2. key.
and other calamites. 7. Gods strict judgment. 13. but first his comfortable
mercy: 16. and perpetual regard of his own work.

A prayer Some Expositors think Moses was the author of this Psalm, and of
the ten next following. But others hold that David was author of al, and that
Moses his name is here put in the title by Esdras, because this Psalm is like
to the prayer of Moses, when the people provoked Gods wrath by their sins
in the desert. And because man's creation, fall, punishment, and Gods mercy to
wards him, are here described: which Moyles first vvritte, as going before the
written law. And that Moses made not this Pialme is probably gethered by the
10. verse, where the ordinary age of men is described to be (in streingth and
vigore) senentie years, or of some fourscore: and the greater part (of the one
or the other) is in labor and sorrow. And it is evident (Deuteronomy. 34.) that
Moses lived in all an hundred and twenty years, and his eye was not dim,
neither were his reeth moved. So Aaron, Iosue, and others commonly lived
longer then is here mentioned. But David was old and impotent at seventy
years. 3. Reg. 1. S. H^larion, living near seventy years in his heremitage,
S Remigius governing the Church of Rhemes, seventy years, and the like are
accounted to have been full of days, and such as lived longer are reputed
extraord narie. Agane it is more euidenly proved that Moses was not author of
the 94. and 95. Psalms.
of Moses the man of God.
Always from the beginning of the world to the end.
from generation unto generation.

The Prophet shows that the world was created in and with time, not eternal.
the mountains were made, or the earth and the world formed: And that only God
is eternal.
from everlasting even unto everlasting thou art God.

e God has often said, that he would not the death of sinners, but rather
that they be connerted and live for ever.


Because Though some lived long (none for all that did reach to a thousand
years) yet it is nothing before God, and in respect of eternity.
a thousand years before thine eyes, are as yesterday, that is past.



The youth of man quickly passes:
the morning as an herb he shall pass, in the morning he shall flourish, and
pass: in old age can not last long: vvherof comes our English proverb: A
young man may dye sovvne, an old man can not live long.
the evening he shall fall, be hardened, and withered.



Sin the cause of shortness of man's life.
our iniquities in thy sight: our Seculum.
age in the light of thy countinance.



Man's life as brickle as a spiders web: or man's life vvasteth continually, as
a spider vvasteth her self by spinning, and consuming her own substance.
as a spyder: the days of our years in them, are These numbers literarly show
the shortness of the longer sort of men's lives. Mystically, seven signify the
rest after labors of this world, and perteyn to the old testament: eight
signify the revvard in the resurrection, perteyning to the new testament.
Which multiplied by ten, a perfect number, make seventy and eighty. Which
joined together make an hundred and fifty. The number of al these Psalms.
seventy years.

And if in strong ones These numbers literarly show the shortness of the longer
sort of men's lives. Mystically, seven signify the rest after labors of this
world, and perteyn to the old testament: eight signify the revvard in the
resurrection, perteyning to the new testament. Which multiplied by ten, a
perfect number, make seventy and eighty. Which joined together make an
hundred and fifty. The number of al these Psalms.
eighty years: and the more of them, labor and sorrow.

Because It is of Gods mild providence, that man's life is short, for that
many if they were sure, or had probability to live long, would presume to
sin more.
mildnes is come upon us: and we shall be chastised.

Seeing God of his justice punished al mankind, for one sin of our first
parente, his wrath must needs be very great to every sinner, for his own
proper sins.
Who knows the power of thy wrath: and for fear

So make thy righthand known: and men learned in heart, in wisdom.



The hope of glorious resurrection turns our calamities into spiritual joy.
We are replenished in the morning with thy mercy: and we have rejoiced, and
are delighted al our days.

Yea the more we suffer in this life for the truth, the greater is our comforth
in hope of reward.
We have rejoiced for the days wherein thou have humbled us: the years, wherein
we have seen evils.

Not only in that we are thy creatures, but also in that we are thy servants,
we are thy proper work, therefore in both these respects, o God look upon us
with clemency.
thy servants, and upon thy works: and lead also our posterity into the right
way, and make them thy servants.
direct their children.

O God illuminate our understanding,
let the brightness of our Lord God be upon us, and make our actions by thy
grace profitable to us.
direct thou the works of our hands over us: and and make perfect in us the
work of charity. In which one work, al good works are included and to which
al other are directed. For then works are right (says S. Angustin) when they
are directed to this one end.
the work of our hands do thou direct.

PSALM XC.
Whosoever faithfully and firmly trusts in Gods providence, is secure from
Gods providence the 3. key.
al dangers of secret, sutle, and open enemies. 7. his adversaries shall come
to ruin. 11. Angels shall defend him 13. no kind of serpent, nor beast shall
hurt him. 14. God himself assures him of his protection, and of eternal
salvation.

Praise of Gods providence, with thanks,
Praise of a Which David songue with voice.
Canticle to David.
He that firmly relieth and rests upon Gods providence, is assuredly
protected by him.
that dwells in the help of the Highest, shall abide in the protection of the
God of heaven.



Al secret and sutle machinations:
the snare of the hunters, and from and from al cruelty of tyrants.
the sharp word.



Terrors obscurly suggested by evil men or spirits, with erronions conceipte
that men are not bond in time of temporal dangers, to confess the truth.
of the fear in the night.

Open persecution threatening present death, except men deny the truth which
they know.
the arrow flying in the day, circumuention of crafty enemies by sutle
arguing, and drawing men into error, and so to decline from Catholic Religion,
of business walking in darkness: long torments, even to death, except Gods
servants will relent, and deny the truth, which they assuredly believe, and know
in their conscience, that they are bond to profess it.
of invasion, and the midday devil.

A On thy left side, in adversity many fall from God,
thousand shall fall on thy side, and and on thy right side, in prosperity many
more forgete, and forsake God.
ten thousand: on thy righthand: but to thee it shall not approach.



In sincerely sayng thou art my hope: thou make God thy refuge.
thou o Lord art my hope: thou have made the Highest thy refuge.



Angels have protection of men by Gods ordinance.
his Angels charge of thee: The devil corruptly alleges this scripture ( Mat.
4) omitting the latter part of this verse: which shows when Angels protect
just men, towitte, when they walk in a right path, observing ordinary course
in their actions, not in giving themselves headlong into needles danger, as the
same devil proposed to our Savior, to cast himself down from the pinnacle of
the temple. Such falling is not the way of the just, but of Lucifer, that fell
from heaven. So S. Bernard notes. Ser. 15. in hunc Psalm.
that they keep thee in all thy ways.





God speaks the rest that follows in this Psalm.
Because he has hoped in me, I will deliver him: I will protect him, because he
has known my name.

In eternal salvation.
will glorify him.



ANNOTATIONS. PSALM XC.
5. Thou shall not be afraid] S. Augustine here observes four manners of
tempting Four sorts of persecution for the Catholic faith.
the faithful to fall from true Religion. Sometimes with tentation that is but
light and obscure, which the Prophet here calls fear in the night: when
ignorant men are tempted by suggestion, or apprehension of temporal
afflictions, not knowing that they fall into eternal damnation, by fleing from 1.
worldly, or bodily calamities. Sometimes the tentation threatens present 2.
death to them that are well instructed in the truth, and know that they must
confess it even to death, which the Prophet calls an arrow flying in the
day: when the faithful clerly sees what danger hangs over him, tovvit,
present death if he stand constant, and damnation if he deny his faith
Sometimes the tentation is n ore vchement, but yet obscure, which he calls, 3
business vvalking in darkness: when by sutle endeuoures, framing arguments in
excuse of sin, men are persuaded that they may lavvfully take some oath, or
do some other thing, which in deed is not lavvful: and so by earnest, and
sutle persuasions they ignorantly decline from Catholic Religion, or
commit other grievous sins. But the greatest and manifest tentation is
called invasion 4
and midday devil: when persecuters seeing neither more easy persuasions can
deceive Gods servants, nor present death force them to deny the truth, they
then assault them more vehemently, and more dangerously with long, and
continual afflictions, not remitting their cruelty til the afflicted either
yield to their vvil, or dye in long torments. And by these two latter kinds of
persecution many are overthrown, which were constant in the former. For
vvhiles tyrants proposed dangers to simple people, and deceived some, yet
threatening present death to others, that were better instructed, and confirmed
in Religion, innumerable perseuered, and gloriously died in confession of
Christian Catholic faith. But by sutle arguing of hard points of christian
doctrine or practice; and by long torments many have been seduced, blindly
falling into errors, and many wittingly have denied the truth, which they
clerly believed in their hearts, to avoid this midday devil, the extremity of
long manifest, and grievous afflictions. Nevertheless in all these tentations God
protecteth God leaves none but those that first leave him.
them that firmly trust in him. Those (says this holy Father) have failed,
which presumed of themselves, which dwelt not in the help of the Highest, and
in protection of the God of heaven: which said not to our Lord: Thou art my
Protector, and my refuge, which trusted not under the shadow of his wings, but
relied, or attributed much to their own streingth.

PSALM XCI.
God is by all manner of voices and instruments to be praised his admirable The
works of God admirable. the 2. key.
works. 7. which the foolish not doing are punished; 11. and the wise are
rewarded.

A Psalm Voices beginning instruments prosecute this song:
of Canticle, when we rest from work then especially we ought to think upon
Gods works, praise and thank him for the same.
in the sabbath day.
To give thanks.
to confess to our Lord; and to sing to thy

In prosperity,
the morning: and thy truth in in adversity.
the night.

On every instrument of ten stringes, signifying the observation of the
ten commandments:
the instrument of tenstrings, in namely on the Psalter.
Psalter: with Canticle, on also on the harp, which signifies mortification.
the Harp.



How are thy works magnified o Lord! thy cogitations are made very profounde.

Carnal and sensual man,
unwise man will not know; and the he that thinks only of present things, not
of future.
foul will not understand these things.







The just in confidence of a good conscience, expect exaltation of their power:
my horn shall be exalted, as the unicorns: and great consolation in the end of
their life.
and my old age in plentiful mercy.

Then shall the just see their enemies depressed: and themselves flourish, like
the palm, and ceder trees as follows.
mine eye has looked upon mine enemies: and the malignant rising up against
me, mine ears shall hear.



Militant Church:
the house of our Lord, shall flourish in triumphant.
the courts of the house of our God.

As yet shall they be multiplied in plentiful old age: and they Publikly
profess Gods praeises, as in the words following:
may shewforth:

That the Lord our God is righteous, and there is no iniquity in him.

PSALM XCII.
Christ reigns for ever in his Church: 3. notwith standing many and
Perpetuity of the Church. the 6. key.
great persecution against the faithful.

Praise Praise to be songue with voice
of Canticle composed by David:
to David himself, in the sixth day of the week, which is our friday,
the day before the sabbath, in which day the Church of Christ was founded,
by his blood shed on the cross.
when the earth was founded.
e has reigned, he gloriously escending in soul into limbus, and in body to
his grave:
has put on beutie: our Lord has he then put on al armor of strength
strength to reform the world, and to enlarge his kingdom, according to his
own prediction where he said: If I be exalted from the earth, I will draw al
things unto myself. Joan. 12. v. 31.
put on strength, and has girded him self. Our Savior founding his Church by
his death begane then to reign therein:


For he has established Not only in Jury and Samaria, but the whole earth:
the round world, which and the same Church shall not be destroyed.
shall not be moved.

Thy seat is prepared from that time: thou Christ being eternal, has an
everlasting Church.
art from everlasting.

Al sorts of persecuters, the High priests (who sometimes watered the
spiritual land, like rivers) with Scribes, Pharisees, and other incredulous
Jews, also Paganes, Turks, and Heretics have oppugned the Church.
rivers o Lord have lifted up: the rivers have lifted up their voice.

With more force then any persecutions in the old Testament.
above the voices of many waters.

The surges of the sea are marvelous; but though al these assaults be great,
and marvelous, yet Christ in protecting his Church, is more marvelous.
marvelous is our Lord on high.

Articles of faith are not evidently apparent to knowledge, but evident to
credibilitie, to those that are disposed by Gods grace, illuminating their
understanding, and moving their free vvil, to give consent of belief if they
vvil
credible exceedingly: It behooves therefore al members of the Church to
converse piously, and religiously in this life, seeing she has so excellent a
spouse, protector, and instructor,
holiness becomes thy house o Lord even to the end of the world.
for length of days.

PSALM. XCIII.
The faithful servant of God assuredly professes, that all the pride, 5.
cruelty, Eternal salvation, and damnation. the 10. key.
7. foolish imaginations, and secret thoughts of the wicked are manifest to
God. 12. acknowlegeth himself happy, that he is better instructed of God:
whereas he had otherwise been damned. 20. sharply reprehendeth those that
consider not of Gods judgments: concluding that the just shall be glorified,
and the wicked damned.

To The Hebrew letter Lamed, which ordinarily is prefixed to the dative case,
or signifies to, being set before proper names, is a sign of the genetiue
case. Yet the Septuagint, express it by the dative, and so does the latin,
ipsi David, and consequently our English has, to David himself, to show a
difference between sacred and profane vvriters. For in humane books the
writer and auctor is al one; but in divine, the Holy Ghost is the proper
auctor, and a man is the writer. To signify therefore the principal auctor,
David is sometimes named as the instrumental cause, to whom the Holy Ghost
inspired this, and other Psalms, and by whom they were written. And when
the titles express otherwise: A Psalm of David, yet it is so to be
understood, that the Holy Ghost is alvvayes the principal auctor, and David
the instrumental, ministerial, or secondarie auctor. But when other names are
expressed, either in the genetiue or dative case, or howsoever, it proves not
that those men were the vvriters of the same Psalms, but imports some other
thing, as by S. Augustins judgment, we noted in the proemial Annotations
page. 3. and. 4. vvherby is proved that this Psalm was not written, nor
composed by Moses, as Hebrew Rabbis suppose, but by the Royal Psalmist David.
David himself, in Made and ordinarily songue in the sourth day of the vveke,
our vvenesday, in which day Judas the traitor sold our Savior Christ to his
enemies. The revenge of which wickedness, and of al other sins, is here
prophesied.
the fourth of the sabbath.
OUR Lord God God more commonly called the God of mercy (which virtue in him
is above al his works, Psalm. 144) is also the God of reuenges, according to
his justice.
of reuenges: the God of reuenges has done He proceeds in judgment
resolutly, not depending, nor fearing, not respecting any person, power,
dignity, vvisdome or other like quality, but their just merits.
freely.

A prayer of just zele.
exalted thou that iudgest the earth: render retribution to the ptoude.



Shall most wicked men still be suffered to speak so insolently?
that work injustice?

A description of heathnish and heretical cruelty.
Thy people o Lord they have humbled: and thine inheritance they have vexed.



Scarce any Atheistes are so blind, as thus to think but many sinners so
behave them selves, as if God saw not, knew not, or at least cared not what
they do.
they have said: The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob
understand.







So impossible is it that God should be ignorant, or careless what men do, that
he also knovveth and observes most secret thoughts.
the cogitations of men: that they be vain.



Mitigate and temper his afflictions, that by patience and fortitude, the just
may persevere, and not be overwhelmed.
give him quietness from the evil days: til a pit be dug for the sinner.

Because our Lord The whole Church shall never be rejected, nor forsaken.
will not reject his people: and his inheritance he will not forsake.

Justice is converted into judgment, when just meaning is put in work and
practice, that it may appear in judgment. Also God who does and suffers al
justly, vvil conserve his inheritance the Church, even unto the day of
judgment.
be turned into judgment: and The sense is easy by transposing the words:
all that are right of heart, are nere it, that is, shall like and approve Gods
justice, when the wicked shall repine, and blaspheme it.
they who are near it, are all that are right of heart.





If I said: when I felt, and complained that I was in danger, thou did assist
me.
My foot is moved: thy mercy o Lord did help me



Only faith suffices not, but careful labor, in keeping Gods commandmnts is
required.
labor in precept?



The just do hope for eternal salvation, to which God will bring them.
of my hope.

And God, the revenger of wrongs, will at last cast the wicked into eternal
torments.
will repay them their iniquity: and in their malice he will destroy them: the
Lord our God will destroy them.

PSALMS. XCIIII.
An inuitation to serve and adore Christ our Lord and Messiah, 3. as well Christ
our Lord and king. the 5. key.
for the benefits of creating al things, 7. as for his Incarnation, and not
to harden our hearts as the Jews did.

Praise Praise songue with voices:
of Canticle, inspired to David, and written by him.
to David him self. This Inuitation is most fitly ordained by the Church for
the proeme or beginning of Mattins.

With great and solemn exultation:
rejoice to our Lord: let us make iubilation to God God our Creator, is also
our Protector and Savior.
our savior.

Let us Let us be more diligent, and prevent our accustomed time. For no man
can prevent Gods grace with any good work, who first preuenteth us; else we
can neither do, nor think any good thing.
prevent his face in confession: and not only in singing his praise with voice,
but also with musical instruments.
in Psalms let us make iubilation to him.







So also Isaias (c. 45. v. 23.) and S. Paul (Philip. 2.) teach that kneeling or
bowing the knees, as an external religious ceremony* is acceptable to God.
and fall down: and weep before our Lord, that made us.

It is most just and necessary that we adore God, because he made us, and all this world for us, has also redeemed us, and made us his people, as sheep of
his pasture, and as a Pastor feeds and governs us.
our God; and we the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his making.
of his hand.

Though some have often repelled, and resisted Gods grace, yet if they receive
it being offered again, it will avail them to remission of sins.
To day if ye shall hear his voice, "harden not your hearts;

The Israelites in the desert tempted God, by desiring water, and flesh, of
voluptuous concupiscence without necessity. For Manna did both extinguish
their thirst, and tasted unto them, whatsoever they desired. Exo. 16. That also
which was left ungathered when the sun waxed hot, melted (v. 21.) and
served their cattle for drink. So this tentation was a figure of those, which
require to communicate under both kinds, as if one did not contain as much as
both.
of the tentation in the desert: where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and
saw my works.

By this mention of the offense of forty years, as long before passed, is
convinced that Moses writ not this Psalm, who died in the very fourtith
year of their abode in the desert. And S Paul citing the words of this
Psalm. (Heb. 4.) manifestly acknowlegeth David the writter thereof, and that it
was written long after Moses time in these words: (v 7) Again he limiteth a
certain day; To day, in David saying after so long time, as is above said. To
day if you shall hear his voice, do not obdurate your hearts. For if Jesus
(that is Iosue) had given them rest, he would never speak of an other day
afterward
Forty years was I Being greatly offended, I approached nere unto them, in
punishing the offenders.
offended with that generation, and said: These always err in heart.

Those that murmured died in the desert, and entered not into the promised
land, even so those that finally offend Christ, shall not enter into everlasting
rest* Heb. 3. and. 4.
if they shall enter into my rest.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. XCIIII.
8. Harden not your hearts.] Whatsoever God proposes by preaching, or It is
in man's freewil to resist good motions.
inspiration to a sinner, it rests still in the power of his freewil, to
harden his heart, and to reject al such good motions, and so he does not only
frustrate Gods grace, and hinder his own justification, but also increases
his former sins. But by not resisting, when deliberating thereupon he could
resist, he disposes Council. Triden. Sess. 6. c. 5
himself and cooperateth to first justification. And therefore the royal
Prophet here admonishes, and earnestly exhorts al men, to do this which God
has put in our power, not to harden our own hearts, when we hear his voice,
by resisting and rejecting his grace freely offered, without al merit of our
part.

PSALM. XCV.
Al peoples and nations are invited to praise the blessed Trinity, 3. for
Christ's Christ's divine power. the 5. key.
Incarnation, and spiritual kingdom in all the world. ^^. even sensles creatures
acknowledging his majesty, 13. and judicial power.

A Canticle Inspired to David, and written by him:
to David * himself, prophesying the restoration of the temple, after the
future captivity. And that in figure of the universal redemption of mankind by
Christ, from the captivity of the devil.
when the house was built ^ 1. Par. 16. v. 23.
after the captivity.
For a new benefit, far greater then the delivery of Israel from Egypt.
a new song: sing to our Lord all the earth.

The same words [Sing to our Lord] thrice repeted, signify the Blessed
Trinity, as some Fathers note. Likewise v. 7. and 8. Bring ye to our Lord,
etc. in both places concluding in the singular number, bless his name, bring
to his name, importing one God.
Sing ye to our Lord, and bless his name: shewforth his salvation from day to
day.





What creatures soever spiritual or corporal, visible or invisible the paganes
serve for gods, still they ^e devils that deceive them, and diverse ways
usurp divine honor, making such idolaters to think, that there is divine
power, where none is.
devils, but our Lord He only is true God, who is Creator of heaven, and of al
creatures. For no creature can create any thing at al, that is, make any
thing of nothing but only God.
made the heavens.

Confession, and beauty in his sight: holiness, and magnificence in his
sanctification.

Bring to our Lord ye families of Gentiles, bring ye to our



Diverse ancient Doctors read more in this place: Our Lord has reigned from the
wood, to wit, Christ by his death on the cross conquered the devil, sin,
and death, and thence begane to reign. S. Justinius Martyr, dialogo aduers.
Triphonem. Tertullian li. aduers. Iudaeos. c. 9. and 13 and aduers. Marcionem.
li. 3 c. 19. and. 21. S Augustine in this place, according to the old Roman
Psalter. Before him Arnobius, and after him Cassiadorus and others, whereby it
is probable, that it was sometimes in the Hebrew text, and blotted out by the
Jews.
has reigned.

For he has corrected the round world which shall not be moved: he will judge
peoples in equity.

The Psalmist in abundance of spirit inuiteth al creatures to praise God, as
Daniel in his Canticle. c. 3.
Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice, the sea be



He Christ judges now in the world by his ministers discerning and deciding
causes, rewarding and punishing, but especially he will judge al in the last day.
will judge the round world in equity, and peoples in his truth.

PSALM XCVI.
All the earth is invited to rejoice in Christ's kingdom, 3. with description The
last judgment, the 9. key.
of the signs coming before the day of Judgment. 7. Idolaters shall be
confounded. 8. Holy Angels and just men shall adore Christ, and rejoice.

To In figure of Christ,
this David, whose body rose the third day after his death: to whom many
returned believing in him after his resurrection, which fell from him in his
passion: and to whom al things shall be subdued, as to their true Lord, in the
day of judgment.
when his land was restored agane to him.
Holy David, and other Prophets having great joy to see long before in
spirit only, Christ's kingdom extended in the whole earth, yea to the Islands,
we Ilanders have great cause to be glad, that God has not only so blessed us
long since, but as yet conserueth seed, whereby we trust the whole Island shall
be again restored unto him.
many Islands be glad.

As in a cloud with terror God gave his law to the Jews: so in a cloud with
greater terror and majesty, he will judge the world;
Cloud, and mist round about him: justice, and judgment not as many
corrupted seats of judgment, in this world, but as a corrected tribunal,
where justice and right judgment shall be practiced.
the correction of his seat.



These things are denounced as if they were already done, for the assured
certainty thereof.
shined to the round world, the earth saw, and was moved,





As well the worshippers of graven, or painted images of Jupiter, Mars, Bacchus
and the like, as the worshippers of the same imagined false gods shall be
confounded.
sculptils: and that glory in their idols.

Adore him al ye his Angels: The Catholic Church.
Sion heard, and was glad.

And And al particular Churches, members of the universal.
the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments o Lord.





Light is risen to the just, and joy to the right of heart.

Praise our Lord Christ who is sanctity it self, and sanctifies others.
of his sanctification.

PSALM. XCVII.
Al men are again invited joyfully to celebrate the marvelous conquest of The
Church in all nations. The 6. key.
Christ in all nations, 4. with heart, voice, and instruments: 8. al creatures
acknowledging his coming to judge the world.

A psalm Prefiguring Christ, who has made his salvation known in all nations.
to David himself.
SING ye to our Lord A new benefit of grace, making men new in spirit,
requires a new songue of gratitude.
a new song: because he has done marvelous things.

His righthand has wrought salvation Raised up himself from death.
to himself: and his arm is holy.

Made his grace effectually known by raising men from sin, and delivering
them from the power of the devil.
made known his salvation: in the sight of the Gentiles he has reveled his
justice.

Some of the Jews converted to Christianity. Romans 11.
the house of Israel.

All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

In voice.
chaunt, and Cantate exultate, psallite.
In heart
rejoice, and In instruments.
sing.

Sing to our Lord on harp, on harp and voice of psalm:



The rivers shall clappe with hand, the mountains together Christ directs and
disposes al things rightly in this world.
because he comes

And will accordingly give just sentence in the end.
He will judge the round earth in justice, and the peoples in equity.

PSALM XCVIII.
Christ reigns, notwithstanding his enemies repine, is adored (5. also his
Christ our Messiah. the 5. key.
footestoole) 6. whom ancient Prophets did invoke.

A Psalm to David himself.
OUR Lord has reigned, Though many enemies do rage, and impugn Christ:
let peoples be angry: he that sits upon the Cherubs, let though the whole
earth be trubled therewith, yet Christ who sits Lord over the highest
Angels, Cherubins and Seraphins, obteyneth the victory, reigns, and does his
vvil in all the earth.
the earth be moved.

Our Lord great in Sion: and high above al peoples.

Let them confess to thy great name: because it is terrible, and holy.

And the honor of the king Requires discretion.
loves judgment.

Thou have prepared directions: thou have done judgment and justice in favor
of thyn elect people.
in Jacob.

Hebrew Doctors expound this of the Arc in the old testament, but the Doctors
of the Church understand Christ's humanity, in the holy Eucharist.
his footstool: because it is holy.

Here it is evident (and S. Augustine says this place takes away al doubt)
that Moses was a Priest, against those that for maintaining the heresy of
Laiheadshippe, deny it.
priests: and Samuel among them, that invoke his name: ^ 23. in Leuit.


By example of their praying and obtaining, the Psalmist confirms his
prophecy, that Priests of the new Testament shall pray, and obtain mercy of
Christ for the Church.
and he heard them: in a pillar of a cloud he spoke to them.

They kept his testimonies, and the precept which he gave them.

God revenged the machinations made against them, punishing the rebellion of
chore, Dathan and Abyron. Number. 16.
their inventions.

Exalt ye the Lord our God, and adore ye in his holy mount: because the Lord
our God is holy.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM XCIX.
5. Adore his footestoole] For so much as al Expositors, also the Hebrew
Rabbis, Christ's humanity is his footestoole, adored in the Eucharist.
affirm that the Psalmist here prophecieth of Christ the promised Messiah,
that should redeem mankind; and seeing the Arc of covenant perteyneth not to
the service of Christ; but was only a figure of him, the footestoole of
Messiah here mentioned, must needs be something perteyning to him: and therefore
most ancient Fathers expound it of Christ's humanity. And because the Prophet
speaks of perpetual adoration, not only of the short time, he conuersed
with men in this life, when very fevv adored him, the same fathers understand
here the adoration of Christ in the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist. Which S
Ambrose teaches (lib. 3. de Spiritu Sancto. c. 12.) in these plain words.
By S. Ambrose.
the footstool must be understood the earth, by the earth the flesh of Christ.
Which we also at this day adore in the Mysteries, and which the Apostles
adored in our Lord Jesus. S. Augustine more largely upon this Psalm, I am made
S. Augustine.
doubtful (says he) I fear to adore the earth, lest he condeme me that made
heaven and earth. Again I fear not to adore the footstool of my Lord,
because the Psalm says to me: Adore his footstool. I seek what is his
footstool, and the Scripture (Isaiae. 66.) tells me, the earth is his
footstool. Doubtful I turn myself unto Christ, because I seek him here, and
I find how without impiety the earth may be adored, without impiety his
footstool may be adored. For he took earth of earth, because flesh is of
earth, and he took flesh of the flesh of (the B. virgin) Marie. And because he
vvalked here The receivers of the B. Sacrament do sin if they do not adore it.
in the same flesh, and gave the very flesh to us to eat, unto salvation, and
no man eats that flesh, onles he first adore it: it is found how such a
footstool of our Lord may be adored: and not only we do not sin in
adoring, but we should sin in not adoring. Thus far S. Augustine. Further
instructing, not to co^ce^ue of Christ's flesh, as ^he Capharnaites did, that he
would cute it in pieces from his body, and give them portions thereof. His very
flesh is given and eaten, not in fleshly manner, but in sacramental. See
Annotations. Joan. 6.

PSALM XCIX. One Creator of al things. The 1. key.

Al are invited to rejoice in God, Creator of al.

A Psalm of praise.
in confession.
Not only Jews, but also al Gentiles.
all the earth: serve ye our

Enter ye in God eueryvvhere present, yet more peculiarly hears his
suppliants, praying in the temple, or place dedicated to his service.
before his sight, in exultation.

He only whom we serve as our Lord is the only God, and there is no other.
he is God: he made us, and not we ourselves.

Peculiar dedicated place, as v. 2.
his gates in confession, his courts in hymns: confess ye to him.

As God is always merciful in giving, and promising:
mercy for ever, and so he is ever faithful in performing.
his truth even unto generation and generation.

PSALM C.
King David gratfully celebrateth the two general divine virtues, Mercy and
Justice: 2. by his own example exhorts al, especially Superiors, Instruction
to govern. the 7. key*
to direct their ways in sincerity, 4. and to separate the wicked from
conversation of the good.

A Psalm to David himself.
MERCY These two capital divine virtues are ever joined in all Gods works,
for both which experienced toward him self, the Psalmist rendereth thanks
and praises.
and judgment I will sing to thee ^ Lord: I I will do mine endeavor to know the
immaculate way,
shall understand in the immaculate which I can not do, but by thy grace coming
unto me. For by help thereof I did as follows.
when thou shall come to me.

I walked through in the inocencie of my heart, in the mids of my house.





That is, al and every one thus wickedly disposed I abhorred.
One secretly detracting from his neighbor, him did I persecute. One of a
proud eye, and insatiable heart, with him I did not eat.

I kept such under, as a servant or slave.
he did minister to me.

Prospered not, got no benefit by me.
not directed in the sight of mine eyes.

Speedely and without delay I cut of al disordered people:
the morning did I kill all the sinners of the earth: that I might destroy that
others might not be corrupted by them.
out of the city of our Lord, al those that work iniquity.

PSALMS. CI.
A sinner in affliction of mind prays God to deliver him, 10. desolate of The
fifth penitential Psalm. the 7. key.
al other help. 13. conceiueth comforth in Gods eternal goodness, and singular
mercy, in redeming mankind, and propagating the Church. 24. Prays to be made
mature in virtue before he dye, that he may live with God: 26. who only and
wholly being immutable, establishes his servants for ever.

The prayer of the poor, when he shall be anxious, and shall
Every petition is a prayer,
prayer: and let my and that which proceeds from more fervent affection, is
called a cry, though it burst not out into clamoure, nor perhaps into any
voice at al. For God said to Moses, praying in mere silence, but with
vehemency of spirit (Exodus 14) Why criest thou to me?
cry come to thee.

Turn Though sin provoke Gods wrath, because we by sinning turn from him,
and not he first from us: yet we pray God not so to leave us, but to give us
new grace, that by humility, and penance we may return to him, and not dye in
sin.
not away thy face from me: in what day soever I am in tribulation, incline
thine ear to me.

In what day soever I shall invoke thee, hear me speedely.

Man's days, and al his works are nothing worth, but vanish like smoke, so
long as he is in mortal sin:
smoke: and my yea his best works, as if he give almose, fast, pray, and dye
for the truth, yet al those avail nothing (1. Cor. 13.) but are
bones are withered as like dried sticks, or chippes, fit to kindle the fire.
a dry burnt firebrand.

My soul separated by sin from God, withers as grass, that is cut from
the root:
am stricken as grass, and my heart is withered: because because I have lost al
savor and appetite to spiritual meat.
I have forgotten to eat my bread.

In this miserable state.
the voice of my groaning, my I am as bones and flesh cleaving together without
moisture, or radical humor.
bone has cleaued to my flesh.

I fled from conversation of men for sorrow, and shame of my sins:
a pellicane of the wilderness: I am become as as a crow that only flies by
night: or as an owl, or batte.
a nightcrow in the house.

Also as a sparow having lost her mate, remains mourning and solitary in the
accustomed nest, ornere unto it,
a sparow solitary in the housetoppe.

Those that were wont to praise or flatter me, now are as sworn enemies
against me.
that praised me, swear against me.

Bread sauoured to me no better then ashes.
eat ashes as bread, and mingled and drink gave me no comfort, but still I
wept.
my drink with weeping.

I am most especially aflicted, because thou art angry.
the face of thy wrath and indignation: because In that thou did sometime
advance me in prosperity,
lifting me up thou have thrown me down. t my fall is so much greater, and
more grievous.


As a shadow declineth to nothing, and al becomes darkness, when the sun, and
other light departs, even so I, that am but a shadow, decline to mere
darkness, when thy favor parts from me.
as a shadow: and I am withered and I lose my beauty, as grass cut from the
ground withers.
as grass.

But I am meruelously comforted, considering that thou our Messiah, the Son
of God, art immutable for ever:
But thou o Lord endurest for ever: and and thy memorable promise of redeeming
mankind, will have effect in all generations.
thy memorial in generation and generation.

Thou rising to help, who semedst to have forgote, wilt protect the Church,
and every faithful soul.
rising up shall have mercy on Sion: because it is because thou have differred
long:
time to have mercy on it, because and because the time by thee designed
seems to approach.
the time comes.

Men that shall hear thyn Apostles preach, shall prove good and fit matter,
for the building of thy Church:
the stones thereof have pleased thy servants: and they shall have pity on and
the simplest poor people, as it were, the earth or dust;
the earth shall participate of this mercy.
thereof.

Besides those Jews that shall believe in Christ, much more the Gentiles shall
fear and serve him
the Gentiles shall fear thy name o Lord, and al His glory is so evident that
al kings know it, though al be not converted.
the kings of the earth thy glory.



Of holy Patriarchs, Priests, Prophets, and of al true penitents.
of the humble: and he has not despised their petition.

That shall be made a new creature in Christ.
be created, shall praise our Lord.





The faithful people of the Church, according to their ability endeavor to
serve Christ.
shewforth the name of our Lord in Sion: and his praise in Jerusalem.





Grant me time and means to be mature in virtue in this life.
in the half of my days: thy years are unto generation and generation.



They Be changed in quality.
shall perish, but thou art permanent: and they shall Heb. 1.
al wax old as a garment.



The Church of Christ perpetual.
their seed shall be directed for ever.

PSALM. CII.
Thanks to God for private, 6. and public benefits. 17. His mercy,
Gratitude for Gods benefits. The 7. key.
justice, and other proprieties are immutable. 20. Angels, and al other
creatures are invited to praise him.

To Inspired to David, and written by him.
David himself.
Show forth praises, and thanks:
bless thou our Lord: and al my cogitations, affections, senses, and powers.
al things, that are within me, his holy name.

My soul bless thou our Lord: and forget not al his retributions.

The first benefit of grace is remission of sins:
propitious to al thine iniquities: who the second, is curing evil habites, or
dispositions.
heals al thine infirmities.

The third, to conserve from falling again:
redemeth thy life from deadly falling: who the fourth, to give victory and
reward in abundant measure.
crowns thee in mercy and commiserations.

The fifth, to grant al lawful petitions temporal and spiritual, which are good
for the soul,
replenisheth thy desire in good things:" thy youth the sixth, resurrection of
flesh in glory.
shall be rewed as the eagles.

Our Lord, whose special property is to show mercy,
does mercies: and when the same is neglected, he reuengeth the wrongs,
delivering the oppressed* and punishing the oppresso^s.
judgment to all that suffer wrong.

By giving them a written law.
known to Moses, his wills to the children of Israel.

Our Lord is God is naturally pitiful, to relieve the afflicted.
pitiful, and merciful toward sinners.
merciful: loath to be angry, or to punish.
long suffering, and very merciful.

God punishes not penitents with eternal pain, but with temporal: for though
(as in the next verse) our sins of their own nature, deserve eternal
punishment, yet Christ paying our ransom, true penitents are only punished
temporally.
not be angry always: neither will he threaten for ever.





See here the perfect washing away, and separation of sins.
as the East is distant from the West: has he made our iniquities far from us.

As a father has compassion of his children, so has our

In reguard of our frailty he has compassion: yet his mercy only avails to
them that fear him: as in the next words before, and v. 17.
our making.







And his justice is upon the childrens children, to them that keep his
testament.

And are mindful of his commandmentes, to A just man not only knows, and
remembers, but also does the commandments.
do them.







Al creatures, though naturally senseles, yet praise God, because they are his
work,
al his works: in every place and because they are in his dominion.
of his dominion, my soul bless thou our Lord.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. CII.
5 Thy youth shall be renewed, as the Eagles.] Aristotel and Pliny write, that
an An Eagle fresh in old age as in youth.
Eagle decays not, nor ever dies by old age, but the upper part of her beak
st. l growing, at last h^ndereth her from eating, and so she dies of fam^ne.
Saadias, and other Hebrew Rabbis, report that an Eagle every ten years
washes herself ^n the sea as in a ba^h, and then flying very hiegh burns
her feathers in the elemental fire, and new feathers growing she becomes fresh,
as in her first youth, t^l at last about an huadred years old, she is not able
to rise from the water and so is drowned. S. Augustine more probably affirms
that in long time her ^e^ke growing long, and stopping her mouth, that she can
not eat, she breaks the upper hooked part thereof against a stone, and so
receives meat, and recouereth strength as in her youth. But whatsoever is the
natural propert e of this kingly bird, the Royal Prophet here instructs us,
by the s^nilitude of her long life, or by the renouation of her streingth, that
just men, Gods servants are spiritually renouated in Christ, the principal
rock, on Renouation of a si^ner by grace.
who^ the Church, and all the faithful are built, either by receiving new
streingth by his grace in their souls, after they are weakened by sin; as S.
Ierom and Eu hymius expound this place: or by restoration of their bodies
glorified in the resurrection; as S. Augustine teaches: or by both, as most
Catholic Doctors understand it. For one sense of holy Scripture excludes
not an Diverse senses of the same Scripture.
other. Especially when one is subordinate to the other. As here these two
senses do very well concur, seeing the state of the body after the
resurrection, depends upon the state of the soul* at the time of death.

9 He vvil not be angry alvvayes.] Origin misunderstood this place, and some
other like, holding an erronius opinion, that al, even the most wicked sinners,
Origens heresy that al shall be saved.
both men and d^uels, shall at last be saved, and not eternally damned: which is
a condemned heresy, contrary to evident places of holy Scriptures. Psalm 9 v
6. The impious has perished: their name thou have destroyed for ever, and for
ever and ever. Mat. 2^. The wicked shall go into fire everlasting, into
everlasting punishment. Apoc. 20. The beast and the false prophet (and the same
reason is for all the wicked) shall be tormented day and night, for ever and
ever. Neither are the^e words (God vvil not be angry alvvayes) spoken
universally, touching al sinners whosoever, but are limited, v, 13, and, 17,
to those that sear him, and keep his testament: vvheras al those that dye in
mortal sin, are still The damned can never repent.
o^^^^na^e in malice, and can never rightly repent, nor rightly fear God, nor
keep his commandments.

PSALM CIII.
The Psalmist inuiteth himself and others to praise God, for his marvelous
works in the heavens, 5. the earth, and water, 9. limiting their bonds, Gods
works (...) the 2. key.
producing al things necessary for all living creatures, in convenient
seasons. 27. With continual providence of al.

To David him self.


Thou have put on Thou possessest al majesty, and matter of praise.
confession and beauty: being clothed with light as with a garment:

Thou have compassed the sphere of the fixed stars, with a sphere of
christalline substance; which is as water ^ongeled.
with waters.

Which According to our capacity the prophet describes the speedy coming, or
vvorking of God, as if he came in a swift cloud, or with wings of the
vvind, to signify that he works what and when he pleases without delay:
He sa^de, and things were made: he commanded and they were created, Psalm. ^2.
make the cloud for thee to ascend on: which walk upon the wings of
winds.

Thy messengers to execute thy vvil:
Angels: and thy and the same Angels are as a burning fire in operation, yea
they dispatch more easily, and more spedely then we can conceive,
ministers a burning fire.

Most sirmly established by natural weight, in the center of the world.
the stabilitie thereof: it shall not be inclined for ever and ever:

The water
depth, should naturally cover all the earth:
as a garment, is his clothing: upon the mountains shall waters stand.

But by thy commandment the waters are contained in their limited places.
thy reprehention they shall flee: at the voice of thy thunder they shall fear.

The waters being contained in their appointed channels, both hills and fields
appe^re, which otherwise would be covered.
mountains ascend: and the plain fildes descend into the place, which thou
have founded for them.

The waters.
they shall not pass over: neither shall they return to cover the earth.



hope for and receive.
expect in their thirst.







That thou may bring forth By these three principal kinds of food, bread,
wine, and oil, al sorts of nutriment are understood.
bread out of the earth: and By these three principal kinds of food, bread,
wine, and oil, al sorts of nutriment are understood.
wine may make the heart of man joyful:

That he may make the face chereful with By these three principal kinds of
food, bread, wine, and oil, al sorts of nutriment are understood.
oil: and bread may confirm the heart of man.

The trees of the silde shall be filled, and the ceders of Libanus,













With thy creatures.
thy possession.

Fishes, serpents, worms, and al living creatures that lack feet.
creeping beasts, whereof No kind of living creatures multiplieth so much as
fishes. Aristotel li. 9. Animal. c. 17.
there is no number.

Little beasts with great: there ships shall pass.

A most huge fish called Leuiathan. Job. 40. v. 20.
dragon, whom thou made to Albeit in the wate^ he passes man's streingth, yet
deprived of water he is not able to defend himself. v. 29.
delude: al expect of thee that thou give them meat in season.















A prediction that impenitent sinners shall be damned, wherein the Prophet
conforming his will to Gods, utters it in form of a prayer.
Let sinners fail from the earth, and the unjust, so that they be not: my
soul bless thou our Lord.

PSALM. CIIII.
The Israelites are exhorted to sing praises to God, 5. for his marvelous
benefits toward Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 11. whose particular Gods special
benefits toward the Jews. the 4. key.
family, being then small, went from Chanaan into Egypt (17. Whither Joseph by
Gods providence was carried before) there increased in number, was persecuted,
26. delivered by Moses and Aaron, working many great miracles, 36. protected,
and fed in the desert, 44. and finally possessed Chanaan.

Alleluia signifies more then Laudate Dominum, Praise ye our Lord. For by
these two hebrew words, Allelu a, the Prophet inuiterh al men to praise God,
with gladness, and iubilation, with heart, voice, and gesture, with instruments,
and howsoever we are able. And therefore S. Ierom, S. Augustine, and al
Catholic writers keep the same word, and translate it not, neither in the
titles of Psalms, not ordinarily in any place of holy Scripture. This is the
first Psalm thus titled, and is the same Psalm in sense, and in good part of
the words, which the royal Prophet made, and caused to be songue, when he
brought the Ark of God from the house of Obededom into his own house. 1. Par.
16. v. 8.
Alleluia.
How much more gratful is it now to God, that we celebrate the greater
mysteries of the new Testament.
shewforth his works among the Gentiles. For an exposition of this Psalm read
the places quoted in the inner margen.






His present help.
his face always.





not only in Israel, but in all the world.
all the earth are his judgments. Gen 12. v. 7. Gen* 17. v. 4. Genesis 26. v. 3.
Gen 28. v 13. Genesis 46. v. 26. 27.


For ever, to the end of the world.
unto a thousand generations.

Which he disposed to Abraham: and of his oath to Isaac.



Saying: To thee will I give the land of Chanaan, the cord of your inheritance.

But. 70. persons.
of small number, very few and seiourners thereof:







By his providence suffered.
he called a famine upon the land: and he desstroyed Genesis 41. v. 54.
all the strength of bread.

Genesis 37. v. 28.


They humbled his feet in fetters, iron passed through his Gen* 39. and seq.








Genesis 4^.
the land Egypt, possessed by Mesraim Chams second son. Genesis 10. v. 13.
of Cham.

Exo. ^. v. 7.


May it be understood, or believed (says S. Augustine) that God turns the heart
of man to commit sins? Or is it no sin, or is it a small sin, to hate
the people of God? Or to work guile toward his servants? Who will say this?
What then, is God author of these so grievous sins, who is not to be
supposed the author of a most small sin? This learned Father therefore
answers, that God perverted not a right heart, but turned that was of it self
perverse, to the hatred of his people, where he might use that evil well, not by
making them evil, but by bestowing upon his own people good things, which the
evil might easily envy. Which hatred of theirs how God used both to the
exercise of his people (which is profitable to us) and to the glory of his
own name, the things that follow do teach us, which are here remembered to his
praise.
turned their heart, that they hated his people: and to work guile toward his
servants.

In whom God established the Priest good of Moses law.
him self whom he Exo. 3. 4. 7. 8. 9. 10. 12.
chose.



The ointh plague of the Egyptians.
darkness, and obscured: and did God willingly, not as one loath or unwilling,
performed all that he threatened.
not exasperate his words.

He turned their The first plague.
waters into blood: and killed their fishes.

The second plague.
frogs in David knew this by revelation, or by tradition for it is not in
Exodus.
the inner chambers of their kings.

The fourth plague.
the a swarm of (...)es.
caenomyia came: and the The third plague.
cinifes in all their coasts.

He made their raynes The seuent^ plague.
hail: fire burning in their land.



The eight plague.
the locust came, and the A worm that spoyleth corn, grass, and fruict.
bruchus whereof there was no number.



The tenth plague.
first begotten in their land: the first fruictes of al their labor.

Exodus 12. v. 35.
was not in their tribes a feeble person.



Exodus 13. v. 21.
The fifth and sixth of pestilence and boyles are omitted.
unto them by night.

Exodus 16. v. 13.


Exodus 17. v. 6.
the dry ground.

Genesis 12.




(...). 6. and seq.




PSALM. CV.
The prophet exhorts the people to render thanks and praises to God, 6. for
The Israelites often sinned, and were mercifully punished. the 4. key.
remitting their manifold sins, in the desert. 34. and in the conquered land:
38. foreshewing like sins to come, Gods wrath and punishment for the same.
44. and that he will give grace of repentance: to some 47. for which he prays,
and praises God.

Allelu ia.
God is of himself and essentially good. Al other goodness is participated of
him.
because he is good* because Judith* ^ v. 21.
his mercy is for ever.

No creature can fully express Gods perfections.
Who shall speak the powers of our Lord, shall make al his praises to be heard?

It is a happy state in this life, either to keep Gods law:
Blessed are they, that keep judgment, and or to repent and do worthy
penance for transgressing.
do justice at al time.

According to thy wonted benevolence, promised to thy people.
in the good pleasure of thy people: visit us in thy salvation:

That we may see, and enjoy the benefits promised to thine elect.
see in the goodness of thine elect, to rejoice in the joy of thy nation: that
thou may be praised with thine inheritance.

We have erred and hurt ourselves:
sinned with our fathers: we have we have wronged our neighbors:
dealt unjustly, we have we have offended against God*
done iniquity.



And they provoked thee to wrath going up unto the sea, the Exodus 14. v 1^.
Read sea.

Albeit the people by their murmuring deserved more punishment, yet God for the
glory of his own name saved them from utter destruction.
for his name sake; that he might make his power known.







Exodus 1^.


They perseuered no^ long in their duty toward God, seeing his* omnipotent
power by his marvelous works:
quickly done, they forgot his works: and they nor were content with his
providence, but carnally coueted things, not necessary.
expected not his counsel.

And they coueted concupiscence in the desert: and tempted Exo. 16* and 17.
God in the place without water.

According to their carnal des^^^s.
souls.

Holy by his function.
holy Number. 16.
of our Lord.





They adored the image that represented a calf, not God.
the Exo. 23.
sculptil.

God being their true glory, they changed him, for a false god of the
Egyptians (who especially hono^ed a calfe called Ap^s) making an image thereof,
and attributed their delivery from Egypt to this imagned god. Exo. 32. v. 4*
8. Of which and the like foolish, and abominable idolatry S Paul writes, Romans
1 v. 23. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God* into a similitude of
the image of a corruptible man, and of fowls, and of four footed beasts, and
of them that crepe: where we see what manner of imagies holy Scriptures
condemn, and not the imagies of Christ and his Saints.
changed their glory into the similitude of a calfe that eats grass.

They forgot God, which saved them, which did great things

He said, he would destroy them, but for Moses prayer spared them.
he said to destroy them: if Moses his elect had not Exo 32.
stood in the way before him:

Number. 14.
desired.



Number 14. v. 21. 22.
in the desert:



The Idol of Moabites, and Madianitees*
Beelphegor: and they did Number. 25. v. ^.
eat the sacrifices As God is in deed the living God, that lives of
himself, and gives life to others: so false gods are called dead gods,
that can not give life to any, but do kill all that serve them* at least
spiritually, and often corporally.
of the dead.



And Phinees stood, and Phinees moved by the zele of God (as the holy text
witnesses. Nu. 25. v. 11.) in killing the adulterers pleased God, and merited
reward.
pacified: and the slaughter ceased.



And they provoked him at the waters of contradiction: and Number 20. v. 2. 12.
Moses afflicted in spirit, by the enormious murmuring of the people, doubted
whether God would give them water out of the rock or no, not doubting of his
power, but of his will: and so when he should have spoken to the rock, Number. 20.
v. 8. he spoke to the incredulous people. v. 10. and therein offended God. for
which he was temporally punished. v. 12. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 37. etc. 3. v. 26. c. 4.
v. 21.
Moses was vexed for them: because they exasperated

Deuteronomy 2. v. 2. and 12. v. 2. and 3. Iudic* 2. v. 11. 12. Iudic. 2. v. 5. 6.
etc. Iere. 15. v. 5.


And they were mingled among the nations, and learned



Some Jews offered these most cruel, unnatural, and abominable sacrifices;
perhaps in the times of Judges, when they were mingled with idolatrous people,
and served their gods; Iud. z. v. 12. c. 3 v. 6. But it is more express
after David's time, whereof he here prophecieth, and was veryfied by Achaz 4 Reg.
16 v. 3. and by Manasses. 4 Reg. 21. v. 6. Which with other idolatry king
Josias destroyed. 4 Reg 2, v. 1^.
they shed innocent blood: the blood of their sons and of their daughters,
which they sacrificed to the sculptils of Chanaan.







And their enemies afflicted them: and they were humbled

But they exasperated him in their counsel: and they were humbled in their
iniquities.

God respected them with his merciful eye, and gave them grace to repent.
saw when they were afflicted: and he heard their prayer.



And he gave them into mercies in the sight of al, that had taken them. Here
the Psalmist concludes both the history and prophecy of this Psame, with
prayer and praise, as follows:


A very fit prayer in time of schism.
Save us o Lord our God: and geather us out of the Nations:

That we may confess to thy holy name: and may glory in thy praise.



ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. CV.
10. He redeemed them.] What price (or ransom) says S. Augustine, was The read
sea a figure of Baptism.
given in this redemption? Or is it a prophecy, that this was done in figure
of Baptism, where we are redeemed from the hand of the devil, by a great price,
which is the blood of Christ? Whereupon it was more conveniently figured, not
by what sea soever, but by the read sea. For blood has read coulor. And
touching the effect of Baptism destroying al former sins, he teaches in the
exposition of the next Psalm (and either the same holy father, or some other
Al former sins destroyed in Baptism.
good author, Ser. 42. de temp) that as the Israelites passed safely through
the read sea, and all the Egyptians going in with them were drowned: so the
baptized are saved in the water of Baptism, and al their sins are destroyed.

PSALM CVI.
Again the Psalmist inuiteth al men to render thanks to God for their Gods
perpetual providence toward al men* The 3. key.
delivery from dangers, or evils in general: 4. particularly from dangers in
journey, 10. in prison, or captivity, 17. in sickness spiritual and corporal,
23. in navigations, 33. describing the changeable course of things in this
world, 38. especially of men's states; 42. for all which the just will praise God.

Allelu ia.
Praise God by confessing his mercy, providence, and goodness.
ye to our Lord because he is good: because 1. Pa^. 16. v. 34.
his mercy is for ever.

God of his mercy promised the Redemer of mankind straight after Adams fall:
redeemed of our Lord, whom he redeemed out of the hand of the enemy: and out of
the countries he gathered them:

Which redemption was intended for all, and fails not of Gods part in any,
but of men's own wilful refusing to be duly penitent, and to keep Gods precepts.
the rising of the sun, and the going down: from the north, and the sea.

They Literally of such as wander in this world, having no settled place to dwell
in* spiritually of al mankind after his fall.
wandered in the wilderness, in a place without water: the way of city for
habitation they found not.

Hungry, and thirsty: their soul fainted in them.

Whenever they call upon God, he helps them, as is best for their spiritual
health.
they cried to our Lord when they were in tribulation: and he delivered them
out of their necessities.



Al Gods benefits, which are of his mercy, not of man's deserte, are just
matter of praising God.
the mercies of our Lord confess to him: and his marvelous works to the
children of men.





Calamities in this world are commonly inflicted for sins.
exasperated the words of God: and they provoked the counsel of the Highest.





















And let them sacrifice the sacrifice of praise: and show forth his works in
exulation.











As before in the 6, 13, and 19, verses.
they cried to our Lord when they were in tribulation, and he brought them out
of their necessities.





This verse also is four times in this Psalm v 8 15. 21. and; 1. to admonish
us, that as there is o^e means ^o escape from al dangers by crying to God, as
v 6 13. 19 and 28, with mou^n^ng and p^nance: so there is one cause of praise
and thanks for our delivery, which is Gods me c^e and grace,
the mercies of our Lord confess to him: and his marvelous works to the
children of men.



God to show sometimes his power, also to benefit some, and to punish others,
changes the accustomed course of things, and states of men, at his divine
pleasure; as here the ^oyal prophet recites some examples. And some others are
^eco^ded in d^ue^s times and places,
He turned No doubt much charge was made in the earth by Noe^ flood. And many
think that the land of Chanaan, was made more fruictful in the time of the
Jews inhabiting, and now is more barrane again.
the rivers into a desert: and the issues of waters into dryness.

He alludeth to the country about Sodom, and Gomotre, which was most
fruictful, and most pleasant, Gen, 13. v, 10, but shortly after was burnt
with fire and brunston, Genesis 19, v, 24, subverted, and turned into a dead and
salt sea.
fruiteful land into a salt ground, for the malice of them that inhabit it.





And they sowed fildes, and planted vineyardes: and they made fruicte Made
abundance of fruict to grow.
of nativity.



Again some countries punished for sins.
they were made few: and were vexed by the tribulation of euiles, and with
sorrow.



An other change in releeuing the poor being humbled.
did help the poor out of poverty: and made families as sheep.





PSALM CVII.
The royal prophet promises, 5. and rendereth praises to God, 7. for his
delivery David sings praises for benefits received. the 8 key.
from trubles, and advancement in the kingdom, 13. praying God still to help
man's infirmity.

A Canticle This Psalm was ^ongue with instruments beginning the music, and
voices following.
of Psalm, to David himself. Psalm. 56. v. 8.

The former part of this Psalm to the 7. verse, is the same in sense, and
almost in words, with the latter part of the 56 from the 8. verse.
chaunte, and will sing in my glory.

Arise my glory, arise psalter, and harp: I will arise early.

King David subdued not only some parts of Chanaan, not subject to the jews
before (2. Reg. 51. Par. 11.) but also brought the Philistims, Moabites,
Ammonites, Idumeans, Amalechites, the kings of Soba, Syria, and Emath, to pay
tribute, 2. Reg. 8 1. Par. 18.
will confess to thee in peoples o Lord: and I will sing to thee Yet al these
victories and conquestes were but a figure of Christ's power, and dominion in all
nations. And therefore, the rest of this Psalm, by S. Augustine, and other
fathers judgment, was rather prophetically uttered by David, in the person of
Christ, and more perfectly performed by Christ in his Church, then historically
auerred of David himself.
in the Nations.



Be exalted above the heavens o God, and thy glory over all The rest of this
Psalm is the same with the latter part of the 59. from the 7. verse.
that thy beloved may be delivered. Psalm. 59. v. 7.




I will rejoice, and will divide Sichem, and I will mesure the vale of tabernacles.



Judah is my king: Moab the pot of my hope.

Upon Idumea I will extend my shoe: the strangers are made my freindes.









PSALM CVIII.
Christ (by the mouth of David) requesteth of God to be justly declared Christ
persecuted and his enemies punished. the 5. key.
innocent, and his enemies punished, 6. particularly describing Judas the
traitors malice, 21. and his own temporal afflictions, 26. prays, 30. and
praises God for his delivery.

Unto the end, a Psalm of David.
The words of Christ.
God conceal not my praise: because the mouth of The Pharisees and Herodians
(Mat. 22.) with their mouth acknowleged Christ a true speaker, and a teacher of
the way of God in truth, thereby to draw him into danger, and to sheede his
blood.
the deceitful man is open upon me.

At other times they accused him of great crimes, lastly of treason against
Caesar.
have spoken against me with deceitful tongue, and with words of hatred they
have compassed me: and they have impugned me without cause.





A prediction that Judas would not make recourse to any good counselor, but
complain of his miserable tormented conscience to the wicked, who gave him no
comfort at al,
a sinner over him: and and so desparing, the devil persuaded him to hang
himself.
let the devil stand on his righthand.

When he is judged, let him comeforth condemned: and let his prayer be turned
into sin.

Act. t. v. 16.
The office of Apostleshippe.
bishopric.

Let The posterity, or successors of wicked persecuters prosper not long in
this world.
his children be made orphans: and his wife a widow.







Arch herit^kes that devise new opinions, are shortly forsa ken, their
folowers still coining new heresies of their own, differing from their false
masters.
one generation let his name be clean put out.



Let them be before our Lord always, and let the memory



Let them observe this, that use more swearing and blaspheming, then praying or
meditating.
loved cursing, and it shall come to him: and he would not blessing, and it shall
be far from him.

And he put on cursing as a garment, and it entered as water into his inner
parts, and as oil in his bones.







Christ's soul was pensive when he prayed in the garden, and he did works of
penance for our sins al his life.
my heart is trubled within me.







Help me o Lord my God: He prayed also for his resurrection, and glorification.
save me according to thy mercy.





With al possible confusion.
duble patched cloak.





PSALM. CIX.
Christ rising and ascending into heaven sits on the right hand of God:
Christ's exaltation. the 5. key.
2. beginning in Jerusalem reigns in the Church of the whole earth. 4. uses
the Priesthood of Melchisedechs order to the end of the world. 6. and shall
judge the world.

A psalm of David. Mat. 22. Act. 2. 1. Cor. 15. Heb. 1. and 10.

God the Father.
Lord said To God the Son, the Lord of David, and of al mankind, yet the
son of David, according to his humanity.
to my Lord: Sit on my right hand: He limiteth not the time, but excludes al
time, wherein the enemy might imagine, that Christ's kingdom should cease:
signifying that Christ shall reign, til al his enemies be subdued, much more
afterward in all eternity.
til I make thine enemies, thy footestoole of thy feet.

The Church of Christ beginning in Jerusalem on whitsunday, the fiftith day
from his Resurrection, continues ever more.
from Sion: rule thou in the mids of thine enemies.

Thou shall have principality,
the beginning in the day in the day of thy powrful conquest, and rising from
death.
of thy strength, in in excellency of al holy spiritual mysteries and graces:
the brightness of holy things: from the womb because, I God the Father of my
substance begat thee, God the Son in eternity. The same which Micheas says
(c. 5. v. 2.) His comingforth from the beginning, from the days of eternity.
before the day star I begat thee.

God most firmly, and unchangeably affirmed: that thou (Christ our Messiah) art
not only a King, but also a Priest:
swear, and it shall not repent him: Thou art Heb. 5. v. 7.
"a Priest not for a time, as Aaron was, but for euet,
for ever" according to neither of Aarons order, but according to the Order of
Melchisedec.
the order of Melchisedech.

Our Lord on thy righthand, Kings that sometimes persecute Christans, are
subdued with other people to Christ.
has broken kings in the day of his wrath.

He shall judge and punish the incredulous people,
shall judge in nations, he make great slanghters amongst those that resist:
shall fill ruins, he and bring princes with their populous kingdom to nothing.
shall crush the heads in the land of many.

He shall in the mean time (and also his best servants) suffer much tribulation
in this life:
Of the torrent in the way he shall drink: and for the same ^e highly exalted
in life everlasting.
therefore shall he exalt the head.

ANNOTATIONS. CIX.
4. A Priest for ever.] In two respects Christ is a Priest for ever: in that
from Christ's Priesthood for ever both in function and in effect.
the first instant of his incarnation he was, and remaneth a Priest, now also
in heaven* and al other Priests are his ministerial vicares, not successors.
So that al priestlie functions, which they do, he by them does the same, as
the principal Priest. Whereupon says S. Paul (1. Cor 4.) So let a man think
of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and dispensers of the mysteries of God.
Secondly Christ daily offering Sacrifice by the hands of his Priests, does
continually pacify Gods wrath, in behalf of those sinners, for whom it is duly
applied, even to the end of the world. VVheras the Priesthood of Aaron, and of
al others in the old Testament, ceased by their* deaths, both in the office,
and in the effect.

4 According to the order of Melchisedech.] As Melchisedech, king of peace and
justice, without father, mother, or genealogy, expressed in holy Scriptures,
The resemblance of Christ's and Melchisedecs Priesthood.
or otherwise known to the world, was Priest or the Hieghest, offered bread
and wine, an unbloody sacrifice; communicating with both Chananeites and
Hebrews, blessed Abraham, and took tithes of him and his subjects: so Christ
the true King of peace and justice, without father of his humanity, without
mother of his Divinity, the Son of God, of ineffable genealogy, borne of a
virgin in his humanity, the Priest of God, offers Sacrifice (not only
bloody on the Cross, but also) unbloody in the forms of bread and wine,
continues the same by the ministry of other Priests, makes al nations
partakers thereof, blesses them and receives of them al dutiful and rellgious
service, as of his subjects.

PSALM CX.
Praise of God for benefits, 4. especially for the B. Sacrament of the
Eucharist, Graces given to the Church. the 6. key.
6 with other graces imperted to the Catholic Church.

Alleluia.
I will praise God both in secret for discharge of mine own conscience; b and in
public for edification of others.
the counsel This Psalm in the Hebrew is composed with every verse and middle
of verse, begunning with a distinct letter, in order of the Alphabet.
of the just, and b the congregation.

The works of our Lord are great: exquisite according Gods will is the whole
cause of al his works.
to al his wills.

Every work of his is praise worthy, and magnifical.
Confession and magnificence his work: and his justice contineweth for ever
and ever.

He has made God has leift one most special and beneficial memory of al
other benefits, his own body and blood, in memory of his Passion, and our
redemption,
a memory of his marvelous works; a the spiritual food and sustinance of all the souls that rightly fear him.
meat to them

Of his promise to conserve his Church perpetually.
of his testament: the powrable operation of his death, and of al his mysteries.
the force of his works he will shewforth to his people:



Gods commandments do justify all that keep them.
are faithful: confirmed for ever and ever, made in truth and equity.

He also of his mercy redeemed man, that he might be able to keep his precepts.
redemption to his people: he commanded his testament for ever.

Begingning with fear of God, brings at last by other degrees to true
wisdom, which two are the first and last of the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost.
the fear of our Lord is the beginning of wisdom.



PSALM CXI.
True happiness consists in fearing God, keeping his commandments, 5. and The
means to be happy the 7. key.
in doing works of mercy. 10. The contrary brings to misery.

Alleluia, The Septuagint Interpreters added this mention of Aggeus and
Zachary, returning from captivity, to signify that this Psalm was very
proper, and meet to be commended to the people at that time* whereby they might
learn, that their sins were the cause of their captivity, and of al their
miseries: and if they desired temporal, or spiritual prosperity, they must
observe the means here prescribed to obtain the same.
Of the return of Aggeus, and Zachary.
He that sincerly fears God, will take great delight in keeping his
commandments.
he shall This Psalm is also composed by the Alphaber, as the next before.
have great delight in his commandmentes. Psalm. 1.


So doing he and his shall prosper.
His seed shall be mighty in the earth: the generation of the righteous shall
be blessed,

The just shall not only prosper in this world but also in the next.
his justice abides for ever and ever.

God will also comfort the just in tribulations.
Light is risen up in darkness to the righteous: he is merciful, and pitiful,
and just.

Acceptable is the man, that is merciful and lends, that That shall give
discrete and wholesome counsel to the afflicted.
shall dispose his words in judgment: Because he shall



His heart is ready to hope in our Lord, his heart is confirmed:

he shall not be moved til he look over his enemies.

Works of mercy are also called justice, because they concur to man's
justification,
his justice remains 2. Cor. 9^.
for ever and ever and to his salvation.
his horn shall be exalted in glory.



PSALM CXII.
God is to be praised, who being hiegh regards, and provides for the Gods
providence. the 3. key.
needy in this world.

Allelu ia.
Al Gods servants.
children: praise ye the name of our Lord.







Who is as the Lord our God, that dwells on high,

and beholds the low things In respect of God al creatures are low, though
they be in heaven.
in heaven and in earth?



See the example of Joseph so advanced d of Sara, Rebecca, Rachael, and other
women made fruictful.
To place him with princes, with the princes of his people.

d barren woman to dwell in a house, a joyful mother of children.

PSALM CXIII
For the marvelous passage of I srael out of Egypt, 3. the red sea, the river
The marvelous passage of Israel from Egypt. the 4. key,
Jordan, 7. and the hills giving them place, 8. the rocks yelding them water,
9. God, not themselves, is to be praised. 12. Idols and Idolaters are vain,
and shall be confounded. 17. the faithful trust in God, 20. are blessed, and for
ever praise God.

Allelu ia.
People of false religion counted barbarous, especially such as also persecute
the true Religion; for otherwise the Egyptians were both civil in manners, and
learned in many sciences.
the barbarous people.

The people of Jews were more notoriously renowned in the world from the time
of their delivery out of Egypt, for the peculiar people, whom God sanctified,
and in whom, as in his elected enheritance or dominion, he dwelled and reigned.
Iewrie was made his sanctification, Israel his dominion.

The The Psalmist writing in verse does often describe things in poetical
manner, but more truly then profane poets: for that in very deed, al creatures
otherwise sensles, as the sea, do in a sort feel the power of their Creator,
and obey his will,
sea saw, and When the Israelites went forth of Egypt,
fled: Jordan when they entered into Chanaan,
was turned backward.

Either there was an earthquake, or some other moving of hills not mentioned
by Moses, or else the Psalmist speaks of the rocks of the torrentes which
bowed, that the Israelites might rest in Ar, and lie in the borders of the
Moabites, Number, 21, v, 15,
The mountains leaped as rams: and the little hills as the lambs os sheep.

By the figure Apostrophe he speaks to the sea, river, and hills: using also
Prosopopoeia: as if senfles things, understood, and should answer.
What ayleth thee o sea that thou did flee: and thou o Jordan, that thou wast
turned backward?





An other miraculous benefit, that the rock yielded them water in their
necessity.
the rock into pooles of waters, and stony hill into fountains of waters.

Here some Hebrewe Rabbis begin an other Psalm, but by the coherence of the
matter, S. Augustine proves that it i^ but one Psalm, where is showed that the
true invisible God is known by such works as are here recited: and
contratiwise, that the Ge^tils idols are not gods, because they are made of
silver, gold, or other matter, by men's hands, having resemblance of living
things are altogether sensles.
NOT TO US O LORD, NOT TO US: but to thy name give the glory.

Thou didstal this o God, of mere mercy toward thy people:
thy mercy, and for thy truths sake, seeing thou did promise to protect them:
thy truth: lest at any time that the Gentiles should not take occasion to
blaspheme.
the Gentiles say: Where is their God?











This is a just prayer of the zealous, conforming their desires to Gods will But
if God give idolaters grace to amend, then all the just will also rejoice in
their cenuersion.
Let them that make them become like to them: and all that have confidence in
them.

Though many Jews fell to idolatry, yet there always remained so many in
Gods true service, that it mighst still be truly said: The house of Israel has
hoped in our Lord, as is here auerred.
The house of Israel has hoped in our Lord: he is their helper and their
protector.









Our Lord add upon you: upon you, and upon your children.

Blessed be you of our Lord, which made heaven, and earth.

This in effect al worldly politikes say in their hearts: as it were quitting
their interest of heaven to God,
The heaven of heaven is to our Lord: but and contenting themselves with
earthly possessions.
the earth he has given to the children of men.

But when such profane men are dead, they make no show at al of praising
The dead shall not praise thee o Lord: nor al they, for parting from the earth,
they descend into hell, and there eternally blaspheme God.
that go down into hell. God ^


But we Contrariwise the just, aspiring to heaven, which is the proper
kingdom of God, and using this world as they ought to do, for a means to
ascend into heaven, shall bless and pra^e God for evermore.
that live, do bless our Lord, from this time, and for ever.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM. CXIII.
12. The Idols of the Gentiles are silver and gold.] Al Catholic Divines
agree in The definition of Idolatry
this authentical definition, of Idolattie, that it is divine honor given to
any creature, as to a god. Of the diverse so t^s also of Idolatry the ancient
learned Doctors have written much. Namely Justinius Martyr in his Orations
against Diverse sorts of Idolatry.
the Gen isles, Tertullian in Apologetico, Arnobius Orat. ad Gentes. Lactantius,
li. 2. c 17. Diuinar. Instit, and many others. But most copiously and
profoundly S Augustine, especially in his ten first books de C^uitate Dei.
Into which error Angels honored as gods.
and crime the Platonistes sell, holding that spiritual invisible
createdsubstances, to vvitte, Angels good and evil, whom they called
Intelligentias separatas, had divine power, and so gave to them divine honor.
O hers honor dead Men living or dead.
men, and some before their death as gods, for their notable acts atchiued
in this life, as Saturn, ^uppiter, Hercules, and the like. Some yield divine
honor Corporal creatures, sensible and without sense. Imagees of false gods.
Imagees them selves reputed gods.
to mere corporal creatures, living or without life, as to beasts and
serpents, the sun, the moon, fire, water, earth, the whole machin of the
vvo^ld, as if it were animate, and that with divine spirit or soul. Again
al these have been worshipped as gods, not only in them selves but also in
their imagees. But to omite other diversities, the most gross sort of al, is
the Idolatry which the P^almist here describes, when Imagees made by men's
hands are immediately honored as gods in themselves. For such gods the
Gentiles had, and of them the Prophet here speaks. Compa^ing these visible
sensles imagined gods, with the one eternal invisible God; who is made
notorious by his divine conspicuous works, vvheras these idols, by how much
they are more visible, so much more they are contemptible: because being
fashioned with mouth, eyes, ears, nose, hands, feet, throat, and other
members, they are altogether sensles, not able to speak with their mouth, and
therein more base in nature, then the men that made them; nor able to see,
hear, smell, taist, feel, to walk, to move, nor to cry, al which beasts
can do. And therefore these that make them, or have confidence in them (as the
Prophet here signifies that some have. v. 16.) are most absurd: becoming
Idolaters are void of reason.
like to the same idols, in their understanding and internal cogitations, as
these idols are void of external sense. And al Idolaters are most wicked,
giving, divine honor to any creature, and are therein servants of devils:
Whether they immediately honor devils, as when sorcerers and witches, making
pact with And servants of devils.
the devil, adore him, and he for the same does some thing which they demand:
or that they honor some other creature, vvherin by the devils false
persvvasion, they think there is divine poor. Both which vvares devils
usurp Gods honor, and therefore the same Prophet said in an other Psalm: All the gods ^sal. 95. ^5.
of Gentiles are devils.

PSALM CXIIII.
The prayer of a just man in tribulation, with confidence and gratitude A
prayer, with praise of God the 7. key
toward God.

Allelu ia.
I am induced to love God,
have loved, because our Lord because he always hears my prayers.
will hear the voice of my prayer.

So long as I shall live.
in my days I will invoke.

When serred like a stray sheep from thee, the pains of death,
of death have compassed me: and and the danger of hel-torments, both due for
sin, environed me, and I was not ware thereof:
the perils of hell have found me.

But by tribulation falling upon me, I came to know my dangerous estate:
I have found tribulation and sorrow: and I turned to thee, and prayed as
follows:
inuocated the name of our Lord.



Afflicted with tribulations.
I was humbled, and he has delivered me.





I I will endeavor to please God, in the congregation of those that live herein
grace, and in heaven in glory.
will please our Lord in the country of the living.

PSALM CXV.
A just man acknowledging that spiritual life begins by faith, and by
Thankesgeuing for our Redemer* the 5. key.
public profession thereof, 4. gratfully accepts of Christ's Redemption, 5.
dedicateth his life, and al he has to Gods service.

Allelu ia.
I believed that God would help me:
believed, therefore I freely professed that I trusted in him. For then in deed
faith is perfect, when we confess with mouth, that which we believe in heart:
for which cause I spoke: but I I was vehemently afflicted in tribulations.
was humbled This in the Hebrew is joined to the next Psalm before.
excedingly.

I said In the mids of my great affliction I professed, that al man's help is
vain, false, deceipful, and defestiue. and therefore our trust must be in God
only.
in mine excess: Every man is a liar.

Considering that God has not only given, and bestowed many great benefits
upon me, and al mankind, but also has rendered good for evil, mercy for our
sinne^, we h^u^^g rendered evil for good: what now shall I render, says a true
penitent, for all that he has thus rendered to me, deserving so evil?
shall I render to our Lord, for all things that he Considering that God has
not only given, and bestowed many great benefits upon me, and al mankind, but
also has rendered good for evil, mercy for our sinne^, we h^u^^g rendered
evil for good: what now shall I render, says a true penitent, for all that he
has thus rendered to me, deserving so evil?
has rendered to me?

Seeing I am not able to render any thing worthy of Gods favor to me, yet I
will do that I can: I will gratfully accept his great benefit the cup of
Christ's passion, which he d^uunke for mankind,
will take the chalice of salvation: and and will praise, and call upon his name.
I will inuocat the name of our Lord.

I will I will pay voluntary vows,
render my vows to our Lord for Gods glory, and edification of others
before al his yea I will offer my life, and suffer death, when Gods glory shall
require it, in whose sight, the death of Saints is precious, and most highly
esteemed.
precious in the sight of our Lord is the death of

Alvvayes understood, that such as suffer persecution, be in good state of then
souls, the true servants of God,
I am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the children of the Church his
handmaide.
the son of thy hand maid.

Delivered me from captivity of sin.
broken my bonds: I will sacrifice to thee the host of praise, and I will
invoke the name of our Lord.

I will render my vows to our Lord in the sight of al his In the Church of the
faithful.
thee o Jerusalem.

PSALM CXVI.
Gods mercy is largely extended to al Gentiles by Christ, and his promise The
Church of Christ in alnations. the 6. key.
withal is performed to the Jews.

Allelu ia.
Not only some, but al nations of the Gentiles:
al ye Gentiles: praise him and al Jews, (Christ's Redemption being abundantly
sufficient for all) are invited to praise God.
al ye Romans 15. v. 11.
peoples.

Because he has multiplied his mercy to us Gentiles, to whom he made no
promise:
his mercy is confirmed upon us: and his and most truly performed his promise
made to the jews.
truth remains for ever.

PSALM CXVII.
Faithful people collected in the Church of Christ, exhort each other to
Christ beneficial Mysteries are celebrated by his Church. the 6. key.
render thanks to God, for their delivery from spiritual and temporal
tribulations. 16. The Laity demand participation of Christ's Mysteries,
promising to serve him duly: 25. Which the Pastors freely impert, and together
with the people, solemnly celebrate Gods praise.

Allelu ia.
Let us praise God, for his goodness, in making us of nothing, giving us many
benefits,
good: because and remitting our sins.
his mercy is for ever. Psalm. 105. 106. 135.


Let the Church of the new testament especially confess his goodness, which
has received more mercy and grace.
now say that he is good: that his mercy is for ever.

Let all the Clergy praise God now in the time of more grace, and of greater
spiritual functions.
now say: that his mercy is for ever.

Yea let the Whole body of the Church, all that fear, and serve God praise his
mercy.
which fear our Lord: that his mercy is for ever.

As well spiritual as temporal.
tribulation I inuocated our Lord: and our Lord heard me in largenes.



Our Lord is my helper: and I will look over mine enemies.





Though innumerable oppose, and endeavor to hurt me (says the Church, or any
just person)
Al nations have compassed me: and in the name of our Lord am I yet by Gods
power, not by mine own, I am defended, and they punished, and so the just
has the victory, and triumphs,
revenged on them.



They compassed me as In great troops, and fury,
bees, and were inflamed as with sharp though short force, and with special
noise, to terrify me, but in God I overcame al
fire in thorns: and in the name of our Lord I was revenged on them.

I was sometimes by vehemency of tentation, declining to sin:
I was ouerturned to fall: and our Lord but Gods grace assisted and strengthened
me.
received me.





The same word [right hand] thrice mentioned, signifies the B. Trinity. Also
[Our Lord] signifying Christ in his humanity the chief instrument of God, is
here often repeted, to signify the singular efficacy thereof.
the right hand of our Lord has wrought strength.



God chastises his children,
chastising has chastised me: and because he would not that they should dye
eternally. So he punishes as a father, not as an enemy.
to death he has not delivered me.

The Prophet now speaks in the person of just souls, requiring spiritual
doctrine, and food,
r and promising to serve God.
Open ye the gates of justice to me, being entered into them





An evident prophecy of Christ uttered by the Royal Psalmist, and now
confessed by every Christian, that our Savior rejected by the Jews, is
nevertheless the builder of his Church, by joining the two peoples of Jews
and Gentiles, as two wales into one house.
The stone, which the builders rejected: the same is made into the head of the
corner.

This was done by our Lord: and it is marvelous id our eyes.

God ordained this acceptable time of grace.
is the day, which our Lord made: let us rejoice, and be glad therein. Mat. 21.
^^. 20. Act. 4. I^m. 9. 1 Pet. 2.


The songue of the Hebrew children, when Christ entered Jerusalem with
palms of triumph, and acclamations.
O Lord save me, o Lord give good success: Blessed be he that comes in the
name of our Lord.

The voice of Christ, and his Apostles and other Clergy blessing the people as
they desire.
We have blessed you of the house of our Lord: our

Appoint a solemn day with This was fulfilled when Christ was brought with
bows of palm, and other signs of triumph, from Bethania,
thick bows, even to through the whole city, even into the Temple and unto
the Altar: Mat. 21.
the horn of the altar.



I will confess to thee because thou have heard me: and art become my salvation.

Our first, chife, and final duty is to praise God. v. 1. and. vlt.
Confess ye to our Lord because he is good: because his mercy is for ever.

PSALM CXVIII.
A perpetual recommendation of the singular excellency, absolute necessity,
and Perfect justice is in keeping Gods law. the 7. key.
eternal heavenly profit of Gods law: with frequent aspirations to
perfection, hatred of sin, love of virtue, and fervent desire to rest in God.

GENERAL ANNOTATIONS UPON THIS CXVIII. PSALM.
As this Psalm is the longest in the whole Psalter, so it seems to the
ancient The obscurity of this profound and Psalm, appears not to the vulgar
reader.
Fathers most profound in sense. And so much the harder to be understood,
because also the very hardness thereof lies hidden, which in diverse other
Psalms, and parts of holy Scripture, easily appears to the reader. But
here the words being clear, and the sense also plain and easy in some
points of doctrine, yet the more deligence is employed, the more difficulty
is found in searching the whole sense and mearning of every word and sentence,
with the manner observed in composing it, and the frequent repetition of the
same or like words, Al which maturely considered caused that great Clerk, and
light of the Church S Augustine, to omite this Psalm, when he explicated all the
S Augustine differred the explication of this Psalm. Omitted to d(...)e one
difficulty.
rest. And when at last he added also this, he wittingly omitted one special
difficulty, which he doubted not, to be contained in the manner of composing
it, not only by order of the Hebrew Alphabet, as diverse more Psalms, and some
other parts of holy Scripture, but more artificially hen any other, the
first eight vers^s al beginning with the first letter Aleph; the next eight,
with the second letter Beth: and so to the last of the two and twenty letters
Of which omission he yeldeth this only reason, because he found nothing (as he
humbly affirms) that might properly perteyne the unto. Confessing also At
last made 32. sermons in explication thereof.
expressly that whenever he applied his cogitations to expound the text i^
self, i^ (...) exceded his ability. But finally to satisfy the often and
earnest request of his brethren and freindes, trusting (as alvvayes) in Gods
special help:, he largely expounds it, in thirty two distinct Sermons.

S. Ambrose also moved with like piety, made two and twenty Sermons in S.
Ambrose writ 22 sermons upon this Psalm. King David a great master of moral
doctrine.
exposition of this Psalm. Affirming in his Prologue, that amongst other
Psalms, especially this shows how great a master king David was of moral
good life. For all moral doctrine being of his own nature sweet, yet most
delights the ears, and gently touches the mind, being uttered, as here it
is, with pleasantnes of verse, and swetenes of songue. Again whereas this
Royal Prophet in many places of this book, powrethout sentences of moral
psalms or songues, as bright stars, that shine and glister to all the world,
here most excellently he produces a more singular mirrhor, as the sun, of
full light, burning with meridian heat. And for the prosite of al, the better
to Why this Psalm was composed in order of the Alphabet.
draw our attentions, to learn that we may, though we can not attain to all that we would, he disposed this Psalm through all the Alphabeth: that as
children beginning with the first letters, make entrance to further knowledge;
so by the same beginninges we should lay the first foundation, and thereupon
proceed in our spiritual building, toward perfection in good life, the true
service of God. Which is yet further insinuated (as the same Doctor reaches)
Why eight verses are begun with every letter.
by the eight verses continually beginning with the same letter, and so other
eight in order through the whole Alphabet, to signify that after seven days
travel in this temporal life, we may come to that unity, which we expect in
the eight day of resurrection, when we hope to rise revived in our Lord
Jesus, in nevvnes of eternal life.

Lickevvise S. Basil in the Argument of this Psalm admonishes, that vvheras
holy David, according to diverse states, which he passed, vvritte diverse
Psalms: as when he fled from his enemies, when he lamented his distresses, S
Basils judgment that this Psalm conteyneth the argument of many Psalms.
mourned in pensiuenes, enjoyed peace and comfort, ran a right course of
virtue, fell from God by sin, and again returning observed Gods laws; in
this one Psalm he comprehends al his prayers made to God at sundry times,
and here proposes the same, as a certain profitable moral doctrine, to al
sorts and states of men Neither does he pretermite doctrinal points of faith,
but interposeth them also with moral documents, in such sort, that this one
Psalm may suffice to teach the well disposed, how to attain to perfection in
virtue, to stir up the slouthful unto diligent care of their souls, to
recreate the desolate with spiritual consolations, and briefly it admmistereth
al kind of medicine, to the diverse passions of mortal men:

For the like judgments of other Farhers we remitte the learned reader, to
Other expositors of this Psalm.
S. Hilarie, Theodoret, Prosper, Arnobius, Cassiodorus, Beda, Euthymius and
others, but can not well omit a brief instruction of S. Ierom. Who in his
Epistle to Paula Vrbica: not only shows the interpretation of the two and
twenty letters, but also explicateth their sense in this place, by connecting
them into certain short sentences, in this manner.

Aleph Beth Gimel Daleth; Doctrina Domus Plenitudo Tabularum; S. Ieroms
interpretation, and explication of the Hebrew Alphabet.
Doctrine. Of the house Fullness Of tables;

Which is the first connection, signifying that the doctrine of the house, that
is, the Church of God, is found in the fulness of divine books.

The second connection is: He Vau Zain Heth. Ista Et Haec Vita. This thing And
This Life.

For what other life can there be without knowledge of Scriptures? whereby also
Christ is known, who is the life of them that believe in him.

The third connection is: Idem Proem. lament.
Teth Iod. Bonum Principium, Good Beginning,

Albeit we now could know al things which are written, yet we know but in 1.
Cor. 13.
part, and in part we prophecy: for we see now by a glass, in a dark sort,
but when we shall be worthy to be with Christ, and shall be like to Angels, theu
doctrine of books shall cease, and then we shall see face to face: the God in
himself,
Good Beginning, even as he is.

The fourth connection is: Caph Lamed Most of these letters have also other
significations. And are diversely explicated by S. Ambrose, S. Beda, and others.
VVherby we may learn (though we understand no more) that holy Scriptures are
full of mysteries (as S. Ierom calls this) and hard to be understood.
Manus Disciplinae, sieve cordis. The hand Of discipline, or of heart.

The hands are understood in work, heart and discipline are understood in
sense or meaning, because we can not rightly do any thing, unless we first
know what things are to be done.

The fifth connection is: Mem Nun Samech: Ex ipsis, Sempiternum Adiutorium: Of
them Everlasting Help:

This needs not explication, for it is manifest as the light, that from
Scriputres are eternal helps.

The sixth connection is: Ain, Phe Sade. Fons, sieve Oculus, O^is Just tiae.
Fountain, or Eye Of the mouth Of justice,

According to that which we have expounded in the fourth connection: that
deeds and intention must concur.

The seventh connection which is last, in which number of seven is also
mystical understanding: Coph Res Shin, Teu. Vocatio, Capitis, Dentium Signa.
Vocation Of the head, Of teeth Signs.

Distinct voice is produced by the teeth, and in these signs we come to the
Head of al, which is Christ, by whom we have access to the everlasting
kingdom.

Or thus (not transposing the words) By vocation of Christ the Head, through
distinct voice of signs (for words are signs shevving the mind) we are
conducted to the eternal kingdom, the happiness which al men desire.

What I pray thee (says this holy Doctor) is more sacred then this mystery,
what more pleasant then this delight? What meat, and what honey are
sweeter, then to know Gods wisdom; to enter into his secrecte closset^; to
behold the sense of our Creator; and to teach the words of thy Lord God, full
of spiritual wisdom, which are derided by the wise of this world.

We must also advertise the reader of the like discourses of ancient Fathers
Gods law especially commended in this Psalm, 14 Symonyma signifying the law
of God.
(over long to be here recited) concerning the manifold hiegh praises of Gods
Law, contained in this Psalm, with frequent repetitio^ of certain Synonyma
words signifying the same thing, in all fourtene* tovvitte: The Law of God,
his VVayes, Testimonies, Commandments, Precepts, Statutes, Iustifications,
Judgments, Justice, Equity, Verity, Words Speeches, and Sermons: of which
there is commonly one in every verse, and sometimes two or three in the same
verse. But our English tongue hardly sufficing rightly to distinguish the three
last, which in latin are Verba, Eloquia, Sermones, we translate WORDS only,
adding in the margen, Eloquia, and Sermones, when they occur.

Leaving therefore larger commentaries to others, we shall prosecute our wonted
manner of brief glosses. Only here premonishing the diligent readers,
especially Clergimen (our selves and our brethren) who every day sing or read
this whole Psalm in the Canonical hours, to observe two particular points of
Christian doctrine, evidently proved by many places of this Psalm. Gods grace
necessary in every good work.
The one against the Pelagians heresy, denying the necessity of Gods special
grace in meritorious works. For the Psalmist often here inculcateth man's
insufficiency, that of himself, and by natural forces, he can not keep the
commandments of God, but needs always the particular grace of God, as well
to believe in him, to repent for sins, and to begin good works; as to
proceed, and persevere in good state to the end. The other against the heresy
It enableth freevvil to merit.
of our time, denying merit by grace and freewil. For here it is also
manifest, that Gods grace makes man able, to keep his commandments, and by
keeping them to become just in this life, and so to merit eternal glory.
Sundry other principal Articles of Christian Catholic Religion are likewise
comprised in this one Psalm: but especially Moral doctrine.

Alleluja. This title was added by the Septuagint, to admonish us that this
Psalm conteyneth that singular manner of praising God, signified by the two
Hebrew words Allelu ja. as before. Psalm 104.

Aleph. Doctrine.

Whereas al, without exception, desire to be happy and blessed;
are they are indede happy (according to the perfectest happiness of this life)
that are immaculate:
the immaculate in the way: which and they are immaculate, that walk in the
law of God. Where the holy Psalmist presupposes, that some can and do keep
the law of God, and so are immaculate, and blessed in the way of this life.
walk in the law of our Lord.

Those that are immaculate, are again blessed, by searching Gods testimonies,
that is, his law testifying that the good shall be revvarded, and the wicked
punished, but searching these testimonies, vvhiles one is contaminate with
sins against Gods law, makes not blessed:
that search his testimonies: that neither does every superficial careless
search bring this blessing, but searching with true affection of the heart.
seek after him with all their heart.

Contrariwise they that work iniquity are not blessed;
they that work iniquity, have not walked in his because they have not
vvalked in the vvayes of God, to wit, not kept his conmamdments and law,
which are the way to happiness.
ways.

For man's own good, that he may come to true happiness, God has most
seriously commanded us to keep his commandments, that is, to observe his Law
commanded by most sufferaine divine authority.
very much commanded thy commandmentes to be kept.

Would God my ways Therefore the faithful servant of God, knovving his own
insufficiency, desires that God by his grace vvil direct and streing then him,
might be directed, to keep thy to keep his law, called Iustifications,
because thereby man is made just.
iustifications.

They shall be safe from eternal confusion, when they shall keep not only part,
but al thy commandments: because breach of ^n^e brings confusion.
not be confounded, when I shall look thoroughly in all thy commandmentes.

So shall I praise thee, and render thanks,
I will confess to thee with sincere not feigned affection,
in direction of heart: in that I have learned the for this great benefit, that
I have learned, that thy law is according to most just judgment.
judgments of thy justice.

I have therefore a firm purpose, and do faithfully promise to keep thy law,
which makes the keeper thereof just.
I will keep thy iustifications: Albeit thou suffer me sometimes to be in
tribulation, or in tentation, yet forsake me not wholly. The Psalmist knew well
(says S. Gregory) that he might be profitably leift a while, who prayed, that
he should not be wholly forsaken.
forsake me not wholly. li. 20. c. 21. Mer.


Beth. House.

In this second Octonarie, as also in all the rest, the Holy Ghost by the
prophets pen teaches the means how to come to perfection and happiness. Here
by way of interrogation, as it were demanding how a youngman, that is every
man prone to worldly pleasure, and slow in Gods service, shall begin to
correct his course?
does a yongman correct his way? Whereto the same Holy Ghost answers, that
he must keep Gods law, called here his words. For all the words which God
utters, are laws to his servants.
in keeping thy sermones.
words.

The Psalmist now speaks in the person of perfect just men, or of the whole
Church in general. Whose common spirit seeks God intyrely.
With my whole heart I have sought after thee: And considering that this perfect
good will is the gift of God, prays that he will conserve the same, and not
suffer it to be altered, or to err from his commandments.
repel me not from thy commandmentes.

An other sincere profession of a resolute good purpose not to sin.
In my heart I have hid thy eloquia
words: that I may not sin to thee.

A gratful aspiration praising God.
Blessed art thou o Lord: Again the just prays to be more and more
instructed in iustifications: that which S. John exhorts unto: He that is
just, let him yet be justified. Apoc. 22.
teach me thy iustifications.

Gods law is also called his Judgments, because sitting in judgment he gives
sentence according to his Law.
judgments of thy mouth.

I am As the just professes by mouth, so he delights in heart.
delighted in the way of thy testimonies, as in all riches.

practices in work:
will be exercised in thy commandmentes: and I will consider thy ways.

and diligently meditateth Gods law.
will meditate in thy iustifications: I will not forget thy sermones.
words.

Gimel. Fulness.

O Lord liberally give me that which I here crave,
to thy servant, quicken me with spiritual life, thy grace.
quicken me: so I shall keep thy law, which otherwise I can not.
and I shall keep thy sermones.
words.

Illuminate mine understanding, by thy grace,
Reuele mine eyes: that I may be able to see the marvelous great and just
reasons of thy law, instructing al, threatening the perverse, encoreging the well
disposed, punishing the wicked, rewarding the good, doing right to al.
and I shall consider the marvelous things of thy law.

I that have but a small time in this world,
I am a seiourner in the land, desire to be instructed in thy law, what is
therein commanded.
hide not thy commandmentes from me.



I consider that thou o God do sharply reprove the proud contemners of thy
commandments:
rebuked the proud: laying curses upon them for declining from thyn obedience.
cursed are they that decline from thy commandmentes.



Though persecutors were very potent,
princes sat, and they spoke against me: but yet the faithful servant of God
perseuered in his service.
thy servant was exercised in thy iustifications.

In time of persecution and tentation we must think and meditate, that Gods
law testifies eternal revvard, or punishment,
thy testimonies are my meditation: and and in our deliberation or
consultation, we must consider that keeping Gods law makes just: and
consequently meriteth reward.
thy iustifications my counsel.

Daleth. Of Tables.

This also is uttered in the person of the just, who is often brought to great
distress: as it were, even nere to death,
has cleaued to the pauement: in which case he confidently prays to be
reliued, according to Gods word, law, and promise.
quicken me according to thy word.

I have uttered my ways, and thou have heard me: teach me thy iustifications.



Being in so great anxietie that my mind is almost distracted, or overcome,
has slumbered for tediousnes: I call to thee o God, that thou will conserve
me, that I still keep thy law* uttered by thy words.
confirm me in thy words.

Protect me that I fall not to iniquity.
Remove from me the way of iniquity: and according to thy law, And of
thy'mercie conserve me in state of grace.
have mercy on me.



Suffer me not to be confounded.
do not confound me.

Man is able, and does run in the right way of Gods commandments,
I ran the way of thy commandments: yet not of himself, but when God
replenisheth his heart with grace.
when thou did dilate my heart.

He. This thing.

Impresse o God thy law in mine affection, make me to love it, and to desire to
be justified, b so shall I heartily and alvvayes seek it.
Set me a law o Lord the way of thy iustifications: and I will seek after it
always.

After thou have given me a desire to keep thy law, give me also understanding.
Give me understanding, then shall I fruictfully search it. For this is the
right order (as before in the first and second verses) first to love Gods
law, to be justified, and to become immaculate; and then to search to know
the law, and so it is more e^sily learned.
and I will search thy law: and I will keep it with my whole heart.

Gods grace first draws and leads,
Conduct me into the path of thy commandments: then freevvil inflamed with
desire effectually concurreth.
because I would it.

Still the Prophet inculcateth the necessity of Gods grace, as well to make us
desire that is good,
Incline my heart into thy testimonies: and as to flee from evil.
not into avarice.

It is necessary also to pray that God vvil take away occasions, which might
move to sin*
Turn away mine eyes that they see not vanity: and still to grant his helping
grace in progress of virtue.
in thy way quicken me.

Again the just prays for confirmation in grace, to be established in the
fear of God.
Establish thy eloquiu^
word to thy servant, in thy fear.

To be delivered also from all the effects of former sins,
Take away my reproach, which I have feared: for sin is therefore reprochful
and odious, because it is contrary to Gods law, and true judgments, which
are most pleasant.
because thy judgments are pleasant.

Being thus affected with desire to keep the commandments, the soul prays
to be still quickened, more and more with good spirit, and so to persevere to
the end.
quicken me.

Vau. And.

Again considering that without Gods grace preventing, man can not do any
good thing, the prophet renevveth his prayer, requesting Gods mercy,
let thy mercy come upon me o Lord: and his help freely promised to all that
ask it.
thy salvation according to thy eloquiu^
word.

VVhervvith being assisted and streingthned, he that before was vveake vvil
boldly answer al calumniators, that reprochfully say: God will not help him:
I shall answer a word to them that vpbrayde me: that in deed he has not in
vain trusted in Gods promised help.
because I have hoped in thy sermo^ibus.
words.

He also prays, though he be sometimes fearful, that God vvil not suffer him
wholy to omit manifest profession of faith and true religion,
take not away out of my mouth the word of truth utterly: seeing by thy former
grace I have already reposed my trust in thy promises, made to them that are
resolved to keep thy law.
because I have much hoped in thy judgments.

For I do firmly purpose ever and always to keep thy law.
I will keep thy law always: for ever, and for ever and ever.

In this I have had great joy and comfort of mind:
I walked in largeness: because I did in deed seek after thy commandments,
which is specially uttered (as also the three next verses) in the person of
those, that are in trial of persecution for their faith:
because I have sought after thy commandments.

Who boldly in time of persecution, even before persecuting Kings and
Emperors, profess Christ's true Religion. Veryfied in innumerable glorious
Martyrs, yea also of the frail sex, in S. Catharin, S. Cecilie, S. Lucie, S.
Margaret, S. VVenefrede, S. Vrsula, and her fellows, and many more, most
constantly answering al words of reproach objected, as if it were a base or
contemtible thing to be Christians, to be Catholics, to be Papists No, al
these and the like, are honorable and glorious titles; importing the true
service of Christ; in unity of the Catholic Church; and spiritual
participation with the visible head thereof, Christ's Vicar in earth.
I spoke of thy testimonies in the sight of kings: and was not confounded.

And Such confessors as yet mortal, rejoice in that they have meditated in Gods
commandments, which they have fervently loved.
I meditated in thy commandments, which I loved.

Also shevved the same in external work, not dissembling by silence, by
word, nor fact.
I have lifted up my hands to thy commandments, which I loved: and every way
exercising Gods law, which makes the obie^uers just.
I was exercised in thy iustifications.

Zain. This.

That which God has decreed, and promised; being in itself most certain and
assured, yet includes the means, vvherby it shall be put in execution: and
therefore the just, his elect, do pray for the performance of his vvil.
mindeful of thy word to thy servant, wherein thou have given me hope.

Expectation of thy promise has given me corege.
thy elo^^^^
word has quickened me.

Provvde contemners of Gods law, have every way molested me, by detracting,
deriding, calumniating, and violently persecuting me.
proud did unjustly excedingly: Al which I have borne patiently, and not
declined from thy law.
but I declined not from thy law.

I remembered and considered thy just punishments inflicted upon the impious,
have been mindful of thy judgments from even from the beginning of the world
(both upon the devils, and wicked men) and that thou vvilt exercise the like
hereafter,
everlasting o Lord: which consideration of thy justice comforted me.
and was comforted.

Otherwise if I had not seen thy justice, my zele against contemners of thy
law, would have killed me.
Faynting possessed me, because of sinners forsaking thy law.

In this place of my perigrination from heaven, I am comforted by remembering,
celebrating, and singing thy just commandments and laws, which make thy
servants just.
Thy iustifications were songue by me, in the place of my peregrination.

In persecution, and in all tribulation, I kept thy law because I would not
dishonor thy name:
the night of thy name o Lord: and have kept thy law.

This was done to me: And my tribulation especially fell upon me, because I
sought to be justified by keeping thy law.
because I sought after thy iustifications.

Heth. Life.

My The Prophet proceeds speaking in the person of the just tending to
perfection, and saying: This is my happy choice, that I desire no other
enheritance, nor possession, but to keep Gods Law.
portion o Lord, I said to keep thy law.

And seeing this excedeth my proper streingth, I prayed God of his mercy to
make me able to keep it.
I besought thy face, with all my heart: have mercy on me according to thy
^loquiu^
word.

Pondering my former actions, I turned my paths to observe more perfectly the
Law, which God has testified to be the right way.
thought upon my ways: and converted my feet unto thy testimonies.

I With prompnes of mind, and without hesitation I resolved to keep the
commandments.
am prepared, and am not trubled: to keep thy commandments.

The wicked laid cords, nets, or snares to intrappe, and hinder me,
cords of sinners have wrapped me round about: and but I kept thy law fresh in
memory.
I have not forgotten thy law.

That this is not understood only mystically in time of affliction, but also
literally and prophetically, that some special servants of God, should observe
a godly profession of praying at midnight, the word [I rose] makes it
probable. S. Paul and Silas, either of a holy custom, or at least upon
special occasion (and such occasions were to them, and others frequent) Act.
16.
prayed, and praised God at midnight. And now in the Church of Christ some
religions men pray, and praise God continually at midnight; besides other
hours, mentioned more distinctly v. 164.
midnight I rose to confess to thee, for the judgments of thy justification.

A great benefit, and a singular consolation, that al true living members of
Christ, are partakers of all the prayers, good works, and merits, of the whole
Church militant and triumphant. Which in our Creed is called, The Communion of
Saints.
I am partaker of all that fear thee: and that keep thy commandments.

So great is the mercy of God, extended, communicated, and multiplied in the
whole earth.
earth o Lord is full of thy mercy: Instruct me, and direct me therefore o God,
that I may learn and observe thy law, and so be justified, and made participant
of so great mercy.
teach me thy iustifications.

Teth. Good.

Dealt very bountifully
done bounty with thy servant o Lord: as thou did promise.
according to thy word.

He that has bountifully received grace at Gods hand, prays for more grace,
that he may be beneficial to others in releuing the needy;
Teach me goodness, in instructing the ignorant,
and discipline, and in persuading to keep the law of God:
knowledge: because he has learned and believes the commandments, by which he
is bond to love, and have care of his neighbor.
because I have believed thy commandments.

Before I was afflicted, I often fell into sin:
was humbled I offended: but vexation gave me understanding, therefore now I
keep thy law.
therefore have I kept thy eloquiu^.
word.

Thou art good: and in thy goodness teach me thy iustifications.

Contemners of thy law have endeavored to entangle me,
the proud is multiplied upon me: but I persist in keeping thy commandments. As
before. v. 51. 61.
but I in all my heart will search thy commandments.

Though the wicked combine themselves together against me,
crudded together as milk: yet I consider, that it is necessary to persevere
in thy law.
but I have meditated thy law.



A clear comparison, that it is better to keep Gods law, which brings life
everlasting, then to have all the riches and kingdoms of this world.
good unto me, above thousands of gold, and silver.

Iod. Beginning.

God being our Creator, we may with confidence pray him to illuminate our
minds, that we may learn what is his pleasure, and so endeavor to fulfill it.
give me understanding, and I will learn thy commandmentes.

Others that love God will be glad to see me also serve him.
shall see me, and shall rejoice: because I have much hoped in thy words.

The just being afflicted, and not seeing the particular cause thereof, yet
knows and confesses, that God does it for most just cause.
I know o Lord that thy judgments are equity: and in thy truth thou have
humbled me. And therefore with patience prays for comforth, as follows:
.

eloquiu^.
word unto thy servant.

who am almost dead in tribulation.
shall live: because thy law is my meditation.

Let the proud The just also prays that the wicked may be ashamed, and
converted, for so the hebrew word here signifies, though it is also lawful to
desire the just punishment of obstinate sinners.
be confounded, because they have done unjustly toward me: but I will be
exercised in thy commandments.

He prays again for conversion of the wicked, and to have peace with them.
be converted to me that fear thee: and that know thy testimonies.



Caph. Hand, or Palm of the hand.

Many just of the old testament most fervently desired the coming of Christ
our Savior, as our Lord himself testifies, Mat. 13 v. 17. And now the just
desire his coming in glory, 2. Tim. 4. v. 8
thy salvation: and I have much hoped in thy word.

eloquiu^
word, saying: Delaved hope afflicts.
When will thou comfort me?

As a leather bottel made of a beasts skin, congeled with the frost, and
after partched in smoke, so is the body of the just mortified by diverse sorts
of afflictions, made a new bottel fit to receive new wine, that is, perfect
doctrine of Christian life, as of fasting, and other austeritie, whereof our
Savior speaks, Mat. 9. v. 17.
as a bottel in the hoare frost: I have not forgotten thy iustifications.

Such is man's infirmity, yea of the just, that he apprehends tribulations to
be very long, and therefore desires consummation; and that without sin, so he
still submit his will to Gods will.
the days of thy servant: when will thou do judgment on them that persecute
me?

The unjust have told me Frivolous idle tails, which are not according to Gods
law.
fables: but not as thy law.



I was in great danger, but am not overthrown.
made an end of me in the earth: but I have not forsaken thy commandments.

And by thy merciful grace shall persist.
thy mercy quicken me: and I shall keep the testimonies of thy mouth.

Lamed. Discipline.

For ever Lord The praise of Gods works; which are firm and parmanent in the
order, wherein he set them.
thy word is permanent in heaven.



By thy ordinance the day contine weth: because Al things, of this world, man
excepted, do Gods will.
al things serve thee.

Man, except he meditate Gods law, and thereby be holden up, is in danger,
But that thy law is my meditation: I had then perhaps in every tentation to
perish eternally* For he can never rise out of mortal sin, by his own power,
and al should perish^f Gods mercy did not spare some, and give them new
effectual grace to rep^ut.
perhaps perished in my humiliation.



I am thine, save me: because Always understood, that Gods grace prevented,
else no man can seek to observe the commandments.
I have sought out thy iustifications.



Al worldly things have their consummation and end*
Of al consummation I have seen the end: Gods commandment continues ever* For
we are perpetually b^nd, to love and serve God: to love our neighbors, yea
and enemies* The reward also for keeping Gods commandments, and punishment for
breaking them, are eternal without end.
thy commandment is exceeding large.

Mem. Of them.

It is meruel to a perfect just man, that he has so much loved, and observed
Gods law. By acknovvleging vvherof, he yeldeth praise and thanks to God,
whose gift it is.
How have I loved thy law o Lord! all the day it is my meditation.

The fruictes of observing Gods law are many and great. Amongst others, it
makes the obseruer, wiser then his enemies.
Above mine enemies thou have made me wise by thy commaundment: because it is
to me for ever.

It makes the obseruer wiser, then his temporal masters, that taught him,
towit, then those that teach well, and do not perform the same.
all that taught me have I understood: because thy testimonies are my meditation.

Younger in years that keep Gods commandments, are vviser then the more ancient
that keep them not.
ancientes have I understood: because I have sought thy commandments.





An other fruict is the swetnes, which the just feels in his own soul.
How sweet are thy eloquia
words to my jaws, more then honey to my mouth!

By thy commandments I have understood: therefore have I It brideth also just
hatred to sin.
hated all the way of iniquity.

Nun. Everlasting.

The word or law of God declared by Prophets, Pastors, or other Preachers is
the ordinary means for others to learn, how to direct their ways, and
actions.
Thy word is a lamp to my feet, and a light to my paths.

Such profession Gods people made in the old law, in Circumcision, or at other
times: Christians make it in Baptism.
swear, and have determined to keep the judgments of thy justice.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3. v.
1^.
humbled excedingly o Lord: quicken me according to thy word.

Besides the commandments, the just also offer voluntary works of
supererogation, acceptable to God.
voluntaries of my mouth make acceptable o Lord: and teach me thy judgments.

By this Hebrew proverb is signified, that a just m^ns temporal life is in
continual danger, as the thing that is in ones hand, is ready to be laid by,
put out of his hand, or to be by and by disposed of, or may forthwith fall from
his hand.
soul is in my hands always: and I have not forgotten thy law.





A most evident place, that the keeping of Gods commandments merit reward, and
are righlty observed in respect of reward.
for reward.

Samech. Help.

I have Not any mortal man is to be hated, in his person, but his iniquity,
by which he is an enemy to Gods law,
hated the unjust: and I have which every just man loves.
loved thy law.



Whosoever will seriously and securely search the law of God, must avoid the
conversation of evil men.
Depart from me ye malignant: and I will search the commandmentes of my God.

A general and very fit prayer, when we addict ourselves by a firm
resolution to serve God, beseching him to receive us into his protection:
Receive me according to thy eloquiu^
word, vvherby spiritual lise is conserved:
and I shall live: and which we pray with great confidence, because he has
promised to hear those that seek, ask, and knock at the door of his grace.
confound me not of mine expectation.

We must pray also that he suffer us not to be confounded, or made frustrate
of the revvard which we expect; for hope confounds not, if charity be
povvred in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which is given us. Romans 5. v. 5.
Help me, and I shall be saved: and I will meditate in thy iustifications
always.

God rejects sinners:
despised all that revolt from thy judgments: so long as they think
peruersly: that is, until by his grace, some return to a better mind, which
of themselves they can never do.
because their cogitation is unjust.

As God accounts of sinners, so the just also estemeth them, conforming his
judgment to Gods.
have reputed preuaricatours: therefore have I loved thy testimonies.

Seruil fear is profitable as this place makes evident: though perfect
charity afterward succeding, expels that fear, and moves to do well for
the love of God, not for fear of punishment 1. Joan. 4.
Pearse my flesh with thy fear: for I am afraid of thy judgments.

Ain. A fountain, or an eye.

The just again in fervent zele, not arrogantly, but confidently professing
his innocence,
have done judgment and justice: prays to be defended from calumniators.
deliver me not to them that calumniate me.

Grant therefore o God the good, and lawful request which I demand.
unto good: let not the proud calumniate me.

By long expecting to be delivered, and saved from tribulation.
after thy salvation: and for the eloquiu^
word of thy justice.





It is time, and hiegh time, says fervent zele of the just man, that God
deliver the innocent:
It is time to do o Lord: when the wicked have not only persecuted the good,
but have also contemptuously made houoke of Gods law, and true religion.
they have dissipated thy law.

For this zele of Gods law so despised, and dissiputed, the just more and more
loves, that which the wicked so deadly hate.
Therefore have I loved thy commandementes, above gold and topazius:

Even by the mortal hate of the wicked I savv, that Gods law is most
excellent, and therefore addicted my self so much the more to lone it,
Therefore was I directed to al thy commandments: and to hate al wicked vvayes.
al wicked way I have hated.

Phe. Mouth.

Gods marvelous power and wisdom, testified by his works and commandments,
testimonies are marvelous: vvorthely inuit just souls, to meditate and
contemplate the same.
therefore has my soul searched them.

First entrance into knowledge of holy Scripture, illuminateth the
understanding of the humble, whereby they proceed to know more.
declaration of thy Sermonum.
words does illuminate: and gives understanding to little ones.

By this Metaphor, of gaping, or vvide opening the mouth, and dravving breath,
the Prophet describes the great desire of the just, to know and keep Gods
commandments.
opened my mouth, and drew breath: because I desired thy commandments.

According to thy accustomed equity, in showing mercy to them that love thy
name.
the judgment of them that love thy name.

eloquiu^
Word: and let not any injustice have domination over me.



Let thy divine Majesty look upon me with favorable countenance.
thy face upon thy servant: and teach me thy iustifications.

True repentance consists not only in purpose to avoid sin hereafter,
which in deed is first required, but also in sorrow and lamentation for sins
past.
Mine eyes have gushed forth issues of waters: because they have not kept thy
law.

Sade. Justice.

Thou art just o Lord: and God being essentially just of himself, makes men
just according to right judgment, by giving them grace of mercy, vvhervvith
they cooperating, are just by justice in deed inherent in their souls, not by
imputation only: for it were not right judgment to impute, or account man
just, who is not so in deed.
thy judgment is right.

Thou have commanded The same is more confirmed, by these three synonyma,
Justice, Testimonies, Verity, signifying the law of God, most earnestly
commanded.
justice thy testimonies: and thy verity excedingly.



eloquia
word is Gods law is as pure as any thing purged by fire.
fired excedingly: and thy servant has loved it.

A just man is often judged ignorant, immature, unexperienced, by the worldly
wise;
a yongman, and contemned: I but in deed is wise, in that he forgets not to
keep the law, which makes him just.
have not forgotten thy iustifications.

Thy justice, is justice for ever: and thy law is verity.



Having professed the necessity of perfect justice, he concludes this
Octonarie, praying to be illuminated in his understanding, that so he may
attain justice, and live thereby.
give me understanding, and I shall live.

Coph. Vocation.

Most serious and seruent invocation of God for his grace, is necessary, to
the fulfilling of his law.
have cried in my whole heart, hear me o Lord: I will seek after thy
iustifications.

I have cried to thee, save me: that I may keep thy commandmentes.

I have prevented the mature, and ordinary time of the night, and have prayed
maturitie, and very attentively.
have cried: because I hoped much in thy words.

Again in the morning I have prevented the accustomed time of prayer.
have prevented early unto thee: that I might meditate thy eloquia
words.

According to thy accustomed manner of shevving mercy, show it me, that thereby
I may live.
thy judgment quicken me.



Thou art God is always ready to hear all that sincerly invoke him.
nigh o Lord: and al thy ways are truth.

Gods law is the same in substance from the beginning of the world, and will be
for ever.
From the beginning I knew of thy testimonies: that thou have founded them for
ever.

See An other prayer of the just in affliction.
my humiliation, and deliver me: because I have not forgotten thy law.

eloquiu^
word Conserve me in thy grace.
quicken thou me.



As before v. 149.
according to thy judgment quicken me.



eloquia
words.

Sincere profession of innocence is no arrogance.
See that I have loved thy commandmentes o Lord: in thy mercy quicken me.

Gods essential verity is the beginning from whence, as from the fountain al
other truths are derived:
beginning of thy words is truth: And al commandments proceeding from this
first truth, are for ever immutable.
all the judgments of thy justice are for ever.

Sin. Tooth.

Potent wicked m^^^ persecute the god^^e without cause, that is, without any
just reason moving them; and without the effect intended by them, which is to
draw Gods servants from truth, and equity;
without cause: and my whose heart being possessed with the true fear of God,
they persist in keeping Gods commandments.
heart has been afraid of thy words.

Yea they also rejoice in keeping the commandments, with such difficulty, as
those do, that gaining the victory over their enemies, carry away great and
rich spoils.
will rejoice at thy eloquia
words: as he that finds many spoils.



Every day the just praise God often, signified by the number of seven. From
hence also the Church of Christ took example to institute the seven
Institution of Canonical Hours by the Church.
Canonical Hours, which is the ordinary Ecclesiastical Office; consisting,
as S. Isidorus, and many other Fathers testify, of Hymns, Psalms,
Canticles, Antiphones, Lessons, Responsories, and other Prayers and Praises,
distributed into distinct times, beginning in the night, vvherof that part is
called the Nocturne (one or three according to the diversity of the Office)
and pertains to one or more of the four Vigiles, into which souldiars
divide the whole night. Whereto also the Lauds are added. Then Prime, in the
morning. Afterward, the Third hour, Sixth, Ninth; and in the evening,
Euensongue, and Compline. Against which most ancient and religious
Constitution, especially against the part called Vigiles, or Nocturnes,
certain Heretics repined, and calumniated the Churches custom, as
superfluous and vnfructful to spiritual This religious institution reprehended
by Drowsy Heretics. Vigilantians. VVicliffists. Lutherans.
Seuentimes in the day I have said praise to thee, for the judgments of thy
justice. work, violating of Gods ordinance, who made the night for rest, and
the day for labor. For which caufe they were called Nyctazontes, Somnicolosi,
Drowsy heretics. As the same S. Isidorus testifies li. 1. c. 22. de Offic.
Eccles. S. Ierom Epist ad Riparium, notes the same heresy in Vigilantius,
calling him Dormitantius, because he reprehended holy Vigiles, as if it were
better to sleep, then wake in time of Divine service. VViclif also raised up
the same heresy, as witnesses Thomas Waldensis. To 3. Tit: 3. c. 21. Lastly
Luther and al his brood. But the holy observation of Canonical Hours is
proved, by many ancient Fathers to be altogether agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, both of Approved. by S Beda. S. Gregory S. Augustine.
the old and new Testament. So S. Beda. in 18. Luc. and li. 4. c. 7. Hist.
Angl. S. Gregory the Great li 3. Dialogi c. 14. S. Augustine (Ser. 55. de temp)
exhorting the people to rise early to the Vigiles (or Nocturnes) and in
aniewise to come to the Third hour, Sixth, and Ninth Let none (says he)
withdravv himself from the holy work, but whom either sickness, or public
utility, or perhaps some great necessity holds back. S. Ierom. Epist. 22.
ad Eustoch. and in Epitaph. Paul. c. 10. makes express menrion of the Third
hour. Sixth, S. Ierom.
Ninth Morning, and Evening; also of Midnighst, adding that no Religious is
ignorant that sometimes they must rise to Divine Service, twice, yea thrice in
the night. S Basil, in Regulis fusius disput. ad Interrog 37. and de Instit.
Monachorum. S. Basil.
first. shows this ordiance to be agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and
namely to this place of the Psalmist. S. Cyprian in fine exposit. Orat. Domini.
affirms S. Cyprian.
that besides the three hours in which Daniel and his fellows prayed, the
Church of Christ has added more. And (as many suppose) S. Clement. li: 8. S.
Clement.
Constitut. Apostol c. 40. shows the set Hours of prayers, and the
reasons thereof: Make your prayers Early in the morning, at the Third hour;
Sixth, Ninth; Evening; and at the Time of cock crovving. Early giving thanks
because our Lord has illuminated us, the night being passed, and the day
coming in; Why public prayer is constituted at these hours.
the Third, because that hour our Lord received Pilats sentence; the Sixth
hour, because then he was Crucified; the Ninth, because al things were moved,
when our Lord was crucified, abhorring the audacitie of the wicked, and not
bearing the ignominy of our Lord, at Evening, giving thanks, for that God
has given us the night for rest of days labors: at the Cock crovving,
because at that time the coming of the day is denounced, to exercise the
works of lighst, thus S. Clement. Touching the distinct and set times of
public prayer, the continual practice by tradition teaches, that Martines
with Lauds were said in the night, about the first Cockcrovving. Prime early
in the morning. The other parts in the day time; At evening Euensongue, and
lost of al Compline. And touching the place: If for the infidels (says the
same holy Father). there be Not lavvful to go to Church, nor to pray with
Insidels.
not access to the Church, the Bishop must geather the Assembly at home, that
the godly may not enter into the Church of the wicked: for the place does not
sanctify man, but man the place. Wherefore if the wicked occupy the place,
that place is to be shunned, because it is profaned by them: for as Priests
de sanctify holy things, so the wicked do contuminate them If neither at
home, not in the Church Assemblies can be celebrated, let every one by
himself sing, read, pray, or two or three be geathered together. For Mat. 18.
2. Cor. 6.
where two or three are geathered in my name (says Christ) there am I, in
Nor with Heretics.
the mids of them Let not the godly pray with an heretic, no not at home.
For what society is there of light with darkness?


There is Amongst other benefits, it is a special commodity, that those which
perfectly love God* law, have always peace in their own conscience:
much peace to them that love thy law: and and are never scandalized, that is,
do not fall not commit sin, by any occasion whatsoever given them by
others. For it is a general assured doctrine, that the perfect are not
scandalized, because they are constant ^^ virtue, and not moved by any
example, persuasion, provocation, or other means to of send God: but only the
weak and imperfect are moned, and drawn to sin by occasion given them, who
otherwise would not have sinned. Neither is he excused that falls by such
occasions, because he ought to be constant.
there is no scandal to them.

I expected thy salvation o Lord: and have loved thy commandmentes.

Not (...)
has loved them excedindgly.

h Because whatsoever I do i^ in thy sight, whom i will in no case offend.


Tau. Sign.

not for humane know ege, or other temporal thing, but to understand Go^ ^^w.
understanding. a In this l^st Octonarie, and conclusion of this Psalm, the
faithful serua^^ of (...) prays,


Thou that have promised to hear all that invoke thee,
according to thy word voursaffe to deliver me in time of tribulation: and
tentations.
deliver me.



eloquiu^
word: God giving grace, it behooves his servants thankefully to serve, and
praise him.
because al thy commandmentes are equity.

Though man be endued with grace, vet he needs more grace, that by Gods hand
and power, not by his own, he may resist tentations
Let thy hand be to save me: because I have chosen thy commandmentes.

I have coneted thy salvation o Lord: and thy law is my meditation.

By this assistance of grace, the soul continues in spiritual life, and
praises God.
My soul shall live, and shall praise thee: and thy judgments shall help me

Al mankind, and universally every one has been a^ a lost sheep,
I have strayed, as a sheep, that is lost: and Christ came into this world to
secke and save al:
seek thy servant, but effectually finds and saves those only, that forgete
not to kept his commandments.
because I have not forgotten thy commandmentes.

A BRIEF NOTE CONCERNING the Gradual Psalms.
Here follow in order fifetene Psalms entitled Gradual Canticles. The Hebrew
word Mahalo^h signifies Steps, or Ascensions. The reason whereof Why the 15.
Psalms following are called Gradual Canticles.
Aadias, and some other Rabbis veld, for that they were songue with hieghest
elevated notes, that can be ^^ Music The Talmud says they are so called,
because they were songue in the fifetene steps going up into the Temple. But
S Augustine, S. Basil, and other Christian Fathers expound them according to the
history, and immediate prophetical sense, of the delivery of the Jews from
captivity of Babylon, ascending into Jerusalem: which is so situated on The
historical sense.
montaines, that the way from al parts was by ascending unto it. According to
the Mystical sense, of ascending spiritually by virtues to perfection, and to
eternal felicity. For the way tending to virtue (says S. Basil) is like to
certain The mystical sense.
steps (or degrees) by little and little bringing the m^n that loves wisdom
unto heaven. These Canticles therefore are prayers, mixed with consolations,
for the joyful delivery of Gods people, from that great captivity in Babylon,
which the Psalmist King David saw in prophetical spiritie, and which his
posterity felt, and sometime endured. Which again as a figure signifies the
^eturne and ascending of mankind from sin to grace, and from the miserable
state of this world into heaven. Whereupon S. Augustine interprets this
prophecy of the ascension, or elevation of the heart, from the veil of tears.
In the mean time, whiles we are in this world, these Psalms These Psalms are
consol^^o^ie prayers and prophecies.
a^e consolator^e prayers, and prophetical assurance, that Gods people,
Catholic Christian shall be delivered from thraldom, and persecution of
Paganes, Turks, and Heretics ^s partly we see by the delivery from the
Roman persecuting Emperors from the Vandals, Goths, and Hunnes: and therefore
with assured confidence we hope and expect the like delivery from Turks, and
al Heretics of Luthers brood.

PSALM. CXIX.
The Jews in captivity of Babylon, Christians in persecution, or other great
Praye^ in tribulation. the 7 key.
tribulation, pray with confidence to be delivered from danger, and sclander of
wicked tongues, 5. lamenting their long indurance.

A gradual Canticle.
Former experience of Gods mercy in hearing the prayers of those that
inuocated him, gives hope that he will hear in like case.
he heard me.

Nothing is more dangerous then untrue and deceiptful tongues, nothing more
damage then to diminish, and detract from the good same of the iost: and
therefore this is a most necessary prayer, that God will deliver us, from the
wicked tongues of. Turks, Heretics, and other wicked men.
unjust lips, and from a deceiptful tongue.

What punishment is great enough for wicked tongues?
What may be given thee, or what may be added unto thee to a deceiptful tongue?

Surely the malice of wicked tongues deserves sharpest punishments to be
afflicted by strong hands.
The sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of desolation.

Jews lamented their long absence from the holy land, especially from
Jerusalem, and the Temple. Christians mourn for their restraint from Gods
Service, and long perigrination from heaven.
Woe is to me, that my seiourning is prolonged: I have Of Cedar the son of
Ismael. came Mahomet, the Turks false prophet, whose tyranny is great and
long. The name Cedar is interpreted, blackenes, and obscurity, which
signifies darkness of error, and sin.
inhabitants of Cedar: My soul has been

The wicked afflict those that give no cause of offense.
without cause.

PSALM. CXX.
The just rejoice that their prayer is heard, and that God continually
protecteth Gods protection. the 3. key.
them.

A gradual Canticle.
Toward Ierusalme, and toward heaven.
the mountains, Al help comes from heaven, that is, from God, who of his
divine ordinance especially hears prayers made in holy places. 3. Reg 7.
from whence help shall come to me.

My help is from our Lord, who made heaven and earth.

The just speaks and wishes well to his own soul. Especially the whole
Church rejoices in Gods assured protection.
thy foot to be moved: neither do he slumber that keeps thee.

Lo he shall not slumber nor sleep, that keeps The militant Church.
Israel.



Prosperity,
the sun shall not burn thee: nor nor adversity can overthrow the Church.
the moon by night.

spiritual life.
thy soul.



PSALM CXXI.
Under the figure of return to Jerusalem, vehemently desired by the Jews
Joys of heaven promised to the just the 10. key.
in captivity, the Psalmist describes the desire, and hope of the just ^o
possess heaven.

A gradual Canticle.
Diverse Prophets told the Jews in captivity, that they should return to
Jerusalem Al Prophets, Christ also, and his Apostles, and Priests preach the
entrance, and joys of heaven to the just Al which the Psalmist savv in
prophetical spirit, and rejoiced.
were said to me: We shall go into the house of our Lord.

The Jews consider that sometimes they were joyful in the Temple of
Jerusalem: Christians rejoice in the comfort they have in the militant Church.
Our feet were standing, in thy courts o Jerusalem

Community and participation of spiritual graces, is a great joy to
Catholics, vvherof the ^am^ Prophet speaks, Psalm 118. v. 6^. and often
elsvvhere.
participation is together in it self.

All the twelve Tribes frequented Jerusalem,
thither did the tribes ascend, and al nations of the world do come to the
Catholic Church.
the tribes of our Lord: the testimony of Israel to confess unto the name of
our Lord.

Seats of Judgment were placed in Jerusalem,
sat there in judgment, and seats of Judgment in the Catholic Church
seats upon the house of Christ
of David.

Christ exhorts to a^ke,
A^ke ye the things that are for the peace of Jerusalem: and and promises to
give that is rightly asked; Christians also inuit each other to pray for the
Church
abundance to them that love thee. Matt. ^^. v. 22.




Christ prays for his Church,
For my brethren, and my neigbours sakes, and gave his peace to the Apostles,
and in them to their successors.
I spoke peace of thee:

For in heavenly Jerusalem, al good things are prepared, and are given to
Saints reigning there forever.
good things to thee.

PSALM. CXXII.
A fervent and attentive prayer, to be delivered from captivity, or any A
pra^e^ in afflict o^. the 7. key.
other affliction.

A gradual Canticle.


Behold as the eyes Servants expecting necessaries at their masters hands,
are commonly very attentive to receive that which they hope for: so must the
faithful praying God, be very attentive, and not distracted in their prayers.
of servants, are on the hands of their masters,

As the eyes An other example of handmaides, who generally are more diligent
then men.
of the handmaide on the hands of her mistress: so are our eyes to our Lord
God until he have mercy on us.

Though God suffer his servants to sustain some affliction and reprech, yet
he hears and delivers them before they be oppressed.
much replenished with contempt.

Because our soul is Seeing persecution still increase, or continue long, the
faithful are then specially to conceive hope of speedy ^^l. e^c.
much replenished: reproach to them that abund, and contempt to the proud.

PSALM. CXXIII.
The whole Church, and every just person, gratfully confesses, that by Gods
Gods protection. the 3. key*
protection they are secure, without which none could escape ruin.

A gradual Canticle.
If God had not sent his help, and defense to us,
was in us, let Israel now say: but that

we could not have escaped the force of our enemies.
When men rose up against us, The word [perhaps] does not here import a doubt,
or vncertanitie, but in modest manner of asseueration, leaves the judgment of
the event that should hapen (if God did not protect his servants) to their
own consideration: which is an usual phrase in most languages.
perhaps they had swalowed us So sudainly should the vveake, without Gods
protection, be destroyed, as men are devoured and svvalovved up by ravening
vvild beasts, even before they be thoroughly dead So was Jonas svvalovved into
the whales belly.
alive:

Furious persecution.
water had swalowed us.

Sudden great trubles.
a torrent: perhaps our soul had passed through an intolerable water.





The snare is Man's subteltie often deceives an other man, but there is no
counsel able to circumuent God.
broken, and we are delivered.



PSALM CXXIIII.
The Church, and holy members thereof, are always protected by God: Gods
protection. the 3. key.
5. The wicked being suffered for a while, are at last punished.

A gradual Canticle.
Th^se that confidently trust in God, are in such security as is mount Sion,
which is a hill, defended also with other hills round about.
that trust in our Lord, as mount Sion: he shall not be moved for ever, An other
thing required to this security, is to dwell within Jerusalem, not the
terrestrial city, for (as S. Augustine observes) the jews that dwelt therein
are destroyed or made captives, and hitherto rejected of God, but in the
Catholic Church.
that dwells in Jerusalem.

Mountains round about it: and our Lord round about his people, from hence
forth now and for ever.

God will not always, nor finally leave his servants in tribulation, but only a
while for their good.
will not leave the rod of sinners upon the lote of the just: that the just
reach not their hands to iniquity.

This prayer is also an asseueration, for it is certain that God will defend,
and reward the good, and right of heart:
Do well o Lord to the good, and right of heart.

And no less assuredly God will punish not only the notorious wicked, and
principal auctors of wickedness, but also al those that for fear or for
commodity, or for any other cause, decline into obligations, bonds,
covenants, or any way consent, in external show with the wicked against God:
as in outward profession of Heresy, or Schism, though such temporizers do not
think in their heart, that the pretended religion is true, whereto they are
drawn to yield external conformity. For, as the Psalmist here teaches, our
Lord will bring al such accessarie offenders, to the same judgment and
punishment, with the principal workers of iniquity.
those that decline into obligations, our Lord will bring with them that work
iniquity: Al which being punished, then Jerusalem, the Catholic Church,
shall have peace.
peace upon Israel.

PSALM CXXV.
Isralites released from captivity of Babylon, much more the blessed both of
The delivered from captivity rejoice. the 7. key.
the old and new testament delivered by Christ from captivity of sin, de
rejoice: 5. Who nevertheless must pass through tribulation to eternal felicity.

A gradual Canticle.
The Jews released from captivity, were excedingly, and almost incredibly
comforted, as men for great, and unexpected sundaine joy think it rather a
dream, then a truth that they are delivered from miseries. So S. Peter when
he was delivered out of prison by an Angel, thought it rather a vision, then a
true delivery. Such spiritual joy devout souls have when they are delivered
from sin.
men comforted. Act. 1^.


Then was our mouth replenished with joy: and our tongue with exultation.

Then VVheras in the two former verses (and very commonly) the Prophet
speaks in the preter tense, for the assurance of that he foreshevveth, as if
it were already done, yet here he vt e^e^h his prophecy in the future tense,
that the Gentiles will confess that God deals magnifically with his people.
shall they say among the Gentiles: Our Lord has done magnifically with them.

The people also themselves gratfully confess that God deals magnifically
with them.
Our Lord has done magnifically with us: we are made joyful.

The Prophet forseing all this in spirit, prays for the performance hereof.
Turn our captivity o Lord, And that it may spedely be done, as a torrent
that runs in the south part of the world, is commonly very great, much
desired, but scarce expected.
as a torrent in the South.

This is the ordinary disposition of God, that his servants shall make their
seeding, which is, do good works (says S. Augustine) with tears, in
tribulation upon earth:
They that sow in tears, and reap a plentiful harvest, the revvard of their
suffering and well vvorking, in the next life. In assured hope vvherof the
Psalmist, and the whole Church joyfully conclude this Psalm with the two
verses following.
shall reap in ioyfulnesse.

Going they went and wept, casting their seeds.



PSALM CXXVI.
Neither house nor city can be built, or kept without Gods special providence
Gods help in all good works. the 3. key.
and help, 3. those that trust in him shall prosper in their endeavors.

A gradual Canticle God not permitting David to build the Temple, promised that
his son should build it; and therefore besides other good admonitions, given
to his son Solomon, he directs this Psalm to him, to be songue with
others in the dedication of the Temple. 3. Reg. 8. 2. Par. 5.
of Solomon.
Unless God be the principal Agent, no work can prosper.
our Lord build the house, they have labored in vain that build it.

Unless our Lord keep the city, he watches in vain that keeps it.

It is vain to atempt any thing without Gods grace assisting:
before light: they that so doing, and thincking they have done something, rest
rise ye after ye have sitten, which eat after their painful travel, must rise
again and begin anew, because that which they seem to have done well, is
nothing vvorth, nor shall have revvard.
the bread of sorrow.

Contrariwise where God giving grace, those that truly love him, do good
works,
When he shall give with great ease, and dilight, as they take their sleep,
sleep to his beloved: behold they merit inheritance in heaven.
the inheritance of our Lord for their good works.
are children: the revvard is promised to the true children of God, borne to
him in the womb of the Catholic Church.
the reward, the fruit of the womb.

Moreover as a strong archer strikes deep with his arrows; so they that
patiently suffer much in this world,
arrows in the hand of the mighty: so are the do multiply good works.
children of them that are shaken.

Such shall be very happy.
Blessed is the man that has filled his desire of them: he shall and very
easily answer all that can be objected against them
not be confounded when he shall speak to his enemies in the day of Judgment.
in the gate.

PSALM CXXVII.
Happiness both of this life and of the next, is obtained by fearing, and
sincerely Fear of God the way to happiness. the 7. key.
serving God.

A gradual Canticle.




Thy If such servants of God be married, they shall ordinarily have issue, and
succession in their fa(...) but especially the souls of such shall bring forth
many meritorious works,
wife as a fruitful vine, in in the b^^ome of the Catholic Church which was
founded in Christ's side.
the sides of thy house.

Children also signify good works.
Thy children as young plants of oliuetrees, round about thy table.

Behold so shall the man be blessed, that fears our Lord.



And that thou may see thy Revvard in heaven for good works in earth.
childrens children, peace upon Israel.

PSALM CXXVIII.
The Church often (3. and much) impugned, is not overcome. 4. Her persecuters
The Church still firm in persecution. the 6. key.
are destroyed, 6. contemned, 8. and cursed.

A gradual Canticle.
Israel which is the Church of God, rejoicing says: that enemies have often,
OFTEN have they impugned me even from the beginning of the world, persecuted
me, as when Cain persecuted Abel, other wicked persecuted Seth, Enoch, Noe: the
Chalders persecuted Abraham: the Egyptians persecuted the Israelites: and so
in other generations.
from my youth, let Israel now say:

But they have never overcome me. So the Psalmist testifies for all times past,
and prophecieth the same for times to come.
but they have not prevailed against me.

Persecuters not being able to overthrow, or suppress the Church, have laid
great weighty burdens of tribulations upon her back, which she has patiently
and strongly borne,
have builded upon my back: they have they have still persisted, one sort
after an other, but with long animitie the Church has stood fast, and
constantly passed through al distresses. In moral sense sinners build iniquity
upon the back of the Church, yea and upon Gods back, when they presume to
sin, trusting in the end to be absolved by virtue of holy Sacraments leift
in the Church. Likewise when they excuse their sins, imputing the cause to
other creatures of God, vvherby they are allured, which is in effect (says S.
Augustine) to accuse God, and to build iniquities on Gods back, who made those
creatures.
prolonged their iniquity.

God therefore who is just, vvil at last cast such presumptuous sinners from his
back, and break their stiff necks:
Our just Lord will cut the necks of sinners: let them then shall they be
confounded,
be confounded and separated eternally from God, become like fruitles, and
withered grass, cast away, despised, yea cursed of al, and blessed by none,
as the Prophet denounces in the next verses.
turned backward, that hate Sion.







PSALM CXXIX.
The Jews, or other people in tribulation for sin, or temporal captivity,
The sixth penitential Psalm. the 7. key.
cry to God to be delivered: 4. trusting, and encoreging each other in Gods
accustomed mercy, assuredly hoping that he will redeem and deliver them.

A gradual Canticle.
This prayer agrees to al true penitents, crying to God for help, being ^^
her in depth of sorrow for sin, and so it is one of the Penitential Psalms,
or the depth of fervent desire to ascend toward perfection in virtue, and
from this veil of misery into heaven, and so it is a Gradual Psalm, or in
the depth of temporal pains, and so it is a special prayer for souls in
Purgatory, offered by the Church in their behalf.
the depthes I have cried to thee o Lord: Lord hear my voice:

Let thine ears be intent, to the voice of my petition.

None is able to abide the rigor of Gods justice.
who shall sustain it*

But al must rely upon his mercy.
propiciation: and for For thy promises made in the law, that thou will remitte
sins to the penitent, give more grace to them that seek it, and mitigate
also the pains due for sins.
thy law I have expected thee o Lord.



The hope of penitents is like to the watches of the day time, from morning
until night, which are more comfortable, then watches of the night:
the morning watch even until night: let Israel hope in our Lord.

The greatest comforth is in Christ our Redemer, whose plentiful Redemption
brings more abundance of grace.
plenteous redemption.

And he shall redeem Christ's Redemption being sufficient for all the world, is
effectual only to true living members of the Catholic Church.
Israel, from al his iniquities.

PSALM CXXX.
Any just soul in humble confidence offers his innocence, as a spiritual
Confidence of innocence. the 7. key.
and gratful sacrifice to God, 3. exhorting al Gods servants ever to hope in
him.

A gradual Canticle of David by Gods special grace having a sincere mind
toward al men, even toward his enemies, and an humble heart, not desiring
any thing ambiciously, but al to the honor of God, proposes his own
example, for others to imitate: that they may with him offer the sacrifice of
humility, and innocence unto God, from whom al good things proceed.
David.
All this with a thankful mind to God who gave this grace.
neither are mine eyes lofty. Neither have I walked in great matters: nor in
marvelous things above me.

As children after they are vveaned come still willingly to their mother, so
does the child of God rely upon Gods help, though he alvvayes feel not the
same svvetnes:
the weaned child is toward his mother, and according to his demaneur herein,
he expects revvard.
so retribution in my soul.

King David, or any other being for his virtue advanced, and revvarded by God,
is a good example to move others to do the like, so shall they receive like
revvard.
Let Israel hope in our Lord, from henceforth now and for ever.

PSALM CXXXI.
The Psalmist earnestly prays God to give him leave, and to show him where,
Christ's coming to restore man. the 5. key.
to build a Temple. But more especially prays for, and prophecieth the coming
of Christ, the promised Son of David, 14. signifying Gods promise thereof, and
of establishing his Church.

A gradual Canticle.
It is an usual thing that David, Moses, and other Prophets speak of
themselves in the third person.
David o Lord, and al his meekenes:

As he swear to our Lord, King David desiring, and so far as lay in him,
promising to build a Temple to God, with great instance prayed that he might
persorme the same. But God disposing otherwise, that not he, but his son
should build it, he nevertheless prepared the matter, workmen, and money,
shevved the form, and disposed the Levites how to serve therein.
vowed a vow to the God of Jacob.

Moreover by vovv deprived himself of entering into his own house, or taking
his ordinary rest, til he might (if it so pleased God) know the place where
it should be built.
If I shall enter into the tabernacle of my house, if I shall ascend into the bed
of my couch.





It was reveled to David, that the Temple should be built, in that part of
Jerusalem, which looks toward Bethleem (otherwise called Ephrata) where
our Savior was borne.
in Ephrata: we have found it in Within Jerusalem, which is compassed with
vvoodes. In this vision also the whole form of the Temple was reveled unto
him, as he testifies. 1. Par. 28. v. 19. Al things, quoth he, came written
with the hand of our Lord unto me: that I might understand all the works of
the pattern.
the fildes of the wood.

Holy David moved with exceeding devotion, repared to the place, where Gods
Temple should be built.
We will enter into his tabernacle: we will and adored God, where the
Propitiatory, as a footstool representing Gods presence, should stand. What
meruel then if devotion move Christians, to visit the holy places, where our
Savior, God and Man was Incarnare, was borne, suffered death, was buried,
ascended into heaven, or any other place where his feet stood.
adore in the place where his feet stood.

O God, leaving Silo, Gabaon, and the like places, come into thy holy Temple.
Arise Lord into thy rest, thou and With the Arc of covenant, where thou
sanctifiest thy people. And here again the Prophet illuminated with a higher
Mystery, and inflamed with more devotion, prays for Christ's coming into
the world, and that after his Passion he vvil rise, not only in glory of
soul, but also of body, prefigured by the Arc of testimony, which was in
the tabernacle, and after in the Temple.
the arc of thy sanctification.

Let thy Priests be clothed with Grant therefore that thy Priests, which must
offer sacrifice in this sacred place, be endued with virtues, and good life
vvorthie of their degree:
justice: and let thy and the Levites who are ordained to serve there, be
likewise made fit for their diverse functions, both in the old and new
Testament.
saints rejoice.

And seeing thou have given such meeknes, devotion, zele, sincerity, and other
virtues making him a man according to thine own heart, and thereupon promised
to establish his sede,
For David thy servants, sake, differ not to send thy promised Messiah, Christ
our Redemer.
turn not away the face of thy Christ.

Henceforth to the end of this Psalm, the Prophet relates Gods revelation to
him: That he has truly promised with an oath,
has sworn truth to David, and and vvil perform,
he will not disapoint it: to set one of David's sons upon his Throne: which
was not only fulfilled in Solomon, who reigned in great peace, and builded
the Temple, but especially in Christ the Son of David, to whom our Lord God
gave the seat of David his father and he shall reign in the house of Jacob for
ever* and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Luc. 1. v. 32. 33. By this
promise S. Peter also proves Christ's Resurrection. Act. 2 v. 30.
Of the fruit of thy womb I will set upon thy seat.

Concerning the children of Christ, members of his kingdom the Church, the
promise is conditional, if they observe Gods commandments, they shall sit upon
his seat: be coheyres of his kingdom. Romans 8 v. 17.
If thy children shall keep my testament, and these my testimonies which I will
teach them:

Their children also even for ever, shall sit upon thy seat.



Sion, the Catholic Church, is a perpetual place where God dwells.
rest for ever and ever: here will I dwell because I have chosen it.

The Church vvanting Christ's visible presence, is replenished with many
blessings,
widow: her and al her humble children are relieved with holy Sacraments.
poor I will fill with breades.

The Church has always some holy Priests;
Priests I will clothe with salvation: and her and some holy people.
saints shall rejoice with ioyfulnes.

Of this Church, elected by God, Christ is the Protector, and strong defense.
Thither will I bring forth a horn to David, I have prepared and the same
Church shall be a perpetual lamp, vvherby others may come to him.
a lamp to my Christ.



PSALM CXXXII.
Fraternal concord is commended to al in the Church, as necessary and
Fraternal concord. the 7. key.
delectable in it self, and blessed of God.

A gradual Canticle David being a most peaceable man, even tovvard his enemies,
is added by Esdras in this title, as an example for others to imitate.
of David.
That concord is both good and pleasant, needs no other proof, but only to
con^ider, and to behold the fruict thereof in every community, and especially
in the Church of God.
how good, and how pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell in one:

The ointment, vvhervvith Aaron, and other High Priests were consecrated,
was precious, and most odori^erous, signifying grace bought by Christ's blood,
and producing virtues, which make svvete sauoure:
As oyntement on was povvred upon the High Priests head, who being head of
the Church,
the head, which ran down upon the beard, unity and concord descended from
him to other Priests,
the beard of Aaron, which ran down unto and so to the people* even to the
lowest, and meanest in Gods Church.
the hemme of his garment:

An other similitude to declare the excellency of concord: As the dew of
mount Hermon, which is perpetually covered with snow, that falls from the
heaven, thence descending refreshes and fructifieth the hill of Sion: so mutual
concord, and fraternal charity amongst the faithful, nourishes each other,
making them fructful in all good works.
As the dew of Hermon, which runs down upon mount Sion.

Because Where there is unity God gives abundance of grace, as where the
Apostles with other faithful were geathered, and continued in prayer, the
Holy Ghost came upon them al. And the multitude of beleuers [then increasing]
had one heart and one soul. Act 2. and. 4. v. 32.
there has our Lord commanded blessing, and life even for ever.

PSALM CXXXIII.
Al, and especially clergy men that serve the Church, are invited to praise
God continually to be praised. the 1. key.
God by day and by night, so shall they be blessed of God.

A gradual Canticle.
LO This last Gradual Psalm, as a conclusion exhorts al to praise God:
now bless our Lord, al ye the servants of our Lord:

Which stand in the house of our Lord, in the courts of the house of our God.



for to this end he made al creatures in heaven and in earth Gods perfection
and goodness. the 1. key.
made heaven and earth.

PSALM CXXXIIII.
God who only is omnipotent, and fountain of algoodnes, is of al to be
praised, 8. He is the special protector of his elected people. 15. Contrariwise
false gods are impotent, vain, and can not help those that serve them. 19.
Only the Church does rightly praise him.

Alleluia.
Gods servants.
ye servants praise our Lord.

Clergy that serve in the Temple,
that stand in the house of our Lord, in and ye Laity that attend to his
service, must praise him for these causes.
the courts of the house of our God.

^^^ goodness.
good: sing ye to his name, because it is his benignity.
sweet.

he has adopted us his children.
has chosen Jacob to himself, Israel for his own possession.

he is omni potent, as appears by his works, here and elsvvhere recited:
and many ways known to the world.
great, and our God above al gods.





Exo. 1^.




Ios. 12. Number. 21. Ios. 13.










Psalm. 113.
of men's hands.





Let them that make them become like to them: and all that have confidence in
them.





Blessed be our Lord out of Sion, who dwells in Jerusalem.

PSALM. CXXXV.
God being marvelous in himself, 4. has showed his power and goodness in Gods
marvelous works* the 2. key.
his works, as well in general to all the world, 10. as in particular toward
his elected people.

Alleluia.
Whose goodness is incomparable
because he is good: This second part of every verse, first pronounced by the
Priests, confessing and praising Gods mercy above al his works, was still
repeted by musicians, or other assistants, in manner as now in L^tanies [o Lord
deliver vs] and [VVe beseech theeto hear vs] And as Gloria Patri etc. is added
in the end of Psalms, and our Lords prayer, and the Angelical salutation are
often repeted in diverse Offices, and in the Rosarie
because his mercy is for ever.

Whose divine power created al other things.
the God of gods: because his mercy is for ever.

By this inuitation to praise our Lord God, thrice repeted, we profess the
blessed Trinity, who is one God in substance, and three Divine Persons.
Confess ye to Whose dominion is over all the world.
the Lord of lords: because his mercy is for ever.

Only God can do true miracles; towit, works above the course of al nature.
only does great meruels: because his mercy is for ever.

In admirable wisdom.
in understanding: because his mercy is for ever. Genesis 1.


Made the waters above nature to remain within their bonds, and not to cover
the earth.
the earth over the waters: because his mercy is for ever.







Exo. 11.


Who brought forth Israel out of the mids of them: because Exo. ^^.
his mercy is for ever.







Exo. ^^.
because his mercy is for ever.

Number. ^^
is for ever.

Who stroke great kings: because his mercy is for ever.

And slew strong kings: because his mercy is for ever.



And Og the king of Basan: because his mercy is for ever.









Al Gods benignity, as well of particular benefits toward his people, as
general to them and al others proceeds from his mercy.
al flesh: because his mercy is for ever.



Confess ye to the Lord of lords: because his mercy is for ever.

PSALM CXXXVI.
The Prophet describes how lamentably the people in captivity of Babylon, The
Jews lamentation in captivity. the 4. key*
will bewail the want of means to serve God, and of their native soil* 7.
with just desire of their enemies punishment.

A Psalm of David By adding to this title [for Ieremie] the Septuagint
Interpreters signify that this Psalm treats of the same captivity, in
which Ieremias writ his Lamentations.
for Jeremy.
UPON the rivers Nere the rivers in Chaldea, whereof Babylon was the head city,
of Babylon, there we the Jews remained mourning,
sat and wept: whiles we remembering the holy rites and service of God, which
had been in Sion, whereof they were deprived in the captivity.
remembered Sion.

Al their musical instruments, as having no use of them.
our instruments.

Either in earnest, or in scorn the Chaldees willed them to sing, as they were
accustomed in their country.
demanded of us words of songs.

And they that led us away: Sing ye an hymn to us of the songs of Sion.

They excused themselves, and refused to sing sacred Psalms before profane
people, neither had they mind to sing in that mourning state of captivity.
How shall we sing the song of our Lord in a strange land?

The people show not only their fervent present desire to serve God in
Jerusalem, but also their firm purpose still to desire the same, wishing that
if they forget it, or lose this affection, their right hands, or what soever
is most dear, or necessary for them, may be forgotten, not conserved, but
suffered to perish,
If I shall forget thee o Jerusalem, let my right hand be forgotten.

If I lose this affection, let me also lose the use of my tongue.
Let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if I do not remember thee:

If I shall not set Jerusalem in the beginning of my joy.

The Idomeans incensed the Chaldees to be cruel against the Jews, whereof they
pray for just revenge, and withal the Psalmist prophecieth that it will be
revenged, which Isaias also prophecieth, c. 21. v. 11. l. for their rejoicing
in Ierusalems misery.
the childrem of Edom, in l the day of Jerusalem:

The voice of the Idumeans, inciting the Babylonians utterly to destroy
Jerusalem.
That say: Raze it, raze it, even unto the foundation thereof.

A prophecy that the people of Babylon should also be punished, for their
cruelty against the Jews, whereof Isaias likewise prophecieth* c. 13.
Daugther of Babylon miserable: blessed is he, that shall repay thee thy
payment, which thou have paid us.

God will bless, or reward them that shall seuerly afflict the Babylonians*
that shall hold, and not sparing their children. Morally he is blessed, that
mortifieth his own passions, cutteth of first il motions, or punishes venial
sins, that they grow not strong within his soul, and so draw it to commit
mortal sin. S. Aug. hic. and S. Greg. in fine expos. Psalm. 4. paeuit.
shall dash thy little ones against the rock.

PSALM. CXXXVII.
The whole Church, or any just person, renders thanks to God for his
benefits Thanks to God for benefits. the 7. key.
4. praying that al kings and kingdoms may do the same, 4. because God being
high respects, and aduanceth the humble.

To This Psalm is a fit form of thanks for David, or any other servant of
God.
David him self.
I vvil render thanks and praise.
confess to thee o Lord in my whole heart: God ever hears the prayer that is
rightly made, for which the supplicant is therefore to give thanks.
because thou have heard the words of my mouth.

Angels are present where the faithful pray, observe our prayers, and offer
them to God, if they be sincere, as the prayers of Tobias, and Cornelius.
the sight of Angels I will sing to thee: I will adore 1. Cor. 11. v. 10. Job.
12. Act 10. Psalm. 24. v. 10.
When there was not access to the Temple, yet the Jews praying in
captivity, turned themselves toward the Temple.
toward thy holy temple, and will confess to thy name.

For thy mercy, and thy truth: because thou have magnified above every thing
The Name and Majesty of GOD, The WORD (which is the Son of God) also the
name of JESUS, is magnified above al names, or temporal things:
thy holy name.



Sovvner or later Kings and Princes of al kingdoms and nations, have been or
shall be converted to Christ.
all the kings of the earth o Lord confess to thee: because they have heard all the words of thy mouth:



God knovveth proud men, not as his freindes or servants, but far of, as
strangers and enemies.
far of.





PSALM CXXXVIII.
Gods knowledge, 7. and presence (10. without the help, or hinderance Gods
special providence of his servants. the 3 key.
any thing) extends to al things, times, and places. 17, he gives exceeding
great honor to his saints, 20, the wicked, as enemies to God are justly
hated, 23. the just pray for Gods perpetual direction.

Unto By this part of the title [to the end] is signified (as is noted Psalm.
4.) that the matter cont^ined in the Psalm, perteyneth to the new Testament.
the end, a Psalm of David.
God who knovveth al things most absolutely and perfectly, without discourse
or searching yet, as it were, makes experimental trial of his servants, to
make them in some sort to know him, and to know themselves. And so here,
holy David or other faithful man, acknovvlegeth Gods Omniscience, that is,
perfect knowledge of al things, without exception, past, present, and to
come: al works, words, thoughts, and what soever can be, though it never
was nor shall be, in general and in particular.
have proved me, and have known me: thou have known my sitting down, and my
rising up.

The uttermost measure and reach of mine intention.
my cord thou have searched out.

The word holden in by the tongue, and not uttered by mouth, is not hidden from
God.
tongue.



By experience we see that Gods knowledge excedeth our reach.
become marvelous of me: it is made great, and I can not reach to it.

As Gods knowledge comprehends al things, so his presence extends it self
to al places, neither is contained in place, but excedeth al place, in his
divine immensirie.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? and whither shall I flee from thy face?







The Prophe also in the person of any curious imaginatiue man, examineth and
finds that no darkness, nor cover can hide any ching from God.
And I said: Perhaps darkness shall tread over me: and the night is mine
illumination in my delights.



Nothing seems more hid then a m^ns entrals.
my reins: thou have received me from o^ a child in the mothers womb.
my mothers womb.



My Or bones in the flesh.
bone is not hid from thee, which thou made in secret: and my substance in
the lower pattes of the earth.

Or man's bodily imperfection before his birth,
Mine Gol^^. Embryo^em.
imperfection thine eyes have seen, and in thy book Of knowledge.
al shall be written: daily formed by God, not by man. Job. 10. v. 8. 2. Mae. 7.
v. 22, 23.
days shall be formed, and no man in them.

Above al considerations it most excedeth, that God so high and infinite,
honoreth his humble poor servants so excedingly, that it seems to themselves,
far more then can be due. For he revvardeth even over and above merits;
which merits also are founded in Gods mercy given without merit.
But to me thy New translaters pervert this place, translating [thoughts] for
[frendes] contrary to the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and al ancient Fathers,
only pretending that the same word in the Chaldee tongue also signifies
thoughts.
friends o God are become honorable excedingly: their principality is
excedingly strengthened.

The number also of Saints whom God has chosen, called, justified and vvil
glorify, excede man's conceit. Apoc. 7.
I will number them, and they shall be multiplied above the sand: Incensed with
this excellent glory, and desiring to be of this innumerable multitude, by thy
grace I have risen from sin, and in confidence of thy perpetual help, I
stand and hope to persevere in thy service.
I rose up and I am yet with thee.

And if it be so, yea seeing it is so, that as thou o God do exalt thy
Saints, to exceeding and unspeakable honor: so thou have also decreed to
punish obstinate sinners, with eternal death and damnation:
If thou shall kill sinners o God: I renounce al wicked association, get ye
away from me al cruel bloody men, that would dravv me into everlasting
torments.
ye men of blood depart from me.

Away from me, you that think,
Because you say in thought: they the glorious mansions in heaven, prepared and
promised to the just, are vain hopes, and in vain expected.
shall receive thy cities in vain.

This hate of such sinners the just shall confidently plead, and happy are they
that shall be able truly to allege for themselves in the day of judgment, that
they hated al, whom God hates,
Did not I hate them, that hate thee o Lord: and yea hated them with fervent
zele, that are Gods enemies.
pyned away because of thine enemies?

Still the Prophet inculcateth this necessary perfect hatred,
with perfect hatred did I hate them: they are become and emnitie toward Gods
enemies.
enemies to me.

For that none in this life (without special and extraordinary revelation)
knows certainly their own state, whether they be worthy of Gods love or
hatred (Eccle 9.) the just submit themselves to Gods examination of their
heart and actions:
Prove me o God, and know my heart: examine me, and know my paths.

humbly praing God, that if they be in the way of iniquity,
see, if the way of iniquity be in me: he will voutsafe to reduce and guide them
into the right way of everlasting life.
and conduct me in the everlasting way.

PSALM CXXXIX.
The just diversely afflicted by the wicked, pray to be defended, 7. repose
their Eternal pain of the wicked, and joy of the blessed. the 10. key.
confidence in God, 10. who will adiudge the reprobate to eternal punishment,
13. and reward the good with the fruition of himself.

Unto the end, a Psalm of David.


Unquiet evil disposed men still devise wicked plottes
have devised iniquity in their heart: and never cease to make discord and
debates.
all the day they did appoint battles.







And they have streched out ropes for a snare: they have laid Scandalum.
a stumbling block for me nere the way.

In time of tentation prayer is most necessary.
I said to our Lord: Thou art my God: hear o Lord the voice of my petition.

Man is not able to resist tentations,
the strength of my salvation: unless God by his grace, as by a helmet, defend
him from yelding consent.
thou have ouershadowed my head in the day of battle.

Suffer me not to fall from that which I now desire (which is to be constant in
virtue) not to consent to sinners persuasions.
my desire, to the sinner: they have devised against me, forsake me not, Who
then would triumph over me.
lest they perhaps be proud.

The sum of their mischeuous devises,
The head of their compase: consisting in their subtle persuasions with sweet
words,
the labor of their lips shall ouerwhelme, and bring themselves to perd^tion.
shall cover them.

Hell fire shall be their lote,
Coals shall fall upon them, unto which they shall fall,
thou shall cast them down into fire: in miseries and ^uer be in intolerable
torments.
they shall not stand up.



I have learned by good instructions and by experience, that in the end thou o
God w^lt comfort the just, who are now afflicted; and punish the unjust, that
live in temporal delights, as it happened to Lazarus, and the glat^on.
I have known that our Lord will do the judgment of the needy: and the
revenge of the poor.

But as for the just, they shall confess to thy name: and the righteous shall
dwell with Eternal glory consists in seeing God.
thy countenance.

PSALM CXL.
The Church prays that her children may avoid sinful words, 4. not The
Church prays and prevails. the 6. key.
make excuses of sins committed, not communicate with others in sin, nor to
harken to slatterers: 6 but to pray that they may amend (the Psalmist by the
way prophecieth that many shall be converted) 8. though sometimes persecution
be great, the Church fails not.

A Psalm of David


In these words the Church prays, offering incense in her solemn Offices.
Let my prayer be directed as As the fume of incense is sweet and ascends
upwards: so the Church prays that her petitions may be gratful, and ascend to
God.
incense in thy sight: the elevation of my hands as In the old testament
morning acrifice was rather more solemn, and more frequeut, but the Prophet
seems to allude unto Christ's Sacrifice, which he was to offer toward evening
on the Cross; and the same also in unbloody manner, the evening befofe his
Passion, in the Eucharist.
evening sacrifice.

A just care and consideration what to speak, before the mouth be opened
a watch to my mouth: and lips must not be always stopped, for it is a sin
sometimes not to speak, but as a door that is to be opened, and shut at due
seasons, for example, opened to confess our sins, and Gods truth:
a door round about to my lips.

shut from words of malice, and from excusing sins committed.
into words of malice, to make excuses in sins.

With men that work iniquity: and I will not communicate with the chief of
them.

Admonition of the just is a profitable reprehension,
shall reprehend me: but let not the oil of a sinner but the fawning of
flatteters is pernicious.
fat my head.

The Church cease not to pray for sinners,
yet also my prayer is in their though as yet they take pleasure in their
sins,
good pleasures: but the very chiefest of them, which seem most potent, if they
remain obstinate to their death, shall then perish, as men thrown against
rocks.
their judges are swalowed up joined to the rock.

They shall then hear and understand, that the prayers of the Church
They shall hear my words are effectual, obtaining grace of constancy to her
children, not to fear any persecution, nor any kind of death; obtaining also
justification of their cause, when the persecuters shall see that the words,
and doctrine of the Church are true, and prevail in true judgment, as true,
modest, peaceable, not sedicious, turbulent, nor against the commonwealth.
because they have prevailed:

As much earth sticking together is made fructful, by breaking it into small
mould, so the children of the Church by persecution, bring forth more fruict
then before. S. Aug.
as the grossenes of the earth is broken out upon the earth.

Our Some persecuters are so cruel as to rage against the bones, and other
relics of Martyrs,
bones are dissipated casting them into the vilest planes they can, willing if
they could, to throw them into hell,
nere to hell: but the Church and al her members repose confidence in God.
for to thee o Lord, Lord are mine eyes; in thee have I hoped, take not away my
life
soul.

Therefore she prays that her children be not entrapped by guilful deceiptes,
the snare, which they have set for me: and from nor overthrown by any
stumbling block cast in their way.
the scandals of them that work iniquity.

In the end, al persecuters and other wicked shall be caught in their own
net of perdition,
Sinners shall fall in his net: the Church is singularly protected even to the
end.
I am alone until I pass.

PSALM CXLI.
Holy David being fled into a cave, and beseeged round about by Saul's David's
prayer in extreme distress. the 8. key.
army, explicating his distress, 6. prays to be delivered.

This Psalm in fotme of a prayer, shows what cogitations David had in
extreme danger.
understanding to David, when he was in the cave, a prayer. 1. Reg. 24.

Not with exterior voice, for so he should have detected himself, but with
feruoure of spirit.
have cried to our Lord: with my voice I have prayed to our Lord:



When by reason of extremity, I was not able to think how to help my
self,
When my spirit fails of myself, and thou o God knovving my actions and
demaneur, did deliver me.
thou have known my paths.

In this way, which I walked, they hid a snare for me.

I looked for help,
the right hand, and and diligently looked about me,
saw: and but none would seem to know me, when I required their help
there was none that would know me.

Endeavoring to save my self by flight, I found no secure place, for being in a
cave or hole of a montaine, the whole army beseeged me; al seek to take
away my life, none to save it.
Flight has failed me: and there is none to require my soul.

Thus leift desolate of al man's help, and destitute of al worldly shift, I
cried to thee o Lord,
I have cried to thee o Lord, I have said: Thou art my only hopeful refuge,
my hope, neither do I desire to live for any worldly respect, but having
chosen thee o God for my portion, and inheritance,
my portion I desire to be out of this desert place, and to be in the land,
where is right use of religious divine service.
in the land of the living.

afflicted.
humbled excedingly. Deliver me from them that persecute me: because they are
made strong over me.

David's desire of liberty, was especially to this end, that he might have
convenient place, and other means to serve and praise God:
to confess unto thy name: the good, and well disposed people of Israel, can
not now serve thee as they desire, but expect me,
the just expect me, whom thou o Lord, vvilt advance to the kingdom, that then
we may serve thee, more freely and more commodiously.
til thou reward me.

All this happened in figure of Christ, of whom prophetically S. Augustine S.
Hilarie, Cassiams, Cassiodorus, and others expound the whole Psalm. Amongst
others S Beda briefly in these words VVheras in the title, Understanding is
premised to Prayer, thereby as signified, that David in his distresses, The
prophetical sense of this Psalm.
and in the den whither he fled, understood what our Lord should suffer of
the Jews, and how he would pray to his Father. In the first part our Lord
cries to his Father, complaining of the detestable deceiptes of Judas the
persecutor. In the second he prays to be delivered from the prison of hell
(Limbus, where he was free) because the faith of all the Saints depended on
his Resurrection.

PSALM CXLII.
King David (or any other) in spiritual or temporal tribulation, not trusting
The seventh penitential Psalm. the 7. key.
in his own justice, lays open his calamity, 5. considering Gods
benignity, 6. prays to be spedely delivered; 11. and confidently assures
himself thereof.

A Psalm of David, when Absalom his son persecuted him. 2. Reg ^7

God having so promised is bond by his truth,
thy truth: hear me in and his justice, to hear penitents praying for
remission of sins.
thy justice.

Deal not with me in rigor of justice,
enter not into judgment with thy servant: for no mortal man is able of
himself to be justified, abstracting from Gods mercy.
because no man living shall be justified in thy sight.

sought my life,
has persecuted my soul: he and brought it into great danger. Spiritually,
the devil as a ro^ing lion still seeking whom he may devour, has tempted me
vehemently.
has humbled my life in the earth.

I am pressed with great calamities, temporal or spiritual.
He has set me in obscure places as the dead of the world: and my spirit is in
anguish upon me, within me my heart is trubled.

In this case I consider, how God has hertofore showed his goodness toward me,
and others.
I was mindful of old days, I have meditated in all thy works: in the factes
of thy hands did I meditate.

Stretching forth hands a ceremony in prayer, whereby the supplicant is made
more attentive, and also indureth some pain for part of satisfaction.
stretched forth my hands to thee: my soul is man's mind without Gods
illumination is dry and* barren.
as earth without water unto thee.

Hear me In great tentations Gods grace and help is more presently nedeful to
prevent our weakness, lest we yield consent.
quickly o Lord: my spirit has faynted.

Turn not away thy face from me: If God leave man without special and
continual grace, he vvil fall,
and I shall be like to them that descend into into sun, as into a deep lake,
from whence without help he can not rise up again.
the lake.

In the first assault of tentation.
in the morning: because I have hoped in thee.

Make the way known to me, wherein I may walk: Seeing by thy grace I have
begun to pray unto thee.
because I have lifted up my soul to thee.

Deliver me from mine enemies o Lord, to thee I have fled:

teach me to do thy will, because thou art my God.

The penitent thus humbling himself and praying may assuredly trust that God
does remitte his sins by the holy Sacraments, and justifies him, protecteth
him, and will bring him out of al dangers of spiritual or temporal enemies.
good spirit will conduct me into the right way: for thy name sake o Lord thou will quicken me, in thine equity.



And thou will destroy al, that afflict my soul: because I am thy servant.

PSALM CXLIII.
The royal Prophet thanketh God, for all his victories, and possession of the
King David praises God for his victories the 8 key.
kingdom. 3. Admiring Gods benignity toward man, 5. prays to be still
defended from al enemies, 9. promises a new songue of praise, 11. describes
the vanity of worldly men, 15. concluding that true felicity is in serving
God.

A Psalm of David, Because this was David's first, and a very notable
victory, the Septuagint Interpreters make mention of Goliath in this title.
against Goliath.
God made David a warier, and victorer against Goliath, without any former
training in arms.
teaches my hands to battle, and my fingers to war.

My mercy, and my refuge: my defender, and my deliverer.

My protector, and I have hoped in him, who Made him afterward king of a
great people.
subdeweth my people under me.

Al mankind was unworthy before Christ,
what is man, that thou art that God should be reveled unto them,
made known to him? or the son of man, especially that he should have care
of the progeny of men, after their sin.
that thou estemest him?

In deed man in himself, in his own nature and frailty, is but a vain and
transitory creature, passing from life to death, as a shadovv that can not
consist of it self, neither can man without God.
Man is made like to vanity: his days pass as a shadow.

By a poetical description he prays for Gods help, as if God should make the
heavens to bovv, and so descend; or make the montaines smoke, as when Moses
received the law, or declare himself by Meteors, as follows:
Lord incline thy heavens, and descend: touch the mountains, and they will
smoke.



Tribulations or tentations.
waters: from the hand Children of the Church,
of children but of evil life.
strangers.

They speak in vanity that promise to keep Gods law, and perform it not.
vanity: and their right hand is the right hand of iniquity.

In that principal instrument, apt for a new songue, and for extra ordinary
benefits.
the psalter of ten stringes, I will sing to thee.

Who geuest salvation to kings: who have redeemed David

And rescue me out of the hand of Both Jews and Christians that live not
well, are as strangers that frame to themselves such a false felicite, as is
here described: making riches or worldly pleasures their God.
children strangers, whose mouth has spoken vanity: and their right hand, is
the right hand of iniquity.

Whose sons, are as new plants in their youth.

Their daughters comely trimmed: decked about after the similitude of a temple.

Their storehouses full, flowing out of this into that.



There is no ruin of wall, nor transmigration.
passage, nor cry in their streates.

True happiness consists not in worldly things.
blessed is the people, whose But in preferring God before al.
God is our Lord.

PSALM. CXLIIII.
God is, and for ever ought to be praised, 3. for his immensiue, infinite, Gods
Majesty excels al things. the 1. key.
glorious Majesty, marvelous works, merciful benefits; for his power,
wisdom, justice, 19. who will reward the good, and destroy the wicked.

By this title, Esdras signifies that the Holy Ghost, who indicted all the
Psalms to Gods praise, more specially in these seven last suggested to David,
and by him to al Gods servants, that al their other service must tend, and be
directed to the praise of God: and that therein we must continue, and finally
rest, as in the sabbath of the seventh day, signified (as S. Beda supposes) by
these seven last Psalms of praise, eternally praising our Lord God. For which
principal end both Angels and Men, yea and al other creatures were made.
Praising, to David himself.
King, is the proper epitheton of Christ, the Son of God, to whom, in his
humanity, God the Father promised the Church of al nations for his kingdom.
Psalm. 2. in whom also the whole Blessed Trinity is praised.
the king: and I will bless thy name All the time of this world they praise God,
for ever, and and after in eternity.
for ever and ever.









Of wonderful and miraculous things, which strike terror into men's minds.
terrible things: and shall declare thy greatness:



Our Lord is pitiful and merciful: patient and very merciful.

The effects of Gods mercy in redeming, and recallidg sinners, are eminent
above al other works.
commiserations are over al his works.

Therefore the sanctified have special cause to praise God.
saints bless thee.





Christ's kingdom the militant Church is magnifical, but much more the
triumphant which is eternal.
of al worlds: and thy dominion in all generation and generation.

" Our Lord is faithful in all his words: and holy in all his works.

God is ready of his part to lift up al.
lifts up all that fall: and sets up all that are bruised.



He gives necessary things to al living creatures, even to brute beasts.
every living creature with blessing.

Our Lord is just in all his ways: and holy in all his works.









ANNOTATIONS PSALM CXLIIII.
I vvil exalt thee] As this Psalm is the first of the seven, which conteyne
The seven last Psalms perteyne more specially to praises. This Psalm and
other six are composed in order of the Alphabet. It is probable that the
Hebrew text now wants a verse in this Psalm. And therefore is not more
certa^ne then the Greek or Latin.
more particular instruction of perpetually praising God: so it is the seventh
of those, which are composed in order of the Alphabet, tovvitte, the 24 33.
^^. 110. 111. 118. and this 144, Of which the three former want some letters:
signifying (as Cassiodorus interprets.) such in Gods Church, as sing his
praises, but with some imperfections: the other four have the perfect
Alphabet, signifying those, that sing Gods praises with perfect devotion.
Which only four S. Ierom calls Alphabetical Psalms. Epist. ad Paulam
Vrbi^am, and Pro^m. in Lament. Ierem.

1^. Our Lord is faithful.] This verse is not now in the ordinary Hebrew
tex^, and therefore either the same is defective, or else this Psalm should
sen^e no^ to be composed with a perfect Alphabet in the fountain tongue. For
here it wants the letter Nun. But seeing S. Ierom counts this one of the
four Alphabetical Psalms, omitting the other three, which consist of
imperfect Alphabets, it is very probable that this verse was once in the
Hebrew text, as it is both in Greek and Latin. VVherby amongst other places,
appears, that there is no certainty, to correct the Greek, or Latin Bible by
the Hebr^^^, which is novvextant; but rather by them that may be supplied,
which the Hebrew wants.

PSALM CXLV.
The Psalmist exciteth himself, and al others to praise God for his singular Al
are exhorred to praise God and trust in his assured providence. they key.
regard, and providence of all that trust in him: 3. showing that neither
princes, nor other men are able to help, 5. but God can and does continually
releue al sorts of necessities.

Alleluia, The Septuagint added ^he names of these tuo Prophets, for the like
reason as they added Ieromie, Psalm. 136. because Aggaeus and Zacharias
prophesying in the reduction of the people from captivity, exhorted them, as
here the Psalmist does, to trust in Gods providence, and prefer his se^u^ce
before worldly cares.
of Aggaeus, and Zachary.


In one Son of Man [Christ] is salvation (says S. Augustine) and in him, not
because he is the son of man, but because he is the Son of God.
the sons of men, in whom there is no salvation.

He says not, that the spirit or soul shall turn into the earth, but the
soul shall depart from the body, and so every one (in whom worldly men put
their trust) shall according to the body, return into his earth.
his earth: in that day al their cogitations shall perish.

Blessed is he, whose helper is the God of Jacob, his hope in





Our Lord lifts up the bruised, our Lord loves the just.





PSALM CXLVI.
God is also to be praised by his peculiar people, for particular benefits. 4.
and Gods excellency in creating and governing the world. the 2. key.
for his omnipotent power, wisdom, goodness, in creating, and governing this
whole world, 11. and most special benignity toward those that trust in him.

Alleluia.
It is good to sing Psalms of praise to God.
is good: to our God let there be pleasant, and comely praise.

A prophec^e of the: estaurat^on of Jerusalem after the captivity.
will gather together the dispersions of Israel.

Remitteth sins to the penitent.
heals the contrite of heart: and binds up their sores.

Besides experience of every one that shall behold the firmament in a clear
night, the holy Scripture (Genesis 15. v. 5., shows, that the stars are
innumerable to man. For albeit P^olomaey other Astronomers numbereth certain
more notorious stars, which serve especially for some knowledge in the science
of Astronomy, numbering 349. such in the Zodiach; 316. in the South part
thereof; and 360. on the North part, which are in all 1025. Yet al acknowledge
that no man can come nere to any probable conjecture of the whole number, nor
is able to attain any perfect knowledge of their natural influences, and
special proprietes. And therefore the Psalmist proposes here the admirable, and
unsearchable knowledge of God: who both most exactly knovveth the number,
numbereth the multitude of stars: and and so perfectly their nature, that
his divine Omniscience gives to every star a proper name, according to
their singular differences and proprieties.
gives names to them al.

Great is our Lord, and great is his strength: and of his wisdom there is no
Things subject to Gods knowledge and wisdom are innumerable.
number.





Al these and the like benefits do show Gods imcomparable greatness, wisdom,
and goodness.
covers the heaven with clouds: and prepares rain for the earth.

Who brings forth grass in the mountains: and herb for the service of men.

Both sacred and profane auctors testify, that ravens seeing their young ones,
either without feathers, or to have vvhitish, unlike to theirs, as suspecting
that they are not their own birds, but of some other kind, leave them
destitute of meat; therefore God the auctor of nature, and conseruer of al
kinds of creatures, by his special providence, feeds them: either by a
certain dew hanging nere them in the air, as Isidorus supposes; or by little
beasts, or flees, sent by Gods providence, which they catching into their
mouths, are nourished and brought up, as S. Chrysostom teaches, ser. in
Heliam; or by what other means soever, al agree that young ravens are
neglected by their parents, and are fed meruelously by Gods ordinance, by
which example the Psalmist shows, that much more God has care of men:
especially of Ho. in hunc Psalm.
such meu (says S. Chrysostom.) as honor him with hymns and praises, whom
also he has called to be his peculiar people, and his own portion or
inheritance.
the young ravens that call upon him.





PSALM CXLVII.
Again God is to be praised for his goodness toward his peculiar people, Gods
providence especially toward the Church. the 6. key.
4. yea toward all the world: 7. but most abundantly toward his Church.

Alleluia.
Jerusalem in the latter part of David's time, all the time of Solomon, and part
of other kings reigns til the captivity, had peace and prospered. Again
after the captivity, the City was repared, the Temple reedified, and the
whole land received and enjoyed many blessings. But all this was no more then
a figure of the excellent benefits here prophesied, and more evidently
verified in Christ's Catholic Church: partly here militant in the whole world,
and especially in the glorious Jerusalem, and Sion, the perfect vision of
peace, and contemplation of God, in eternal life.
Jerusalem praise our Lord: praise thy God o Sion. The Hebrews join this
Psalm with the precedent.


Because he In comparison of other cities, and peoples of the world, the gates
of Jerusalem were strongly fensed,
has strengthened the locks of thy gates: he and the citizens blessed: much
more the Church of Christ is built upon a fure rock, her faithful children
endued with all spiritual graces; and most of al, heaven it ^^l^^ is free from
al danger of calamity, and the Saints are most secure and most happy,
enjoying eternal fruit on of God.
has blessed thy children in thee.

Has given peace in thy borders,
has set thy borders peace: and fills thee with and the very best corn, and
al other fruictes: wine, oil, milk, honey, and the rest. Allegorically in the
Church, reconciliation with God, by remission of sins, and peace of
conscience, in the Sacraments of Baptism and Penance; with the most spiritual
food of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, and graces of other
Sacraments. In heaven most assured peace and joy without end.
the fat of corn.

This perteyneth most specially to Euangelical doctrine, preached
his speech to the earth: his word and quickly received in all the world. Rom
10. v. 18.
runs swiftly.

Who gives Snow nourishes the earth, making it vvarme by Antiperistasis, as
is evident in natural Philosophy,
snow as wool: scatereth and noisome air is changed into clear vveather. In
the Church by penance and austere life men are purged from sins and vices,
evil spirits are also driven away. If your sins shall be as scarlet, they
shall be made white as snow, and if they be red as vermilion, they shall be
white as wool. Isa^e. 1. v. 18.
mist as ashes.

Yea some that are hardened in sin, as yse, or crystal, shall be melted,
broken, or made fit to be ingraffed in Gods Church. So S. Peter was
admonished by a vision (Act. ^0. v 1^.) to kill and eat. Otherwise without
Gods grace giving remorse and sorrow, no man can overcome his own vices.
his crystal as morseles: before the face of his cold l who shall endure?

But Gods word preached,
shall sendforth his word, and shall melt them: and his grace touching men's
hearts,
his spirit shall blow, and innumerable are converted.
waters shall flow.

The Church only enjoys these spiritual benefi^es.
Jacob: his justices, and judgments to Israel.

Considering that al mankind was in the mass of sin, and that God lets
many justly perish, those to whom he gives his grace to justification, are
specially bond to praise him.
not done in like manner to any nation: and his judgments he has not made
manifest to them. And therefore the Prophet concludes this Psalm, and the rest
following, with Alleluia.
Allelu-ia.

PSALM CXLVIIII.
Al creatures spiritual and corporal, are invited to praise God, their Creator
Our Creator to be praised by all creatures the 2. key.
and Conseruer, 13. as incomparably excellent.

Alleluia.
PRAISE ye our Lord Al ye heavenly spirits praise God for the excellency of
your nature.
from the heavens: praise ye him in the high places.

Praise ye him al his Angels: praise ye him And for your innumerable multitude.
al his hosts:

Al creatures, wanting sense or reason, shewforth the Majesty and excellency
of their Creator.
sun and moon: praise him al ye stars, and light.

Praise him ye heavens of heavens: and the waters that are

Because he said, and they were made: he commanded, and they were created.



Praise our Lord from the earth: ye dragons, and al depthes.





Beasts, and al cattle: serpents, and fethered fowls:

Again God is to be praised for the diversity of stares in men, whereby the
whole community, is conserved and governed
Kings of the earth, and al peoples: princes, and al judges of the earth.

Yongmen, and virgins: old with young let them praise the God only, and no false
imagined god made and disposed al things in order.
alone is

More especially for that God has so fortified his Church.
the horn of his people.

An hymn to al his Sanctified children,
saints: to the children of Israel, a people that by grace and free will,
which he gives them, approach unto him
approaching unto him. All this considered the Psalmist concluding with Alleluia,
inuiteth al to praise our Lord.
Alleluia.

PSALM CXLIX.
The Church is most singularly bond to praise God, 4. for the grace, sanctity,
The Church must ever praise God. the 6. key.
victory, glory, 7. and judicial power, which he gives to his Saints.

Alleluia.
SING ye to our Lord a new song: let his praise be in God our Lord whom al
creatures are bond to praise, only accepts those men's praises, that live in
his holy Church.
the Church of saints.

Let Israel be joyful in him, that made him: and let the children of Sion
rejoice in their king.





eternal rest.
their beds.

Hieghest praises of God shall be continually uttered by Saints in glory: for
still as praises pass by their tongues and mouths, more like praises shall
succeed from their throat, and hearty affection, so out of the abundance of the
heart their mouth shall still speak Gods praise.
exaltations of God in their throat: and Glorified Saints shall also have
iudiciarie power. First, al in general shall like and approve Gods justice in
punishing the wicked. Secondly the wicked shall be justly condemned in
comparison of the blessed, who passed through, and overcame the like, yea and
greater tribulations and tentations then those, by which the damned were
overcome. Thirdly, certain more excellent Saints, namely the Apostles, and
al those that forsaking propriety of temporal In Psalm. 121. v. 5. li. 3. in
Mat. 19. ho. in Not. S. ^ened.
goods, give that they have to the poor, as some religious Orders do; or
into a Community as the Apostles, and many primitive Christians did (Mat. 4.
v 20. cap. 19. v 27. Act. 4. v. 34. 1. Cor. 6. v. 3.) shall sit in judgment
seats, assessorie judges with Christ, and judge those that render account, of
well or evil spending the temporal lands or goods, which they possessed in
this world. So teach S. Augustine S. Ierom. S. Beda, and others.
two edged swords in their hands.





Decreed by God.
written: This judicial power is part of Saints glory.
this glory is to al his saints. Alleluia.

PSALM. CL. God most excellent and most laudable. the first key.

God absolutely most excellent is to be praised, 3. with all sorts of
instruments, and by all other means.

Alleluia.
Al ye Angels and men that are in the holy and highest heaven praise our Lord.
in his holies: praise ye him in All ye creatures that are in, and under the
first moveable firmament praise our Lord.
the firmament of his strength.

And you especially (Gods peculiar people) amongst whom, and for whom, divine
miracles have been wrought praise our Lord,
his powers: praise ye him with all your possible endeavor, for though his
infinite Excellency excedeth the power of al creatures to praise him
sufficiently, yet it rests that you may infinitely extend your will and desire
to praise our Lord, according to the multitude of his greatness.
according to the multitude of his greatness.

Out of this your great and infinite desire, let your tongues sound and sing
divine praises, as well with voice, as musical instruments.
Praise ye him VVherof six most usual in the Tabernacle and Temple were these:
Trumpet, Psalter, Harp, Timbrel, Organ and Cymbal.
in the sound of trumpet: praise ye him on psalter, and harp.

By the way the Psalmist interposeth agane two especial things, which make
perfect harmony, without which no instrument is gratful to God: Unity
amongst his servants, signified by the Quire of consonant voices:
quire: praise ye him on and mortification of passions, signified by Stringes,
which are made of dead beasts bowels.
stringes, and organ.

Praise ye him on well sounding cymbals: praise ye him on Man created of
corruptible body and immortal soul, is finally admonished to praise our Lord,
over and above the praises of al other corporal creatures; who also is more
especially bond thereto then Angels, because God has voutsaffed to make
himself Man, to redeem man that was lost by sin, and to endew him with
new grace, and so bring him to everlasting glory, where with holy Angels,
men also for ever and ever shall praise our Lord, with heart, voice, and
iubilation of spirit, singing as the Psalmist concludes, Alleluia.
spirit praise our Lord.

ANNOTATIONS. PSALM CL.
S. Augustine in the conclusion of his Enarrations, or Sermons upon the Psalms,
The number of Psalms signifies the agreement of the old and new ^ estament.
explicateth a mystery in the number of an hundred and fieftie* signifying the
concord of the two Testaments. For in the old testament they kept the Sabbath,
which is the seventh day: in the new we keep our Lords day, after the sabbath,
that is, the eight: which seven and eight: (making fieftene) multiplied by
ten, signifying the Law of ten commandments, rise unto 150.

Again even multiplied by seven make 49. whereto one (to wit the eight) being
added make fieftie, which multiplied by three* signifying the B Trinity, make
150 Neither seemed it without cause to this great Doctor, that the fi^^^ Three
fifeties sign ^^^ P^na^ce* Mercy with justice, and Praises of God*
fieftie end with a Psalm of Paenance, craving mercy and remission of sins:
the second with Mercy and Justice, which God joins in the Redemption,
Justification, and Salvation of men: the last with Divine Praises, signifying,
that by condemning sins in our selves, through Gods mercy we may be
justified, and so begin in this life, which is to be perfected in the next,
to praise our Lord, as S. Paul admonishes with Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songues. Concluding (...) ^* (...) An. D^* 380.
with the two verses, appointed by S Dama us Pope, to be added in the end of
al Psalms, and is observed ever since his time by tradition in the Gloria
Patri: added by tradition*
whole Church:

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in
the beginning, and now, and ever, into worlds of worlds [in eternity
without end]

Amen.
THE THIRD PART OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, CONTAINING SAPIENTIAL BOOKS.
The argument of Sapiential Books.
Hitherto the Law, and History of Gods peculiar people are set The coherence
of this part with the rest.
forth in the former parts of the holy Bible: after which followed the Book
of Psalms, which in manner of style, being al in verse, is a distinct part, but
in substance of matter, is an Epitome or brief Sum of al holy Scripture:
most conveniently therefore placed in the mids of the rest, as the Sun
amongst other Planetes, a shining great light in a large house. Now ensues the
third part, containing Divine Instructions, or Rules of good life. A doctrine
most agreeable to Gods hiegh wisdom, and most fitly The contents of Sapiential
books.
commended to Man, his reasonable creature in earth. But besides this principal
subject, as before is noted (that each part participateth with others in
Preface. before Iosue.
their proper contents) so here be many precepts of the Law renewed; sundry
examples of men, and things past repeted; and diverse prophecies uttered of
things to come: though in this part more specially is showed the ground, and
as it were, the very life or soul of the Law, which is Reason, the true Rule
or Directorie wherein al good laws are grounded.

For it both shows what ought to be done, or avoided, and directs man's
judgment to embrace that is good, and to flee from al evil, not only
illuminating the understanding to see that is right and just, but also
disposing the internal affection to desire, love, choose, and prefer the
right path of Gods law, before whatsoever otherwise seems pleasant or
profitable: and so, notwithstanding al dangers, difficulties, distresses,
worldly calamites, and death it self, effectually persuading to persevere to
the end in holy conversation. Al Why they are so called.
which by a general name is called Wisdom: comprising in one word, al good
desires, holy virtues, supernal gifts, godly endeuoures, and the whole
means whereby God is rightly known, and duly served; whereof these five Books,
teaching this most excellent and most necessary manner of life, are called
Sapiential. Nevertheless four of them have also other particular names, as
appareth in their titles. Only the fourth is called the Book of Wisdom, by
appropriation of the general name.

Al five are Canonical and assured holy Scripture: as is showed before: They
are al Canonical Scripture. Solomon is auctor of the three first.
Proem. Annot. Prefac. Tobiae.
and may be further proved of the two later, which Protestants deny. It is
also evident that King Solomon was Auctor of the three former: as S. Ierom, S.
Augustine, and other Fathers prove by the holy text it self. As it is likewise
certain that he either writ, or at least by divine inspiration uttered, much
more then is now extant. For the holy Scripture Other books of Solomon not
extant.
S. Iero, in proem S. Aug. li. 17. c. 20. ^iuii.
(3. Reg. 4.) testifies, that he spoke three thousand Parables: and his Songs
were a thousand and five. He disputed of the trees from the ceder that is in
Libanus, unto the hyssop which comes out of the wall: and he discoursed of
beasts, and fowls, and creeping worms, and fishes. Josephus (li. S. c. 2.
Antiq.) following some other Edition, says his songs were five thousand, and
parables (as the ordinary text has) three thousand. For he deduced a parable
(says Josephus) through out every kind of trees, from the hyssop to the
ceder. In the same manner he treated of beasts, and other living creatures of
the earth, water, and air. For he was not ignorant of any natural thing,
neither omitted to treat thereof, but clerly explicated al their natural
proprieties. Most briefly S. Ierom declares both the Auctor, and A brief sum
of these three:
Prologo galeato.
matter of these three books, saying: Solomon the Peaceable, and amiable of
our Lord Proverbs,
corrects manners: Ecclesiastes,
teaches the nature (of creatures) Canticles.
joins the Church and Christ; and sings the sweet bridal song of the holy
Marriage.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE PROVERBES
THE first book called Proverbs, that is, common and usual pithie Why this
book is called Proverbs and Parables.
sentences, short in words, ample in sense; and Parables, signifying likeness
or similitudes, whereby more important things are understood then expressed;
instructs and exhorts new beginners, to learn, and practice al sorts of
virtues, the only right way to true wisdom and eternal happiness. The contents.
It may be divided into four parts. In the first nine chapters the auctor
interposing certain general precepts, produces wisdom her self inuiting
Divided into four parts.
al men to seek her, for the spiritual profit, they shall thereby enjoy. From
thence to the 25. chap. he gives sundry more particular precepts, as well for
embracing virtues, as shunning of vices. In the next five chapters, more like
precepts of the same auctor, are added by the care of King Ezechias. In the two
last chapters, either an other Auctor, or rather the same under an other title,
commends to al men certain most excellent precepts, received of his mother;
whereto he adioyneth the praise of a right wise woman: prophetically the
Catholic Church.

THE BOOK OF PROVERBES, WHICH THE HERBREWES CALL MISLE.
CHAP. I. The first part* An inuitation to seek wisdom: with some general
precepts.
Parables are profitable to those that love and will learn wisdom. 10. Al are
admonished not to follow the alurements of sinners: 20. but to embrace wisdom;
24. and ruin is threatened to the contemners.
THE Parables of Solomon, the son of David, By these sentencious similitudes
the studious may better conceive and understand true wisdom, and the virtues
belonging thereto.
To know" wisdom, and discipline: profound and solid vvitte.
subtilitie may be given to Not only yongmen and inexperienced but also the
wise may learn more wisdom by these patables.
wise man hearing shall be wiser: and he that understands, shall be fit to
govern others.
shall possess gouernementes. He shall understand Fear of our Lord, that is,
reverence of his divine Majesty with desire duly to serve him, and never to
offend him, is the first degree in ascending to perfect wisdom: which
consists not only in the understanding but also in action.
The fear of our Lord is the beginning of f hear the discipline of thy
father, and leave not the law of thy mother: that grace may be added to thy
head, and a g if sinners shall h a net is cast in vain before the eyes of
them that have wings. Them selves also lie inwayte against their own blood
and practice deceites against their own souls. So the The second to resist
evil suggestions.
shall be at hand: when tribulation, and distress shall come upon you: Then shall
they invoke me, and I will not The proper remedy against such alurements is
to be vvatchful, and to ^ee from them.
for that they have hated discipline, and not received the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. I.
2 Wisdom.] As well in these Sapiential books, as in other holy Scriptures,
Three kinds of wisdom.
and sacred writers, the word wisdom has three significations. Sometimes it
imports the Divine Attribute called Gods wisdom; sometimes supernatural
wisdom given to men by the Holy Ghost; and sometimes it signifies mere Divine
Attributes are not qualiries in God, but his substance.
humane wisdom, gotten by the natural light of reason and man's industry. The
first, as like wise other Divine Attributes, Gods Power, Goodness, Justice,
Truth, Mercy and the like, are not qualities, or other accidents in God, as
the same terms signify in creatures. For in God there is no Accident, but al
in him is this Divine Substance and Essence, whose diverse Excellences are
called by such names as man's capacity can better conceive: and so Gods wisdom
is God himself: and is approprieted to the second Person of the blessed
Trinitic, Wisdom increated is God himself.
as Power is approprieted to God the Father, and Goodness to the Holy Ghost.
In this sense: chap 3. v. 16. is said: Our Lord by wisdom founded the earth
etc. The second is called (Sap. 3. v. 25.) the vapore of Gods power, and a
pure emanation (orinfluence) of the glory of Almighty God, and so is a
participation of Wisdom the gift of Holy Ghost.
Divine increated wisdom called also divine, according to a certain anologie,
or similitude of Gods own wisdom, and is the principal gift of the Holy
Ghost, by vvhieh God is righstly known, and duly served, including al other
supernal gifts and virtues, vvherof is treated in these books, and so which
al men are invited, with assured promise of celestial and eternal revvard. The
Humane wisdom.
third vvisdome is mere humane, gotten by natural vvitte and study, such as
Philosophers have, knovving many truths, but mixed with many errors, and
much ignorance, truly called worldly wisdom, serving only for this world.
But the second kind, which is as asparkecle of Gods wisdom, makes meu,
otherwise ignorant and of small capacity, rightly wise in deed, the true
servants of God, and enheriters of the kingdom of heaven, as these books do
most copiously teach.

24. Because I called and you refused] God voursaffeth four benefits of
grace:: Four benefits of God Vocation, Help. Instruction, Repreheasion.
to every man, al necessary and sufficient for his salvation: 1. He calls
al by preaching, or good inspiration. 2. He offers help. 3. He instructs
the ignorant what is good, that they may choose it if they will. 4. And
reprehendeth evil, that they may shun it. They therefore that neglect this
manifold grace in this life, shall without al remedy be damned, being to late
to repent in an other world. For then they shall cry and not be heard. v. 28.

33. But he that shall hear me.] Contrariwise those that accept Gods grace, and
Reward of works.
cooperate therewith, shall have eternal rest and joy. The very same, which S.
Paul teaches, 2. Cor. 5. v. 10. Every one shall receive the proper things of
the body, according as he has done, either good or evil.

CHAP. II. Gaining of wisdom brings much good, 10. and auoydeth much evil:
16. delivering from error of Idolaters and Haretikes.
MY son, This frequent manner of proposing the way and means to wisdom If
thou vvilt receive my words, etc. shows most cuidently the power of man's
free vvil.
if thou will receive my words, and wilt Not every desire, or slight seeking
of vvi^dom sufficieth, but such laborious seeking is required, as a covetous
man s^ekerb^re^sure which he knows to be hid in the ground.
as money, and Sap. 3. v. 32. 10. v. ^.
shall thou understand justice, and judgment, and equity, and every good
path. If wisdom shall enter into thy heart, and c leave the right way, and walk
by dark from " the strange woman, and from the forener, which mollifieth her
words, forsakes the guide of her youth, A description of peruers sinners
especially of heretics.
is bowed down to death, and her paths to hell. Al " that

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
13. Who leave the right way.] Generally this description of wicked men,
agrees to all that commit and persist in mortal sin, whether they walked
Four marks of an heretic. 1. He forsakes the known faith.
right at any time before or no; but most especially shows the properties of
heretics: who forsake and leave the direct, ancient, beaten, known way of
Isaiae. 35. v. ^.
the Catholic Church, and teach new obscure doctrines, not heard of, or not
approved in our forefathers time Secondly (v. 14) they glory in their own
devises, and rejoice in most wicked things, as in seducing multitude 2. He
glories in his own invention.
of peoples, to rebel against their Catholic Princes, and other Superiors
spiritual and temporal, in breaking vows; in despising good works; trusting
to only faith, and that not the Catholic faith of al true Christians, but
every one his particular persvvasion, that himself is just, and shall be saved,
which by their own doctrine, none is bond to believe of an others state, but
of his own only. In so much that the chiefest point of a Protestants imagined
faith, is not a general Article, which al do or should believe, but a most
particular and singular fantasy, which each one must conceive of himself, or
herself. Thirdly (v. 16.) Heresy, called here the strange and forrene woman,
tempereth 3 Teaches pleasing things.
her words, to please the itching ears of her auditorie, framing her
doctrine to the humor of those, whom she seeks to pervert. The same which
the Apostle says in other words, by svvere speeches and benedictions Romans
1^. v. 18.
they seduce the hearts of innocents Fourthly (v. 19.) Those that do enter into
4. Admits no judge but himself.
error of heresy, shall not return, that is, very hardly and rarely return
into the right way of life; the reason whereof the same Apostle yeldeth,
because an ^it. ^. v. 11.
heretic is condemned by his own judgment. For being in error, and
admitting no judge but himself, he parts from the Church, excludes the
means of better iustruction, and through his erroneous judgment, remains in
damnable opinion, and so in the state of damnation.

CHAP. III. Wisdom exhorts to keep Gods law (giving long life) to observe
mercy, and truth. 5. to confide in God, 7. to fear, 9. and honor him, 11. to
take his correction gladly (13. for all good things follow wisdom) 27. to releue
the needy without delay, 30. not to contend with the wicked, nor to imitate
them. 33. The evil shall fail, and the godly shall prosper.
MY son, It avails little to hear good instructions, except we(...) them in
memory.
forget not my law, and let thy not ^n books only but in the heart.
heart keep days, and years of life, and peace. Let not and ^ut them in
execution.
mercy and know also that al thy streingth is in Go^* in whom th^^ m^^st
(...) ^^ust, not in th^^ o(...) (...)e
Have confidence in our (...) and(...) (...)those that endeavor (...) God, is a
(...) of his s^u^ur toward them; and therefore his other promises which seem
to be temporal, are to be understood of the next life.
for whom our Lord loves he chasticeth and as God revvardeth as it were with
both hands promising eternal life,
Length of days in her right hand, and competent means in this life.
riches and glory Her ways are beautiful M(...) for the words of thy mouth
grace to thy jaws. Then shall thou walk confidently Alms in season (...)
vvorth to that which is differred long.
tomorow I will give to thee: whereas thou may give forth with. Practice not
evil against thy friend, deluder is an abomination of our Lord, and his
communication is with the simple. There is poverty from our Lord

CHAP. IIII. The wiseman exhorts others by his own example to seek wisdom,
14. to decline from the wicked, and to imitate the just, 23. to guide well the
heart, mouth, and feet.
CHILDREN hear ye the fathers discipline, and attend As Solomon was instructed
by his father king David so he teaches others, the right order how to learn
wisdom.
I also was the son of The first part of wisdom is to desire it. For nothing
hind res^ from being ^ust but that justice is not desired S. Aug in Psalm. 118.
v. 20.
The beginning life to those that find them, and health to al flesh. With all
As the heart is the principal part of the body, so the vvil is the chiefest
power of the soul: from which good or evil proceeds.
heart, because life proceeds from it. Remove from thee a froward mouth, and
let detracting

CHAP. V. Again wisdom dehorteth from fornication (carnal and spiritual) 6.
showing that in the end sinners shall see and feel the effect of their folly:
20. which God sees and will punish.
MY son, attend to my wisdom, and to my prudence incline To avoid al
impiety it is first of al necessary, not to think, speak, nor hear
unlawful things.
cogitations, By woman is generally understood concupiscence of what sin
soever, as. chapter 1. v. 10. and ch 3. v. 33 chap 4. v. 14.
woman: for the lips of an harlot are as a honey comb distilling, and her
throat netter then oil. But The world the flesh and the devil are strangers.
to strangers, And cruel enemies that render for revvard eternal damnation.
cruel. Lest perhaps strangers be Good doctrine is to be imperted to men of
sincere intention.
Let thy fountains be derived abroad, and in the streates no to contemners and
obstinate in^idels.
Have them alone, neither let strangers a most grateful fawn: let her breasts
inebriate thee at al time, in her love be thou delighted continually. Why art
thou seduced

CHAP. VI. He that is surety for an other, must have care to discharge that he
promises. 6. The slouthful must learn diligence of the emmotte. 12. The
description of an Apostata. 16. Above other six bad things, God detesteth the
sower of discord. 20. Al are exhorted to keep Gods law, 24. namely to flee
fornication, and al occasions thereof.
MY son,:: if thou shall be surety for thy friend, and The vvisman does not
absolutely disvvade from al manner of suretishippe, but from rashly, or
unadvisedly answering for others. And especially exhorts to use al diligence
in performing, or causing others to perform that which is promised or
couenanted.
have made fast thy hand to a stranger, thou art entrapped Every one that
sins vvittingly and of malice refusing to obey God, imployeth his mouth,
eyes, feet, hands and al parts with a wicked heart and intention to
peruerte others: most proper to heretics, apostates from the faith.
Apostata, a lying tongue, hands that shede innocent blood, a heart The forme^
six are al damnable, but this seventh is most detestable, because it is
opposite to the chief virtue charity, it breaks unity, and is the proper
sin of the devil.
sows discordes. My son keep the Al occasions of sin, especially
probable are to be shunned.
Can a man Theift is also mortal sin, against the seventh commandment, but
not so great as ad^lterie.
no great fault,

CHAP. VII. He further exhorts youngmen to seek wisdom, 5. especially to flee
from the intisements of harlots, largely describing the same, 22. and the ruin
of them that are so deluded.
MY son, Because tentations still occur in this life, and man is frail,
good exhortations, and earnest admonitions must also be continually inculcated
as here the vvisman often repeteth and much urges the same good and necessary
aduises to embrace wisdom and to walk still in the way of virtue, especially
to flee from vices, and dangers of sin.
keep my words, and my precepts hide I see little ones, I behold a foolish
youngman, which passes Sinners after consent given to tentations, are as
inconsiderate of their own state, and of their perile and ruin, as an ox,
when he is led to the shamles, or a ^^rd allured with a ba^e, that ^^^eth
into the snare or n^^te.
as an ox led to be a victime, and as a lamb playing the wanton, and not
knowing that he is drawn as a fool to bonds, til the arow pearse his liver:
as if a bird should

CHAP. VIII. Wisdom is preached in conspicious and most frequented places, that
none may pretend want of admonition, 7. her doctrine is true, godly,
profitable, and necessary to al sorts of men. 12. wisdom (increated which is
God himself) is eternal. 32. and brings eternal happiness.
DOES not wisdom cry, and prudence give her voice? True wisdom directing to
good life and so to eternal salvation, is only found in the visible Church
standing upon a mountain, not hid in corners or obscure places.
in the high and lofty tops over the way, the very doors she speaks,
saying: O men, to you I cry, These singular praises perteine to the increated
wisdom, God himself, from whom proceeds wisdom given to men by the Holy
Ghost. See Annot. chapter 1. v. 2.
wisdom dwell in counsel, and am present in learned cogitations. The fear of
our Lord hates evil: arrogancy, and God much prefers man before al other
corporal creatures.
my delights to be with blessed are they, that keep my ways. Hear ye
discipline,

CHAP. IX. Wisdom having built her house with seven pillars, inuiteth al to a
prepared banquette, 11. promising to multiply joyful days. 13. Folly inciteth
^e her contrary banquet of stolen water and hid bread.
WISDOM " has built herself an house, she has S. Cyprian li. 2. ep. 3.
cites this whole passage of Christ's Sacrifice in the forms of bread and wine.
eat ye my bread, and drink Where is no hope of amendment prudence directs
us not to admonish, nor rebuke sinners, le^t without an^e (...) ^e procure
emnitie, charity also requires rather to expect better opportunity, lest the
offender become worse by our admonition.
not the scorner lest he hate thee. But when there is hope of good, every one
is bond, especially superiors to correct offenders. S. Aug. li. 1. c. 9. de
ciuit. S. Basil. regulis fuse disput. 158.
Rebuke

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
^. Wisdom has built herself a house.] According to the literal sense, wherein
God built his Church with spiritual Pastors and Rites of Religion in the old
Testament.
the mystical is grounded (both intended by the Holy Ghost) Wisdom which is
God himself, Creator and Conseruer of al things, whose special good pleasure,
and delight is to be with men, built his house the Church, first in the
Patriarchs, Prou. 8. v. 3^.
Priests, Prophets and his other faithful servants in the old Testament;
partly before; but more conspicously in the people of Israel, establishing the
same with seven, that is (according to the frequent phrase of holy Scripture)
with many pillars, Pastors and chief gouerners, by whom the whole people were
directed in all spiritual causes; as the Psalmist likewise induces God, Psalm.
74. Galat. 2.
saying: I have confirmed the pillars thereof. And as S. Paul afterward calls
S. Peter, S. James, and S. John, pillars. In this house wisdom also prepared a
banquette, appointed victimes of diverse sorts, as gratful Sacrifices to God,
and thereto invited al men in much better order, and to their more profit, then
the adultresse woman, folly and wicked concupiscence, in cites to her
carnal and vvordlie pleasures, which bring to eternal ruin. And for this
purpose, God never ceased to send Priests and Prophets to inuit the people
of Israel, to this strong tower fensed with wales. In the Allegorical
sense, the same divine increated Wisdom, the second Person in the B. Trinity,
the Divine The same are more excellent in the Church of Christ.
WORD coeternal to the Father, built himself a house, his humane body in the
virgins womb, and thereunto, as to the head, adjoined the members, his
mystical body the Church, immolated victimes of Martyrs, prepared the Table in
bread and wine, where also appears his Priesthood, according to the Order
of Melchisedec, and called thereto such as before were unwise, and of small
understanding: because as the Apostle says: God chose the vveake of this
world to confound the strong. As S. Augustine expounds this passage li. 1.
Cor. 1.
17. c. 20. de ciuit. and q. 51. veter. and noui. Test. to. 4. The second part.
Sentencious moral precepts.


THE PARABLES OF SOLOMON.
This repetition of the title signifies, that the sentences which follow are
more properly called Parables, then the former. From which they also differ in
manner of utterance, by the figure Antithesis, for most part opposing, and
comparing contrary virtues and vices, shevving their contrary effects; with
How these Parables following differ from the former.
great elegancie, especially in the original tongue; which could not be so
fully expressed in Greek, nor Latin, much less in vulgar language. But are the
same in sense, though often obscure by reason of the Hebrew phrase, shortness
of sentences, and so without any certain connection, that we can not with
perspicuitie, comprehend the sum thereof in brief contents after the
ordinary manner before the chapters And therefore have thought it better for the
vulgar reader, to set down in the margent of the twenty chapters next
following, Why the contents of the twenty chapters following are put in the
margent.
in brief terms, the virtues, or other good things (rather then the bad, not
having place for both) commended in every sentence* For though the same be not
always expressed in the text, yet they may be understood by their opposite
vices Whosoever desires further explication, may find many of these divine
sentences, excellently expounded by S. Ierom, S. Augustine. S. Gregory and
other Fathers in several places. Or read S. Bedas Commentaries upon this whole
book To. 4. vel apud S. Ierom. To. 7. Or amongst late writers, our learned
countriman D. Radulphus Bainus: Bishop Iansenius; and F. Peltanus.

CHAP. X.
Wisdom in general.
is the sorrow of his mother.

Justice.
shall deliver from death.

Confidence in God.
and the deceitful practices of the impious he will overthrow.

Industry.
strong gets riches.

Who so trusts to lies feeds the winds: and the self Truth.
same man follows the flying birds.

Diligence.
snorteth in summer, is the son of confusion.

Equity.
iniquity covers the mouth of the impious.

Good fame.
the impious shall rotte.

Desire to learn.
with lips.

Sincerity.
that depraueth his ways, shall be manifest.

Unfeigned freindshipe. Whole some talk.
fool in lips shall be beaten.



Charity. Prudent speech. Discretion inspeaking.






Just gain.
fear of the poor their poverty.

Just intention.
unto sin.

Love to be corrected.
fors keth reprehensions, erreth

Internal and external charity. Moderate spe^^h Sincerity of heart.
unwise.





The lips of the just teach very many: but they that are Love of doctrine.
untaught, shall die in the penury of wit.

Spiritual riches.
affliction be joined to them.

Sorrow for sin.
is prudence to a man.

Remorfe of conscience
to the just their desire shall be given.

Justice in general
as an everlasting fundation.

Diligence.
to them, that sent him.

Fear of God
impious shall be shortened.

Piety.
impious shall perish.

Observation of Gods law, fulfulling al justice.
is to them that work evil.



Speaking and Meditating good things.
of the froward shall perish.



CHAP. XI.
Equity
an equal weight is his will.

Humility.
where humility, there also wisdom.

Sincerity.
of the peruers shall waste them.

Spiritual riches.
deliver from death.

Piety.
impious shall fall in his impiety.

Justice.
unjust shall be caught in their deceitful practices.

Care of the other life.
more: and the expectation of the careful shall perish.

Future joy.
given for him.

The dissembler with his mouth deceives his friend: but Truth in words.
the just shall be delivered by knowledge.

Common good. Public joy.
in the destruction of the impious there shall be praise.



True freindshipe.
will hold his peace.

Fidelity.
is faithful, concealeth the thing committed of his friend.

Good government.
is health where is much counsel.

Prudence in suretishipe.
but he that is ware of the snares, shall be secure.

Diligence.
have riches.

Mercy.


Justice.
sows justice, is a faithful reward.

Clemency.
death.

Sincerity.
is in them that walk simply.

Just dealing.
seed of the just shall be saved.

Internal virtue. Expectation of glory. Alms deeds.






Benevolence.
that inebriateth himself shall also be inebriated.

Care of the poor.
but blessing upon the head of them that sell.

Good desires.
that is a searcher after evil things, shall be oppressed of them.

Trust in Gods goodness.
as a green leaf.

Frugalitie.
he that is a fool shall serve the wise.

The fruit of the just man a tree of life: and he that gains Spiritual
instruction Straict way of salvation.
souls, is wise.



CHAP. XII.
Love of discipline.
hates reprehensions is unwise.

Progress in virtue.
that trusts in his own cogitation, does impiously.

Piety.
of the just shall not be moved.

Diligent industry.
in his bones, she that does things worthy of confusion.

Desire of justice.
of the impious are fraudulent.

Sincerity in words
mouth of the just shall deliver them.

Justice.
of the just shall be permanent.

Sound doctrine.
and foolish, shallye open to contempt.

Contentment of mind.
is glorious and wants bread.

Compassion.
of the impious are cruel.

Diligent travel.
that purseweth idleness is a very fool.

He that is delighted in much quaffing of wine, leaves contumely Temperance.
in his munitions.

defense
muniment of the most Just punishment of the wicked. Guard of the tongue.
Godly instructions: and good deeds.
wicked: but the root of the just shall prosper.





Yelding to good counsel.
hears counsels.

A fool by and by she weth his anger: but he that dissembleth Toleration of
injuries.
injuries is wise.

True testimony.
justice: but he that lies, is a fraudulent witness.

Advised promising.
sword of conscience: but the tongue of the wise is health.

Considerate testimony.
hasty witness, frames a tongue of lying.

Pacification.
follows them that give counsels of peace.

Justice in general.
but the impious shall be replenished with evil.

Fidelity.
do faithfully please him.

Prudent silence.
the unwise provoke folly.

Resistance of tentation*
shall serve under tributes.

Alacrity in good works.
a good word he shall be made glad.

Freindshipe*
of the impious shall deceive them.

Honest industry.
of a a (...) man.
man shall be the price of gold.

Good life.
death.

CHAP. XIII.
^^^al fear.
is a scorner, hears not when he is rebuked.

Sound doct^e.
good things: but the soul of the preuaricateurs is wicked.

Discretion in speech.
is unadvised to speak shall feel evils.

Constant endeavor.
work, shall be made fat.

Truth in words and deeds.
and shall be confounded.

Justice.
the sinner.

True acknowlegement of temp^ al state.
and there is as it were poor, whereas he is in much riches.

The redemption of a man's life, his riches: but he that is Mediocritie of
riches.
poor, bears not reprehension.

Sincere conscience.
impious shall be extinguished.

Humility.
that do al things with counsel, are ruled by wisdom.

Just gain.
little and little is gathered with the hand, shall be multiplied.

Speedy performance of promise. Good report.
desire of coning.



Guilful souls err in sins: the just are merciful and have pity. Plain
dealing. Good instruction. True doctrine.






Prudence.
is a fool opens folly.

Faithful message.
legate, is health.

Desire to learn.
but he that yeldeth to him that rebukes, shall be glorified.

Hate of sin.
detest them that flee evil things.

Conversation with the good.
fools shall be made like.

Justice.
repayed.

Succession.
the substance of the sinner is kept for the just.

Frugalitie.
others they are gathered with our judgment.

Chatisment.
him does instantly nurture him.

Contentment of state.
impious insatiable.

CHAP. XIIII.
Frugal industry.
her hands destroy that also which is built.

He that walks in the right way, and fears God is despised Fear of God.
of him, that goes an infamous way.

Gnard of the tongue. Diligent labores.
of the wise keep them.



Truth in all speech.
utters a lie.

Seek wisdom modestly.
of the prudent is easy.

Feloshipe with the wise.
of prudence.

Knowledge of ourselves. Detestation of s^ane. Internal comforth. Contempt of
their world.
the imprudence of fools erreth.

A fool will ^ugh at sin, and among the just grace shall abide.





The Catholic faith.
later ends thereof lead to death.

Spiritual joy.
occupies the later ends of joy.

Reward of works.
man shall be above him.

Believe not al reports.
his steps.

Mature consideration.
leapeth over and is confident.

Patience.
is odious.

Desire of solid knowledge
1. Cor. 14. v. 20.
expect knowledge.

Piety shall be ^evvarded.
before the gates of the just.

Compassion of the poor.
freindes of the rich be many.

Alms deeds.
pity on the poor, shall be blessed.

Mercy and (...).
things.

In every work there shall be abundance: but where Good deeds with few words.
Right use of riches
many words are, there is oftentimes poverty.



Versip^^^ a (...), ^^turnetrait.
dissen^bier Tiue testimony as v. 5.
utters lies.

Fear to offend God preuen (...)
his children there shall be hope.



Procu(...) and fid(...) in subjects. Patience.
fewnes of people the ignominy of the prince.



Sincere intention.
of the bones.

Compassion.
but he honoreth him, that has pity on the poor.

Confidence in justice.
hops in his death.

Instruction of the ignorant.
all the unlearned.

Public justice.
miserable.

Industry in every man.
that is unprofitable shall sustain his anger.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XIIII.
12. A way which seems just.] If any Jews, Turks, or Heretics lead a
Without true faith none can be saved.
moral good life in this world, it seems both to themselnes, and to other rude
people, tha^ they are in a right way of salvation, but their error in faith
leads them to eternal damnation.

30 Health of the heart.] As soundnes of the heart conserueth the rest of the
same body in life, so a pure intention often excuses from mortal sin, as in
errors Sincere intention excuieth some errors.
committed of probable, not of gross, nor affected ignorance. But secret S.
Greg. li. 5. c. 34. Moral.
envy in the heart infecteth and putrifieth man's actions, and destroys the
works that seemed good: which can no more endure strict examination in the day
of judgment, then a rotten cloth can abide washing.

CHAP. XV.
Meeknes.
up fury.

Discretion.
fools boyleth forth folly.

In every place the eyes of our Lord behold the good and Gods omniscience.
the evil.

Caulmnes of speech.
shall break the spirit.

Love to be corrected.
regards reprehensions, shall become more prudent.

In abundant justice there is greatest force: but the cogitations Desire to
fulfill al justice.
of the impious shall be rooted out.

Diligence in teaching others.
fruits of the impious is perturbation.



Purity of heart.
the vows of the just are acceptable.



Learn of good men. Al secrets known to God. Harken to good admonitions. A
cherful heart is de^^^ous to ^erne.
he that hates reprehensions shall dye.









A quiet mind.
were a continual feast.

Contentment w^^h sufficiency.
and insatiable.



Patience.
those that are raised.

Diligence.
of the just is without offense.

H^^our of parents.
man despises his mother.

D^^^r^^^on.
steps.

Cogitations are dissipated where there is no counsel: but Desire to live well.
where many counselors are, they are confirmed.

Counsel in season.
in due time is best.

To him that is well trained in good works, heaven gates are open. Honest
thoughts and words. A liberal mind
The path of life above the learned, that he may decline from the lawest hell.







By mercy and faith sins are purged: and by the fear of our Mercy and
justice.
Lord every one declineth from evil.

Obedience.
the impious redoundeth with evils.

God assisteth the just.
prayers of the just.

Words of edification.
fatteth the bones.

Love of discipline.
the mids of the wise.

and Admonition.
yeldeth to reprehensions, is a possessour of the heart.

Humility.
goes before glory.

CHAP. XVI. Gods grace necessary in every good action. Man's judgment is not
secure. Commend thine affairs to God. Gods providence. Punishment of sin.
Equity.









v^pu^ished.
innocent.

The beginning of a good way, is to do justice: and it is more acceptable with
God, then to immolate hosts.

By mercy and truth iniquity is redeemed: and in the fear Mercy*
of our Lord evil is avoided.

Devotion.
convert also his enemies to peace.

Just gain. Necessity of Gods grace.




God assisteth superiors in governing their subjects. Just balance do please
God and good kings.
Divination is in the lips of the king, his mouth shall not err in judgment.





Righteousness.
things shall be beloved.

Fear, and reverence of authority.
man will pacify it.



Love of wisdom.
prudence, because it is more precious then silver.

Justice in general.
keeps his way.

Humility.
shall be exalted.

Meknes.
spoils with the proud.

Hope in God.
hops in our Lord, is blessed.

Mildnes.
sweet in speech shall find greater things.

Teaching others.
the doctrine of fools foolishnes.

Sincere heart.
grace to his lips.

Sweetness in conversation.
health of the bones.

True faith and Religion.
(...) 12.
ends thereof lead to death.

Proper industry.
because his mouth has compelled him:

The impious man diggeth evil, and in his lips fire burns. Charity.


Common good.
separateth princes.

True freindshipe.
not good.

Sincere thoughts.
his lips brings evil to pass.

Holy oldage.
ways of justice.

Patience.
his mind, then the ouerthrower of cities.

Gods providence.
Lord.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI.
1. It pertains to man to prepare the hart*] For the better understanding of
this A general rule that one place of holy Scripture is not contrary to an
other.
and other hard places of holy Scripture, this general rule ever approved by all Christians, is most necessary, that al holy Scripture is true and
certain, as being al indicted by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of truth: and so
one place is never contrary to an other, though at first sight they may so
seem to man's understanding. For by this place the Pelagians would prove, that
man can of himself, without the help of Gods grace, begin a good thing,
though without this help he cannot perform it, because it is here said: that
it petteyneth to man to prepare the heart: that is, ^o begin a good thing. But
S. Augustine li* 2. c. 8. cont d^as Epistolas Palag Joan. 15. 2. Cor. 3.
shows that it may not be so understood the cause so it should be contrary
to that saying of our Savior* Without me you can do nothing; and that of S.
Paul We are not sufficient to think any thing of our selves, as of our
selves: but our sufficiency is of God. Which two evident places, with
otherlike, do show that this place has an other different sense, from that
which the Pelagians gather. An^ so S. Augustine, and other Fathers teach, that
Gods grace is necessary both to begine and to prosecute any good work.
the vvisman here affirms not, that man of himself can prepare his heart, or
begin a good work, but that it pertains to man to prepare his heart,
presupposing help of Gods grace, and having so begun, God also governs the
tongue, and by more grace directs it ^o speak those things well, which the
heart purposed, and disposed to be uttered; without which help none is able,
neither to begin any meritorious work, nor to prosecute, nor perfect that
is well begun. The like sentence follows in the 9. verse: The heart of man
disposes his way: but it perteyneth to our Lord to direct his progress;
signifying in both places, that after a thing is well begun (which can not
be without the help of Gods grace) yet it can not proceed well, without more
grace, still directing and streingthning man's freevvil.

CHAP. XVII.
Peace.
with brawling.

A wise servant shall rule over foolish children, and divide Wisdom in general.
inheritance among brethren.

Purification.
Lord proves the the hearts.

Feloshipe with the good. Commiseration.
obeys lying lips.



Succession.
glory of children their fathers.

Gravity in speech.
prince.

Desire of eternal life.
whither soever he turns himself, he understands wisely.

Remitting offenses.
other word repeteth it, seperateth the confederate.

Discrete correction.
hundred stripes with a fool.

Concord.
shall be sent against him.

Gentienes.
then a fool trusting to himself in his own folly.

Gratitude.
from his house.

Conservation of peace.
he suffer contumely, he forsakes judgment.

Just censure.
just, both are abominable before God.

Spiritual riches.
not buy wisdom?

He that makes his house high, seeks ruin: and he that refuses Humility.
to learn, shall fall into evils.

Constancy.
in distresses.

Carefulnes in promising.
his friend.

Concord.
that exalts the door, seeks ruin.

Sincerity.
that turns his tongue, shall fall into evil.

Education of youth.
the father rejoice in a fool.

A joyful mind makes a flourishing age: a sorrowful spirit Alacrity of heart.
dries up the bones.

Just judgment*
may pervert the paths of judgment.

Contempt of the world.
fools are in the ends of the earth.

^^lial obedience.
of the mother that bare him.

Obedience to Magistrates.
prince, which judges right.

Discretion in speaking.
the learned man is of a precious spirit.

Moderate silence.
if he close his lips, a man of understanding.

CHAP. XVIII.
Constantamitie.
shall ever be subject to reproach.

Harken to good counsel.
say those things which are in his heart.

Speedy repentance.
contemns: but ignominy and reproach follow him.

a wise man.
man: and a Wise discourse.
stream over flowing the fountain of wisdom.

Equity.
good, that thou decline from the truth of judgment.

Study of peace.
provoke brawles.

Guard of the tongue.
the ruin of his soul.

Avoid secret bate makers.
the same come even to the inner part of the belly.

Fear casts down the slothful: and the souls of the effeminate Fortitude.
shall be hungry.

Constant labor.
him that destroys his own works.

Confidence in God.
to it and shall be exalted.

Spiritual riches.
a strong wall compassing him about.

Before he be broken, the heart of a man is exalted: and Humility.
before he be glorified, it is humbled.

Consideration in answering.
a fool, and worthy of confusion.

Quietness of spirit.
that is casie to be angry who can sustain?

Desire to learn.
wise seeks doctrine.

Alms deeds.
before princes.

Acknowleging of faults. Use of lote to make agreement. ^^^ternal concord.
Godhe instructions.
shall search him.







Right use of the tongue.
shall eat the fruits thereof.

A wives virtue is her best dowry. Meeknes.
and has received a pleasure of our Lord.



Amity with (...).
brother.

CHAP. XIX.
Honest poverty.
then a rich writhing his lips, and unwise.

Knowledge of ourselves.
that is hasty with his feet shall stumble.

Man's own will the cause of evil. Spiritual riches secure. True testimony.
in his mind against God.





Liberality.
of him that gives gifts.

Industrious travel.
friends have departed far from him.

He that purse weth words only, shall have nothing: but he Solid doctrine.
that is possessour of the mind, loves his soul, and the keeper of prudence
shall find good things.

True testimony.
speaks lies shall perish.

Wise and fit magistrates. Pa(...)ce ^^ teachers. ^oy^ltie to kings, and
Pr^n^es. Don estical peace.
princes.







A good wife is Gods gift.
properly a prudent wife.

Diligence.
shall be an hungered.

Obedience.
he that neglects his way, shall die.

Alms deeds.
will repay him the like.

Moderate chast^^me^t.
set not thy soul.

Patience.
shall take away violently, he shall add an other thing.

Follow good counsel.
wise in thy later ends.

Trust in God.
Lord shall be permanent.

Good will to help the poor. Fear of God.
lying man.



Diligent travel.
does he put it to his mouth.

Just correction.
but if thou rebuke a wiseman he will understand discipline.

Honor of parents.
ignominious and unhappy.

Desire to learn.
the words of knowledge.

An unjust witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of True testimony.
the impious deuoureth iniquity.

Fear of eternal punishment.
for the bodies of fools.

CHAP. XX.
Sobriety.
whosoever is delighted therewith shall not be wise.

Obedience to Princes.
that provoke him, sins also against his own soul.

Concord.
but al fools meddle with contumelies.

Industry.
beg therefore in the summer, and it shall not be given him.

Profound counsel.
man shall draw it out.

Fidelity.
find?

Sincerity.
children.

Execution of Justice.
al evil with his look.

Nece^sitie of grace. ^^quitie.




Good toward ^^^es
clean and right.

Right use of senses. Diligent travel Prudence.






Knowledge is (...)ewel.
vessel the lips of knowledge.

Secu(...) in ^^e^^snipe.
for strangers take a pledge from him.

Truth.
mouth shall be filled with the grauelstone.

Counsel in war.
to be handled by gouernmentes.

Meddle not with him that reuealeth mysteries, and walks Consult with the
faithful.
fraudulently, and dilateth his lips.

Honor of parents.
extinquished in the mids of darkness.

Law full gain.
in the later end shall lack blessing.

Meeknes.
deliver thee.

Equity.
a deceitful balance is not good.

Trust in Gods providence.
men can understand his own way?

Performance of vows.
retracte the vows.

Public justice.
a triumphant arch.

Purity of mind.
all the secrets of the belly.

Three kingly virtues.
by clemency.

Prudence with fortitude. Punishment of sins.
oldmen a gray head.



CHAP. XXI.
Gods providence.
hand of our Lord: whither soever he will, he shall incline it.

ch 14. v. 12. and 16 v. 2.
weighs the hearts.

Mercy and judgment.
Lord, then victimes.

Humility.
lamp of the impious sin.

Fortitude.
but every sluggard is always in poverty.

Truth.
and witles, and shall stumble at the snares of death.

Equity.
because they would not do judgment.

The perverse way of a man is strange: but he that is clean, Right in heart.
his work is right.

Domestical peace.
with a brawling woman, and in a common house.

Commiseration.
on his neighbor.

Chastisment of sin.
wiser: and if he follow the wiseman, he will take knowledge.

Charity.
he may draw the impious from evil.

Alms deeds.
also shall cry, and shall not be heard.

Alms in secret.
greatest indignation.

Just punishment.
that work iniquity.

Observation of orders.
in the assembly of giantes.

Temperance and pa^cimonie.
loves wine, and fat things, shall not be rich.

Piety.
the righteous.

Domestical peace. Frugalitie.
and angry woman.



Justice, and mercy.
and glory.

Fortitude.
destroyed the confidence thereof.

Guard of the tongue.
soul from distresses.

Modesty.
anger works pride.

Desires kill the slothful: for his hands would not work Diligent travel.
Liberality.
any thing: all the day he longs and desires: but he that

Sincerity in religion.
offered of wickedness.

True testimony, and found doctrine.
victory.

The impious man malepertly hardens his countenauce: Amendment of faults.
but he that is righteous, corrects his way.

Conformity to Gods will.
counsel against our Lord.

Gods grace necessary.
gives salvation.

CHAP. XXII.
Honest fame.
and gold, good grace.

Contentment with out state.
is the maker of both.

Prudence.
by, and was afflicted with damage.

Poverty of spirit.
glory and life.

Care of the souls health.
keeper of his own soul departs far from them.

Good custom in virtues.
he is old, will not depart from it.

Diligent travel.
is the servant of him that lends.

Equity.
of his wrath, he shall be consumed.

Alms deeds.
he has given to the poor.

He that gives gifts shall purchase victory and honor: but Better to give
then to take.
he that receives takes away the soul of the geuer.

Expel the incorrigible. Cleanes of heart.
him, and cause shall cease and contumelies.



The godly prosper.
of the just are supplanted.

Fortitude.
the streates I am to be slain.

Care of chastity.
whom our Lord is angry, shall fall into it.

Chatisment.
discipline shall drive it away.

He that does calumniate the poor, to increase his riches, Compassion.
himself shall give to a richer, and shall be in need.

Rules of wisdom are necessary, profitable, and upon practice found pleasant:
rightly directing al our thougtes words and deeds.
Incline thine ear, and hear the words of wisemen:



Behold I have described it to thee three manner of ways, in

Do not violence to the poor, because he is poor: neither Care of the poor,
because they are dear to God. Flee from evil company which may corrupt thee.
Avoid suretishipe, le^t thou fall into distress. Keep ancient traditions.
Diligent travel.
oppress the needy in the gate: because our Lord will judge

Be not friend to an angry man, nor walk with a furious

Be not with them, that stick down their hands, and that





CHAP. XXIII.
WHEN thou shall sit to eat with a prince, attend Modesty and discretion
at the table of great persons.
diligently what things are set before thy face: and set a knife in thy
throat, if notwithstanding thou have

Mediocritie of riches, and contentment with mean state. Eat not with a
niggard, lest he be secretly grieved, ou^wardly dissembling, and thyself repent
it. Advise not the incapable.




Eat not with an envious man, and desire not his meats.



The meats which thou had eaten thou shall vomit up: and shall lose thy
beautiful words.



Hurt not orphans: for they are dear to God.
pupils enter not.



Diligent study of wisdom.
of knowledge.

Moderate chatisment profits youth.
strike him with the rod, he shall not die.



My son, if thy mind shall be wise, my heart shall be glad Virtues of children
are joyful to the parents. Contentment with Gods will. Hope of reward. Learn
and practice wisdom. Sobriety and Temperance.
with thee: And my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips

Let not thy heart envy sinners: but in the fear of our Lord

Hear my son, and be wise: and direct thy mind in the way.

Be not in the feasts of great drinkers, nor in their comessations,

Honor of parents.
mother when she is old.

Wisdom most precious.
intelligence.

See. v. 15. and 16.
begotten a wiseman, shall rejoice in him.



Bodelie and spiritual purity.




So brietie alvvayes necessary. Detest drunkenness.
shall see not circumspect, she will kill.

To whom is woe? to whose father woe? to whom browles?

Behold not wine when it waxes yelow, when the color Drunkenness is deceiptful,
thereof shall shine in the glass: it goes in pleasantly, but dangerous,
power abroad poysones.

beastly,
perverse things.

hurtful to others.
and as the governor fast a sleep, the stern being lost.

senseless, and insatiable.
grieved: they drew me, and I felt not: When shall I awake, and find wines
again?

CHAP. XXIIII.
EMVLATE not evil men, neither desire thou to be with Flee evil company, lest
thou be alured to vice. Wisdom and virtues, not wickedness, do prosper
temporally and spiritually.
them: because their mind does meditate robberies,





A wiseman is strong: and a learned man, strong and valiant.

Counsel in wars, and other great affairs.
salvation where many counsels are.



Good purposes* Report well of others* Fortitude.






Works of mercy, according to our ha biliue.
drawn to death cease not to deliver.



Eat honey my son, because it is good, and the honiecombe Wisdom is sweet:
and gives hope.
most sweet to thy throat: so also the doctrine of

Toleration of others imperfections:
just, nor spoil his rest.

For "seven Oftentimes. S. Aug. li. 11. c. 31. ciust.
times shall the just fall, and shall rise again: With out which none lives.
Charity toward enemies.
but the impious shall fall into evil.

When thine enemy shall fall, be not glad, and in his ruin let

Contend not with the most wicked, nor emulate the impious: Have peace with all:
so much as may be. Loial^ie to God and king.
because evil men have not hope of things to come,

Fear our Lord, my son, and the king: and with detracters

Equity in judgment, condemning the guilty, and delivering the innocent, is
very gratful to al.
is not good.





He shall kiss the lips, who answers right words.

Order in all affairs. Discretion in bearing witness. Revenge not.
that afterward thou may build thy house.





I passed by the filde of a slothful man, and by the vineyard of Diligent
labor, and vigilance to provide necessa^ies, and to avoid beggerie.
a foolish man: and behold nettels had filled it wholly, and



A little I say, thou shall sleep, a little thou shall slumber, a

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIIII.
16. Seven times shall the just sal.] A just man, that is to say, Gods true
servant, A just man falling into venial sins is not thereby unjust, nor Gods
enemy.
free from mortal sin, is subject during this life, to many tentations,
imperfections, and may often fall into venial sins, and not lose justice, nor
the true title of a just man (as here he is called) nor become the devils
servant, nor Gods enemy: but through Gods grace helping his weakness, he rises
aga^ne from small sins, still perseuering in Gods favor: whereas contrariwise
the impious falls into evil, towitte, into more and more sin, through
malice, and lack of grace, and rises not so easily. And therefore the wisman
here admonishes, not to lie in wait, nor calumniously to seek impiety in the
house, (that is, in the soul) of the just. For though he commit some
faults, yet he Al sins are not mortal.
rises again, and is not impious, unjust, nor guilty of mortal crime, as the
wicked man is.

CHAP. XXV. The 2. part. More Parables of Solomon gathered by others. Gods
works are not al reveled. Kings have some secrets. Public justice and
punishment of sin. Modesty, and Humility.







Take away the rust from silver, and there shall comeforth a





Care of others fame.
brawle: lest afterward thou can not amend it, when thou have dishonored thy
friend.

Treat thy cause with thy friend, and reveal not a secret to Compose
controversies secretly, rather then contend in public court. Speak in due
time. Prudent admonition. Diligence in public affairs. Performance of
promised industry. Meeknes.
a stranger: lest perhaps he insult against thee, when he

Grace and frendshipe deliver (...) ^eare.
: which keep to thyself, lest thou become reprochful.











Temperance.
perhaps being filled thou vomit it up.

Modesty.
some time having his fill he hate thee.

A dart, and sword, and a sharp arrow, a man that speaks True testimony.
false testimony against his neighbor.

A rotten tooth, and weary foot, he that hops upon the Trust not a
dissembler.
unfaithful in the day of distress, and that loses his cloak

Vinegar in A consuming (...) hard earth.
nither, he that sings songs to a naughty heart. Strive not with the
incorrigible. Alacrity.
As a moth the garment, and a worm the wood: so the sadness of a man hurts
the heart.

If thine enemy shall hunger, give him meat: if he thirst, Charity toward
enemies
give him water to drink: for thou shall heap hot coals Romans 12.
upon his head, and our Lord will reward thee.

Hear not detraction.
that detracteth.

Domestical peace.
a brawling woman, and in a common house.

Joy of well doing.
country.

Profession of truth.
the just falling before the impious.

Humility in knowledge.
he that is a searcher of the majesty, shall be oppressed of the glory.

Government of the tongue.
man that can not repress his spirit in speaking.

CHAP. XXVI.
Advance not the vicious.
glory indecent for a fool.

Patience in false sclander.
he list: so a curse uttered in vain shall light upon some man.

Chastisment.
the back of the unwise.

Answer a fool wisely: detecting his folly.
made like to him.



Place fit men in office:
words by a foolish messenger.

Wise men in authority:
in the mouth of fools.

Virtuous in honor: and Learned to teach. Make fools to keep silence. Return
not to sormer sins. Humble opinion of thy self. Fortitude. Profitable
labors. At least some good work. Love not idleness.
that gives honor to the unwise.

As if a thorn should grow in the hand of the drunkard: so a parable in the
mouth of fools.



2. Pet. 2.
his folly.



The slothful says: A lion is in the way, and a lioness in the





Intermedle not in brawles Unfeigned friendshipe, especially in familiar
acquantance. Punish batemakers. Pacific the wrathful.
impatient, and medleth with an other man's brawle.

As he is hurtful that shoots arrows, and spears unto





Hear not whisperers of evil reports. Flee from hypocrites. Whose flaterie
and soft speech are suspicious, they will fall at last into their own trappes,
truth prevailing.
come to the inmost parts of the belly.













CHAP. XXVII.
Trust not to future uncertainties.
come may bring forth.

Let an other praise thee, and not thine own mouth: a Praise not thyself.
stranger and not thine own lips.

Beware of a fools wrath:
is heavier then both.

for it has no mercy.
violence of a moved spirit who can sustain?

Love freindlie severity not enemies flaterie. Temperance in meat. Just care
of thy family.








Esteem freindlie counsel.
and with the good counsels of a friend the soul is sweetened.

Old friends are better, and surer then a kinsman. Be wise even for thy
fathers sake. Foresee and prevent dangers. Trust not enemies. Suspect
extraordinary courtesy. Tolerate incorrigible brawlers with patience; lest
they become worse, by thy striving to amend them. Conserve that is good.
Conscience is best witness. Contentment with our state. Humility desires not
praise.
into thy brothers house in the day of thine affliction.

Better is a neighbor near thene a brother far of.









Dropping through in the day of cold, and a brawling











The heart of the wicked seeks after evils, but the righteous Right of heart.
heart seeks after knowledge.

Strine not to teach a fool. Discharge thy duty: VVhiles thou art in this
life. Be content with things necessary, and they shall be given to thee. Mat*
6. v. 33.
upon prisane, his folly shall not be taken from him.

Know diligently the countenance of thy cattle, and consider



Lambs for thy garment: and kiddes the price of the filde.



CHAP. XXVIII.
Innocence is without fear. General piety of the people procures Gods
favor, Neighborly compassion.
confident as a lion, shall be without terror.





Zele of justice.
keep it, are set on fire against him.

Remember the day of judgment. Honesty and poverty. No want nor waste.
our Lord, mark al things.





Just gain in traffike.
them for him that is liberal to the poor.

Obedience to magistrates.
prayer shall be execrable.

Give counsel sincerely.
destruction: and the simple shall possess his goods.

Humility in authority.
being prudent shall search him.

Place the godly in office.
impious reign ruins of men.

He that hides his wicked deeds, shall not be directed: but Acknowledge thy
faults.
he that shall confess, and shall forsake them, shall obtain mercy.

Fear to offend.
an obstinate mind, shall fall into evil.

Clemency in princes, and prudent liberality. Revenge bloodshed.
the poor people.





Harmles life.
ways, shall fall once.

Diligent labor.
that purseweth idlnesse, shall be replenished with poverty.

Just dealing.
to be rich, shall not be innocent.

Just judgment.
man even for a morsel of bread forsakes the truth.

Moderate gain.
ignorant that poverty shall come upon him.

Freindlie correption.
him more then he, that by flatteries of tongue deceives.

To rob parents is a grievous crime. ^^alt not thyself. Trust not thine own
judgment. Alms deeds.
mother: and says this is no sin, is the partaker of a mankiller.







Godly magistrates.
perish, the just shall be multiplied.

CHAP. XXIX.
Love to ^^e corrrected.
soden destruction shall come upon him: and health shall not follow him.

Choose godly magistrates.
rejoice: when the impious shall take princedom, the people shall mourn.

A man that loves wisdom, makes his father glad: but he Love wisdom.
that maintains harlots, shall destroy his substance.

Just and liberal magistrates. Sincere amity
destroy it.



Just joy of the wickeds fall.
just shall praise and rejoice.

Compassion of the poor.
ignorant of knowledge.

Care of common good. Contend not with a fool. Defend the just. Discretion in
just anger. Derestation of lying. Contentment in state of life. Equity in
judgment.




Men of blood hate the simple: but just men seek his soul.









Chastisment of youth. God never permits al to be evil Instruct children.
Pray to have good Pastors.
left to his own will, confounds his mother.







Compel the froward to obey. Consideration in speaking. Subdue the flesh to the
spirit. Meeknes.
that which thou say, and contemns to answer.







Humility.
the humble of spirit.

Participate not with sin.
hears one adiuring, and tells not.

He that fears man, shall soon fall: he that trusts in our Fear not men in
Gods cause remembering that God is Judge of al. Hate al wickedness. Obey
spiritual and temporal parents.
Lord shall be lifted up.





The son that keeps the word, shall be out of perdition.

CHAP. XXX. Aright wiseman thinks humbly of himself. 4. knowing that Gods
works The fourth part. Other singular precepts, with praise of a prudent woman.
are inscrutable, and perfect: 8. desires truth in all things, and mediocritie
in riches. 11. Abhors certain sorts of men, 1. 5. and certain execrable
things 18. notes certain things hard to be known: 21. other things
intolerable: 24. others admirable. 32. the tongue dangerous.
THE words of the Gatherer the son of Vomiter. The The wisest man best
knows that he wants much of perfect wisdom yet in his humility supposes,
that others have attained some what more then himself.
most foolish of men, and the wisdom of men is not with me. I have not learned
wisdom, and have not known the science Christ the Son of God is wisdom it
self and as the Son of man has perfect wisdom.
Who has ascended into heaven and descended? Bondslades are to be pitied, and
not affliction added to the afflicted.
Accuse not a servant to his master, lest

There is Four execrable vices. Ingratitude* Hypocrisy: Insolency:
Oppression of the poor. Concupiscence of the flesh, and of the eyes.
a generation that curses their father, and that

The horseleach has:: two daughters that say: Bring, ^^u^e, Luxury, Avarice,
and Ambition.
Hell, and the mouth of the matrice, and the earth Dishonor of parents shall be
senerely punished.
the fire never says it suffices. Youngmen following carnal appetite, can no
more give account of their actions, then of the vvayes which an eagle, a
serpent, and a ship have passed.
The eye, that scorneth his father, and that despises

Three things are hard to me, and of the fourth I am By these examples are
commended four virtues, Industry, Prudence, Concord, and Humility.
the way of a man in youth. Such is also the

By three things the earth is moved, and the fourth it can

There are Other four Fortitude, Chastity, Order, and Justice
four the least things of the earth, and they are Fools ought not to govern.
There are three things which (...)l, and the fourth that

There is that Moderation is necessary in all actions.
has appeared a fool after that he was listed

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXX.
1. The words of the Gatherer.] Some Interpreters take these four Hebrew
Some suppose one Agur to be auctor of this chapter.
words, Agur, Iache, Ithiel, and Vcal, contained in this first verse, to be
proper names of men, supposing that a certain wiseman named Agur, the son of
Iache, spoke the sentences following in this chapter, to his sons or scholars,
called Ithiel and Vcal. And so this supposed Agur, not Solomon, should be the
auctor of this chapter. But the old Interpreter, whom S. Ierom approves and
follows, translated the same words as noones appellatiues. Neither But it
seems more probable that only Solomon is auctor of this whole book.
does any ancient Father account this Agur, amongst the writers of holy
Scriptures. And if there were a peculiar auctor of this chapter, it is like the
same should have been placed last, and not before that which now follows, and
is by all men confessed to be Salomons. And therefore we think it more probable,
with S. Beda, and the common opinion, that there was no other auctor of any
part of this book, besides King Solomon Who is here called CONGREGANS, the
Gatherer, because he gathered these excellent Parables, Why he is called
Gatherer.
and Proverbs; as the son of the Holy Ghost, signified by the word IACHE,
povvring forth divine sentences, for instruction of ITHIEL and VCAL, that is,
of al those with whom God is by his grace; and who are streingthened by God
abiding with them.

23. A bond woman when she shall be heir.] Of al things in this world, it
seems Why God suffers heresy to reign.
most absurd, that heresy does dominiere over Catholic religion: which God
some times, and in some places suffers, for the greater merit of his elect.

CHAP. XXXI. An exhortation to chastity, temperance, 8. and to works of
mercy. 10. with praise of a valiant wise woman.
THE Words perteining to Solomon spoken to him by his mother: who here
calls him Lamuel, signifying, God with him.
words of Lamuel the king. The vision wherewith Doctrine is most profitable to
those, that are modestly dumme, more vvilling to hear then to speak.
the The chief and most proper office of a king is to do justice.
decree that which is just, and judge the needy and poor. A valiant woman A
woman of such perfection as is here described, is in deed rare, yet possible
to be found
who shall find? far, and from the strong things, and her fingers have taken
hold of Flax on the distafe signifies purpose to do good works, yarne on the
spindle the work well begune, which gives confidence in God that the same
shall be perfect and have due revvard.
the spindle. She has opened her hand to the neddie, and They make and sell
cloth, which lerning and observing Gods law, do teach it others
made sindon, and sold it, and delivered a External comelines is not durable:
but the fear of God is more vvorthie of praise.
Grace is deceitful, and Good works shall be revvarded,
of the fruit of her hands: and at the tribunal seat of judgment.
in the gates.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXXI.
10. A valiant woman who shall find?] Upon occasion of his mothers most The
praise of a right wise woman written in verse, and in order of the Alphabet.
prudent admonition, the wiseman singularly praises a perfect virtuous woman.
And that in an exquisite kind of style: in Tetramical lambike verse, with
perfect order and number of the Alphabet letters Signifying, as S Ierom Proem.
lament.
teaches, that as none can read, or speale words, unless they first learn to
know the letters: so we can not attain to know the greater Mysteries in holy
Scriptures, except we begin with moral good life, according to that the
Prophet says: By thy commandments I have understood. And therefore Psalm. 11^.
v. 104.
wi^e Solomon, by instinct of the Holy Ghost, as well by the manner of style, as
The Church has al good properties requisite. A faithful soul has them at
least in desire.
by the doctrine contained, concludes his Book of Parables, with praise both
of the Church in general, which has all the virtues, and good properties here
mentioned; and of every faithful soul, sincerely serving God, which either in
deed, or in desire of mind, has such part of them, as may suffice to the
attaining of eternal life. For concerning the whole Church, S Augustine in two
Sermons (217. and 218 de temp.) S. Beda upon this place, and other Fathers show
it evidently. Touching also particular souls, not only of holy men, but also
of women, the frailer sex, holy Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical monuments
yield many examples, besides the most Excellent and immaculate Rare and
excellent women both in the old and new testament.
virgin Mother of God; as of Sara, Rebecca, Lia, Rachael, Elizabeth, Marie
Magdalen, Martha, and innumerable others, most precious pearls, dear spouses
of Christ, and singular ornaments of his Church.

THE ARGUMENT OF ECCLESIASTES.
KIng Solomon a divine Preacher, whereof this Book is called This book called
Ecclesiastes, teaches to contemn this world. Because felicity consists
not in any temporal thing: but in the eternal sight of God.
Ecclesiastes, exhorts al such as have learned the principles of good life, to
contemn this world: because al things therein are vain, and insufficient to
give repose to man's soul: showing that true felicity, which al men desire,
consists not in natural knowledge, gotten by wit and industry; nor in
worldly pleasures, much less in carnal; nor in riches; nor in authority or
dominion; nor in any other temporal thing; as diverse diversely think: but only
in the true service of God, by flying from sin, and doing good works, as in
the meritoricus cause, and essentially in the clear vision of God: the proper
end, for which man was created. And so this Book conteyneth three principal
parts. First this divine preacher confuteth al their opinions, that imagine a
false felicity in humane, Divided into three parts.
worldly, or temporal things: to the beginning of the 7. chapter. In the rest
of that chapter, and three following, he teaches that true felicity consists
in the eternal fruition of God: and is procured by declining from vices, and
embracing virtues. In the two last chapters, he exhorts al to begin spedily
to serve God, and to persevere therein to the end of this life.

ECCLESIASTES, IN HEBREW CALLED COHELETH.
CHAP. I. Al temporal things (in comparison of true felicity) are vain, 4.
because The first part of this Sermon shows, that Felicity consists not in
any temporal thing.
they are mutable, 8. neither can any man attain perfect knowledge, to his
satisfaction: 12. as appears by Salomons own experience.
THE words of Ecclesiastes, the son of David, In the end of this world the
earth shall be purified, and so remain for ever.
the earth stands for ever.

The sun rises, and goes down, and returns to his Men's souls daily
created are of the same kind as Adams soul: other creatures either were in
their kinds from the beginning of the world, or are procreated of diverse
kinds preexisting. S. Tho. pa. 1. q. 73. a. 1. ad. 3
Nothing under the sun is new, Al natural things are insufficient means to
attain felicity.
al are vanity, and affliction of spirit. The perverse Wisdom is the best
thing in this world, yet is not perfect selicitie, but the means to attain
it.
wisdom there is

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. I.
18. In much wisdom is much indignation.] How much more any man profits in
wisdom, so much more he is angry with himself, for the evils which Wisdom
makes men to be angry with sin, to fear God, and to proceed in virtue.
he has done: so much better he knovveth the strict judgment of God, which he
must pass: so much more he understands the want of perfect wisdom: so much
more he sees that labor is required to proceed in virtue: and to conserve
that small portion which he has gotten. Neither is any man ordinarily assured
that he has got any part of true wisdom; for he knovveth not, whether he
be vvorthie of love or hate. Eccle. 9.

CHAP. II. Humane deligthes are al vain: 4. as gorgious buildinges, fruitful
vinyards, plenty of fish, cattle, servants, silver, gold, music: 11. not
satisfying man's desire. 18. Neither can any man know, how his heir will behave
himself.
ISayde A vvordlie man may object, that seeing wisdom brings not felicity in
this life, it seems best to take his pleasure and ease, and not to labor for
it.
therefore in my heart: I will go, and flow in delights, But the wiseman
co^futeth this conceit. Because wordlie joy is short and uncertain, neither
is any joy that men have in this life true joy of the blessed, but only a
consolation in miseries.
And I saw that this also was vanity. Laughter I have reputed error: and to
joy I have Consideration is the directorie of al good works.
eyes of a wiseman are in his head: the fool walks in darkness: and I have
learned that there was one death of both. And I said in my heart: If the fall of
the fool and mine shall be one, The conceit of worldly men not considering the
life to come.
what does it profit me, that I have bestowed greater labor for wisdom? And
speaking with my mind, I perceived that this also was vanity. For there shall
be no memory of It is better to use that is honestly gotten for our
necessity, then to be still solicitous to get more.
and this is of the hand of God. Who shall so devour,

CHAP. III. Contrary things succeed in their seasons, and pass away, 9.
whereof man gets no perfect knowledge, how long soever he lives, and laboreth
to know them: 16. neither will there be equity where it ought to be in this
world: 21. but in the next, good and evil shall be separated, and judged
according to their deserts.
AL things have a time, and in their spaces al things pass Generation,
Corruption, and Alteration perteine only to things of this world under heaven,
often here described by the term, Under the sun. For spiritual substances
are not comprehended in time, nor place. S. Ierom in hunc. locum. to 7.
heaven. A time to be borne, and a time to dye.

A time to weep, and a time to laugh. A time to mourn, and a time to dance.

A time to disperse stones, and a time to gather.

A time to embrace, and a time to be far from embracings.

A time to get, and a time to lose.

A time to keep, and a time to cast away.

A time to rent, and a time to sow together.

A time to keep silence, and a time to speak.

A time of love, and a time of hatred. A time of war, All this shows that
nothing of this world is perpetual, but to be used interchangeably, in due
time, place, manner, and order. For disorder makes confusion.
What has man more of his labor?

CHAP. IIII. In this would many innocents are oppressed, 4. The potent
sometimes envied, contemned, 15. and forsaken by their subjects, 17.
especially when the superiors obey not God.
ITurned myself to other things, and I saw the oppressions, God suffers the
innocent to be afflicted for a time, of his special providence: because they
thereby merit a great reward Psalm. 72.
tears of the innocents, and no comforter: and that they can not resist their
violence, being destitute of al men's help. And I praised:: It is in deed
better not to be at al then to be in eternal misery, ( Mat. 26. v. 24.) but
temporal affliction which the just suffer is not misery, as wordlie men
estemeit, but a special mean to attain eternal felicity.
is an handful with rest, then both hands full with labor, and affliction of
mind. Considering I found also an other vanity True charity not contaminate
with envy, by how much it is increased in number, so much it increases in
streingth. S. Iero.
triple coard is hardly broken. Beter is a God, and approach thou to hear. For
much better is obedience, 1. Reg. 15. Osee. 6.
they do.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IIII.
9. It is better that two be together] Besides the commendation of charity,
Man without Christ's help can neither resist tentations, nor rise from sin.
and freindshipe amongst men: which is one proper sense of this place: S. Ierom
expounds it also of the necessity of Christ's dwelling in man's soul, and of
his continual assisting grace: that man alone lie not open to the deceiptes of
the adversary. The benefit of feloshippe (says he) is streightwayes showed
in the profit of society. For if the one fall (as * the just falls often)
Christ Prou. 24. v. 16.
raises up his partner: for vvoe to him, who falling has not Christ in him,
to raise him up. If one also sleep, that is, be dissolved by death, and have
Christ with him, being vvarmed, and quickened, he sooner reuiueth. And if the
devil be stronger in impugning against a man, the man shall stand, and Christ
vvil stand ( pro homine suo, pro sodali suo) for his man, for his companion.
Not And without man's free consent Christ will not stay him, nor raise him up.
that Christ's power alone is vveake against the devil, but that free will is
leift to man, and we doing our endeavor he becomes stronger in feighting. And
if the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost come vvithal, this sodalitie is
not soon broken. Yet that which is not soon broken, may sometimes be broken.
For this triple coard, was in Judas the Apostle, but because after the morsel
Joan. 13. v. 27.
the devil entered into him, this coard was broken. Thus S. Irom teaches, that
neither can man without Christ resist tentations, nor rise from any sin in
this life, or In purgatory.
in the next; neither vvil Christ without man's consent and endeavor, stay him
from falling, nor raise him up being fallen.

CHAP. V. An exhortation to speak discretly, and reverently of God; 3. to
perform vows; 6. not to be trubled with imaginations, nor present oppressions
of the poor. 9. Avarice is never satiate, 11. riches sometimes cause sickness,
ruin of the body, 18. and oblivion of God.
SPEAK Because no man is able to attain perfect knowledge of God, it behooves
al to speak and think so berly of him.
not any thing rashly, neither let thy heart be Vow or promise once made must
be fulfilled.
If thou have vowed any thing to God, Deuteronomy. 23.
displeases him. But what soever thou have vowed, pay it: and it is much
better not to vow, then after a vow not to The proper Angel which associateth
every man.
the Angel: There is no providence: lest perhaps God being wrath against thy
words, dissipate all the works of thy hands. Where oppressions of the poor,
and violent judgments, and justice to be subverted in the province, meruel not
at this matter: because there is an other higher then the high, and over these
also there are others more eminent: and besides the king Job. ^^.
does not suffer him to sleep. There is also an other very il As temporal
riches ^e often the occasion of their owners ^uine: so vain philosophy, and
heresy avail not heretics, not their folowers, but as they came naked from
their mothers womb, the perverse Church, so shall both such masters, and
scolars depart without comforth into the wrath which they prepare to
themselves. S. Ierom. in ^une locum.
has begotten a son, which shall be in great poverty. As he came forth naked
from his mothers

CHAP. VI. Riches make not men happy, because many dye shortly: 3. and many
rich men will not use their riches. 8. Likewise study to know al secret
things is vanity, not felicity.
THERE is also an other evil, which I have seen under the but a strange man
shall eat it up. This is All this shows evidently ha^ (...)e consists not
in riches.
vanity and great misery. If a man shall begette an hundred children, and It
is plainly preached (says S. Iero.) of the coming of Christ, whose name was
given, and known before he was borne in flesh.
He that shall be, his name is already

CHAP. VII. It is in vain to seek, and impossible to know al natural things.
2. It imports to lead this short life in mortification, 4. paenance, 8. and
patience: 12. seeking wisdom, with competent temporal means; 15. providing for
the next world; 24. not yelding to concupiscence.
None can perfectly know the nature of al things present, of to come.
himself, whereas he is ignorant, what is profitable for him in his life, in the
number of the days of his peregrination, and the time that passes as a
shadow? Or who can tell him what shall be after him under the sun?

Better is a good name then precious ointments: and the day The 2. part. True
felicity is procured by good life, and consists in the eternal sight of
God.:: Anger rightly used, is commendable and beneficial to correct our own
faults and others.
of death, then the day of nativity. It is better to go to the Prou. 22.
house of mourning, then to the house of banketing: for in that the end of al
men is signified, and he that lives thinks what shall be.:: Anger is better
then laughter: because by the laughter of a fool: but this also is vanity.
Oppression But hasty, or immoderate anger is sinful and hartful.
Better is Likewise moderate riches profit the servants of God, so that they
^ette not their mind upon them.
riches is more profitable, and does more 3. Reg. 8. 2. Par. 6. Prou. 20. 1.
Joan. 1.
good, and sins not. But to al words also, that are The preacher.
Ecclesiastes, Man's reason which is the superior part of his soul, rarely
thinks good.
A man of a thousand I have found one, Sensuality still inclines to evil.
a woman of al I have not found. Only this I have found, that God made man
right, and he of his own will ^el from God. Sec S. Aug li. 14. c. 11 ciuit.
God made man right, The obscure thing.
the word.

CHAP. VIII. A sign of true wisdom appears in observing Gods commandments, 6.
in this short time of meriting eternal reward. 9. Rule of others, 11. and want
of fear hurt many. 14. Why God suffers the wicked to prosper, and the just
to be afflicted in this life, no mortal man can know.
THE wisdom of a man As probable conjecture of a man's inward disposition is
made by his exterior countenance: so his good works shining before men are
good sign of internal virtues, which in deed are right and meritorious, when
the intention is sincere, referring al to Gods glory, and edification of
others, without desire of vain praise in the world.
shines in his countenance, and By this term vanity is full understood that
fell- city is not in prosperous things of this world: neither are al men
miserable, that suffer adversity.
vanity, which is done upon the earth. There are just men, to whom evils
happen, as though they had done the works of the impious: and there are
impious men, which are so secure, as though they had the deeds of the just. But
this also I judge most vain. I therefore have praised mirth that there
(...)(...)ing
distraction that is in the earth: There is a man that days and nights takes
no sleep with his eyes. And I understood that man

CHAP. IX. None knows (certainly and ordinarily) whether they be in Gods
grace or no. 4. The evil are in worse case dead then alive, 11. neither can we
know the event of temporal things, nor the term of our life, nor how gratful
others will be toward us. 16. Sure it is, that wisdom is better then streingth.
AL these things have I discoursed in my heart, that I Mortal men suffering
calamities know not whether the same be in^^^ted for their proof and merit
as in I^b and Tobie, or for their sins only, as in Pharao, and the
Egyptians: but shall know in the indgement after their death.
man knows not, whether he be worthy of love, or hatred: but al things are
reserved uncertain for the time A sinner in this life may amend if he will and
become inst. but after death he can not repent. chap. 11. v. ^. Mystically, the
Gentiles were judged by Solomon better then the Jews. S. Ierom.
a dog living then a lion dead. For the living know that they shall dye, but the
dead know Go therefore and eat thy bread in joy, and drink thy wine

CHAP. X. Considering the great difference between wisdom and folly, 4. it
behooves to resist vehement tentations diligently. 5. As when evil, and
ignorant men have authority over the wise. 8. The wicked often fall into their
own snares, 10. are hard, yet not impossible to be corrected. 11. Detracters
are like serpents. 12. wise grave princes are profitable; childish are hurtful
to the commonwealth; 18. which by their negligence tends to ruin: 20. yet
subjects ought not to judge evil of them.
FLIES Base and vicions me^ mixed with the good corrups the whole company: much
more a mortal sin in a man's soul destroys all the virtues, that were there
before.
dying mar the sweetness of ointment. Wisdom heart of a fool is in his
lefthand. Yea and the fool walking Evil men advanced seem to prosper:
servants upon horses: and princes But they fall into their own trappes
that diggeth a Such as seek by sense and reason to obtain true knowledge,
enter not into the city, the Church: They labor in vain and are afflicted in
study of Scriptures, when they walk in the desert, and can not find the
city. S. Ierom.
the city. " Woe to thee

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. X.
16 VVoe to thee o land, whose king is a child.] S. Ierom (as in most part of
This text, and many others, have two senses.
his commentaries upon this book) expounds this passage in two senses:
simply according to the first appearance of the letter; and mystically
concerning the Church. The wiseman seems in deed (says he) to reprove the
principality of yongmen, and to condemn luxurious judges; for that in the 1.
In kings and al superiors are required mature age, and diligent care of the
common good.
one by want of age is infirm wisdom; in the other, mature age is weakened by
delicacies. And contrary wise he approves a prince of good parts, and liberal
education; and commends those Judges, which do not prefer voluptuousnes
before public affairs: but after great labor, and administration of the
commonwealth, are constrained as by necessity to take meat. Yet to me (says
this great Doctor) something more sacred seems to lie hid in the letter:
that in Scripture they are called yongmen, who forsake old authority, and
contemn ancient precepts of forefathers; who neglecting Gods commandment 2.
Antiquity in matter of faith and religion is to be followed, not novelty.
desire to establish traditions of men. Touching which points, our Lord
threatens Israel by Isaias, for that this people has refused the water of
Siloe, Iya. 8.
that runs with silence, and has turned away the old fishpond, choosing the
streams of Samaria, and gulfes of Damascus, I will give yongmen to be their
princes, and deluders shall rule over them. Read Daniel: Thou shall find God
ancient of days. Read the Apocalips of S. Iosu; Thou shall find the head of
Dan 7. Apoc. 1. Iere. 1.
our Savior white as snow, and as white wool. Jeremy also because he was wise
and gravity was reputed in his wisdom, was forbid to call himself a child.
Also mortification and labor is required in Pastors, not delicacie nor ease.
VVoe therefore to the land, whose king is the devil, who always covering
novelties, rebelled in Absalom against the father. VVoe to that land whose
Judges, and Princes love the pleasures of this world. Who, until the day of
death come, say: Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.
Contrariwise blessed is the land of the Church, whose King is Christ, the
Son of the freeborne, descending from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the stock of
Prophets, and of al Saints, over whom sin ruled not: and for that cause
they The B. Virgin Marie more free from sin then the Patriarchs.
were truly free: of whom was borne the holy Virgin Marie more free: having
no shrubbe, nor branch out of the side, but her whole fruit sprungforth into
a flower: saying in the Canticles: I am the flower of the filde, the lilly of
the valles. The princes also of this land are the Apostles, and al Cant. 2.
saints, who have their king the son of the freeborne, the son of the
freevvoman, not of the bondvvoman Agar, but borne of the freedom of Sara.
Neither do they eat in the morning, nor quickly. For they seek not pleasure in
this present world; but shall eat in their due time, when the time of revvard
shall come, and they shall eat in fortitude, and not in confusion. All the good
of this present world is confusion: but of the future world is perpetual
fortitude. Thus far S. Ierom. Whose discourse we have here cited at large
for a taste of his profound exposition of this whole book; that such as have
apportunitie, may read the rest in the auctor himself. To. 7.

CHAP. XI. The 3. part. An exhortation to begin quickly, and persevere in
Gods service.
Works of mercy are necessary, whiles we have time, 3. because after death
none can merit: 4. neither must we differ to begin, nor cease from good
deeds, 8. but still be mindful of death and judgment: 10. avoiding wrath and
malice.
CAST thy bread upon the passing waters: Of al virtues, the works of mercy,
corporal and spiritual, most avail for obtaining eternal felicity: Mat. 25.
because after So the same be grounded in true faith, believing all that is
written in the old and new testament signified by seven and eight.
to seven, After death none ca(...) either ^^erite or demerite.
there shall it be. He that observes the wind, sows not: and he that
considers the clouds, shall never reap. As thou art Both in youth and old
age do good works.
the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening

CHAP. XII. In youth is fittest time, and most meritorious to serve God. In age
the same is more and more necessary, but harder then to begin, and less
gratful, 8. In this book the preacher has showed, that al worldly things
are vanity, 13. and that true felicity is only procured by wisdom, which
consteth in the fear of God; and observation of his commandments.
REMEMBER thy Creator in the days An admonition to al in general to live well
in this world, remembering the day of general judgment before which such signs
shall come as are described here, and by our Savior Mat. 24. And likewise
every one is admonished in particular to serve God diligently whiles he has
time, before death come, when al his senses and former helps shall fail.
of thy youth, and the water pot be broken upon the fountain, and the wheel
be broken upon the cesterne, and the dust return The preachet.
Ecclesiastes, This is the brife sum of al proficable doctrine: Fear God,
and keep his commandments.
Let us al hear together the end of speaking. Fear God, Hidden, or obscure
thing.
error, whether it be good, or evil.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE CANTICLE OF CANTICLES.
SOLOMON, called also Ecclesiastes, and Idida, according to these Proem. in
Eccle.
King Solomon according to his three names writ and entitled his three books.
three names (as S. Ierom notes) writ three books of three particular
arguments, directed to three degrees of people, with three distinct titles, al
tending to one end, the true service of God, which brings to eternal
felicity. In the first he teaches the principles of good life, to flee from
vices, and follow virtues: belonging to such as begin to observe Gods law,
wherein true wisdom consists: and this book is called the Proverbs, or
Parables, that is to say, Pithie, brief, sentencious precepts; of Solomon,
which signifies Solomon Pacifier king of Israel.
Pacificus, Peaceable, or Pacifier: the son of David, King of Israel. In the
second he exhorts to contemn this world, showing that true felicity
consists not in any worldly or temporal things, but in the eternal
fruition of God, which is obtained by keeping his commandments. And this book
he intitleth: The words of Ecclesiastes, which is Concionator, Ecclesiastes,
Preacher king of Jerusalem.
Preacher, Son of David, King of Jerusalem, because he there exhorts such
as have made some progress in virtues, called Proficientes, signified by the
inhabitants of the Metropolitan city Jerusalem; whereas in the former he
styled himself king of Israel, proposing precepts mete for all the twelve
tribes, and al vulgar men desirous and beginning to serve God. In both books,
for more authority sake, making mention of his godly renowned father the
Royal Prophet David, with his own title also of king. But in this third book
he only expresses his proper name Solomon, whom God Idida, Beloved.
singularly loved, whereof he was called Idida. Because this alone, without
mention of father or king, was most convenient for the Perfect, who not as
servants, or young scholars are moved by fear of authority, but as children
This Canticle does excel other Canticles.
are swetly drawn by love. And this he writ in verse, intitling it not
simply a Canticle, but The Canticle of Canticles, as preeminent above other
Canticles. The bridal songue for the Marriage, to be solemnized between God
himself and his glorious spouse. For though al holy Scriptures are the
spiritual bread, and food of the faithful, yet al are not meat for all, at al
Al are not mete to read it.
seasons. Some parts are not for sinners, nor for beginners, nor for such as
are yet in the way toward perfection, but only for the perfect. According to
Heb. 5.
the Apostles doctrine: Milk is for children, that are yet unskillful of the
word of justice. But strong meat is for the perfect, them that by custom, have
their senses exercised to the discerning of good and evil. With what moderation
therefore, and humility, this Canticle of Gods perfect spouse may be read, the
discrete will consider, and not presume above their reach, but be wise with
sobriety. For here be very high and hidden Mysteries, as Origin teaches in
his learned Commentaries (which S. Ierom translated into Latin, and singularly
commends) and so much harder to be rightly understood, for that the fervent
spiritual love, of the inward man, reformed in soul, and perfected in spirit,
is here uttered in the same usual words and terms, wherewith, natural,
worldly, yea and carnal love of the outward man, old Adam, corrupted by sin,
is commonly expressed: and are so much more dangerous to be mistaken, as we are
more addicted to proper will, and private judgment, or subject to carnal, or
passionate Best method in lerning is to begin with doctrine of good life,
then study to know natural things: and finally contemplate divine mysteries
motions. Wherefore it seems most mete to keep the same order in reading these
three books, which the auctor wise Solomon observed in writing them. And which
Philosophers also follow in their form of discipline. For they first learn and
teach Moral Philosophy, then Natural; and lastly Metaphisikes which is their
Divinity. As Solomon had given them example: first teaching precepts of good
life, and manners, in his Proverbs: after, discoursing of natural things in
Ecclesiastes, deduced thence a conclusion, which profane Philosophers well
understood not, to contemn this world: and finally comes to high mystical
Divinity, in this supereminent Canticle: written in an other style, in verse,
and in form of a sacred A sacred, dialogue or Interlude.
Dialogue between Christ and his spouse: or as Origin calls it, in form of an
Forma dramatis
Interlude, in respect of diverse speakers and actors, and of diverse persons, to
whom the speeches are directed, and of whom they are uttered. For by the Spous
or Bridgrome, is not only understood Christ as Man, but also as God and Christ
the Spous, or Bridgrome.
God, and the whole Blessed Trinity; to whom many prayers, praises, and
thanks are offered up; and by whom many benefits are given, praises
returned, and promises made to his spouse, Likewise by the Spouse or Bride,
Three spouses
the ancient fathers understand three sorts of spouses: al espoused to Christ,
and to God. towitt, his General Spouse, the whole Church of the old and The
General.
new Testaments; of all that are, and shall be perfect, making one mystical The
special. and Singular.
body, free from sin, without spotte, or wrinkle, sanctified in Christ. Also
Ephesians. 5.
his special spouse, which is every particular holy soul. And his singular
spouse, his most blessed and most immaculate Virgin Mother. This being the
Origin. S. Ierom. S. Aug. lib. 8. de Genesis adli. S. Greg. S. Beda, S. Tho.
A^bor. Geneb. Del Rio.
general sum of this excellent Canticle, remitting the reader, for
explication thereof to the learned devout Commenters, both of ancient and late
writers, we shall also endeavor together the same contents more particularly,
not before the chapters, because we can not there so conveniently distinguish
the same The particular contents are set in the margent of every chapter.
by verses, but in the margent. Where we shall especially note the speakers, as
seems more probable of every parcel, according to the first sense (not having
rowme for more) perteyning to the General spouse, the Catholic Church: which
is the great, and everlasting holy City of God the eternal King.

SALAMONS CANTICLE OF CANTICLES,
CHAP. I.
LET The Church of the old testament desires Christ's coming in flesh: and the
Christian Church prays for his coming in glory.
him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth: The Church outwardly afflicted, is
inwardly fair.
I am black but beutiful, keeper in the vinyards: my vinyard I have not kept.
Show Christ encorageth his spouse the Church.
If thou know not thyselfe, She meditateth of his Passion, and Resurrection.
Whiles the king was at his repose, my spikenard gave the Christ praises his
spouse
Behold thou art She again praises him;
Behold thou art fair my beloved, and comlie: With thanks for her repose,
and present consolation.
our

CHAP. II.
I AM Christ professes himself the flower of mankind: yea Lord of al
creatures.
the flower of the filde, and the lilie of the valley, The Church excels al
other societies: In the Church the godly excel sinners, Among the innocent and
holy, the virgin Marie surpasses al.
As the lilie among the thorns, so is my love among The Church praising Christ
rests secure under his protection.
As the apletree among trees of the woddes, He for the weakes sake permits
her not to be molested, til she be prepared to suffer with patience.
that you raise not, nor make the beloved to awake, until herself will. She
feeling Christ's assistance, confesses, and preaches boldly his Gospel, and
truth against al Paganes, and Heretics.
The voice of my beloved, behold Who though he show not himself visibly:
looking through the windows, looking forth by the grates. Behold yet
encorageth her to approach unto him:
Arise, make have my love, my dove, beautiful one, and come. For winter is now
past, forth her green figs: the flourishing vineyards have given their
savor. Arise my love, my beautiful one, and come. My commands his pastors to
destroy heresies. i And so she reposeth in him.
Catch us the little i My beloved to me, and I to him, who feeds among

CHAP. III.
IN The Church finding Christ not in dark ignorance nor in philosophy but by
his reue^ling him self to her, holds him for ever:
my little bed in the nights I have sought him, whom even til the jews shall at
last also find him.
my mothers house, and into the chamber of her that bare me. Christ speaks as
before ch 2. v. 7
I adjure you o daughters of Jerusalem The Church of Christ admireth her own
conversion from Gentilitie,
What now full of good works.
the aromatical spices of myrtrhe, and frankincense, and of al powder of the
apothecharie? She also professes that the ascending to eternal rest, is by
fighting manfully, in observing the ten commandments, in the six days of this
life:
Behold threescore valiants even to blood, if ned^ be,
of purple: the mids he has paued with which is the highest degree of
charity.
charity for the daughters of Jerusalem. And inuiteth al others to come unto
Christ,
Go forth who in the flesh which he took of his mother, was crowned in heaven
after his Passion.
the diadem, wherewith his mother has crowned him in the day of his
despousing, and in the day of the joy of his heart.

CHAP. IIII.
HOW Christ again prai^eth the beauty of his Church.
beautiful art thou my love, how beautiful art Sincere and simple intention.
eyes as it were of doves, besides that, which lies hid within. Thy Al her
temporal occupations directed to Gods glory
hears as the flocks of goats, which have come up from mount Galaad. Thy
Pastors who like nurces give bread of good doctrine to little ones.
teeth as Faith and good works.
twins, and there is no barren among them. Thy Preaching Christ's passion.
lips as a scarlet lace: and thy speech sweet. And not ashamed to profess
Christ Crucified.
cheeks, besides that which lies hid within. Thy Administration of Sacraments
whereby the Church, Christ's mystical body, is joined to him her head,
neck is as the which is an inexpugnable fortress.
tower Both Jews and Gentiles are fed with the principles of Christian doctrine.
two breasts Christ dwells in mortified, and devout minds.
I will The Church triumphant is without spotte, and every particular soul
entering into heaven; the B* virgin mother was also in this life always
immaculate.
not a Al tentations, whether they be in manifest cruelty, or in flatering
sureltie, make constant souls more gratful to God.
Arise Northwinde, and come Southwinde, blow through

CHAP. V.
LET The spouse condescending to Gods vvil, is well content to suffer
persecution.
my beloved come into his garden, and eat the Christ again^ shows his good
liking in his spouses patience:
I am come into my garden o my sister spouse, I have reaped my myrrh, with
mine aromatical spices: I have eaten the honiecombe with mine honey, I have
drunk my wine with my milk: and wills the glorious Saints to
congratulate with the patient.
eat o friends, and drink, and be inebriated my dearest. The spouse desires
to rest in meditation.
I sleep, but is called upon to help others:
the voice of my beloved knocking: Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, mine
immaculate: and urged by Christ's own example working for all mankind.
because my head is full of dew, and my locks of the drops of the nights. I
have spoiled myself of my robe, how And so she imployeth herself also in
active life.
I arose, that I might Still conseruing a desire to return unto contemplation.
I adjure you o daughters of Jerusalem, if you shall find The devout confer
together describing the excellencies of Christ.
What manner of one is thy beloved of the beloved, o most And resolve to seek
him, whersoeuer he be.
Whither is

CHAP. VI.
MY The Church teaches her children that Christ is delighted with the godly
desires, and fructful works of the faithful.
beloved is gone down into his garden, to the bed Christ g^^^^e commends his
Church, well composed of distinct orders (some governing, some retired in
clo^sters from this world, the rest also exercising works of mercy, in the
trubles of this life) al together making a complete army terrible to al
enemies.
Thou art fair o my love, The more any contemplate Gods Majesty, the better
they perceive that he is incomprensensible.
Turn away thine eyes from me, Many true pastores,
threescore queens, and more hyrelinges, that also preach truth, but for
temporal commodity.
fourscore concubines, And innumerable faithful souls in the Church.
yongmaydes there is no number. My dove Al which are but one body in unity
of ^aith
one, my perfect one, she is the only to her mother, elect to her that bare
her. The daughters have seen her, and declared her to be most blessed: the
queens and concubines, and have praised her. The voice of the old synagogue,
admiring the beauty of Christ's Church
What is she, that comes forth as the The Church of Christ exhorts the
Synagogue of the Jews to return to Christ.
Return, return o Sulamitesse: return,

CHAP. VII.
WHAT Christ interposeth his commendation of the Jews, who at last shall
return to him with great seruoure of faith and devotion.
shall thou see in the Sulamitesse but the b the joints of thy thighs are as
jewels, that are made by the hand of the artificer. Thy nauel as a round bowl,
never wanting cups. multitude. Thy nose as the tower of Libanus, that looks
And so jointly praises his Church consisting of both peoples.
against Damascus. Thy head as Carmelus: and the hears The Church, as it were
taking the vvoid out of Christ's mouth vvhiles he praised her, she returns all the praise to him.
worthy for my Praying him to come and still remain with her,
Come Acknovvleging him to be the only Savior of both old and new testament.
the new and the old, my beloved, I have kept for thee.

CHAP. VIII.
WHO The Synagogue prosecuteth her prayer, desiring Christ's Incarnation.
shall give to me thee my brother, sucking the Christ admonishes vvordlie men
not to molest those that serve him in contemplation, and other spiritual
virtues.
I Angels and other Saints of the triumphant Church admire the beauty of the
C^n^les converted, which is also understood of every holy soul ascending
from this world into heaven, And more singularly of the most glorious virgin
mother of God.
Who is d there thy mother was corrupted, there she vas defloured that bare
thee. Put me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon e Our sister is little,
and it bulwarks of silver: if she be a door, let us join it together with
bordes of ceder. The Church of Gentiles rejoices in the strong defense,
vvhervvith her Savior has established her.
I am a wall: and my breasts are as a Keepers of this vinyard, were the
Prophets and Apostles, and their Successors are still the kepers thereof.
to keepers, a man brings for the fruit thereof a thousand pieces of silver.
Christ shows that together with the pastors, himself especially has care
of his Church, alvvayes assisting the visible gouerners thereof with his
invisible grace.
My vineyard The whole Church militant well contented, yea desiring Christ's
Ascension into heaven, for the good of all that here serve him, prays him from
thence to send abundance of his grace, that we may ascend the high mountains
of perfect charity, and zele of Gods honor, that he vvil make our souls such
hills, the garden of al virtues, and so voutsafe to dwell therein. Amen.
Flee, o my beloved, and be like to the roe, The Synagogue of the Jews was
corrupt under the tree of Christ's Cross, when they cried: Crucify him,
Crucify him. And again: His blood be upon us, and upon our children. Again:
We have no King but Caesar. etc.
and to the fawn of hearts upon the mountains of aromatical spices. Christ
again shows his affection toward his Church of the Gentiles: calling her
his own sister, and the Synagogs sister, promising and bestowing on her many
excellent benefits.


THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK OF WISDOM.
AS well of the auctor, as of the authority of this book, there have been Both
the auctor and authority of this book were sometimes doubtful.
diverse opinions among the learned. But in process of time, the first is
probably discussed, the other is clerly decided by the Church. For concerning
the former doubt, Many ancient Fathers allege sentences of this Book, as the
sayings of Solomon. Namely S. Ireneus (apud Eusebium, lib. 5. c. 8. Hist.) S.
Clement of Alexandria, li. 5. and 6. Stromat. Origin. ho. 12. in Leuit. and li.
8. in Epist. ad Romans S. Athanasius in Synopsi, and Orat. 2. cont. Arrian. S.
Basil li. 5. cont. Eunomianos. S. Epiphanius heresi 67. S. Gregory Nazianzen.
lib. de Fide. S. Gregory Nissen. in Testimonijs ex vet. Testam. cap. de
Natiuitate ex Virgin. S. Chrisost. hom. 33. and 34. in Mat. S. Cyril of
Alexandria li. 10. c. 4. Also S. Cyprian li. de exhortat. Martyrum. c. 12. and
li. 3. c. 59. ad Quirin. and li. de Mortalitate. S. Hilarie in Psalm. 127. S.
Ambrose, li. de Salomone. c. 1. and diverse others suppose Solomon to be auctor
of this book. To whom likewise some of them The same doubt is of
Ecclesiasticus.
ascribe the book of Ecclesiasticus. But S. Ierom Praefatione in libros
Salomonis testifies that some ancient writers affirm this book to be written
by Philo a Jew, and the other by Jesus the son of Sirach. And S. Augustine
very plainly (li. 17. c. 20. de ciuit.) says, custom prevailed, that the
books of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, for some similitude of speech are called
Salomons: but the more learned assuredly judge that they It is most probable,
that Philo a Jew writ this book collecting many sentences of Salomons.
are not his. what then shall we say, seeing so many other ancient learned
Doctors cite them as his. The answer is easy. And sufficiently insinuated by
S. Augustine, that these two books being like unto the other three, which are
Salomons, were also called his. Whereto we may add a like example in Argum.
lib. Reg.
the two first books of Kings, which are called the books of Samuel, though
he writ not all the first, nor any part of the second. Moreover al these five
are called by one general title Sapiential books. In so much that the Church
reads in the sacred Office before al Epistles, taken out of any of these
five Five Sapiential books of the old testament.
books, not Lectio Prouerbiorum, or Ecclesiastae, etc. but still, Lectio libri
Sapientiae. The solution therefore is very probable, that this book of wisdom
was written by Philo Iudeus, not he that lived after Christ, but an other of
the same name, nere two hundred years before. And Ecclesiasticus by Jesus the
son of Sirach. Who not only imitated Solomon, but also compiled their books,
for most part of Salomons sentences; conserved til their times by tradition, or
in separated scrolles of papers; yea they so utter some sentences in Chap. 7.
8. 9.
his person, as if himself had written them. As touching the authority of The
Jews deny these books to be Canonical.
these two books, and some others, it is evident that the Jews refuse them.
And therefore many ancient Fathers writing against them, spared sometimes to
urge such books, as they knew would be rejected. Especially having abundant
testimonies of other holy Scriptures, for deciding matters of Mat. 22.
faith against them. Even as our Savior himself proved the Resurrection of the
dead against the Sadduces, out of the books of Moses, which they confessed
Exo. 3.
for Canonical Scripture, denying other parts, where the same point might
otherwise have been more evidently showed. And so S. Ierom in respect of the
Jews said these books were not Canonical. Nevertheless he did often allege
testimonies of them, as of other divine Scriptures: sometimes with this
parenthesis [si cui tamen placet librum recipere] in cap. 8. and 12. Zachariae;
other times, especially in his last writings, absolutely without such
restriction, as in cap. 1. and 56. Isaiae. and in 18. Ieremiae. Where he
professes to allege none but Canonical Scripture. As for all the other ancient
fathers They are judged by very many ancient fathers, and afterward defined
by the Church to be Canonical Scriptures.
here above mentioned, ascribing this book to Solomon, and many others cited
by Doctor Iodocus Coccius (To. 1. Thesauri. li. 6. art. 9.) they make no doubt
at al, but that it is Canonical Scripture, as appears by their express
terms, Divine Scripture, Divine word, Sacred letters, Prophetical saying, the
Holy Ghost says, and the like. Finally as well ancient General counsels, namely
that of Charthage, an. D. 419. With others, as the later of Florence, and Trent
have declared this book to be Canonical. And that conformably to the most
ancient, and learned Fathers, as S. Augustine, not only judges himself, but also
plainly testifies (li. de Pradestinat. Et li. 17. c. 20. ^^^^.
Sanct. c. 14.) saying: The sentence of the book of wisdom ought not to be
rejected (by certain inclining to Pelagianisme) Which has been so long
publicly read in the Church of Christ, and received of al Christians,
Bishops, and others, even to the last of the Laity, Penitents, and Catecumes
(cum veneratione diuinae auctoritatis) With veneration of divine authority.
Which also the excellent writers, next to the Apostles times, alleging for
witness (nihil se ad^ibere, nisi diuinum testimonium crediderunt) thought they
alleged nothing but divine testimony.

The sum and contents of this book is an Instruction, and Exhortation to
Kings and al Magistrates, to minister justice in the comonwealth, teaching The
contents.
al sorts of virtues under the general names of justice and Wisdom. With
frequent Prophecies of Christ's Coming, Passion, Resurrection, and other
Christian Mysteries. Al may be commodiously divided into three parts. In the
six first Divided into three patts.
chapters, the auctor admonishes al Superiors to love and exercise justice and
wisdom. In the next three, he teaches that Wisdom proceeds only from God, and
is procured by prayer and good life. In the other ten chapters, he shows
the excellent effects, and utility of wisdom and Justice.

THE BOOK OF WISDOM.
CHAP. I. Superiors are admonished to do justice, sincerely seking God. 7. Who
being every where sees al things. 11. Murmuration, detraction, and lying The
1. part. An admonition to love and practice justice.
bring to perdition. 13. God created men to live, but they brought death upon
themselves.
LOVE justice, you that judge the earth. Think 3. Reg. 3. Isa 56. 2. Par. 1^.
of our Lord in goodness, and in simplicity of heart seek him: because he is
found of them, that Mortal sins are not only committed in deeds and words,
but also in though tes.
perverse cogitations separate from wisdom will not enter into a malicious
soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins. For the Holy Ghost of
discipline, He that maliciously curses s^u^sed of God.
the ^^ for from his ^al. 5. v. 22.
lips: because God is witness of (...) is a true searcher of his heart, and an
h^ar^r (...)cause Be not cause of your own eternal death by evil life.
Zeal not death in Desperate death delivers not the wicked from calamities.
there is no medicine of destruction in them, Neither are an^e damned while
they are in th^^ life*
nor kingdom of hell in the earth. ( For justice is p^rpetual But sinners not
repenting being et^^nal (...) them (...)*
provoked it: and esteming it a friend, have fallen to decay, and have made
couenances with it: because they are worthy to be of the part thereof.

CHAP. II. Such as hope not of life to come, 6. addict themselves to (...)* ^^*
and persecute the just, especially our Sauio^^ (...) their wickedness. 23. Death
came upon man by the (...).
FOR they have said thinking with the (...) (...) be (...), and (...) be after
death, fall to these profane thoughts and speeches of infidelity.
:: Little, and with tediousnes is the time of (...) the end of a man there is
no recou^^^^, and (...) known that has returned from hell: because oe of (...)
a spark to move our heart. Which being extinguished, our Of infidelity
touching pain or reward after death, proceeds the Epicures life.
Come therefore, and let us enjoy Infidels are not content to live in riote, but
do also envy and persecute the just. whose good examples vex their minds,
sturred thereto by the devil.
oppress the poor just man, and not spare An evident prophecy of the Jews
malice persecuting our Savior. Fulfilled by the chief Priests, Scribes, and
Ancientes, recorded die the Evangelists. Mat. 27. v. 41. Mar, 14. v. 53.
Let us therefore Mat. 27. v. 43.
us to the defaming of our cogitations. He is grievous unto want of believing
divine Mysteries, namely the reward of the just, and punishment of the wic ked,
is cause of dissolute life, and of hatred against the good.
the sacraments esteemed the honor of holy souls. For God created man

CHAP. III The just contemned by the wicked, and proved by tentations are
happy. 10. and the wicked unhappy. 12. Chastity shall be rewarded, and
adulterous generations shall not prosper.
BUT Temporal death of the just, is the way to eternal life. where damnation
(called here the torment of death) shall not touch them.
the souls of the just are in the hand of God, and For albelt Martyrs seem in
the eyes of the unwise to dye, or to be extinguished, they pass in deed into
eternal, and unspeakable glory.
They seemed Chap. 5. v. 4
in the eyes of the unwise to die: and their decease was counted affliction:
and that which with us is the way, is Mat. 13. v. 43.
and as sparks in a place of reeds they shall run abroad. They All the just
shall approve Gods judgment condemning the wicked.
shall judge nations, and have dominion over peoples, Literally is understood,
that the wives of adulterers, often become adultresses, and their children
wicked. Morally, their sensuality and al their works are wholly corrupted.
wives are sensles, See. S. Ierom. in Isa. 56. v. 4.
the eunuch, that has not shall be destroyed. And if certes they be of long
life, they

CHAP. IIII. Great difference between chaste, and adulterous generations. 7.
Speedier death of the just is recompensed by Gods providence, 19. but the
wicked incur greater damnation by living long.
O How beautiful is Chastity of the body is a singular great virtue, and
spiritual chastity of true faith and religion is greatter, and more generally
commended, as the root and fundation of al virtues. For without faith it is
impossible to please God.
the chaste generation with glory: When soever the just dies it is
profitable for him and dying young his immaculate life is more commendable then
old age in the wicked. v. 16.
the just if he be prevented with death, shall be in a place of refreshing. For
venerable oldage is not that of long time, impions alive, and youth soon
ended, the long life of the unjust. For they shall see the end of the wise, and
shall not The damned shall be without al excuse utterly confounded in their own
consciences.
without voice, and shall remove them from the fundations, and they shall be made
desolate unto the highest degree: and shall be moorning, and the memory of them
shall perish. They shall

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
11. He was taken avvay] By this place S. Augustine proves that such as died
in good state, might have fallen into wickedness, if they had lived longer: and
Gods prescience d^^th not prejudice man's free will.
therefore it was a benefit to them, to dye sooner And that it is nevertheless
certain, that God both knew the possibility that such might, yea would have
sinned, if they had lived longer, and also knew that they should d^e sooner,
and so escape that danger. Which assured foreknowlege of al things that shall
be, or may be, stands well with man's freewil: against certain that inclined
to Pelagianisme, attributing too much to man's freewil; and detracting from Gods
foreknowlege, and providence. Which he proving by this place, his adversaries
excepted against the authority of this book, and therefore he also ^tl 17. ^.
30. ciuit.
proves that it is Canonical Scripture. li. de Predest. Sanct. c. 14.

CHAP. V. In the general judgment, the wicked seeing the just, whom they had
contemned, to be in great honor, shall bewail their own misery, 9.
considering that their pleasure was short, 16. and the joy of the blessed shall
be for ever. 18. God will arm himself, and al creatures, to punish the impious.
THEN shall the just stand in great constancy against those Wicked men in
their false conceit judge the travels of the just to be vain and fructles.
taken away their labors. They seeing shall be trubled with horrible fear, and
shall Repentance of the damned is only for the loss and pain whereinto they
are fallen not of love toward God, or virtue, nor of hate toward sin, and
therefore is fructles bringing no comfort nor help at al, but everlasting
torment and anguish of mind.
repenting, and sighing for anguish of spirit: These are they, whom we had
sometime in derision, and in a parable of reproach. We senseless esteemed their
life madness, Chap. 3. v. 2.
and their end without honor. Behold how they are counted the light of justice
has not shined to us, and the sun of understanding rose not to us. We are
weried in the way of Pro. ^0 v. 19.
in the waves: or as a bird, that flies through in the air, For the
certainty of things that shall be, Prophets do very often speak in the
pretertence, of things to come as if they were already past.
said they in hell, which sinned: As the joy of the blessed, so contrariwise the
misery of the damned is marvelous great, and for ever unchangeable.
his zele will take armor, and he will arm the creature iniquity shall bring all the land to a desert, and naughtines shall overthrow the seats of the mighty.

CHAP. VI. Kings and al Magistrates are again admonished to exercise justice:
7. otherwise they shall be more grievously punished. 13. wisdom may easily be
found, 18. by those that sincerely desire it. 22. And is very profitable (25.
excepting the envious, or il disposed) 26. both to prince and people.
WISDOMS is better then strength: and a wiseman Eccle. 9. v. 18.
then a strong. Hear therefore ye kings, and understand, Al power is from God:
and therefore to be respected, though the magistrates sometimes abuse their
authority.
power is given you of our Lord, Romans 1^. v. 1.
and strength by the Highest, who will examine your works, and search your
cogitations: because when you were the As every ones charge is more or less,
so his account is easier or har der, and the punishment (if he offend) smaller
or greater. S. Gre. ho. 9. in Euang.
the mighty shall mightily suffer torments. For God will not except any man's
person, Wisdom is attained by this gradation and so from first to last, a
resolute desire joins faithful souls to God. v. 21.
the beginning of her is the most true and love, is the keeping of her laws:
and the keeping of the laws, is the consummation of incorruption: and
incorruption

CHAP. VII. The second part. Wisdom proceeds from God, and is procured by
prayer.
Whereas al men have the like birth and death, 7. Wisdom makes great
difference, bringing al goodness, 13. and knowledge, 17. as well of natural
things, 22. as moral. 25 Which heavenly gift is a sparckle, and participation
of wisdom increated, God himself.
I also certes am a mortal man, like to al, and of the earthly The perfectest
children are borne in the beginning of the tenth month.
ten months Children in the mothers womb are as in sleep.
sleep concurring. And I being borne Solomon (whose sayings are here recited)
prayed for wisdom, and obtained it. 3. Reg. 3.
I wished, and understanding 3. Reg ^. v. 9.
because her light can not be extinguished. And al good things came to me
together with her, and very much honesty by her hands, and I rejoiced in all:
because God first gave him grace to desire wisdom before al other things, as
he explicateth plainly cap. 8. v. 21.
this Solomon was a most excellent Philosopher.
the true knowledge of those Proper Epithetons of the spirit of wisdom.
holy, only, manifold, See the Annotation, Proverb. 1. v. 2.
is a vapor of the power of God, and a certain sincere Heb. 1. v. 3.
and the image of his goodness. And whereas she is one, she

CHAP. VIII Wisdom excelling al things, that can be desired, 9. is worthily
preferred as the cause of much estimation, 13. and of immortal glory, 16.
without molestation. 21. Alwhich is Gods gift.
SHE God, the increated wisdom is infinite and wisdom created is also most
excellent amongst Gods gifts.
reaches therefore from end unto end mightily, and 3. Reg. 3.
glorifieth her nobility, having consociation with God: yea and the Lord of al
has loved her. For she is the mistress of the Prou. ^.
the subtilities of words, and the solution of arguments: she knows signs
and wonders before they be done, and the euentes of times and ages. This is
also the speech of Solomon, recited by the writer of this book.
I purposed therefore to bring Of Salomons wisdom, riches, glory and renowned
fame not only the books of Kings and Paralipomenon, but also our Savior does
witness. Mat. 6. and 12.
glory with It is not certain that Solomon has immortal glory, but rather
by immortality is here understood that his glorious fame remains to the end
of this world.
immortality: Nevertheless wisdom of her part, gives life and glory
everlasting, to all that persevere to the end of this life.
immortality is in the kindred of wisdom, and hands honesty without defect,
and wisdom in the disputation of her talk, and glory in the communication of
her words: I went about seeking, that I might take her to me. And I was a
witty child, and had gotten a good soul. It is certain that Solomon was
sometime innocent and holy, but was perverted by women. 3. Reg. 11.
a body vndefield.

CHAP. IX. A prayer (made by Solomon) for wisdom, 9. whereby Superiors are able
to govern: 13. Which by only humane wisdom, they can not rightly perform.
GOD of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, which made al 3 Reg. 3. v 9. 12.
things with thy word, and by thy wisdom did appoint Here again it is
evident, that the Auctor reports Salomons speeches.
Thou have chosen me king to thy people, and 1. Paral. 28. v. 5.
judge of thy sons, and daughters: and badst me build a 2. Par. 1. v. 9.
prepare from the beginning: and Wisdom increated is with God, yea is God him
self.
thy wisdom with thee, Prou. 8. v. 22.
thou made the roundworld, and knew what was pleasing to thine eyes, and what
was direct in thy precepts. Wisdom which is given to men proceeds from God
as a gift created.
Send Man's wisdom without special wisdom from God is not sufficient to govern
ourselves, much less others.
who of men is able to know the counsel of God? or who can think what God will?
For the cogitations of mortal men be fearful,

CHAP. X. The benefits of wisdom are declared by examples, in Adam, 4. Noe,
The 3. part. The excellent effects of wisdom and justice.
5. Abraham, 6. Lot, 10. Jacob, 13. Joseph, 15. And the people of Israel.
SHE kept him, Adam.
that was first made of God father of the Genesis 1. v. 27.
world, when he was created alone, and she By this it is certain that our
first pare^t Adam truly repented, and had remission of his sin.
brought Genesis 4. v. 8.
her, by the fury of brothers man slaughter perished. For whose cause, when
water destroyed the earth, wisdom healed Genesis 6.
it again, governing the Noe.
just by contemptible wood. She even in the consent of wickedness, when the
nations Abraham.
the just, and preserved Genesis 19.
him without blame to God, and in his sons mercy kept the strong. She
delivered Lot.
the just, fleing from the impious In all trees about Sodom there is only show
of fruit, which when it is touched falls into dust.
trees having fruits at uncertain season; and the memory of an incredulous
soul a standing Lots wife an example of inconstancy.
pillar of salt. For pretermitting wisdom they did not only Jacob.
the just fleing his brothers wrath, she Genesis 28.
conducted by the right ways, and showed him the kingdom of God, and gave him
the knowledge of the holy, did honest him in labors, and accomplised his
labors. In the fraud Genesis 37.
forsook not Joseph.
the just being sold, but delivered him from sinners: and she went down with
him into the pit, and Genesis 41.
in bands leaft him not, til she brought him the scepter of a kingdom, and
might against them, that oppressed him: and showed them to be liars, that
spotted him, and gave him eternal glory. The Gods peculiar people.
just people, and seed without blame Exo. 1.
entered into the soul of the servant of God, and stood against Exo. 3.
dreadful kings in wonders and signs. And she rendered to Exo. 14.
them through the Redsea, and carried them over through a great water. But their
enemies she drowned in the sea, Exo. 12.
holy name o Lord, and thy victorious hand they praised together: Exo. 15.
because wisdom has opened the mouth of the

CHAP. XI. Other benefits of wisdom, protecting the Israelites in the desert;
3. overthrowing their enemies; 4. giving them water out of a rock; 8. plaguing
the Egyptians, 21. yet not al sudenly, but by often admonitions, that they
might have repented if they would.
SHE directed their works in the hands of Moses.
a holy prophet. Exo. 16.
They made a journey through the deserts, that were not Exo. 27.
inhabited: and in desert places they pitched cottages. They The Amalachites.
Exo. 17.
the adversaries, and revenged themselves of the enemies. They thirsted, and
inuocated thee, and water Number 20.
was given them out of a most high rorcke, and quenching of their thirst out of
the hard stone. For by the things whereby went well with them. For in steed of
the fountain of an When the Israelites wanted water God gave them abundance
out of rocks.
they were tempted, But turned the Egyptians waters into blood.
the impious being judged with wrath did suffer torments. These certes
admonishing as a father thou did prove: but After affliction the benefit of
peace is more gratful.
by their Moses was rejected when he judged between his brethren Exo. 2.
whom 14. but was afterward the deliver of the whole people Act. 7. v. 45.
some erring did worship dumme serpents, and superfluous beasts, thou did
send upon them a multitude of dumme beasts for revenge: that they Leuit. 26. v.
22.
made the world of invisible matter, was not unable to send upon them a
multitude of bears, or fierce lions, or unknown Iere. 8. v. 17.
beasts full of anger of a new kind; or breathing the vapor of fires, or
casting forth the savor of smoke, or shooting ^ Egyptians serving beasts for
gods, were plaged by frogs, stuiphes, flees, and locustes.
horrible sparks from their eyes: of which not only God made no creature evil
as the Manichees foolishly imagined, neither is. there any God but one who
alone created al things.
love al things that are, and hate nothing of make any thing hating it.
And how could any thing continue,

CHAP. XII. Gods wisdom and mercy in destroying the wicked inhabitants of
Chanaan, by parts (10. that they might have amended,) whom he could have slain
sudenly. 15. In that God never condemns the just, 19. his people are
instructed to confide in him, 25. and sinners to turn unto him.
O how good, and sweet is thy spirit o Lord in all! And From the land of Jury
called sacred because God was there tightly served in the old testament, and
man's redemption was wrought there by Christ.
of thy sacrament, and the parents authors of Exo. 23. Deuteronomy. 7.
not ignorant, that the nation of them is wicked, and their malice By custom
malice became as it were natural, after that nature was corrupted.
natural, and that their cogitation could not be changed for ever. For it was a
cursed seed from the beginning: do dispose al things justly: thou also
estemest it disagreable from thy power, to condemn him, who ought not to be
punished. For thy power is the beginning of justice: and Gods power being
almighty is only limited by his vvil.
it is in thy power when thou will, to be able. And thou have taught thy people
by such works, that Romans 1. v. 23.
error, esteming for gods those things, that in beasts Serpents, battes,
moles, and like beasts, which seem not only super fluous in the world, but
also hurtful, yet were esteemed as gods.
are superfluous, living after the manner of sensles infants. For this Knowing
him to be the only true God, by whom they saw their false gods destroyed,
yet they did not serve him as God.
for the which cause the end also of their condemnation shall come upon them.

CHAP. XIII. Men following their fantasies knew not God by his creatures, but
honored the creatures for gods. 10. Most sottishly also worshipped things
fashioned by men's hands, as gods.
BUT al men be vame, in Whom there is not the knowledge Gods most proper name is
HE WHICH 1^. Exo. 3. v. 14.
they Romans 1.
could not understand him:: that is, neither attending to the works have they
agnised who was the workman: but Deuteronomy. 4.
either the fire, or the wind, o^ the swift air, or a circle of stars or
exceeding much water, or the sun and the moon, they thought to be gods
rulers of the world. With whose Seeing no creature how excellent soever, is or
may be esteemed a god, it is more foolish to think, an Image, or statua, or
any thing framed by man's hands can be God.
the works of men's hands godds, gold and silver, the invention of art, and
the similitudes of beasts, or an unprofitable stone the work of an old hand.
Or if an artificer Isa. 4.
a carpenter, cut straight timber out of the wood, and pare of all the bark
thereof cunningly, and using his art, diligently frames Iere. 10.
a vessel profitable for the common use of this life, and speak with him, that
is without soul: and for health certes

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
1. They could not understand him, that is.] Philosophers discussing the nature
God is the beginning of al things, absolute and independing.
of many creatures, saw that every creature proceeded of some other thing, and
so there must needs be one beginning of al, absolute of itself, neither
proceeding nor depending of an other, nor a limited substance. As the thing that
is a man, is not a beast; an ox is not a horse: etc. and telling what any
thing is, we exclude thereby that it is not other things, but saying without
addition, HE WHICH IS, we show the beginning of al, in no sort limited: and
this is God. Whom some Philosophers, by such discourse found, and knew, in
general, and sometimes confessed, but did not honor him as God, and therefore
were inexcusable, as S. Paul concludes against them. Romans 1.

CHAP. XIIII. Foolish men intending to sail, honor wooden idols, in regard
of the profit they receive by ships: 6. by which some were saved in the
general diluge. 8. Idols, and idolmakers are cursed. 12. They were not from the
beginning, 15. but were devised for memory of the dead, and worshipped with
divine honor. 22. So men forgetting God, proceeded in idolatry, with other
abominable, and cruel enormities.
AGAIN an other thinking to sail, and beginning to Great madness to invoke a
wodden idol more base and commonly more corruptible then the wood of a ship.
more frail then the wood that carries him. For As the Israelites went through
the redsea.
if a man go to the sea without art. But that thy works might not be void of
The auctor prophetically alludeth to the wood of the Cross, on which our
Savior redeemed mankind.
blessed is the wood, by the which:: justice is and he that made it: because he
in deed wrought it: and the same being frail, was called god. But to God the
impious From whole death proceeds man's justification.
of fornication is the devising of idols: Invention of Idols brought men to
spiritual fornications, and corruption of manners.
he began to worshipe as god, and appointed holy things and sacrifices among
his servants. This first idolatry was only pr^u^tly exercised by the father
and his servants at their masters commandment, by which occasion public
idolatry came into the world, wicked custom in time prevailing.
Afterward by succession of time, the wicked custom preuayling, The name GOD in
the proper signification, can not be given to any creature.
not communicable to stones and wood. And it was not sufficient that they erred
about the Many enormious crimes proceed from dolatrie.
or playing the adulterer makes him sorrowful: and al disquieting of the good,
forgetfulness of God, inquination Two sort es of perjury: swearing by false
gods, and swearing untruths.
Two evil things therefore shall happen to them worthily,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XIIII.
15. The father made unto himself the image of his son.] Calvin here charge
Calvin falsely charge this book with ^r^or.
this book with error, in affirming that idolatry begane by supersticiously
honoring images of the dead. Against which he alleges that Labans idols,
Genesis 31.
and others more ancient, were before any images of dead men were honored.
But he argues upon a false ground. For labans idols were images, as the Hebrew
word Teraphim signifies, and is so translated in the English Bibles (1552. and
1577.) but because they were images of false gods, and for that Laban called
them his gods, a later Bible (1603.) rranslateth it better, idols, Images of
false gods are rightly called idols.
as the Latin and Greek have idola. It is also certain that Ninus king of
Assirians long before Laban, yea before Abraham, set up the image of his
Father Belus (otherwise called Iuppiter) to be publikly honored by the people
as S. Cyril shows. li. 3. in Iulianum, nere the end, and S. Ambrose, or an
other grave Auctor writes the same, in cap. 1. ad Romanos. Likewise S. Cyprian
li. de Idolorum vanitate. S. Chrysostom. ho. 87. in Matthew. and Egesippus, apud
S. Ieronym. li. de Viris Illustrib. testify, that the making of men's images,
in memory of the dead, was the occasion, and beginning of idol^tric, according
as this place repotteth, that a Father sorovving for the death of his son,
Idolatry begane by worshipping images of dead men with divine honor.
made an image in his memory, and begane to worship him as a god, causing
his servants also to honor his dead son, with rites and sacrifices. Which
private idolatry was absolutely the first, that is recorded in holy
Scripture, or any other good auctor. And the first public is counted by most
auctors, that of Ninus, worshipping the image of his father Belus, with
divine honor, who also pardoned al offenders, how enormious soever their
crimes were, that fled unto that image. Which allurment together with so
great a kings auctotitie, Private idolatry was before public.
drevv innumerable to public idolatry. Whereupon S. Ierom notes (in cap. 2.
Oseae) that Ninus became so great and glorious, as to make his father to be
honored as a god*

CHAP. XV. The wise gratfully praise the swetenes, and mercy of God, by whom
they are delivered from idolatry: 6. detesting the makers, and worshippers of
idols.
BUT o thou our God, art sweet, and true, patient, and Of the diue^s sorts of
idols and ^dolaters see our brife Annotion upon the 113. Psalm.
fashioneth Idolaters having forsaken and forgot the only true God, become as
Atheists, making their temporal gain of false gods.
they esteemed our life And so waxing insolent, contemte and persecute the
servants of God.
are the enemies of thy people, and rule over them: because he is better then
they, whom he worshippeth, because he in deed lived, though he were mortal,
but they never. But Some idolaters worshipped brute beasts for gods, as
being better then sensles images: but al are abominable.
they worship also most miserable beasts: for the senseless things compared to
these, are worse then they. Yea neither

CHAP. XVI. God plaguing the Egyptians for idolatry, and cruelty, delivered
the Israelites. 5. Chasticed them also, but again showed them mercy; 20. and
fed them with Manna.
FOR The Egyptians were plagued for their idolatry.
these things, and And that by beasts, because they worshipped beasts for
gods: and by death of their first begotten, for their cruelty against Gods
people.
by the like to these, they have God punished his own people as a father, for
their amendment.
but to these only to show how their enemies were destroyed. For when the
cruel wrath of beasts came The brazen serpent not by any virtue inherent, but
as a sign of Gods favor, was the means of curing the people. Number. 21.
was not healed the gates of death, and fetchest again: but man certes With
the plague of hail there was also fire mixed. Exo. 9. v. 24. Which destroyed
the profitable cattle.
fire more prevailed: for the world is revenger of the just. For a certain
time, the fire was mitigated, that But burnt not other beasts, that plagued
the Egyptians.
the Hail did not extinguish the fire, by Gods power above nature.
in water on every side, that it might destroy the nation of a wicked land.
For the which things thou See the miracles of Manna. Annoe. Exodus 16.
having in it al delectation, and the sweetness of al taste. For He speaks
again of Manna.
heated with a little beam of the sun did melt: that it might be known to al
men, that we ought The vain imagination of the wicked that himself shall be
saved vvil fail him.
faith of the vngratful shall melt as

CHAP. XVII. Horrible darkness falling in Egypt. 19. the rest of the world had
ordinary light.
FOR thy judgments o Lord are great, and thy words inexphcable, for this
cause the souls lacking discipline have erred. For whiles the wicked are
persuaded that they can Exo. ^ and 10.
and Literally the (...)s ^^^^a knes th^er days together Exo 10. v. 22.
Morally they and other g^n^ les were in darkness without faith in God, til
Christ's Resurrection the third day.
long night, shut up under roofes, they have lain fugitives from the
everlasting providence. And whiles they A trubled conscience is a great torment.
a trubled conscience does always presume cruel things. For fear is nothing
else but a bewraying of the thick boughs of trees the sweet sound of birds,
or the force of water running downward exceedingly, or the This signified the
conversion of al nations to Christ.
all the world

CHAP. XVIII. In the Egyptian darkness, the Israelites saw clerly, and were not
seen of their enemies. 5. For the Egyptians cruelty against the Hebrews
infants, al their own first borne were slain, and their whole army drowned
in the redsea. 20. But fire devouring the rebellions in Chores schism, was
quenched by Aarons intercession.
BUT to thy The Church is called holy because it professes holiness and has
always some holy men, and without the Church there is no sanctity.
saints there was very great light, and their When the Egyptians drowned the
Hebrews children, Moses was saved, and reserved to guide the Israelites, when
the Egyptians were drowned.
one child being laid forth, and delivered, thou to the reproving of them,
did take away a multitude of children, and destroyedst them together in the
mighty water. For that night was known before of our disagreing voice of the
enemies, and a lamentable moorning was heard for the bewailed infants. And the
servant with A prophecy of Christ, coming into this world when there was
temporal peace, but extreme darkness of ^gnorance.
For when quiet silence contained al An other example of difference in Gods
punishing his people for their ^mendment, and of the obstinate unto their
^uine. Exo* 14. ^. ^8. Number. 16. ^. 46.
there touched the just also a Number 10
made in the wilderness: but thy wrath did not long continue. For a man without
blame hasting to pray for the people,

CHAP. XIX. Egyptians persecuting the Hebrews were drowned, 10. having been
plagued before with flies, and frogs. 11. Quails were given to the people of
Israel. 13. The barbarous not receiving, or evil entreating Gods people, were
strooken with blindness. 17. And al creatures serve God in punishing the
impious, and rewarding the godly.
BUT upon the impious even to the later end there came God foreseing the
Egyptians malice, permitted them to persecute his people, but was no way the
cause nor auctor of their sin.
he foreknew also the Exo. 14.
things that should come unto them: because when they Exo. 16.
of their desire, there came up to them the quail from the sea: and vexations
came upon the sinners, not without those arguments, which were made before by
the force of lightninges: for they suffered justly occording to their wickedness.

For they instituted a more detestable in hospitality: The Amorrheites refused
to grant them passage. Number 21. v. 21. The Egyptians brought them into
servitude, Exo. 1.
some God changing the natural properties of elements, by them wrought justice
on sinners, S. Greg. ^^. 35. in Euang.
are turned in themselves, as in an instrument the sound of the quality is
changed, and al keep their sound: wherefore it may be certainly judged by the
very sight. For the things Exo. 9. v. 24.
fire had force in water above his power, and the water forgot her quenching
nature. On the contrary the flames vexed Exo. 16. v. 2^.
did they melt that good meat, which was easily dissolved even as ice. For in all things thou did magnify thy people o Lord, and did honor them, and
did not despise them, at al time, and in every place assisting them.

THE ARGUMENT OF ECCLESIASTICVS.
IN what sense this Book is sometimes called Salomons, we have showed in the
argument before the Book of wisdom. As likewise that it is Canonical
Scripture. Whereto we might add more testimonies of ancient Fathers: as S.
Clement of Alexandria, li. 1. c. 8. Pedagogi, Origin. ho. Particular
testimonies that this book is holy Scripture.
8. in Numer. and ho. 1. in Ezech. S. Cyprian de opere and eleemos. S.
Athanasius in Synopsi, and li. de virginitate. S. Basil in regul. disput. resp.
104. S. Gregory Nazianzen. Orat. 2. aduers. Julian. S. Epiphanius. haer. 76.
and in Ancorato. S. Hilarie, in Psalm. 144. S. Ambrose de bono mortis. c. 8. and
Ser. 22. in Psalm. 118. S. Chrysostom ho. 33. ad populum Antioch. S. Augustine,
li. 2. ca. 8. Doct. Christ. and li. 17. c. 20. de Ciuit. S. Gregory the great.
in Psalm. 50. and many others expressly cite this book as holy Scripture, But
chiefly we re^ie upon the authority of the Church defining that it is
Canonical.

It was written by Jesus the son of Sirach in Hebrew, about the It was
written in Hebrew and translated into Greek.
time of Simon Iustus, otherwise called Priscus: and translated into Greek by
the auctors Nephew, as the same Translator testifies in his Prologue, but
expresses not his own name. It is called Ecclesiasticus, which signifies a
Collector or Gatherer, as a common title of every ordinary preacher,
instructing and exhorting the multitude gathered to a sermon: with difference
from Ecclesiastes: Which signifies The Difference between Ecclesiasticus, and
Ecclesiastes.
Preacher, as a greater title of the chief or principal Preacher of any
Church, City, or Province, and agrees most eminently to Christ our Savior:
Who preached, and sends preachers to the whole world. And for the excellent
contents, it may also rightly be called Panaretos, Panaretos.
that is, a Receptacle, or storehouse of al virtues, for the instruction of al
in general, to cooperate with Gods grace in this life, and so enherite eternal
glory. In forty and three whole chapters, are mixtly the commendations, The
contents divided into two parts.
and precepts of al sorts of virtues; sometimes in particular, but more often
under the general names of wisdom and Justice. In the other eight chapters are
recited many excellent examples of most renowned holy men: with praises and
thanks to God.

THE PROLOGVE UPON ECCLESIASTICVS OF JESUS THE SON OF SIRACH.
THE knowledge of many and great things has been By reason of a more perfect
law the people of Israel were more renowned then any other nation in the
world. Deuteronomy. 4.
showed us by the Law, and the Prophets, and others that followed them: in
which we ought:: to praise Israel for doctrine and wisdom: because not only
they in speaking must needs be cunning, but strangers also both lerning and
writing, may become most learned. My grandfather Jesus, after he gave himself
more amply to the diligence of reading the Law, and the Prophets, and other
Books, that were delivered us from our fathers: himself also would write some
of those things, which perteyne to doctrine and wisdom: that such as are
desirous to learn, and to be made counning in the same things, may more and
more be attent in mind, and be confirmed to the life that is according to the
law. I exhort you therefore to come with benevolence, and to read with attent
study, and to pardon us for those things, wherein we seming to follow the
image of wisdom, may fail in the composition of words: for the Hebrew words
also Translations into other languages hardly express the sense of the
original tongue.
fail when they shall be translated to an other tongue. And not only these,
but the Law also itself, and the Prophets, and the rest of other books, have
no small difference, when they are spoken within themselves. For in the eight
and thirteth year, in the time of Prolomee Euergetes the king, after I came
into Egypt: and when I had been there much time, I found there books leaft,
of no small nor contemptible doctrine. Therefore myself also thought it good, and
necessary to add some diligence and labor to interpret this book: and with
much watching I brought forth this doctrine in space of time, that men may learn
those things which teach them, that will apply their mind, how they ought to
order their manners, them that purpose to lead their life according to the Law
of our Lord.

ECCLESIASTICVS. CHAP. I. Wisdom proceeds from God, appears in his
creatures. 10. and is given The 1. part. Praises and precepts of wisdom.
in competent measure to all that fear God, 16. it brings al virtues, 27.
excludes al vices, 33. and is to be sought in simplicity of heart.
AL wisdom is of our Lord God, and has been always Man's wisdom is not able
to comprehend the works of God.
who has numbered? The height of heaven, and breadth of the earth, and
profunditie of the depth who has measured? The wisdom of God that goes before
al things who gift, and has given her to them that fear him. The fear
Eternal glory is the fruicte of the fear of our Lord: not that this one
virtue suffices, but it is the beginning, grounded in true faith, and brings
forth other virtues, divine gifts with the fruits of the Holy Ghost, and a
joyful crown in the end.
glory, and gloriation, and joy, and a crown of exultation. The fear of our
Lord shall delight the heart, Prou. 1. and 9.
and goes with the elect women, and is known with the just and faithful. The
fear of our Lord is religiositie of knowledge. Men drowned in sin think the
service of God a most ted^ous and loathsome thing.
is abomination reuele thy secrets, and in the mids of the synagogue cast
thee down: because thou came to our Lord wickedly, and thy heart is full of
guile and deceit.

CHAP. II. Whosoever will serve God must have justice, fear of God, and
patien^^; 6. with confidence in God. 14. Dissemblers, incredulous, and
impatient shall be miserable; 18. but the godly shall receive more grace.
SON coming to the service of God, stand in justice, and Desire not to dye,
that thou may thereby be covered from vvorldl^e miseries, for that is a
desperate desire, but have patience in this l^fe that thou may fi^de rest in
God.
and make no have in the time of Co^^^ing.
obduction. Sustain the sustentations of God: be joined to God, and As virtues
are to be revvarded: so al sins shall be punished. Namely external pretense of
holiness, with secret evil intention. Distrust in God. Impatience, and the
like.
Woe to them of his way. They that fear our Lord, will seek after the

CHAP. III. Honor of parents procures Gods blessing, 11. dishonoring them his
curse. 19. Mekenes and modesty avail much: but curiosity to know secret
mysteries is dangerous. 27. A charitable, sincere, and docile heart, 33. with
works of mercy merit reward.
THE children of wisdom, are the Church of the just: and The progeny of Gods
children bring forth the fruit of obedience and love.
nation, obedience and love. Honor and estimation of parents is the chiefest
obligation that man has toward his neighbor, and the first after his duty
to God.
Hear your Exo. 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
his parents, and as his lords he will serve them, that begat him. In work and
word, and al patience honor thy father, Genesis 27. and. 49.
may remain in the later end. The fathers blessing establishes the houses of
the children: but the mothers curse rooteth up the foundation. Glory not in
the contumely of thee Alms given, or prayer made, or sacrifice offered for
parents, does merit reward at Gods hand.
for the sin of thy mother, and in justice it shall be Al greatness in men
proceeding from God, binds them so much the more to humility. Which virtue
God most specially loves, that so they may show gratitude for his benefits.
greater Philip. 2.
thou art, humble thy self in all things, and thou shall find grace before
God: because the might of God only is great, Pro. ^^. v. ^.
higher then thy self, and search not things stronger then thy ability: but
the things that God has commanded thee, think on them always, and in many
of his works be not curious. For it is not necessary for thee, to see with
thine Those that dare live in sinful state, tempting God even to the last
hour, commonly perish therein.
that Dan 4. v. 24.
and God is the beholder of him that renders grace: he remembers

CHAP. IIII. An exhortation to practice works of mercy. 12. With commendation
of wisdom: 23. (and observing due times) not to omite for any fear, or sham
fastnes, to say the truth, 34. also to be diligent, meke, and liberal.
SON defraude not the alms of the poor, and turn hungry soul: and
exasperate not the poor in his poverty. Afflict not the heart of the needy,
and defer not the gift to Give not occasion by thy hard dealing with the
poor, that they curse thee.
leave not to them that ask of thee, to curse thee behind thy back. For the
prayer of him that curses thee in the For if thou give cause, God who is their
protector, will revenge them against thee.
shall be heard: and he that made him, will hear him. Make thyself affable to
the congregation of They that follow wisdom shall be safe.
creatures shall be in confirmation: because in tentation she walks with
Through shamfastnes to yield unto sin: or not to reprove sin, is vicious.
shame that brings sin, and there is But to be ashamed, and to abhor
sin is very good and necessary.
shame that brings in his offense: nor keep in a word in time of salvation.
Al men are bond to say the truth at convenient times, v 23. And ever bond to
avoid untruths.
Do not gaynesay the word of Every one is bond ^ather to lose his l^fe, then
to do against justice, o^ to deny the truth.
justice contend for thy soul, and

CHAP. V. Let not riches, youth, nor streingth hold thee in sin: 5. but do
penance for sins remitted, and add not sin upon sin. 6. Neither presume
to sin, because God is merciful. 10. Be not covetous, nor unconstant. 13. Be
meek in lerning, and careful in teaching. 16. not a bat^maker, nor duble
tongued.
ATTEND not to unjust possessions, and say not: I have Though thou be so
potent, that no man can hinder thy evil de signment; yet do it not because God
will punish it.
the concupiscence of thy heart: and say not: How mighty After that sin is
forgeuen there remains of^e^ times punishment for satisfaction.
Of sin forgeuen be not without fear, Covering, or death.
obduction and vengeance. Toss not thy self into every wind, and go not
into every way: for so every sinner is proved by a duble Prou 10. v. 4.
tongue. Constancy in good purpose, meriteth
Be steadfast in the way of our Lord, and in the truth of thy understanding and
in knowledge, and let the the promised peace, and just reward.
word of peace and justice accompany thee. Be mild to hear the

CHAP. VI. Reproach, envy, and ferocitie hinder from loving our neighbor, 5.
swetenes norisheth it. 6. A trusty friend is much worth. ^8. Seek and keep
wisdom, with all diligence. 35. Frequent the company of the wise: and meditate
in Gods law.
BE not for a friend made an enemy to thy neighbor: for So Gedeon pacified the
Ephraimites, that were incensed against him. Iudic. 8
A sweet word multiplieth friends, and appeaseth against thee, and hide himself
from thy face, thou shall have frendshippe of one accord for good. Be separated
from Many prefer lerning before piety, which S. Augustine reproves,
preferring the godly before the learned that are less virtuous: The unlearned
rise (says he) and take the kingdom of heaven, and we with our lernings
without halt, lo how we tumble in the dirt. li. 8. c. 8. Consess.
the wisdom of doctrine is doors. Have thy cogitation in the precepts of God,
and in

CHAP. VII. Fly from al evil things, 4. as ambition, presumption, scandal,
pusillanimitie, lying, and babbling. 16. Husbandry of the ground, 21. a good
wife, and good servants are to be cherised, 25. keep children in discipline.
29. Honor parents, and elders, 36. and pity the poor. 40. Memory of the
last things preserves from sin.
DO what soever any sows that he shall reap, and the wicked shall eat the
fruits of his own works
not evils, and they shall nor apprehend thee. Job. 9.
not reap them seuenfold. Seek not of the lord chief Psalm. 142
principality, nor of the king the chair of honor. Justify not thyself
before God, because he is the knower of the heart: Eccle. 7.
and before the king desire not to seem wise. Great prudence and sortitude are
required in all Judges spiritual and temporal.
Seek not In hell are two punishments: fire burning, and the worm of
conscience vering the soul, and both are eternal.
iterate not a word in thy speech. Hate not laborious works, and husbandry
created of the Lord: for the grace of her bashfulnes is above gold. Hurt Leuit.
^^.
not the servant that works in truth, nor the hired man that gives his
soul. Let a wise servant be beloved of thee as T^b. ^.
mother: remember that thou had not been borne but by Deuteronomy. 1^.
Honor God with all thy soul, and honor the priests, and Leuit. ^.
is commanded thee, of the first fruits and purgation: and of Number ^^.
thy negligence purge thy self with few. The gift of thine Works of mercy
are also profitable to the dead, as prayer, alms, and sacrifice for souls in
purgatory.
and from the dead stay nor grace. Want not in consolation Rom 1^, v. 15.
to them that weep, and walk with them that moorne. Be not loath to visit the
sick: for by these things A most especial preservative from sin.
remember

CHAP. VIII. Contend not with a man of power, rich, full of tongue, or very
ignorant. 6. Despise not the penitent, nor old folk. 8. Rejoice not at an
enemies death. 9. Learn of the elder. 13. Observe discretion in admonishing,
lending, and in being suertie. 17. Reprove not Judges. 18. Converse not with
the furious, foolish, nor with strangers.
STRIVE not with a mighty man, lest perhaps thou fall Briberie sometimes
corrupts kings much more other inferior Judges. And therefore it is better to
suffer damage then to contend by law against the rich.
gold and heart of kings, and has turned them. Strive not with a man Gal 6.
are al in state to be blamed. Despise not a man in his old Prou. 26.
the fire of their sins. Stand not against the face of a contumelious Prou.
22. v. 24.
audacious go not into the desert: because blood is as nothing before him, and
where there is no help, he will overthrow thee. Confer no counsel In all
consultations confer with the skilful; for the blind can not judge of
colors, the dease of music, the sick of taist: nor worldly m^n of spiritual
things.
with fools, for they can not

CHAP. IX. Great prudence is required in conversation between men and women. 14.
Esteem old freindes. 16. Emulate not sinners. 18. Avoid the company of
malicious. 21. Consult with the prudent, having God ever before thine eyes.
BE Seeing ielosie between man and wife is dangerous, much more unnecessary
conversation between other men and women, especially probable occasions of sin
must be avoided.
not ielous over the wife of thy bosom, lest she show Prou. ^.
thyself, and thine inheritance. Look not round Constancy in good things
namely in freindshippe is very necessary.
Forsake not an old friend: for the new will not be like to A sinner that
prospers is like to a somer flower in the filde, that is quickly cut down,
and withers,
Do not zelousely

CHAP. X. Wise superiors are very necessary, because the multitude follow their
example. 6. Remitte and forget injuries, detest pride, injustice, contumely,
and avarice. 12. Life is short. 14. Pride is the root of al sins. 23. Just
poverty is better then sinful riches. 31. Mekenes and modesty are necessary
in all men.
A wise judge shall judge his people, and the principality Example of rulers is
of great efficacy.
According to the Judge Prou. 29.
of the people, so also are his ministers: and what manner of man the ruler of a
city is, such also are the habitants therein. An unwise king shall destroy his
people: and cities shall be Dan. 4.
God and men: and all the iniquity of the nations is execrable. A The causes of
translating kingdoms, and dominions.
kingdom is translated from nation unto nation, Couetuosnes is the root of al
euiles, 1. Tim. 6. in that for lucie many fall into al sorts of sins, even
into schism and heresy, erring from the faith. ibidem. v. 1^.
nothing is more wicked then the Nevertheless pride is the beginning of al
sin, as this text expressly testifies, and the reason is, for that man's
inordinate self love is the cause of declining from Gods commandments. and they
which run on in that course, cast themselves headlong into the depth of al
mischief, and of eternal misery.
pride is the beginning of al sin: he that holds it, shall be filled with
curses, and it shall subvert him in the end. Therefore has our Lord dishonored
the congregations He has made of them to wither, and has destroyed them,
Prou. 17.
that is prudent and has discipline, will not murmur being rebuked, and the
ignorant shall not be honored. Extol not Prou. 1^.
things, then he that glories, and lacks bread. Son in

CHAP. XI. Wisdom by humility meriteth exaltation. 7. Judge not before
examination. 16. Trust not in riches. 14. God sends both prosperity and
adversity, for the good of his servants. 31. Take heed of the deceiptful.
THE A wisman humbling himself by penance as Daniel did, or being unjustly
humbled by others, as Joseph was shall be exalted by God.
wisdom of the humble shall exalt his head, and shall and secret, and not seen.
Many tyrants have sit in the Expect the end of an other man's speech, before
you begin to answer.
Before thou hear, Expect also if any that is elder, or better able will
answer first.
of ancients add not Deuteronomy. 13.
to speak. Strive not for that thing, which does not Job. 42.
the eye of God has respected him in good, and has erected him from his low
estate, and has exalted his head: and many have merueled at him, and have
honored God. Good One punishment of sin is blindness of heart. Especially
where is no remorse of conscience.
Error and darkness are created with sinners: In prosperity is fear, and in
adversity hope of change.
In the day of good things be not unmindful of evils: every one according to
his ways. The malice of an hour

CHAP. XII. Use benevolence toward good men. 10. Trust not enemies over much.
IF thou will do good, It is rather cruelty then mercy to nourish a wicked
man persisting in sin: for so he runs still into more wickedness, and into
eternal damnation,
know to whom thou do it, and but the penitent is to be comforted and
assisted.
that are penitent. Give to the merciful, Every one is bond to love his enemy
of charity; but in prudence it be houeth not to credit him. According to our
Saviors rule: Be wise as serpents; and simple as dooues. Mat. 10
Credit not thyn let him sit on thy right hand, lest perhaps turning into
thy place, he seek after thy seat: and at the last thou know my words, and be
pricked in my sayings. Who will have pity

CHAP. XIII. Conversation with the proud, rich, and potent is dangerous. 9.
Rely upon Gods help, 11. Beware of pusillanimitie, and of presumption. 19. A
mean is necessary, and the company of equals is most secure.
HE that touches pitch, shall be defiled with it: and he that Deuteronomy. 7.
communicates with the proud, shall put on pride. He that conuerseth with a
greater man then himself (except it be with virtuous) is forced often to suffer
much and to yield to many inconveniences.
He shall take a burden upon him that communicates with Pusill animitie in a
superior makes him omite his duty, and commit errors, fearing to do that
perteyneth to his office, and which his authority requires.
Be not humble in thy wisdom, not importune, lest thou be rejected: and be not
far from him, lest thou go into oblivion. Stay not to speak felowlike
Acception of persous hinders many good counsels: and promoteth many evil
things.
The rich man

CHAP. XIIII. Offense of the tongue is a frequent and dangerous sin. 3.
Riches are hurtful to a covetous, and to an envious mind. 11. works of mercy
necessary. 22. and perseverance in wisdom.
BLESSED is the man that has not offended in a word Iac. 3.
out of his mouth, and is not pricked with the sorrow of sin. Happy is he,
that has not had heaviness of his He that can not afforde nourishment to his
own body by such means as he has, sins against God, abusing his
benefits, against himself whom he unjustly afflicts and against his
neighbor whom he scandalizeth.
He that enuieth himself, Prou. 27. v. ^0.
a portion of iniquity, will not be satisfied til he consume his own soul
withering it. An evil eye is toward evil In the old testament al descended
into some part of hell.
the covenant of hell has been showed thee: for the covenant of this world
shall dye the death. Before death do good to thy friend, and according Isa. 40.
v. 7.
a green tree. Some grow, and some are shaken of: so the There shall be
particular reward of every good work.
every excellent and good things shall rest in his cottage for ever. He shall

CHAP. XV. The fruictes of fearing God; 7. Which fools, and liers reap not,
but the wise only. 11. God is no way auctor of sin, 14. but sinners
themselves are the auctors, abusing their freewil.
HE that fears God, shall do good things, and he that Who so ever shall
resolve with himself to live justly, shall be sure to have grace, for God
preuenteth our weakness and so continues to help all that acccept his grace.
justice shall apprehend her, and she will meet He does injury to God, and to
his word, that preaches well and lives evil.
Praise is not Beza says, God ordained Adams fall, but to a good end: and
that God justly decreed that which men unjustly have done. in refut. 2.
calumnae, ad Castle. But this holy Scripture teaches the contrary, that God
gave man both freewil, and sufficient grace, that he might if he would have
kept his preceps. The same is also clearly taught. Deuteronomy 7. 11. 30. and other
places.
It is by God, that she is absent: for do not Genesis 2.
and left him in the hand of his own counsel. He added his Mat. 19. v. 17.
commandment, and keep acceptable fidelity for ever, they shall preserve thee.
He has set before thee water and fire: Ier. 2. v. 8.
man there is life and death, good and evil: what pleases him shall be given
him: Because the wisdom of God is much, and he is strong in might, seeing al
men without intermission. The eyes of our Lord are toward them that fear

CHAP. XVI. A few good children, yea none at al, are better then many wicked.
9. Gods wrath falls upon the evil, and his mercy on the good. 14. works of
mercy merit great reward. 15. Nothing is hid from God, 20. but many things
from men.
REJOICE not in impious children, if they be multiplied: Fire of concupiscence,
if it be not overcome in this life, will procure the fire of Gods wrath, which
shall never be extinguished.
a fire shall flame, and in Genesis 6.
trusting to their own strength: and he spared not the peregrination Number. 26.
six hundred thousand foot men, which were gathered together in the hardness of
their heart: and if one had been stiff necked, it is meruel if he had been
unpunished. For there Romans 2. v. 6.
every man according to Even a dish of cold water given in alms shall be
rewarded. Mat. 10.
the merit of his works, and according to the understanding of his
peregrination. Say not; I and the heavens of heavens, the depth, and all the
earth, and the things that are in them, in his sight shall be moved, the
Reasonable souls (if they follow reason) and al sensible souls do (in their
manner) praise the providence of God, in using al creatures to that end for
which they were treated.
the

CHAP. XVII. God creating man to his own image, gave him gifies, 9. and
precepts. 14. chose the Israelites for his peculiar people. 18. Works of
mercy are commended to al men. 20. Repentance to sinners. 28. mercy is
offered to al.
GOD created man of the earth, and after his own image Man at first recemed
original justice, by losing whereof we al fell into original sin.
with strength. He and tongue, and eyes, and ears, and heart to devise: and he
filled them with the discipline of understanding. He created in God gave a
precept to man to be observed for exercise of his obedience and so to be
rewarded, and under pain of punishment if he transgreded. ^en. 2.
discipline Romans 13.
And al their works as the sun in the sight of God: and Perseverance in
virtue to the end is necessary which none can merit:
stand in the lot of thy purpose, and But must still pray for it.
of prayer of the most high God. Go into the parts of the delighted in the
vanity of malice. What is brighter then the

CHAP. XVIII. Gods wonderful works excede man's capacity. 7. Our weakness is
streingthened by grace. 15. whereto man must cooperate, 19. by purging his
conscience, 22. by prayer, 24. by meditating Gods judgments, 30. and by
mortifying his own concupiscence.
HE that lives for ever, created al things Al creatures according to their
substantial form in general, were created together, though they were
afterward formed in particular kinds, as they are distinctly recited in
Genesis, with the order and ornaments of the world. S. Aug. li. 4. c. 33 and
34. de Genesis ad litter. Where he expressly affirms that this Scripture was
written by inspiration of the same spirit of truth, whereby Genesis was written.
together. God Psalm. 89. v. 10.
drops of the water of the sea they are reputed: and as the grauel stone of
the sand, so a few years in the day of eternity. For this cause God is
patient toward them, and powers judgment examine thyself, and in the sight of
God thou shall 1. Cor. 11.
find propitiation. Before sickness humble thy self, and in They pray always
that pray at certain convenient times. And still have intention so to frequent
the same exercise al their life. S. Aug. Epist. 121. c. 9. ad Probam.
to pray always, and fear not to be justified even to death: Luc. 18. 1.
because the reward of God abides for ever. Before prayer 1. These. 5.
prepare thy soul: and be not as a man that tempts God. Remember the wrath
in the day of consummation, and the

CHAP. XIX. An admonition against drunkenness, luxury, 4. light suspicion, 7.
and detraction. 13. Freindlie correption is necessary, 23. and sincere
humility. 27. Exterior carege is a sign of internal disposition.
A workman that is a drunkard shall not be rich: and he The best remedy against
great sins is to avoid small ones, and not to contemn the least, but
diligently to amend al.
that contemns small things, shall fall by little and little. Wine and women make
wisemen to apostatate, and shall 3. Reg. 11.
reprove the prudent: and he that joins himself to harlotes, Ios. 22.
over be counted one that sins against his own soul. He thar rejoices in
iniquity, shall be reprehended, and he naughtiness, shall be reprehended.
Iterate not a wicked That this document perteyneth to common conversation with
worldie men, appears by the next verse. But to reuele secret sins to a
spiritual father, in sacramental confession, is necessary wholesome and
secure. It is al^o very commendable and most lawful in holy religious
Societies, where they willingly for their own spiritual good submit
themselves to such a godly rule.
disclose it not. For he will hear thee, and will watch thee, and as it L^uit.
1^.
say: I did it not: or if he did it, that he do it not again. Mat. 15.
Rebuke thy neighbor, lest perhaps he said it not: and if Iac. 3.
tongue? Rebuke thy neighbor before thou threaten. And: False pretense of
piety is hypocrisy.
wickedly humbles himself, and his inner parts be full of deceit: and there
is a just man And in a Superior, to oppen his own secret fault to his
subjects is pusillanimitie.
that submits Discretion auoideth both: by concealing and reueling faults
as reason directs and justice requires.
that boweth his face, and feyneth himself not to see that which is unknown:
and if he be forbidden to sin

CHAP. XX. Correction ought to be without passion of anger. 5. much discretion
is required in speech, and in silence. 14. Also in giving, 20. and promising,
29. and in uttering knowledge, where and when it behooves.
HOW good a thing is it to rebuke, rather then to be angry, Eccle. ^.
How good a thing is it He that takes reptchension in good part when he is
faulty meriteth pardon, and when he is not faulty he satifieth for his other
sins and meriteth reward.
being rebuked to show repentance! His intention is full of guile that
flattereth by show of love and of praise, but he will detract so much the more,
and in the end reproach thee when he may get probable advantage against thee.
seven fold. He will give few things, and vpbraide mouth shall be rejected: for
he does not speak it in his time. There is that is forbid to sin for
poverty, and in his rest Prou. 12.
and who so works justice, he shall be exalted: and he that pleases great
men, shall avoid iniquity. Presents, and gifts Exo 23.
blind the eyes of judges, and as one dumb in the mouth turns Deuteronomy* 16.
away their chastisementes. Wisdom is to be showed in words and deeds when
it may profit others.
Wisdom hid, and treasure To conceal faults, so they be amended, is most
convenient.
Better is he that

CHAP. XXI. An inuectiue against sin in general, 5. and diverse in particular.
SON have thou sinned? do so no more: but for the As a serpent deceiptfully
approaches and stingeth the body, so al sins inuegle and hurt the soul.
As from It is a sign that he is guilty, who contemns freindly admonition.
the trace of a sinner: and he that fears God, He that truly fears God will
diligently examine his own acts, and defectes when he is warned.
will turn to his own heart. The mighty in there, and their consummation a
flame of fire. The way of As walls of stone built in the frost, so riches or
good name unjustly gotten will not continue long
understanding thereof. The consummation of the fear of Senseles, or bad talk
is tedious to al good men.
narration of a fool is as a burden in the way: Words that may edify are
gratful to al godly ears.
the lips of the wise shall grace be found. The Wicked men condemning the
devil or any other wicked, do in deed condeme them selves. And to them agrees
that sentence: of our Savior. By thine own mouth I judge thee, naughty
servant. Luc. 19.
the impious curses the devil, he curses his

CHAP. XXII. An other admonition against sloth, 3. dissolute children, 6. and
mirth out of season. 7. Fools are hardly corrected, 10. more to be bewailed
then the dead. 14. Much talk does not profit them. 24. Offend not, nor sear
not a friend. 33. Keep always guard of thy torgue.
THE sluggard is stoned Contempt and ignominy is the worldly punishment of
the slouthful, besides his eternal damnation at the day of judgment. Mat. 25*
^. 30*
with a durtie stone, and al men will In this and other places is not understood
a fool that by defect of natural vvitte is ignorant, or an ideote, but he that
is void of grace, full of malice, and wickedness. For the wicked life of such a
one is worse then his death. v. 12.
a fool, for he fails in understanding. Weep a Gen 50.
life of the very wicked, above the death of a fool. The Prou. ^3.
moorning of the dead is seven days: but of a fool and of the impious, all the
days of their life. Speak not much with a Prou* ^^.
then an unwise man, and a fool, and impious. A frame of stone at fowls, and
shall throw them down: so he that speaks reprochefully to his friend,
dissolueth freindship. A true friend will not be lost for temporal damage no^
danger.
Although But the vices of derision, reproach, and the like violate al
freindshipe with wise and good m^n*
except taunt, and reproach and pride, and revealing of secret, and a traitorous
wound: in all these things a friend will flee away. Possess fidelity Ps. 140.


CHAP. XXIII. A prayer against pride, 6. gluttony, and luxury. 7. Beware of
offending in speech. 9. especialliy of unlawful swearing 15. blasphemy, 17.
irreuerent and reprocheful words. 21. Also of avarice, 24. fornication, and
adultrie, 30. al which God sees, and will seuerly punish. 33. With other sins
that follow thereof.
O Lord father, and dominatour of my life Man being weak and the enemy subtle
and strong, he is not able to resist tentations without Gods special grace, for
which the vvisman therefore prays, instructing al by his example to do the
same.
leave me not Precepts how to govern the mouth, and tongue.
the doctrine of the mouth: and vanirie, and the proud and the evil speaker
shall he scandalized in them. Let not thy mouth be accustomed Against rash,
untrue, and unlawful swearing. Iere. 4.
to swearing: Mat. 5.
God be usual in thy mouth, and meddle not with the names of Saints, because
thou shall not escape free from them. For In oaths God is called to witness as
he that can not lie, but b^a^phemie attributes that to God which perteyneth
not him, or attributes to some creature that which only belongs to God, and
so is a contrary sin to unlawful swearing.
contrary speech, also Both are mortal sins.
to death, be it not found in the inheritance of Jacob. For of the merciful al
those things shall be taken away, Admonition against sins, of the tongue.
vnnurtered speech: for there is in it a word of sin. Reproach to parents, and
other neighbors.
Remember thy father and thy mother, for thou Against covetousness.
hot soul as a burning fire will not be Fornication.
a fornicatour al bread is sweet, he will not be weary transgressing unto the
end. Every man that passes Adultrie.
beyond his own bed, contemning against his own soul, and saying: Who sees
me? Darkness compasses me, and Isa. 29.
the walls cover me, and no man beholds me: whom do I fear? the Highest will
not be mindful of my sins. And things. Seeing earnal adultrie shall be
severely punished, much more spiritual: as schism heresy, and apostasy from
Catholic Religion.
Revenge shall be taken on this man in the streates Leui 20.
of the city, and as an horsecolt he shall be chased: and where Deuteronomy. 22.
he expected not, he shall be apprehended. And he shall be in

CHAP. XXIIII. True and laudable wisdom 5. proceeding from God, 6. shines in
his works: 12. especially in his Church; where she brings forth al virtues.
26. She inuiteth al unto her. 44. and lighteneth her folowers with splendore of
doctrine.
WISDOM shall praise Divine wisdom the Second Person of the B. Trinity
begotten not created praises it self. According to the phrase of speech Iere.
51. v. 14. The Lord of hosts has sworn by his soul, that is, by himself.
her soul, and shall be honored down the hearts of all the excellent, and the
base; and in all these things God offers his grace, but forces not any to
accept it.
I sought rest, and I shall abide in the inheritance of our Lord. Then the
creator of al commanded, and said Creation is not here taken in the strict
signification, but for divine production, in that God the Father by
understanding begets God the Son. As likewise the Father and the Son by
love produce the Holy Ghost.
created me, rested in my tabernacle, and in the Church only is effectual grace.
in Jacob, and inherit in Israel, and take root in mine elect. From the
beginning and before Psa. ^^^
honey, and mine inheritance above honey and the honey comb. My memory is
unto generations of worlds. The more grace any has the more he desires and
receives.
eat me, shall yet hunger: and they that drink In David's progeny God
preserved the kingly state til the captivity: and the estimation of the royal
blood unto Christ But in all this David was a figure of Christ. Who sits in
the Throne of honor absolutely for eu^^.
for ever. Who fills wisdom as replenisheth understanding as Euphrates, who
multiplieth it Ios^. 3.
as Jordan in the time of harvest. Who sends discipline as

CHAP. XXV. Concord between brethren, neighbors, and man and wife, much
pleases God. 3. A poor man proud, a richman a lier, and an old man doting in
carnal, or worldly things, are very hateful. 9. He that sees his children
good; and his enemies overthrown; has a good wife; offends not in speech;
consents not to sin; has a true friend; teaches good doctrine; has
sacred; and humane knowledge: has undoubtedly nine happy things: but to fear
God conteyneth 14. and excels al. 17. A wicked woman (heresy) is very
detestable, 30. and most intolerable, if she have supreme dominion.
IN three things my spirit is pleased, which are approved Three very
commendable things.
The concord of brethren, and Other three detestable.
A poor man proud: and a rich man a God is their glory. Nine happy things
in this life.
Nine things not to be imagined of Iac. 3.
dwells with a wise woman; and that has not offended with his tongue; and
that has not served such as are unworthy of him. Blessed is he that finds a
true friend; and that declares Al happiness in this life is grounded in the
fear of God.
that fears our Lord. The fear of God has set it self above all The
description of heresy under the figure of a wicked woman: whose malice is
secretly covered under pretense of truth and ^^^^^^.
the wickedness of a woman. And he will see al plague, and not the plague of
Prou* ^^.
pleasant to abide with a lion and dragon, then to dwell with a wicked woman.
The wickedness of a woman changes her Layheadshi^e in spiritual causes is so
vnreasonab le and absurd, that ^^w heretics (...)ure it.
if she have superiority, is contrary to her husband. An humbled heart, and
heavy countenance, and plague of

CHAP. XXVI. The praises of a good woman. 5. The betraying of a city, mutenie
of people, and fal^e accusation are terrible, but a ielous woman is more
greuou^. 10. Diverse il qualities of a bad woman. 16. More commendations of a
good woman. 25. A doleful thing to see a valiant warier wanting liuelihood, a
wiseman not regarded, and greatest grief to see a just man become wicked. 28.
A man full of business hardly cares for his soul: and a^^ Inns keeper often
sins in words.
THE husband of a good wife is happy: for the number of An vnqu^^^ life
dep^iu^th a man of much comforth: and therefore continual peace ^^ as a duble
life.
duble. A strong woman delights her As when o^^n mo^e* the yoke o^ their
necke^ does move withal: so a wicked woman (to witt^ heresy) can not rest, nor
let others rest, quiet.
a yoke of oxen, that is moved, so also a wicked woman: The Catholic faith is
the ground al al virtues.
The

A lamp shyning upon the holy candlestick, and the beauty Those that keep
innes or ailehouses are always talking, as willing to please al, but in much
talk wants not sin. Prou. 10. v. 19.
a viteler shall not be justified from the sins of the lips.

CHAP. XXVII. For want, and desire of riches, many commit sin. 4. from
which the fear of God preserves. 6. Tentation proves, who is just, 12.
constant, and modest. 17. Freindes are bond to secrecy, 25. and fidelity.
THROVGH poverty many have offended: and he that 1. Tim 6.
seeks to be made rich, turns away his eye. As a The soul is kept in good
state by fearing God.
thy house After that sin is purged there remain relics in the soul, as
dust in a siene, when the chafe is cast out, til it be more purged or washed
Psalm. 50. v. 4.
the perplexity of a man in his cogitation. The furnace tries the potters
vessels, and the tentation Prou. 27.
of tribulation just men. As the husbandry about a tree Whether the sun
shines forth or not, it is alvvayes light: so is a vvisman alvvayes virtuous,
vvhetherit appea^^ outwardly or no.
as:: the moon. In the mids of the unwise keep the word shall make the hear
of the head to stand upright: and his lack of reverence is the stopping of the
ears. Sheding of A fool, or wicked man, has no light of virtue in himself
(like the moon) butsometimes seems to have more light, sometimes less,
sometimes none at al. S. Bernard.
Love thy neighbor, and be joined with him in fidelity. Prou. 10.
winketh with the eye, forgeth wicked things, and no man will cast him of: in
the sight of thine eyes he will sweet his He that expressly does injury to an
other is iuitly punished also in this world.
casts a stone on high, it will fall upon his head: and How secretly soever
any hutteth an other, he vvoundeth his own conscience, and can not escape
Gods judgment.
the deceitful stroke will divide the wounds of the deceitful. He Prou. 26.
his neighbor, shall stumble on it: and he that lays a snare for Eccle. 10.
an other, shall perish in it. To a man that does most wicked

CHAP. XXVIII. Abstain from revenge, 8. and strife, 15. from making debate,
28. from hearing, and speaking evil.
HE He that seeks revenge contrary to the course of justice, or of evil
intention, or of rancor of mind, sins grievously.
that will be revenged, shall find revenge of our ^ut. 6.
thy neighbor hurting thee: and then shall thy sins be loosed R^m. 11.
to thee when thou prayest. Man to man reserueth anger,:: Charity requires
that we remitte injuries with three conditions, if the offender be truly
penitent, if the remission of punishment be not against justice, nor against
necessary discipline.
to be at enmity: for consumption and death are imminent (...)* ^^*
the forest, so the fire burns: and according to the power of a man, so shall
his anger be, and according to his substance he will increase his anger. Hasty
contention kindles a fire: Indiscreet report to one what an other has said,
is often cause of much coffeehouse, and of dissension.
third tongue has moved many, and dispersed them from nation into nation. It
has destroyed the walled city of the burn in them, and shall not be quenched,
and it shall be sent in upon them as a lion, and as a leopard it shall hurt them.
To hear detraction is as bad as to speak it.
Hedge thine ears with thorns, and hear not a wicked

CHAP. XXIX. Lend charitably, 3. and restore faithfully. 10. For the fault of
il debtors, omit not to help the honest. 12. rather give alms where need
is. 19. Be thankful for suretiship, 28. Live frugally. 32. Go not a ghestning
for delicate chere.
HE that Lending is a work of mercy, and a kind of alms. To repay that is
borrowed is a work of justice, wittingly not to restore is as bad as theft.
lends to his neighbor, does mercy: and Exo. 22.
Deuteronomy. 14.
send him not away empty. Lose money for thy brother and T^b. 4.
Great fruit of works of mercy.
and it shall profit thee more then gold. Shut up alms in the heart of the
poor, tnyne enemy. A good man becomes surety for his: and he that has lost
shame, will leave him to himself. Forget not the kindness of a suertie: for he
has Prudence requires that by helping an other, thou do not overthrow
thyself.
take heed to thy self that thou fall not. The beginning of man's life water and:
and where he shall lodge, he shall not deal boldly, nor open his mouth. He shall
lodge, and feed, and make the vnthanckful

CHAP. XXX. Chastisment of children is necessary, and indulgence very
dangerous. 14. Health is better then riches. 17. A trublesome life is worse
then death. 22. Be not pensive but chereful in mind.
HE that loves his soune, does accustom him to stripes, Pr^^. 1^. and. 2^.
that he may rejoice in his later end, and not grope after the doors of his
neighbors. He that teaches his son, the enemy into emulation, and in the
mids of his freindes he shall glory in him. His father is dead, and he is as
it were Deuteronomy. 6.
not dead: for he has left behind him the like to himself. In his life he saw
and rejoiced in him: in his death he was The eldest son being heir to his
father, is to have ^pecial case of the other children, even to the aduenturing
of his own hurt for their lives.
For the Teeth on edge o^ g^ashing of teeth, is a part of hell pains. ^^^. 8.
and 1^ and sometimes begins in this life.
thy teeth shall be on edge. Give him not power in his youth, and contemn not
his (...) is above al riche^, and honor.
health of the soul in holiness of justice, is better Deuteronomy. 14.
of iniquity: seeing with his eyes, and groaning, as an eunuch Suffer not
unnecessary pensiuenes to afflict thy mind, through pusillanimitie.
Give not heuines to thy Prau. 12. 15. and 17.
soul, and afflict not thyself in thy counsel. Ioyfulnes of the ^^ut rely
wholly ^^^^ Gods ^^l and providence. resigning thy will ^^to his*
pleasing God, and refrain: and comfort thy heart in his holiness: and expel
sorrow far from thee. For

CHAP. XXXI. By seeking virtue, and laboring for necessaries, the flesh is
subdued to the spirit. 8. Moderate riches are best, 12. with temperance in
diette, 30. especially in drinking.
WATCHING They that employ al their study to getre virtues, shall be more free
from tentations of the flesh.
after honesty shall pine the flesh, and And from drawsines of mind: whereupon
S Ierom admonishes: Love the studies of holy Scriptures, and thou vvilt not
love the vices of the fresh. Epist ad Rusticum Monach.
takes away sleep. The It is in man's freewil to transgress, and therefore
they are happy, that through Gods grace do not break his commandments.
could transgress^e, and has not transgressed: and do evils, and has not
done: therefore are his good Prou. ^^.
Leave of first, for manners sake, and exceed not, lest thou he shall sleep
until morning, and his soul with him shall be deligted. And if thou have been
forced with eating much, Prou. 22.
faithful. In As bread is the chief sustena^ce of the body, so doctrine is of
the mind, which being good nourishes, and if it be bad corrupts them that
receive it.
naughty bread the city will murmur, and the Psa. 103.
is the joy of the soul, and the heart. Sober drinking Prou 31.
is health to soul and body. Much wine drunken makes

CHAP. XXXII. Superiors must rule with mekenes, 4. teaching those wisdom that
are capable thereof. 7. Be moderate in music, and in wine. 9. Let yongmen be
diligent to hear, and sparing to speak. 13. especially before their betters.
1^. Be always well occupied. 17. Serve, and fear God. 21. admit correction.
24. do nothing without counsel.
HAVE they made thee Ruler? Humility is necessary in all, but most especially
in men of authority. The greatest art in this life is to contemn vain glory
in height of authority. S Greg. de cura pastorali
be not extolled: be Eccle. 3.
speech, and extol not thyself out of time in thy wisdom. A little pearl of
the carbuncle in an ornament of gold, and God di^ecteth men's resolutions, and
actions, when they use the means of consultation, as he has appointed* for
when two or three are gathered in his name, he is in mids of them. Mat. 18.
do nothing without counsel, and after the fact Do not against thy conference.
by faith: for this is

CHAP. XXXIII. Fear of God defends from al adversaries. 5. Folly is
unconstant. 8. God disposes al to the best. 13. Man is in Gods hand, as clay
in the po^ters. 20. Superiors must keep their authority: and their subjects
in discipline.
TO him that fears our Lord evils shall not happen, but Men led with
passions run from one vice into an other without ceasing. Especially
heretics run into many errors. Against which S Paul prescribes this rule.
It is best that the heart be established with grace. Heb. 13. v. 9.
The heart of a fool is as a wheel Romans ^.
Al his ways according to his disposition: so man in the be exquisite. Give no
stain to thy glory. In the day of the

CHAP. XXXIIII. Trust not vain dreams, southsayinges, nor lies. 9. Much good
is got by experience: 14. and more by fearing God. 21. God rejects the
oblation, of the wicked. 24. Defrauding the poor is like to manslaughter. 28.
Destroy not that an other builds. 30. Repentance without amendment is nothing
worth.
VAIN hope, and lying is to a foolish man: and Vain dreams are not to be
regarded: but some are good, and from God. Gen 37. 40. 41. Dan. 2. 4. Mat. 1.
dreams Whatsoever is written in holy Scripture is undoubtedly true: and no
^ote of the law shall perish.
The word of the law shall be fulfilled God also provides that always there be
some which truly explicate his law.
wisdom in the mouth of the faithful shall be made plain. He that has not
been proved, what few things: and he that has been in many things,
multiplyeth wickedness. He that has not been proved, what Psa. 32.
a stay of strength, a cover from the heat, and shadow for the noone time, a
saving from offense, and help from falling, Prou. 21. v. 27.
of an unjust thing is spotted, and the scorninges of the unjust are not
acceptable. Our Lord is only theirs that expect him Prou. 15. v. 8.
the gifts of the wicked: neither has he regard to the oblations of the
unjust, neither will he be made propitious for sins by the multitude of their
sacrifices. He that offers Leuit. 19.
the hired man, are brethren. He that destroys that an other builds
brings two men's labors to nothing.
One building, and an other R^cidiuation into sin makes the ^o^^er
repentance frustrate. Mat. 18. v. 33.
and touches him

CHAP. XXXV. Observation of the commandments, 4. and sacrifice of the just
please God, 12. not the sacrifice of the wicked. 14. God protecteth the poor
and desolate, 19. hears the prayer of the humble, and rendereth to alas they
deserve.
HE Sacrifices of penance, Psalm ^^* of justice Psalm. ^ and of praise, ^^a. 4^.
(...) then (...)
that keeps the law, multiplieth oblation. It is 1. Reg. 15* v. 22. Iere. 7.
an wholesome sacrifice to attend to the commandments, Nevertheless (...) is also
necessary
Thou shall not appear Exo. ^^.
before the sight of our Lord empty. For all these things (...) ^4. D^^^ ^^.
are done because of the commandment of God. The oblation 2 Cor. ^. ^^^ ^.
make thy countenance chereful, and in ioyfulnes sanctify thy tithes. Give to
the Highest according to his gift, and with Often times so much. A^ Prou. 24.
Seven times shall the just fall, and shall ^^^ again.
seven Leuit. 22. Deuteronomy. 1^.
receive them. And look not upon an unjust sacrifice, 2 P^^^^. 19.
the poor, and he will hear the prayer of him that is hurt. He will not despise
the prayers of the pupil: nor the widow, Romans 2. Act. 10.
if she power out speech of mourning. Do not the widows

CHAP. XXXVI. A prayer for conversion of al nations: 14. and for conservation
of the Israelites. 20. Discretion is necessary in all actions, and desires.
HAVE mercy upon us o God of al, and respect us, and This prayer implies also
a prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles, as the like very often in the
Psalms. 58. 6^. 65. etc.
the nations, that have not sought after thee, that they may know that there is
no God but thou, and that they may shewforth thy glorious things. Lift up thy
hand over the Exo. 4.
thou have made equal to thy first begotten. Have mercy on Number. 6.
inhabit the earth, that thou art God the beholder of the worlds. The As
there i^ difference of meats* (...) so there ought to be discret on in words,
in choosing a wi^e and in all actions, and desires.
belly will eat al meat, and one meat is The beauty of a woman chereth the
face of her husband, In concord small things increase, by discord al things
go to havoc.
rest. Where there is

CHAP. XXXVII. Beware of a feaned, and love a sure friend, 7. consult with the
wise, trusty, 15. and virtuous, 19. especially relying upon God. 21. The
tongue is cause of much good, or much evil. 30. Be temperate in diet.
EVERY friend will say: I also have joined freindshipe: As freindshippe is a
most necessary thing in humane life; so fained fre^dshippe is most dangerous.
but there is a friend, in name only a friend. Does there not sorrow remain
even to death? But a companion and continual with a holy man, whomsoever thou
shall know to observe the fear of God, whose soul is according to thine Man
is bond to use al pru^lentendeuour and withal most especially to pray for Gods
direction.
beseech the Highest, that The days of the Blessed in heaven, who see God, are
eternal.
of Israel are innumerable. A wise man in the people shall inherit honor, The
same which S. Paul admonishes (1. Cor 11.) let every one prove him self, by
examining and rectifying his conscience.
prove 1. Cor. 6.
are not expedient for all, and every kind pleases not every soul. Be not
greedy in all feasting, and power not out thy

CHAP. XXXVIII. God has ordained corporal, 9. and spiritual medicines. 16. Use
moderate, not excessive sorrow for the dead. 26. Tradesmen and artificers are
necessary, much more spiritual pastors.
HONOR the physician Man's body naturally needs sustena^ce and sometimes
phisike, and so does his soul; which as it is more excellent, so it ought to
be more regarded.
for necessity: for the Highest The Highest has created medicines of the
earth, and a wise Exo. 25.
sweet by wood? The virtue of these things is come to Isa. 38.
earth. Son in thine infirmity contemn not thy self, Spiritual infirmity
requires spiritual phisike.
but pray our Lord, and he will cure thee. Turn away from To avoid evil
speech, show that thou art truly sorry for the death of thy friend. But
moderate thy sorrow, lest it hurt thy self.
for detraction bear bitterly Prou. ^5. and 17.
heaviness, and make mourning according to his desert one 2. Reg. 12
him in the departing of his spirit. When pastores have ley sure from
preaching they may then profit others by writing. So S. Paul, not only
preached, but also writ. So likewise the Doctors of the Church and other
holy fathers.
The wisdom of give his heart to turn up furrows, and his watching in the
feeding of kine. So every craftsman and workemaster that

CHAP. XXXIX. Goldie knowledge, 16. purity of soul, 20. humble conceit of our
selves, 27. and consideration of eternal reward, are good dispositions to
spiritual contemplation.
THE Besides active life commended in the former chap. it is necessary that
virtuous men use also meditation, and co^templation. Unto which four
dispositions are requisite, described in this chapt.
wise man will search out the wisdom of all the made him, and he will pray in the
sight of the Highest. He 1.
spirit of understanding: and he will power forth the words True knowledge of
holy My^^eries: without the* which meditation will be erroneous.
of his wisdom as showers, and in prayer will confess to our Lord. And he will
direct his counsel, and discipline, and in 2.
rose planted upon the rivers of waters fructify ye. As Libanus Purity of
soul free from grievous sins, and endowed with virtues.
have ye the odours of sweetness. Flourish ye Humility is especially required in
contemplative persons.
Give magnificence to his name, and confess 3.
unto him in the voice of your lips, and in songues of the lips, and
harpes, and thus shall ye say in confession: All the Genesis 1.
works of our Lord are exceeding good. At this word the Exo. 1.
were receptacles of waters: because in his commandment Hope of eternal reward
comfort, and encoregeth the servants of God.
His blessing has ouerflowed as a 4.
stream. And as a flood has watered the dry land, so his Genesis ^.
wrath shall inherit the nations, that have not sought him: even as he turned
waters into drught, and the earth was In the mean time God gives necessaries
for this life. Which the good use rightly to their merit and the wicked use
evil to their damnation.
The beginning of the thing necessary oil, and clothing. Al these shall be
converted to saints into Devils were created in state of grace, and of their
own will fell from God, and consequently are eternally punished.
for vengeance, and in their fury they have confirmed their torments: in the
time of

CHAP. XL. The first matter of spiritual meditation may be man's misery,
contracted by original sin, 4. and increased by actual, 17. reliued by God
grace: 22. which gives many benefits, 27. man adding his voluntary
cooperation.
GREAT travel is created to al men, and an heavy yoke The penalties which al
men even newborn infants suffer, do show that al in general are guilty of
original sin, for if they were not guilty then punishment were not just.
That Christ also would be subject to the same penalties was for the sins of
others. And though his ^ mother was preserved from this sin yet she was not
exempted from the general penalty of al mankind.
the day of their coming forth of their mothers womb, until the day of their
burying, into the mother of al. Their cogitations, and and contrition, and
scourges: for the wicked al these were Genesis 7.
created, and for them the flood was made. Al things that Eccle. 1.
are of the earth, shall turn into the earth, and al waters shall return into
the sea. Al bribing, and iniquity shall be clean The society of Christ's
Church flourishing in all virtues excels the benefits of the old Testament.
green sown fields are above this. A friend and companion meeting together
in Every one is bound to labor that he want not necessaries.
want

CHAP. XLI. An other matter of meditation is death, 8. whereof sin is the
cause. 1^. Care of a good fame is necessary. 19. Let shamfastnes be a bridle
to avoid fornication, 22. iniquity, 24. theft, and other sins.
O DEATH how bitter is thy memory to a man that has It is to no purpose after
death to accuse the shortness, or length of life, pretending the same to have
been cause of sin. For God does al justly, yea and for the best, if men would
so use his benefits.
accusing of life. The It behooves children, and scholars to esteem that which
their elders teach:
have reverence though the same does not seem reasonable in their own opinion.
al things salute thee, of silence: of beholding a woman that is an harlot:
and of turning away thy countenance from thy kinsman. Turn not away thy face
from thy neighbor, and of taking Mat 5. v. 28.
wife, and search not his handmayde, neither stand by her bed. Before freindes
of opprobrious words: and when thou

CHAP. XLII. Further admonition to avoid sins in words, and deeds. 6. with
care that others offend not by our negligence. 15. An other matter of
meditation is Gods excellency, appearing in his works.
REPEAT notthe word It is not lawful to reveal that, which we justly promise
to conceal.
which thou have heard, neither Leuit 19. Deu. 1* 16 Prou. 24. Jacob. ^*
testament, and of judgment to justify the impious, of the for beauty sake*
and among women tarry not. For out of garments There is less danger in
conuersing familiarly with a wicked man, then with a freindlie woman. In which
conuersarion, much prudence is required, as is before admonished. chap. ^.
better is the iniquity of a man, then a The excellency of God, which can not
be seen with mortal eye ( Exo. 33.) is proposed to our meditation in his
works. The like in, Job. 38. 39. 40. 41. and in many places of holy
Scripture.
the tokens of secret things. No cogitation escapes him, and no word hides

CHAP. XLIII. Gods incomparable excellency appears in the heavens; 2. in the
sun, 6. moon, 9. other stars, 12. rainebow, 14. snow, 15. clouds, 16.
hayle, 17. wind, 18. thunder, 21. frost, 22. crystal, 24. dew, 26. the sea,
and innumerable things therein. 29. No man is able to praise God sufficiently.
THE firmament of height is his beauty, the beauty of Of al sensles
creatures, yea and of sensible also, that have not reason, the sun is most
excellent. Of which al corporal ^reatures receive their light: and by whose
influence al generation of creatures proceeds: whereof is this Maxim in
Philosophy, that the sun and man begette a man, And Aristotel calls the
sun the father of men and of gods. li. 2. de anima But the faithful know it
is a creature inferior to man, in respect of his reasonable soul, and in them
both and in all other creatures, acknowledge superexcellent and infinite Maiestic
in God.
sun in sight Lord that made it, and by his words it has hastened his
course. And the moon in all in her time, is the showing of Which also
appears even in the least creatures whose natural substances and qualities,
with other accidents, the more any man considers the more he shall admire
God, the only Creator of al.
breast plate it shall put it self upon the waters. And it shall devour him how
far shall we be able? for the omnipotent himself is above al his works. Our
Lord is terrible, and exceeding great,

CHAP. XLIIII. Praises of holy fathers in general: 16. and in particular of
Enoch, 17. Noe, The 2. part. Examples and praises of holy men: with praise and
thanks to God.
20. Ahraham, 24. Isaac, and Jacob.
LET us praise glorious men, and our fathers in their generation. Virtuous men
are rightly called Lords, and Princes; so the children of Heth said to
Abraham. My Lord, the^^ art a prince of God among v^. Genesis 23.
dominions, men great for force, and endued with their wisdom, declaring in the
prophets the dignity of prophets, and ruling in the people that was present,
and by the virtue Enoch shall preach penance in the time of Antichrist.
Let peoples tell their wisdom, and the Church declare Gen 5. Genesis 6.
into paradise, that he may:: give repentance to the nations.

Noe was found Noe was perfect.
perfect, just, and in the time of wrath he Genesis 9.
was made a reconciliation. Therefore was there a remnant Genesis 12.
Abraham father of all the beleuers in Christ.
father of the multitude of the nations, and there was not found the like to
him in glory, who kept the law of the Highest, and was in covenant with him.
In his flesh he Genesis 22. Heb. 11.
made the covenant to stand, and in tentation he was found faithful. Therefore
by an oath he gave him glory in his Isaac, and Jacob were blessed in Abraham.
blessing of al nations, and

CHAP. XLV. Praises of Moses, 7. Aaron, 16. and his priestlie progeny. 22.
Against whom Chore with his accomplices rebelling, were destroyed.
MOSES beloved of God, and men: whose memory is Exo. 3.
in benediction. He made him like in the glory of Number. 12.
he made him holy, and chose him of al flesh. For he heard Moses saw Gods
works more clearly then other Prophets, yet saw not his substances, as is
noted. Exo. 33.
face to face, and a law of life and discipline, to teach Jacob his testament,
and Israel his judgments. He exalted Aaron his brother high, and like to
himself of the Aarons priesthood continued so long as Moses law: that was til
Christ. And now the priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech
continues to the end of the world.
an everlasting Exo. 28.
testament, and gave him the priesthood of the nation, and made him blessed in
glory, and he girded him about with a belles of gold very many round about,
to give a sound in Leuit. 8.
Moses filled his hands, and anointed him with holy oil. Number. 16.
stood against him, and for envy men compassed him about in the desert, they
that were with Dathan and Abiron, and the congregation of Core in anger. Our
Lord God saw, and it The tribe of Leui had not a portion of inheritance
separate from the jest, but had tithes, first fruits, and oblations for their
temporal provision
he shall not inherit the nations in the land, and he Number. 25.
in imitating him in the fear of our Lord: and to stand in be to him and to
his seed for ever. And the testament to King David gave special assistance to
the Priests, and greatly advanced Gods service 1. Paral 23. ^^ ^.
David king, the son of Iesse of the tribe of Judah, and inheritance to him
and to his seed, that he might give wisdom into our heart to judge his nation
in justice, that their good things might not be abolished, and their glory in
their nation he made everlasting.

CHAP. XLVI. Praises of Iosue, 9. Caleb, 13. the Judges of Israel, 16. Namely
of Samuel Judge and Prophet.
STRONG in battle was Jesus the son of Naue, Iosue succeeded in the temporal
government: for the spiritual perteyned to the successors of Aaron. Number. 27.
successor Iosu. 10.
day was made as two? He inuocated the mighty sovereign:: Only Iosue and Caleb
remained of those which came out of Egypt, all the rest dyed in the desert, and
their children entered into Chanaan.
Number. 14^
of Iephone, did stand against the enemy, and stayed the nation from sins,
and appeased the murmuring of malice. And Iosu. 14.
and his strength continued even until old age, so that he went up into the
high place of the land, and his seed obtained inheritance. That all the
children of Israel might see, that it is Though some of the Judges were
sometimes great sinners, yet they were finally just and for their good acts
much renowned.
all the judges by their 1. Reg 17
and their bones spring out of their place, and their name Samuel the prophet
of our Lord, renewed the empire, and Samuel anointed Saul. and David kings.
anointed princes in his nation. By the law of our Lord 1. Reg 7.
sound he made his voice heard, and he descomfited the ^ Reg. 12
gave testimony before our Lord, and his Christ, money and what soever besides
unto the very shoes he took not of al flesh, and no man accused him. And
after this he slept, and If Samuel himself had not appeared, (but some other
spitite) it could not have been noted in his praises. See. 1. Reg. 28.
he notified to the king, and showed him the end of his 1 Reg. 28
life, and he exalted his voice out of the earth in prophecy to take clean
away the impiety of the nation.

CHAP. XLVII. Praises of Nathan, 2. David, 14. and Solomon; in whose progeny
(21. notwithstanding his fall) 27. the royal scepter remained for David's sake,
though for his and the peoples sins, ten tribes were cut of, and fell into
schism.
AFTER these things arose Nathan the Prophet in the 2. Reg 11
days of David. And as the fat separated from the 1. Reg. 17
with lions as it were with lambs: and with bears he did in like manner as
with lambs of sheep in his youth. Did not Ibidem.
he kill the giant, and took away reproach from his nation? In lifting up his
hand, with a stone of the sling he overthrew 1. Reg 18
in ten thousand did he glorify him, and praised him in the blessings of our
Lord, in offering to him a crown of glory: for he destroyed the enemies on
every side, and rooted out Amongst all the renoumed acts of David his pure and
sincere heart most pleased God.
al his heart he praised our Lord, and loved God that made him: and gave him
might against his enemies: and he made singers to stand before the altar, and
by their 1. Par. 25
sound he made sweet tunes. And in the solennities he gave 2. Reg 12
sins, and exalted his horn for ever: and he gave him a testament of the
kingdom, and the seat of glory in Israel. After For David's sake God gave
wisdom to Solomon, and peace in his kingdom.
him did he overthrow all the might of the enemies. Solomon reigned in days of
3. Reg. 3.
peace, to whom God subdewed al his enemies, that he might build an house in
his name, and prepare holiness for ever: as By Apostrophe the auctor turns his
speech to Solomon.
thou art instructed in thy youth. And thou art replenished 3. Reg 4.
as a river with wisdom, and thy soul discovered the earth. And thou did
multiply dark sayings in comparisons: 3. Reg. 10
and bowdest thy thighs to women: thou have had power Salomons sins were
punished, but Gods mercy continued in conseruing his posterity. Psalm. 88.
have made a blotte in thy glory, and 3 Reg. 11
profaned thy seed to bring wrath to thy children, and thy folly to be
kindled, to make the kingdom divided, and a Psalm. 88. v. 34.
leave his mercy, and he will not corrupt, no^ abolish his own works, neither
will he destroy from the stock the nephews of his elect: and he will not
corrupt the seed of him, that loves our Lord. But he gave a remnant to Jacob,
3 Reg. 1^
turned away the nation by his counsel, and Jeroboam the

CHAP. XLVIII. Praises of Elias, 13. Eliseus, 19. Ezechias, 23. and Isaias.
AND there arose Elias the prophet, as it were fire, and 3. Reg 17
his word burnt as a little torche. Who brought famine Elias procured fire from
heaven to burn his sacrifice, 3. Reg. 18 and ^w^e more to burn an hundred men
which persecuted him. 4. Reg. 1.
thrice. So was Elias magnified in his marvelous works. And who can so glory
3. Reg. 19 4. Reg. 2.
make prophets successoures after thee. Who wast received The miracle
wrought by his dead body showed that he was an holy prophet. 4. Reg. 13. See
the miracles of Elias, and Eliseus. To. 1. page 940.
prophesied being dead. In 4 Reg 13
his life he did wonders, and in death he wrought marvelous things. In all
these things the people repented not, and 4. Reg. 20 4. Reg. 18
came up Sennacherib, and sent Rabsaces, and lifted up his hand against them,
and put forth his hand upon Sion, and became proud by his mightines. Then were
their hearts, Prayer prevailed, when forces were not sufficient. Sec, 4. Reg. 19.
quickly heard their voice. He was not enemies, but purged them by the hand of
Isaie the holy prophet. He overthrew the camp of the Assirians, and the 4
Reg. 19 Isa. 37.
Angel of our Lord destroyed them. For Ezechias did that 4. Reg 2^ Isa. 38.
backward, and added life to the king. By a great spirit he saw

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XLVIII.
10 Who art written:] Amongst other quarrels, Protestants except against Not
only this book but also other holy scriptures witness that Elias shall return
and preach before the end of the world. S. Chrysostom Aretas, and other Doctors
testify the same. See. Annot. Genesis 5.
the authentical authority of this book, because the auctor says, that Enoch
and Elias shall come again, to appease the wrath of our Lord, to reconcile the
father to the son, and to restore the tribes of Jacob. But that this is no
just exception, is clear by other holy Scriptures, where the same uniform
doctrine of the whole Church, is no less evident, then in this book. For God
himself says the same also by the mouth of his prophet Malachie: Behold I will
send Mal. 4.
you Elias the prophet, before the day of our Lord come, the great and
dreadful. Christ also says: Elias in deed shall come, and restore al things.
Whereupon Mat. 17. In 2. These 2.
S. Chrysostom, after he has showed how terrible Antichrist shall be, by reason
of his temporal power, cruelty, and wicked laws, he adds: Fear thou not;
He shall only have force in the reprobate, that perish. For then also Elias shall
come, to fortify the faithful. Likewise the words in the Apocalips, I will
Apoc. 11.
give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and
three score days, were ever inuariably understood by tradition, from the first
preachers of Christ (as the ancient writer Aretas testifies) that Enoch and
Elias shall come, and admonish al, not to give credit to the deceiptful wonders
of Antichrist: and that they shall travel in this testimony the space of three
years and a half. For 1260. days come very nere to that space of time.

CHAP. XLIX. Praises of Josias, who (like to David, and Ezechias) took away
occasions of idolatry. 8. Praises of Jeremy, 10. Ezechiel, 12. and the twelve
Prophets. 13. Also of Zorobabel, Jesus the son of Iosedech, Nehemias, Enoch,
Joseph, Seth, Sem, and Adam.
THE memory of Josias is according to the confection of 4. Reg. 22
perfume made by the work of an apothecarie. His 2. Par 34
repentance of the nation, and he took away the abominations of impiety. And
he governed his heart toward our 4. Reg. 23
Lord, and in the days of sinners he strengthened piety. Except David, and
Ezechias, and Josias, Many other kings of Judah refrained always from
committing idolatry, but these three destroyed al places of idolatry in their
kingdom, which the others did not.
al committed 4. Reg. 25 Iere. 1.
ways thereof desolate in the hand of Jeremy. For they evil Ezech. 1.
of glory, which he showed him in the chariote of Cherubs. For he made mention
of the enemies in rain, to do good Agge. 2. 1. Esd. 3. 3. Esd. 5. Zach. 3. 2.
Esd. 2. Genesis 5. Genesis 39. 40. etc.
Zorobabel, for he also was as a signet on the right hand, and so Jesus the
son of Iosedec? who in their days See the Annotation. chapter 38 v. 10.
he also was taken up from the earth. Neither as Joseph who was Joseph
prophesying that the people should depart from Egypt, willed them to carry his
bones with them. Genesis 50. So by carrying his bones they professed, that he had
truly prophesied.
they prophesied. Seth, and

CHAP. L. Praises of Simon the High Priest. 27. Detestation of certain
persecuting adversaries. 29. With conclusion that the obseruers of this
doctrine shall be wise and happy,
SIMON This Simon called Iustus, and Priscus, was high priest when this book
was written (in the time of Ptolomie the first, king of Egypt) a very holy
man, and dead before it was translated into Greek. about the time of Ptolomie
the third called Euergetes, nere 300. years before Christ.
the son of Onias, the high priest, who in his life Josephus li. 12.
duble building and high walls of the temple. In his days Antiqui
sea above measure. Who had care of his nation, and delivered who obtained
glory in conuersing with the nation: and amplified the entrance of the house,
and the court. As the Libation^.
oblation of moist sacrifice, and offered of the blood of the grape. He powered
out on the fundation of the altar a Three nations; the Idumeans, Philistijmes,
and Samaritanes, did most persecute the Isralites: the Samaritanes were not one
pure nation, but mixed of Assirians and Jews: and so here called no nation.
increased full of sweetenes. And the people in prayer desired Number. 6. v. 23.
and they finished their office. Then coming down, everlasting: that Israel
may believe that the mercy of God They are also called a foolish people,
because they knowing true religion, mixed idolatry therewith, according to
diverse sects. as appears 4. Reg. 17. v. 29.
no nation, which I hate: they that

CHAP. LI. The auctor rendereth praises and thanks to God; 18. and inuiteth
others to do the same, by his own example, 31. and by earnest exhortation.
THE prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach. Where we are not able to render
recompense to benefactors; especially to God, we are the more bond to
acknowledge his many great benefits, altogether undeserved by us.
I will confess day of my tribulation, and in the time of the proud without
help. I will praise thy name continually, and will collaude When senses are
most ripe, and the soul most free from great sins, is the aptest time to
serve God, and to get al virtues, and true knowledge. Eccle. 12.
young, In stead of riches labor to get wisdom for it is much better then al
gold and silver.
in Merit is in this life, and reward in the next.
before the

The end of the Sapiential Books.
THE FOVRT PART OF THE OLD TESTAMENT CONTAINING PROPHETICAL BOOKS.
The argument of Prophetical books in general.
AMongst many great benefits, which God bestowed upon his peculiar Gods
special benefit of sending Prophets to the people.
people in the old Testament, one principal, and very excellent was, that
besides their ordinary Pastors, and gouerners in spiritual causes, the
Priests of Aarons progenic, and other clergy men of the same tribe of Leui,
in ^erarchical subordina ion of one chief, with other superiors and subjects,
disposed in sacred functions; he also gave them other extraordinary Prophets
of sundry tribes, as admonitors and guides, to reduce them from errors of
sin, into the right way of virtue. Which office the same Prophets The
function of Prophets, to exhort to repentance with hope of Gods mercy by
Christ.
performed, as well by threatening the offenders with Gods wrath, and punishment,
as by exhorting them to repentance, and so to trust in Gods assured mercy,
that he would give them better times, and relief from their miseries. But most
especially these holy Prophets did foresee, and foretell the happy times of
Grace in the New Testament. The coming of Messiah, Christ our Redemer and
Savior: With the mysteries of his Incarnation, Birth, Passion, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Coming of the Holy Ghost, Fundation, Propagation,
perpetual Stabilitie of his Church; and finally the General Judgment, Eternal
Glory of the blessed, and Everlasting pain of the damned. For albeit they
preached and prophesied many things, properly and immediately perteyning to
the particular state, and people of the Jews, and other nations, Where they
conuersed, yet the principal sum of all the prophetical books, is of Christ
and his Church. Yea all the old Testament is a general prophecy, and forshewing
of the New. Which (as we noted in the beginning) is contained, and lies hid in
the old. Nevertheless speaking more distinctly of the proper arguments, or
contents of the four parts of the old Testament, the former three more
peculiarly setforth the Law, the History, and Sapiential precepts: and this
last part chiefly conteyneth Prophecies of things to come. Of which the
greatest part is now come to pass, or daily fulfilled, and the rest shall
likewise be performed in due time. So now in Four greatter Prophets, and
welue lesse^ were auctors of the prophetical books following. Baruchs book
being inserted in Ieremies.
order after the Legal, Historical, and Sapiential books, follow the
Prophetical: and are these, according to the names of the Prophets that writ
them. Isaie, Jeremy with Baruch, Ezechiel, and Daniel, commonly called the
greatter Prophets: and the twelve lesser a^e Osee, Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas,
Micheas, Nahum, Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zachary: and Malachie. Who were al
singularly inspired, and governed in their preachings and writings, by the
Holy Ghost, that they could not err. Yea they were so illuminated in their
understanding, that they clerly saw that, which they uttered. And therefore
their Prophecies are called Visions, for the assured infallibility of truth,
which they avouch. For as nothing is Prophecies are called visions, for their
certainty.
more certain in vulgar knowledge then that, which we see with our corporal
eyes, and therefore of al witnesses the eye witness is esteemed the surest: and as
in all natural knowledge, that is most certain, which is seen by discourse of
reason: so in supernatural knowledge nothing is more assured then that, which is
seen by supernatural light. Whereof there be three sorts: the light of Faith,
of Prophecy, and of Glory. Al three certain, and undoubted; but Light of
prophecy is next to the light of glory, and more clear then the light of
faith.
most clear and manifest is the vision by light of glory: whereby God is seen
in himself, and al things in him, that perteyne to the state of every
glorious Saint. Next thereto is the vision by light of prophecy, wherewith God
illuminateth the understanding of the Prophet by a special, extraordinary, and
transitory light of grace, that either he clerly sees the reveled truths, or
at least perfectly knows, that he is moved by the Holy Ghost, though he
understand not al, that the Holy Ghost intends; and so when, and where it is
Gods will, he utters the same, for instruction of others. The last, which is
also certain, but more obscure, is the supernatural knowledge, which al
Catholic Christians have by light of faith, assuredly believing al things
which God reueleth by his Church.

Concerning therefore this excellent divine gift of Prophecy, granted to few,
for the benefit of al Gods servants, we are here to inform the vulgar reader,
Prophecies are hard to be understood for diverse causes.
that whereas these prophecies are for most part hard to be understood, and as
S. Peter teaches, not known by private interpretation, but must 2. Pet. 1
be interpreted by the same Spirit, wherewith they were written, our purpose is
not to explicate them, nor yet to produce large explications of the godly
learned Fathers, but rather fewer and briffer notes then hertofore* and for the
rest we remitte the more learned and studious readers, according to their
capacities, to search the same, in the commentaries of ancient and late
Expositers: wishing others to content themselves, with the more easy parts of
holy Scriptures, and other godly books, and daily instructions of spiritual
teachers. And such as do also read these, may observe with us, these (amongst
other) special causes of the hardness of the Prophets. One cause is Sudden
transition from one thing to an other.
the frequent interruption of sentences, with sudden change from one person,
or matter to an other, without apparent coherence. Which S. Ierom notes in
sundry places. As I say. 7. after that the Prophet has severely S. Ierom.
i^c. 2. and 3 Nahum
reprehended king Achab, for his distrust of Gods assistance against his
temporal enemies (v. 13.) in the next words he prophecieth, that a Virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, Christ our Savior, and the like in other places.
An other cause is, that the Prophets speak things of some That which is
spoken of certain persons is meant of others
S. Chrysostom. ^o. 8. i^ ^^ath. 2.
persons, which are to be fulfilled in others, either of their progeny, or
prefigured by them. As the prophecy of the Jews and Gentiles, comprised in
the history of Esau and Jacob. Likewise that which Jacob prophesied (Genesis 49.)
of Simeon an Leui, not fulfilled in themselves but in the Scribes, and Priests
descending of their stock. Also much of that which David seems to speak of S.
Aug. d^catech. ^^^ibus. c. 3.
Solomon, Psalm. 88. can only be understood of Christ. Other examples will
Prophecies are often uttered in figurative speeches* Some consist in things
done, others are mixed with histories, and temporal things with spiritual.
occur in the Prophets ensuing. Briefly, for we can not here express all the
causes in few words, prophecies are often times uttered in figurative
speeches, and often not in words, but in factes; other times so mixed with Et
cont. Mend. c. 1^.
histories, and temporal things with spiritual, again some things perteyning
to the old Testament, so joined with mysteries of the new, and the like, that
most hard it is to discern, nay not possible without special revelation, or
instruction of others to know, to what purpose or thing every part perteyneth,
^^^ym. in P^al. 1^7.
or is to be applied: for some things are spoken only of the history, some
things of mysteries, many things of both. And the reason why the Holy Ghost
does so utter these prophecies is noted by S. Ierom (in Nahum. 3.) that Why
God would have them obscure.
the proud and malicious enemies of Religion may not understand them: lest
(says he) a holy thing should be given to dogs, pearls cast to swine, most
sacred mysteries laid oppen before profane persons. S. Gregory also
alleges an other reason (ho. 17. in Ezech.) that occasion of humility may be
given us by those things, which are hidden in holy Scriptures. And increase
also of merit by believing more then we understand, because faith has not
merit, where reason gives experiment.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE PROPHECY OF ISAIE.
ISaie the son of A^os, and nephew (as S. Ierom insinuates) to king Isai of
noble lineage and a mar^i^ prophesied a long time.
Presat. ad Paul. and Lusto.
Amasias, prophesied in the times of Osias, Ioathan, Achaz, Ezechias, and in
the beginning of Manasses, Kings of Judah; in all above three score years and
was cruelly put to death, sawed into parts by commandment of Manasses. He is
commonly called the Euangelical Prophet, for his ample Is called the
Euangelical Prophet. Hewritte in a high style
S. Ie^o. Epist. ad Pa^^^^. Et in com Isa^. S. Aug. ^^. 18. c. 27. ^u^t. and
lib 9 c. ^. con^^^^. Heb. 1.
and particular speeches of Christ, more large and more plain then in a^^e
other of the old Prophets. His style is high and eloquent, according to his
liberal education being of the royal blood. For so it pleases the Holy Ghost,
to utter his divine prophecies diversely according to the qualities, and
conditions of the persons, by whom he speaks: by Isaie in a lofty, and by
Amos in a mean style: as a musician sounds the same songue, by a simple
pipe, and by a corne^, trumpet or other musical instrument. Which S. Paul also
witnesses, saying, Diversely and by diverse means, God spoke to the fathers in
the Prophets. Isaie therefore conuersing in the kingdom of Judah, Lived in the
kingdom of Judah.
especially in the Emperial and Metropolitan city of Jerusalem, preached and
prophesied many things perteyning to the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, as also
to the tribe of Leui. Which after the schism of Jeroboam, repaired in manner al
to the kingdom of Judah, where God was rightly served. He prophesied also of the
ten Tribes, the kingdom of Israel: and of the future captiuities of them
both, and of the reduction of Judah. Also he prophesied of other nations, and
peoples, with whom the Jews had either emnitie, or freindlie conversation: and
of all the world. But most especially of the coming of Christ, to redeem, and
deliver mankind from captivity of sin.

The whole prophecy conteyneth two general parts. First more principally The
contents, divided into two general parts* and into eight particular.
the Prophet admonishes, and threatens the people, that they shall be punished
for their manifold sins. in the 39. former chapters. In the other 27. he
comfort them, signifying that God of his mercy, will after chatisment, and
their repentance, deliver them from their adversaries. Yet so that each part
participateth of the principal contents with the other. More particularly the
whole book may be divided into eight parts. In the twelve first chapters, the
1.
Prophet admonishes alsortes in the kingdom of Judah, of their ingratitude
toward God, with many other sins and of just punishment, but mixed with
consolation of Gods mercy, and thanksegeuing for the same. In eleven 2.
chapters following, he directs his speech to other Nations, adversaries to
the Jews. In four more he extends his admonitions to all the world, still
intermixing 3.
some consolations. In other four he reprehendeth both the 4.
kingdoms, of Israel and Judah, for seeking help of strange nations. In the 5.
next eight chapters he prophecieth of diverse dangers immine^t to the kingdom
of Judah, of their captivity in Babylon, of Gods benignity delivering them,
and 6.
very much in every part of Christ, and his Church. Then in five chapters he
prophecieth very particularly of the comfortable delivery from sin by
Christ. In other four from temporal captivity by Cyrus King of Assirians. 7.
And finally in the last eightene chapters, he prophecieth largely of the
perfect 8.
delivery by Christ, conversion of al Nations, reiection of the Jews, til
nere the end of the world, when they shall also return to Christ.

THE PROPHECY OF ISAIE
CHAP. I. Isaie prophesying in the days of four kings of Judah, 2.
admonishes both The first part. The kingdom of Judah shall be captive in
Babylon, for their ingratitude toward Gods, and other sins.
princes and people of their ingratitude, and other sins against God. 7. for
which they shall be led captive. 11. Neither shall sacrifices, nor prayers save
them, 16. except they cleanse their souls from sins. 20. which they not
doing shall be severely punished. 26. Whereby the relics shall be purged, and
the Church shall flourish.
THE vision of Isaie the son of Not A^^s the third of the less prophets,
for this name is written in other letters in Hebrew: but one of the royal blood
as S. Ierom. testifies.
Amos, which he saw Prince, Priest, and people are al sick of ingratitude
against God and other iniquities.
every head is sick, and every heart in heaviness. From the sole of the foot
unto the top of the head, there Jerusalem defaced and destroyed.
the God continually preserves some holy seed, that his Church never fails.
Unless Romans 9.
and we should be like to Gomorrha. Hear the word of our for these things at
your hands, that you should walk in my courts? Offer sacrifice no more in
vain: incense is abomination Much wickedness reigned in Jerusalem before their
captivity in Babylon: but much more at Christ's passion, when they persecuted
him even to the Cross: and his disciples, and al christians, til their city
was taken by the Romans and the whole nation dispersed.
become an harlot? justice has dwelled in it, but now mankillers. Thy silver
is The Rabbis understand those Judges and Priests that governed the people
after their delivery from captivity: but S. Ierom expounds this and the
like places of the Apostles, and their success^^s.
thy judges as they have been

CHAP. II. Al nations shall come to the Church of Christ; which shall begin in
Jerusalem. 6. And the Jews shall be rejected for their idolatry, avarice, and
other sins. 11. Proud men shall be humbled, and Gods glory shall increase, 18.
Idolatry shall be destroyed.
THE word, that Isaie the son of Amos saw upon Judah It is not only certain,
but also evident that the prophet speaks here, and in innumerable other
places, of the Church of Christ, which is the city set upon a mountain. Mat
5. unto which al nations are gathered, and all the time of the new Testament is
called the last hour, 1. Joan. 2. because no time shall follow after this, but
al eternity.
the later days the montaine The Jews were rejected after Christ's death:
before which they were still conserved: though often severely punished. And so
now the Church of Christ shall never be rejected, no^
rejected thy people, the house of behold. And the loftines of men shall be
bowed, and the It is most absurd, and contrary to this and other Scriptures,
that Protestants seyne of great idolatry in the Christian world, for a
thousand or more years together, professing Christ's name and Religion, and yet
continually committing (as these new masters imagine) gross idolatry.
utterly be destroyed.

CHAP. III. The Jews shall be deprived of wise men, 4. and be subject to
childish, and effeminate gouerners, 8. for their grievous sins. 16. The proud,
curious, and lascivious attire of their women, 24. shall be turned into
ignominy, and sorrow.
FOR behold the dominatour the Lord of hosts This was fulfilled first in the
captivity of Babylon and more notoriously after Christ's passion, in the
destruction of Jerusalem, and dispersion of the Jews: even to this day: and
yet forward, til nere the end of this world.
shall take soul, because evils are rendered to them. Say to the just An
Ecclesiastical preacher must not flatter the people. He must move tears (
says S. Ierom) not laughter.
they that call thee blessed, the same deceive thee, and dissipate the way of
thy steps. Our Lord stands to judge, and he stands Apoc. 1.
the ancients of his people, and his princes: for you have devoured the
vineyard, and the spoil of the poor is in your house. Why do you consume my
people, and grind the By the metaphor of women, S. Ierom understands the
cities of Jury, of which Jerusalem was the head, and Sion the chief place
there of, al which were defaced, by the Babylonians, but more fully destroyed
by Titus and Vespatian, forty years after Christ's Passion.
the daughters of Sion are haughty, and have walked with stretched out neck,
and went with twinglings of eyes, and clapped their hands, walked on their
feet, and ietted in a set pace. Our Lord shall make balde the

CHAP. IIII. After the destruction of the Jews, many women shall seek to
marie with one man, 2. but the relics, repenting of their sins, shall
return to God, 5. and flourish under his protection.
AND After the reduction of heathnish or heretical people to catholic
religion, there will be great want of spiritual pastors.
seven women shall take hold of one man in that and Not all the Jews that
escaped temporal death in the destruction of Jerusalem, but those only shall be
eternally saved, that believing shall be baptized and live well.
shall remain in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, every one that is written in
life in Jerusalem. If our Lord shall

CHAP. V. Under the figure of a barren vineyard, is prophesied the reiection of
the Jews, 7. for their sins of avarice, 11. intemperance, and other
wickedness, 18. one iniquity drawing an other, 20. judging good to be evil, and
evil good. 25. for which the Gentiles of diverse nations shall afflict them.
I will sing to my beloved Isaie of the tribe of Judah here prophecieth the
doleful songue which Christ uttered weeping over Jerusalem, fore seeing and
foretelling their destruction. Luc. 19. v. 41.
the canticle of my cousin concerning Mat. 21.
his vinyard. A vineyard was made to my beloved in horn the son of oil. And
he hedged it, and chose stones All this shows that God only subtracting his
protection, no man nor people is able to stand; of whose ruin God is not the
auctor, but only permits that they fall into sins, and so into other
miseries.
I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be into spoil: I will throw
down the wall thereof, and it shall be to be trodden upon. And I will lay it
waist: it of hosts: unless many great and fair houses become desolate,
without an inhabiter. For ten acres of the vineyards An admonition to celebrate
festiual days with ^oly religious exercises, and not to follow drunkenness nor
other wicked or vain things.
the work of our Lord you regard not, nor consider the works of his hands.
Therefore is my people led away captive, because they had Romans 12.
yourselues. Woe to you that are mighty to drink wine, and Grievous sins
must be grievously punished. Such as was the sin of the Jews persecuting
Christ.
but yet is his hand stretched forth. And he shall lift up a is none that
faynteth, nor that laboreth in them, he will not slumber, nor sleep, neither
shall the girdle of his reins be loosed, neither shall the latchet of his shoe
be broken. His

CHAP. VI. The prophet after a glorious vision, 5. lamenteth his former
silence; 6. his lips being purified by an Angel, with a hot coal, 8. he is
willingly sent and so prophecieth that the peoples heart will be hardened; their
cities shall be destroyed, but good relics shall be conserved.
IN the year that king Ozias died, I saw our Lord sitting 4. Reg. 15 2. Par. 26
upon an high throne and elevated: and those things that were under him filled
the temple. Seraphims stood upon Neither Isaie, nor Moses, nor any other
mortal man did ever see God in himself but only shadowed. Yet the wicked
calumniously accused, condemned, and put Isaie to cruel death, upon pretense of
blasphemy, for saying that he saw God. Which he otherwise said not, but
covered by the wings of the Seraphimes. Origin in hunc locum. and S. Ierom.
Tradi. Hebraicis in Paral.
they covered his face, and with two they covered his feet, and with two they
flewe. And they cried one to an Apoc. 4.
the earth is full of his glory. And the lintels of the doors Romans 1^.
filled with smoke. And I said: Woe is me because I have Isaie was not only an
Euangelical but also an Apostolical prophet, with whom God here treats and
proceeds, as with an Apostle, saying: Whom shall I send? and the prophet
answering: Send me. God sent him, saying: Go. etc. S. Ierom in Pro^mio Isais.
shall I send? and who shall go for us? And I said: Lo I am here, send me. And
he said: Go, and thou shall say Mat. 23.
and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: lest perhaps they may see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart,
and be converted and I heal them. And I said: How long Lord? And he said:
Until the

CHAP. VII. Jerusalem being beseeged, 3. the prophet tells the king, that the
enemies shall not prevail (8. but the kingdom of Israel shall be destroyed) 10.
gives for a sign that a Virgin shall conceive and bare a Son. 17.
prophecieth also the captivity, and desolation of the kingdom of Judah.
AND it came to pass Before this, the kings of Syria and of Israel had taken
king Achaz in battle and carried away great spoils, 2. Paral. 28. But
presuming, to do the like again, God suffered them not to prevail. My
stically this signified that heretics of diverse sects conspire together, to
impugn the Catho like Church. Which they do much afflict, and terrify, but
can never overthrow i^* S. Ierom in hunc lo^^^.
in the days of Achaz the son of 4. Reg. 16
Ioathan, the son of Ozias king of Judah, there came up Rasin the king of
Syria, and Phacee the son of Romelia the king of Israel to Jerusalem, to
fight against it: and they could not overcome it. And they told the house of
David, said: I will not ask, and Though Achaz was very wicked and committed
idolatry, 4. Reg. 16. 2. Par. 28. yet he believed in God Almighty, knovving
that he ought not to tempt him.
I will not tempte our Lord. And Upon occasion of Gods mercy promised without
man's desert, which king Achaz hardly believed, to confirm the same with a far
greatter example, God inspired the Prophet also to forshevv the greater
mystery of Christ's Incarnation, his conception and birth of a virgin, for the
redemption of ^l mankind.
give you a Luc. 1.
honey, that he may know to refuse evil, and choose the good. For before the
child know to refuse evil, and choose good, 4. Reg. 19.
hired by them, that are beyond the river, by the king of the Assirians, the
head, and the hairs of the feet, and the whole beard. And it shall be in that
day: a man shall nourish a

CHAP. VIII. Under the figure of a new name, Christ's birth of a virgin is
again prophesied. 4. but first the kingdoms of Syria, and Israel shall be
destroyed: and Judah sore afflicted: 8. yet conserved with loss of many. 16.
which is a mystery hidden from the Iowes. 21. Great evils hang over them, that
depart from the law.
AND our Lord said to me: Take thee The mystery here prophocied is of so great
importance, as would require a very great book for full explication thereof.
a great book, and witnesses, Vrias the priest, and Zacharias the son of
Barachias. And I went to the prophetess, and she conceived, and bare Christ
the Son of God and virgins child quickly takes the pray from the devil, who
before possessed almost all the world.
Hasten to take away the spoils: make have to take prays. For before The
prophet speaks of the ten tribes, which joined forces with the king of
Syria against Jerusalem, but them selves were first brought into captivity by
the Assyrians, God protecting Jerusalem for that time, and long after.
this people has cast Luc. 2. Romans 9. 1. Pet. 2.
offense, and for a rock of scandal to the two houses of Israel, for a snare
and a ruin to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And light. And he shall pass by
it, shall fall, and be hungry: and VVheter they seek to God in their extreme
distress, not sincerely, but ^^acted,
will look upwards. And he will look or seek worldly help, they shall not
escape misery.
to the earth, and behold tribulation and darkness, dissolution and distress,
and mist persecuting, and he can not fly away from his distress.

CHAP. IX. Theglath Phalasar carries some Israelites captive, and Salman asar
many more, in figure of a few disciples converted to Christ in Gallilee, and
al Iewrie, but many more in the whole world. 7. Whose Impyre shall be great,
and durable: 8. but the Jews glory, especially of the ten tribes, shall be
obscured, for their pride, hypochrisie, and other sins.
AT S. Matthew expounds this prophecy of Christ, first preaching in Galilee.
Where his disciples believed in him and followed him.
the first time was the land of Zabulon alleuiated: Mat. 4.
and the land of Nepthali: and at But after his passion few Jews believed in
him, in comparison of the Gentiles.
the last was aggrauated the way of the sea beyond Jordan of Galilee of the
Gentiles. The people that walked in darkness, has seen great Iudic. 7.
Because al violent taking of pray with tumult, and garment He that is great,
yea omnipotent God, is borne a little one in this world, and without violence
conquereth and rules all the world.
A LITTLE CHILD IS BORNE TO US, and a Luc. 2.
son is given to us, and principality is made upon his shoulder: and his
name shall be called, Marvelous, Counseler, God, Strong, Father of the world to
come, the Prince of peace. His empire shall be multiplied, and there shall be no
end of of Rasin over him, and shall turn his enemies into tumult. Syria from
the East, and the Philisthims from the West: and God punishing sinners, and
they not repenting, his just fury still increases: punishing eternally al
those that never repent.
fury is not turned away, but his hand is yet stretched forth. And the people
is not returned to him, who has Where is no repentance, there can be no
remission. As v. 12. 17. and chapter 10. v. 4. etc.
In all these things his

CHAP. X. Makers of wicked laws are cursed. 3. For which the Israelites shall
be afflicted by the Assirians. 5. The Assirians overthrown by extraordinary
means sent from God: 21. and the Jews delivered from imminent danger: with
diverse mysteries of Christ intermixed.
VVOE to them that make VVheras good laws are the stabilitie of the common
wealth wicked are the ruin thereof. Such as Jeroboam made forbidding to go to
Jerusalem and setting up golden calves in Bethel and Dan: causing the people to
serve them as the gods of Israel. 3. Reg. 12. v. 16. Such also as the Scribes
and Pharisees made devising wicked traditions, contrary to Gods commandments.
Mat. 15. v. 5.
wicked laws: and writing, hand is yet stretched forth. Woe to Assure, he is
the rod of The Jews are called a deceiptful nation because they broke their
promise made to God, that they would serve him and keep his commandments. Exo.
19. v. 8.
a deceitful nation, and I will give him commandment 4 Reg. ^^
accomplished al his works in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, I will visit over
the fruit of the magnifical heart of the king of Assure, and over the glory of
the hautines of his eyes. For Senacharib not by his own power but as Gods
instrument and minister afflicted the Israelites. Nevertheless he persecuted
them of his own free will, which God used for the punishment of his people. In
general therefore evil men are like to instruments without sense, but differ in
that men's actions are voluntary, and unreasonable, and sensles creatures have
no will at al, but only natural ap^nes, and inclination.
the axe glory against him, that cutteth with it? or shall the saw exalt
itself against him, by whom it is drawn? As if a rod should lift up itself
against him, that lifts it up, and a staff exalt itself which is certes but
wood. For this cause holy one of Israel in truth. The remnant shall be
converted, Iudi. 7.
and his rod upon the sea, and he shall lift it up in the way of Egypt. And it
shall be in that day: his burden shall be taken By these places Senacherib passed
with his army from Egypt to Jerusalem:
Aiath, he shall pass into Magron: at Machmas he shall commend his vessels. They
have passed in have, Gaba is

CHAP. XI. Christ borne of the stock of Iesse, replenished with seven gifts of
the Holy Ghost, 4. shall have a spiritual kindom, most just, and potent. 10.
whereto al nations will repair.
AND a The blessed virgin.
rod shall come forth of the root of Iesse, and a Act. 13.
Christ our Savior replenished with the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, of
whose infinite plenitude his servants participate as it pleases his divine
spirit to impert.
flower shall rise up out of his root. And the Spirit the ears. But he shall
judge the poor in justice, and shall 2. These. 2.
rebuke in equity for the mild of the earth: and he shall strike the earth
with the rod of his mouth, and with the spirit of his lips he shall kill the
impious. And justice shall be the girdle Romans 15.
root of Iesse, that stands for a sign of peoples, him the nations shall
beseech, and Christ after his death, which to the world was ignominious, would
be gloriously buried, by very honorable persons, Joseph and Nicodemus, with
abundance of most precious spices, vvrapped in finne linen, and laid in a
new monument: to show that the glory of the just begins from their death:
where the glory of the wicked ends. Christ's sepulcher still also remains
glorious, honored even by the Turks: much more by Catholic Christians.
his sepulcher shall be glorious. And

CHAP. XII. A Canticle of thanks for the benefits of Christ.
AND thou shall say in that day: I WILL confess to thee o Lord, because thou
wast angry with me: thy fury is turned away, and thou have comforted me.

Ex^. 15. Psalm. 117.
not fear: because our Lord is my strength, and my praise, and he is become my
salvation.

You shall draw waters in joy out of the saviors fountains.





The 2 part. Ten prophetical comminations against so many peoples The 1.
against Babylon.


CHAP. XIII. The Prophet fortelleth the calamity, and ruin of Babylon.
THE The Jews gave thanks for their delivery from captivity of Babylon; and
much more the Church of Christ rendereth thanks for her delivery from al
sins.
burden of Babylon, which Isaie the son of Nemrod began the kingdom of
Babylon (Genesis 10.) his son Belus did much augment it: and his son Ninus
brought it to be a very great Empire, and Monarchy. But at last, after 1240.
years, it was overcome by Cyrus king of Persia.
sanctified, and have called Ezech. 32. Joel. 3. Mat. 24. Mar. 13. ^uc. 2^.
the stars of heaven, and their brightness shall not display their light: the
sun is darkened in his rising, and the moon shall not shine in her light. And
I will visit over the euiles Medes and Persians were called sanctified in that
they were the ministers of Gods justice, in the ruin of Babylon: which the
Prophet foretelling calls it The burden of Babylon.
man shall be more precious then gold, and After the slaughter there shall be so
few Babylonians, or Chaldeans left alive, that one man shall be more rare and
precious then much fine gold.
man then pure fine gold. For this I shall truble heaven: Psalm 1^6.
their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives shall be ravished. Behold I will
raise upon them the Medes, which shall not Genesis 1^.
It shall not be inhabited for ever, and it An other city was built by the same
name, but much less, and in an other place of Chaldea.
shall not be

CHAP. XIIII. The Jews shall be released from the captivity of Babylon. 12.
Nabuchodonosor most proud and mighty, shall be thrown into extreme misery.
24. In the mean time the Asirians beseging Jerusalem shall be defeated. 28.
Neither shall the Philistims prevail against the jews, as they presume.
IT Isaie prophesied the destruction of Babylon above 100. years before the
Jews were carried thither captive, and their captivity endured 70. years
Which was released by Cyrus, after he had overcome the Babylonians. Yet this
space of nere 200. years, is counted a short time in respect of so great a
Monarchy as this was, which had now continued above a thousand years, from
the time of Ninus, yea was begun by Nemrod. Genesis 10. v. v.
is near that the time thereof shall come, and the days against the king of
Babylon, and shall say: How has the exactour ceased, the tribute rested: Our
Lord has broken the As Lucifer the greatest devil, so Nabuchodonosor king of
Babylon fell through pride into extreme misery.
How art thou fallen from heaven Lucifer, which saying: If it shall not be, as I
have thought: and so fall out, as I have in mind consulted: That I The
miraculous destruction of the Assiriansarmie beseging Jerusalem is recorded. 4.
Reg. 19.
destroy the Assirian in The second commination is against the Philistians.
In the year, that king Achaz died, was this burden 4 Reg 1^
made. Rejoice not thou whole Philistaea, that Though Achaz was dead whom the
Philistims feared, yet Ezechias a better king did afflict them more then the
other had done 4. Reg. 18. v 8. Much more Ozias. 2. Par. 26
the rod From Jerusalem which is situated on the north of Philistea.
the North, and there is none that shall escape his troop. And what shall be
answered to the messengers

CHAP. XV. Unexpected ruin shall fall upon the Moabites: 5. Whereof the Prophet
has compassion.
THE burden The third commination was against the Moabites.
of Moab. Because Ar-Moab was wasted in Destruction made in the night,
prevented that they feared not the imminent danger, but so much the more they
were afflicted, being suddenly oppressed with extreme myserie.
he has held his peace: because the wall of Moab is destroyed in the night, he
has held his peace. The Iere. 4^. EE^ch. 7.
thereof baldnes, and every beard shall be shaven. In the Miscrie, even of
^^mi^s, moves a charitable heart to compassion. So the Prophet lamenteth the
Moabites affliction.
My heart shall cry to they shall lead them to the torrent of willowes. Because
the

CHAP. XVI. The prophet prays for, and prophecieth Christ's coming: 6. adding
more of the affliction of the Moabites for their pride.
SEND forth o Lord In the great misery of he Moabites, the Prophet saw one
special cause of consolation, that Christ the lamb of God which takes away
the sins of the world, should be borne of their lineage, by one of th^er
progeny.
the lamb the dominatour of the Of Ruth a Moabite, who was married to Booz, and
so was David's great grandmother. Ruth, 4. See the argument of Ruth.
Rock of the desert, to the mount of the daughter of Sion. And he shall be as a
bird fleing, and the has labored for his excelses, he shall go in to his
sanctuaries to pray, and shall not prevail. This is the word, that our Lord The
vvarres against Moab continued three years,
In three years, as the years of In which it was brought into servitude.
an hired servant, the glory of Moab shall be taken away upon all the multitude
of people, and it shall be leaft little and small, not much.

CHAP. XVII. Damascus with other Syrians shall be afflicted, 4. likewise the
ten tribes of Israel. 7. Of which some few persons will return to God. 12.
And finally their enemies the Assirians shall be overthrown.
THE burden of Damascus. Behold Damascus shall cease The fourth prophetical
commination was against the Syrians.
to be a city, and shall be as an heap of stones in ruin. The forsaken cities
of Aroer shall be for flocks, and they Iosue 10. 11. etc.
face of the children of Israel, and thou shall be desolate. Because thou have
forgotten God thy fauiour, and have not After that the Assirians had afflicted
the Israelites, and their confederates, them selves were also afflicted.
the multitude of many peoples, being as the multitude of the sounding sea:
and the tumult of multitudes, as the sound of many waters. Peoples shall sound
as the sound of waters ouerflowing,

CHAP. XVIII. The Egyptians, for alluring the two tribes to their
confederacy, shall be afflicted, 7. and the Jews return to more sincere
service of God. The fifth was against the Aethiopians and Egyptians.

VVOE to the land the cymbal of wings, which is Or paper boats.
bulrushes upon the waters. Go ye swift The Egyptians bid their messengers
go swiftly, and tell the Jews that they shall have present help according as
they require and expect.
angels to a nation shaken a sunder, and torn in pieces: to a terrible people,
after which there is none other: to a nation expecting and trodden under foot,
whose land the floodes have spoiled: But the prophet shows that the
Egyptians them selves shall be overthrown by the Assirians.
Al ye inhabitants of the world, which abide in the earth,

CHAP. XIX. Further description of the Egyptians punishment, 17. With their
conversion to Christ in the new Testament.
THE burden of Egypt. Behold When our B. Savior was carried in his infancy
by his mother into Egypt the idols of that country lost their power. And the
inhabitants were specially blessed, and afterward very many believed in
Christ, and sincerely served him.
our Lord will ascend upon In that day there shall be five cities in the land of
Egypt, Both Jews and Christians understand this prophecy of the conversion
of the Egyptians to Christ. But the Jews expect it as yet to come, we know
that it is already fulfilled. At least in part. For there were sometimes many
Christians in that country, yea many most excellent Saints. S. Paul. S.
Antonie. S. Hilarion, and innumerable others.
an altar of our Lord in the mids of the land of Egypt; and a title of our
Lord by the border thereof it shall

CHAP. XX. The ignominious captivity of Egyptians, and Aethiopians is again
foreshewed by the Prophet going naked. 5. whereat the Jews are astonished and
afeard, seeing their co^federaies so confounded.
IN the year, that Tharthan entered into Azotus, when Sargon The holy prophet,
of noble blood, was not disobedient, nor ashamed to go naked, because nothing
is more honest then to obey Gods commandment. S. Ierom. in ^un^ locum.
going naked, and barefoote. And our Lord said: As my servant Isaie has
walked, and of Egypt their glory. And the inhabitant of this i will

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XX.
6. Lo this was our hope.] God to show the vanity of al hope, that is
reposed in men, or in wordlie things, lays the marvelous and miserable
mutations of Gods providence in punishing all that trust in men and not in him.
temporal great kingdoms, before the eyes of his people. That we may see, and
admire his merciful providence, and our own folly, when we trust in the help
of our selves, or of other men, who can not defend them selves from ruin and
ignominy: and much less can they save us, or we our selves. As these examples
make manifest. The kingdom of Israel (or ten tribes) trusted in Damaseus,
which could not defend it self, but was overthrown. The kingdom of Examples of
mutations in kingdoms.
Judah (or two tribes) trusted in Egypt. The Egyptians trusted in the
Ethiopians, and both were overthrown by the Assirians. The Assirians glorying
in their victories and triumphs, attributing al to their own streingth, were
overcome by the Babylonians. The Babylonians, likewise insolent and proud, were
oppressed by the Medes and Persians. The Medes and Persians were subdued by
Alexander the great. Who was shortly taken away in his youth by poison; and
his great Monarchy divided amongst his servants. And so other peoples, and
kingdoms, much more particular persons, and families are turned like a whole.
And therefore our only refuge must be to God: in whom is al true hope, help,
safety, and happiness, temporal and eternal.

CHAP. XXI. The destruction of Babylon by the Medes and Persians is again
prophesied, 11. The like of the Idumeans; 13. and of Arabians.
THE burden of the desert sea. As whirlewinds come The sixth commination was
against the Assirians, and specially the Babylonians.
from the South, it comes from the desert, from an horrible land. A sore
vision was told me: he that is incredulous Cyrus king of the Persians a people
of small power, and of the Medes, of great streingth.
ass, and a rider upon a camel: and he beheld them diligently with much
looking. And a lion cried: I am upon Iere. 51. Apoc. 14.
sculptils of the gods thereof are broken to the ground. O The seventh
prophetical commination was against the Idumeans.
The burden of Duma cries to me out of Seir: The eight against the Ismaelites
Arabiam.
The burden in Arabia. In the

CHAP. XXII. For the sins especially of chief officers, Sion and the temple
shall be destroyed. 15. Sobna a wicked ruler shall be removed, 20. and Eliacim
put in his place.
THE The ninth against the chief rulers of Jerusalem.
burden of the Sion situated on a hill, and often called a montaine is here
called a vale, for the afflicted state wherein it was in the captivity.
vale of vision. What aileth thee, shilde has made the wall naked. And thy
principal valleis This Sobna had some of fi^e about the Temple, but by crafty
intrusion and unjust usurpation, rather then by lawful induction, was very
covetous* and ambicious* and so by Gods judgment fell into misery.
* Sobna the provost of the temple, and thou shall say to him: What do thou
here, or as if little vessel from vessels of cups even to every instrument of
music. In that day says the Lord of hosts, shall the pin

CHAP. XXIII. The destruction of Tyrus by the Chaldees, 15. and reparation
thereof after seventy years.
THE burden of Tire. Howl ye ships of the sea, because The tenth commination
was against the Tyrians.
the house is destroyed, from whence they were wont to come: from the land of
Cethim it is reveled to them. Hold your peace ye that dwell in Tyrus was an
island, as Ezechiel also describes it ( chapter 27.) in the entrance, yea situated
in the heart of the sea: but not far distant, for king Alexander filled up
that passage of water and made it continent.
the i will: the trafickers of The Tyrians rejoiced in the Jews captivity and
therefore God punished them with like captivity of 70. years.
seventy years, as the days of one king: but after seventy years, there
shall be to Tire as it were the song of an harlot. Take an

CHAP. XXIIII. All this world shall be destroyed, 7. whereof many signs shall
come before, 18. and general judgment shall follow. The third part Prophecies
perteyning to the whole world.

BEHOLD our Lord shall dissipate the earth, and make it Osee. 4.
naked, and afflict the face thereof, and disperse the inhabitants thereof. And
Diversity of states which is now in the world, shall cease at the general
judgment, and al men shall receive according to their delertes.
as the people, so shall the priest be: and Nere the end of the world, many
forgetting the law of God, and nature, will rage in extreme fury against
others, persecuting and murdering one an other, especially the wicked
afflicting the good: which our Savior describes ( Mat. 24) saying: Nation
shall rise against nation. You shall be odious to al nations for my sake.
Iniquity shall abound. etc.
shall be mad, and few men shall be leaft. The vintage has mourned, the vine
is weakened, the gates. Because these things shall be in the mids of the This
joyful propagation of Gods glory and name, is either understood to be
prophesied of the Church in general, which is as an island of the whole world:
or properly and particularly (amongst other gentiles) of ^la^des converted to
Christ: as great Britannie and others.
in the isles of the sea the name of our Lord the God of Israel. From the ends
of the earth we have Iere. 48.
flee from the voice of fear, shall fall into the pit: and he that shall rid
him self out of the pit, shall be held in the snare: because the fludgates
from on high are opened, and the fundations of the earth shall be shaken. With
breaking shall

CHAP. XXV. The Prophet gives thanks to God for his marvelous works, 7. and
great benefits, in lightning many with faith, washing away sins, and giving
grace, and eternal glory.
OLORD thou art my God, I will exalt thee, and confess The prophet and faithful
people confessing Gods benefits, and perfect performance of whatsoever he
promises, or determines, conforming their desires to his pleasure, say: Amen:
as well in prosperity, when he delivers, and blesses them, as in adversity,
when he punishes: by the destruction of Jerusalem* which is here prophesied,
and the like.
Amen. Because thou for ever. For this shall strong people praise thee, the
city of After the reiection of the Jews al Gentiles shall be converted to
Christ.
al peoples in this mount, a feast of fat things, a feast of vintage, of fat
things full of marrow, of vintage purified from the dregs. And he shall in
Apoc. 7. and ^1.
and our Lord God shall take away tear from al face, and the reproach of his
people he shall take away out of the whole earth: because our Lord has spoken
it. And he shall say in

CHAP. XXVI. A Canticle of thanks for changing the old Synagogue into the
Church of Christ: Which has more light of true faith, 12. and more patience in
tribulations: 19. Which in the general resurrection shall be made manifest.
In the time of grace given by Christ his whole Church sings this and other
like canticles of praises.
THAT day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah. Other peoples have their
peculiar proper cities: Babylon, Damascus, Tyrus, Sidon, etc. but al Christians
have one city the Catholic Church signified by Sion.
Sion the city of our strength a Savior, therein shall be put:: a wall and
bulworke.







Because he will bow down them that dwell on high, the high city he will abase.
He will abase it even to the ground, he will pluck it down even to the dust.







Fensed with wal, and bull work, of faith and good works. S. Ierom here
notes that the sense of this Canticle is hard, by reason of often and sudaine
inter locutions of diverse persons consisting in questions and answers. To
whose learned commentaries we remitte the studious readers.
spirit in my heart I will watch to thee in the morning.

When thou shall do thy judgments in the earth, the inhabitants of the world
shall learn justice.



















A prophecy of the general resurrection of al men.
dead shall live, my slain shall rise again: awake, and praise ye that dwell in
the dust: because Some in glory.
the dew of the light is thy dew; and Some in misery.
the land of the giants thou shall pluck down into ruin.

Go my people, enter into thy chambers, shut thy doors upon thee, be hid a
little for a moment, til the indignation pass.

Mich. 1
earth shall reuele her blood, and shall cover her slain no more.

CHAP. XXVII. God comfort the faithful, promising to destroy the wicked. 3.
Christ's coming is again prophesied, with propagation of his Gospel, and
conversion of al nations.
IN that day our Lord will visit with his sore, and great, and Job. 40.
strong sword upon Leuiathan Tyrants are called serpents for their subtle
poysenful malice, and bars because they hold men fast enclosed in bondage.
And for the same reasons the devil is called a serpent, and a bar.
the serpent,:: the bar, and upon Leuiathan the crooked serpent, and shall kill
the whale that is in the sea. In that day the vineyard of pure one o children
of Israel. And it shall be: in that day a sound

CHAP. XXVIII. Tribulations are threatened to the ten tribes of Israel, for
their pride, and voluptuosnes. (5. God still protecting some who serve him
sincerely) 7 and for contempt of Religion. 16. But God will lay a sure fundation
in Sion, 20. Will punish the wicked, 24. and comforth the good.
VVOE to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of The fourt part. Prophetical
admonitions to both the kingdoms of Israel and Judah.
By Ephraim is understood the kingdom of Israel, whose first king Jeroboam was
of that tribe.
Ephraim, and to the flower falling down from the glory of his exultation,
which were in the top of the most fat valley, erring by wine. Behold our
Lord is valiant After that the ten tribes were carried captives (4 Reg. 17.)
God delivered the two tribes out of imminent danger. (4. Reg 18. 19)
In that day the Lord of hosts shall be a crown giving peace to their people:
a garland of exultation to the residue of his people: and spirit of judgment
to king Ezechias:
a spirit of judgment to him that sits in and victory to the souldiars.
strength to them that return out of battle to the gate. But these also have
been ignorant because of he said: This is my rest, refresh the weary, and this
is my refreshing: and they would not hear. And the word of our Because Isaias
and other holy prophets often and much urged, not only the people, but also
priests (which had rule over the people) to keep Gods commandments, and to
expect his mercy and goodness, they scornfully repete the same words, deriding
such exhortations and desperately giving themselves to al wickedness, as if they
neither feared death nor hell. v. 15.
command recommand, command recommand; expect reexpect, expect reexpect; a
little there a little there: that they may go, and fall backward, and be
destroyed, and snared, and taken. For this cause hear the Mat. 21. v 42.
stone, an approved stone, a corner stone, precious founded in Act. 4. 1. Pet.
2.
the foundation. He that believes, let him not make have. And I will put
judgment in weight, and justice in measure: Romans 9.
and hail shall overthrow the hope of lying: and waters shall ouerflow the
protection. And your league with death shall 2. Reg. 5. 1. Par. 14
the valley, which is in Gabaon, shall he be angry: that he may do his work,
his strange work: that he may work, his Iosue. 10
work is strange from him. And now mock not, lest perhaps As husbanmen
dispose their works in order: so God sometimes works miracles, sometimes
gives benefits, sometimes sends afflictions: and greater to some then to
others.
the ploughman plowe all the day corn shall be broken small: But none are
continually afflicted without intermission.
but the thresher shall not thresh it for ever, neither shall the wayne wheel
vex it, nor break it with the teeth thereof. And this is come forth from our

CHAP. XXIX. The Prophet bewaleth the Jews destruction, 9. for their blind
obstinacy; 17. prophesying the Gentiles conversion.
VVOE to Ari signifies a lion, El God: So Jerusalem called the lion of God, to
wit a strong city, is threatened with destruction, which happened first by
the Babylonians. 4. Reg. 25 again more miserably by Titus and Vespasian, 40.
years after Christ's death.
Ariel, Ariel the city, which David overcame: 2. Reg. 5. 1 Par. 11
year is added to year: the solemnities are Luc. 19.
at an end. And I will make a trench about Ariel, and it shall Scribes and
Pharisees pretending knowledge of Scriptures, can not read Christ in the
Prophets, because these books are sealed (or loeked) and they have not the
key. Apoc. 3.
I can not, for it is sealed. And the book shall be given to one that knows
not letters,

The Gentiles could not read Christ in these books, because they knew not
letters of the holy Scriptures. S. Ierom Praemio. in Isaiam.
I know not letters. And our Lord said: Because this Mat. 15.
people approaches with their mouth, and with their lips Mar. 7.
glorifieth me, but their heart is far from me, and they have feared me by the
commandment and doctrines of men: therefore behold I will add to make
admiration to this 1. Cor. ^^.
to hide your counsel from our Lord: whose works are in darkness, and they
say: Who sees us, and who knows us? This your cogitation is perverse: as if
the clay should think Eccli. 29.
against the potter, and the work should say to the maker thereof: Thou made
me not: or the thing formed should say to the fashioner thereof: Thou
understand not. Shall not

CHAP. XXX. The Jews are blamed for seeking counsel, and help of the
Egyptians. 18. but if they repent, they shall find relief, and spiritual
riches of the soul. 27. Gods judgment will be strict: 33. and hell is most
horrible.
VVOE You that trust in your own counsels and forces, or in other men's and not
in God, shall find the miserable event of your folly, as is before noted.
chap. 2^.
unto Apostatae. or, denyers.
renegate children, says our Lord, that and have not asked my mouth, hoping
for help in the strength of Pharao, and having confidence in the shadow of
Egypt. And the strength of Pharao shall be a confusion to you, and Either
Isaias was commanded to write this which should be fulfilled many years
after; or else he speaks prophetically to Jeremy, nere 200. years before he
prophesied; signifying that he should: hen write it, as in deed he did. Iere.
41 etc.
Now therefore going in write to her upon box, may have mercy on you: and
therefore shall he be exalted sparing you: because our Lord is the God of
judgment: blessed Psalm. ^3.
are al they that expect him For the people of Sion shall dwell This claritie in
sun and moon shall be after the general resurrection.
the Christ will exercise his severe justice in the general judgment, when he
shall bid the damned go into everlasting fire. Mat. 25.
burning fury, and heavy to bear: his lips are filled with indignation,
and his tongue as a devouring fire. His spirit as a rod shall never cease,
which our Lord shall make to rest upon him in If often happeareth that when e^il
men seem most secure, they ^al into sudden calamities.
tymbrels and harpes* and in principal battles he shall overthrow them. For Hell.
Topheth is prepared since

CHAP. XXXI. The prophet further bewayleth the Jews calamity, into which they
shall fall for their confederacy with the Egyptians. 5. Yet God will protect
^erusalem: 8. and overthrow Senacharib.
VVOE to them that go down into Egypt for help, Iere. 42.
hoping in horses, and having confidence upon chariots, because they be many:
and upon horsemen, because they be very strong: and have Both this Prophet, and
afterward ^ere^^e admonished the Jews not to trust in the Egyptians, but
they contemning this admonition showed in their deeds that they distrusted
God, not be leuing nor obeying his prophets: and for the same were at last
punished.
not trusted upon the holy one of Israel, and have not sought after our Lord.
But he that In the mean time God destroyed the army of Sennaca^^b be seging
Jerusalem. 4 Reg. 19. But they forgote this and many other examples of Gods
power and love.
to fight upon mount Sion, and upon the little hill thereof. As birds that Isai.
2.
which your hands have made you into sin. And Assure

CHAP. XXXII. The prophet conforteth the Jews, foreshewing that their king
Ezechias will rule well, and prosper; but most especially prophecieth of Christ.
9. That they shall be rejected for persecuting him, 15. and his Church shall
prosper.
BEHOLD "the king shall" reign in justice, and the princes The fifth part. Of
the captivity, and relaxation of the kingdom of Judah: with other afflictions
and comfortes; but especially of Christ and his Church.
shall rule in judgment. And a man shall be as he that Albeit many things in
this and other places perteyne first and literally to the old testament: yet al
are in figure, and some things have no other literal sense but of the new
testament. As this prophecy of maffling, or imperfect tongues, to speak
readily, is fulfilled in the Church of Christ; plainly and distinctly
confessing al Mysteries of Catholic faith and religion: and the like, which
can not be verified in the Jewish people.
of mafflers shall speak readely and plain. He that is unwise shall no more be
called prince: Noble cities of Judah.
rich women arise, and hear my voice: ye confident peace, and in the
tabernacles of confidence, and in wealthy rest. But hail in falling upon the
forest, and the city shall

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXII.
1. The king shall reign.] Some expound this whole passage of Ezechias, or This
and many other prophecies perteyne to the old testament as in figure, alluding
to the history, but principally to Christ, and his Church.
Josias kings of Judah, and of the chief princes under them: but so great
effects* as be here prophesied, were not fully verified in them, but as in
figure only of a more excellent king, and his principal servants, that should
follow afterward. For albeit these were very good kings, and had good and
wise counselers, and gouerners under them: yet they had not that perfect
judgment, nor performed that complete justice, vvherby the subjects enjoyed
such peace, rest, safety, and consolation, as be here described, by the
metaphores, and similitudes of men hid from vvinde, safe from tempest,
refreshed with waters in their heat, and shadowed by a rock from the burning
sun in the desert, with the like. And therefore S Ierom, and other Christian
Doctors understand it of Christ, who has most perfect judgment and justice;
and of his Apostles, and other Pastors of his Church, who by unction of the
Holy Ghost, participate more abundantly of Christ's grace, then did the
priests, and other rulers in the old testament. And so Christian people
receive these benefits of peace, rest, protection, refreshing in soul, and
conscience, and other spiritual comfortes in Christ, by the mysteries of the
new Testament, which the faithful of the old Testament could not receive by
their kings and princes, nor by priests and prophets of that time. The same
we might deduce of innumerable other Pref. of prophetical books.
places of this and other Prophets: but it is not our * purpose to explicate
much in this Edition.

1. Reign in justice: and rule in judgment.] Here also to avoid prolixitie,
we may once note that these words: Judgment, and Justice, have a sa^^e
other What the words, Judgment and Justice signify.
higher and more excellent signification in holy Scriptures (where they most
frequently occur) then in profane vvritings, and natural or moral
philosophical discourses. For Philosophers, such as Plato and Aristotel, could
reach no further then to natural reason, which they called right judgment:
and to moral equity, which in general they named justice. But the Holy Ghost
by these words reueleth most high spiritual mysteries, known by faith, most
comfortable to men's souls, releeuing and refreshing the consciences of
penitents in this life, and replenishing the just with unspeakable gladness in
eternal glory. Therefore in the sense usual in holy Scripture, Judgment is the
act of the mind, Definition of Judgment and Justice as they are used in the
holy Scriptures. Both applied to Gods, and men's actions.
or understanding, discerning what is right, just, and agreing to reason: And
Justice is the rectitude of the vvil, doing conformably to right direction of
the mind, or understanding. And so these words are applied to signify both
Gods, and just men's actions. As that which God mercifully decreed in
eternity, and promised after the fall of man, to do for mankind, as convenient
for his Divine Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and Goodness; with all the
means which he ordained for effecting the same, is called his Judgment; and
the performing and accomplishment thereof, so sa^re as is of his part, is called
his Justice. Also that which any man discusseth, discerns, and determines
in his understanding, as right, or reasonable in supernatural things, is
called his spiritual judgment; and that which he does of his freevvil
according to the same right judgment, is called his justice. So in this place
the Prophet forshevveth, that Christ our Kingvvil reign in iust^^^, that is,
perform and fulfill all that he, as God Explication of the text.
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, decreed for Redemption, Justification
and Sal^ation of men. And the princes* his Apostles and other Pastors, shall
rule in judgment: that is, discern and judge, what is right and good for
themselves, and the people in respect of their souls, and eternal salvation.

CHAP. XXXIII. Sennacherib beseeging and threatening Jerusalem, shall be
overthrown by Angels. 13. that both wicked arrogant infidels may feel the
hand of God, and faithful sinners repenting after great terror be comforted.
VVOE to thee Sennacarib spoiled all the kingdom of Israel, and al* Judah saving
Jerusalem, which he also beseged, reproching and despising God: but himself was
therefore spoiled, and despised.
that spoilest, shall not thy self also be Fidelity in performing promises of
good things temporal and spiritual.
faith in thy times: riches of salvation wisdom and knowledge: the fear of our
Lord that is his treasure. Behold they that see shall cry without, Messengers
sent to procure peace shall mourn, because they can not obtain it.
the angels of peace Psalm. 14*
shakes his hands from al gift, that stops his ears lest he hear blood,
and shuts his eyes that he may see no evil. This man shall dwell on high, the
munitions of rocks shall 1. Cor 1.
where the teacher of little ones? The unwise people thou Both prophecies and
histories testify that terrene Jerusalem was subject to destruction, and was
destroyed, and therefore this is necessarily to be understood of the Church of
Christ, against which he^ gates shall never prevail.
that can not be transferred: neither shall the nails thereof be taken away for
ever, and all the cords thereof shall not be broken* because only there our Lord
is magnifical: a place

CHAP. XXXIIII. A prophecy of the destruction of the whole world, at the day
of Judgment, 5. and in particular of I dume^, 9. and Jerusalem, as figures
thereof.
COME God wills as well the gentiles that were far of, to come near.
near ye Gentiles, and hear, and ye As* Iso the Jews, that were his pecular
people al to attend that he will destroy this whole world, before the general
Judgment.
peoples The sword of our Lord is filled with blood, it is fatted of the No
defense of strong places (signified by Bosra) shall save any men from
destruction in the day of Judgment.
Bosra, and agrear slaughter in the land of Edom. And the unicorns shall come
In the mean time, as a figure thereof Sion shall be destroyed: and therefore the
metaphorical destruction following rather perteyneth to the state of the damned
in the next world then to the afflicted in this life.
of Sion. And the torrents thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the

CHAP. XXXV. Gentiles converted to Christ shall much rejoice, 5. being comforted
and confirmed by his miracles, much more by his internal grace, which brings
to life everlasting.
THE An evident prophecy of the conversion of Gentiles. In whom the Church
shall continually spring and flourish.
desert and the land without passage shall be glad, and Springing it shall
spring, and shall rejoice joyful and praising: Christ leaning al logical
arguments, proved himself to be Messiah by his works. If ye believe not me
(says ou^ B. Savior) believe my works. Joan. 10. v. 38.
the Mat. 15.
open. Then shall the lame leap as an heart, and the tongue Mar. 7.
^^c. 7.
of the dumme shall be opened: because waters are cut out in the desert, and
torrents in the wilderness. And that which

CHAP. XXXVI. Sennacherib king of Assirians having taken other cities in Jury,
besieges and threatens Jerusalem; 4. reprocheth king Ezechias; 7. blasphemeth
God; 13. and terrifieth the people.
AND it came to pass That which the prophet had foretold by way of prophecy,
now he records by way of history, and therefore these four next chapters are
inserted in the fourt book of kings. chapter 18. 19. and 20. almost in the same
words, and an abridgement thereof 2. Paral. 32.
in the fourtenth year of king 4. Reg. 18.
Ezechias, Sennacherib king of the Assyrians came up against all the fensed
cities of Judah, and took them. And 2. Par. 32.
the king of the Assyrians sent Rabsaces from Lachis to Jerusalem, to king
Ezechias with a great army, and he stood by the water conduite of the upper
poole in the way of the fullers filde. And there came out to him Eliacim the
son art revolted from me? Lo thou do trust upon this broken Such is the
blindness, and malice of infidels, that they confound things done to destroy
idolatry, as if the same were against God.
whose excelses and altars Ezechias has taken away, and he said to Judah and
Jerusalem: Before this altar shall you adore? And now deliver Do that is
profitable for you. 4. Reg 18. v* 31.
a blessing with me, and come forth to me, and eat ye every man of his own
wineyard, and every man of his own figtree, and drink ye every man the
water of his own cesterne, til I come and take you away to a land, that Many
in Samaria served false goods which could not defend them: others served God
almighty who for their good suffered them to be afflicted.
Samaria out of my hand? Who is there of all the gods of these lands, Lord
can deliver Jerusalem out of any hand? And they held

CHAP. XXXVII. King Ezechias requesteth the prayers of Isaie the prophet, 6.
who assures the king of Gods help. (8. In the mean time the enemies
threatening and blaspheming, 14. King Ezechias prays) 21. God promises to
protect Jerusalem: 36* and by an Angel kills in one night an hundred
eigtiefiue thousand Assirians. 37. Their king returns to Ni^^ue and is slain
by his own sons.
AND it came to pass, when king Ezechias had heard it, he Renting of cutting
of garments was a^^ ceremony to show internal sorrow;
rent his garments, and was wrapped in And sackcloth was an habit of ponitents
for sins.
sackcloth, 4. Reg. 19.
and entered into the house of our Lord. And he sent Eliacim 2. Par. 32.
which was over the house, and Sobna the scribe, and the ancients of the
priests covered with sackclothes to Isaie, the son of Amos the prophet, and
they said to him: Thus Ezechias, saying: Thus shall you say to Ezechaias the
king That which happened to al these ^nfidel kings, fell also upon Sennacharib
king of Assyrians shortly after he had thus bragged, or rather greatter ruin
and misery. v. 36. and 38.
Where is the king of Emath, and the king of Arphad, and have dried up with the
step of my foot all the rivers of the rampires. Why, have thou not heard,
what I have done to He turns his speech to Ezechias.
But to th^e this shall be Job. 1. Eccli 48. 1. Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 8.
forth, and stroke in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred eighty five
thousand. And they arose in the morning, and behold,:: al were carcasses of
dead men. And he went out, and

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXVII.
^5. For David's sake.] We have here a manifest example that the merits of
Merits of Saints do profit the living.
Saints departed forth of this world, do profit the living: God protecting
Jerusalem not only for his own, but also for his servant David's sake. Against
which plain sense, Protestants denying merits and prayers of Saints, seem
The Protestants evasion.
to have no better quasion, then this silly shift, ^e^ned without vvarrant of
holy Scripture, or ancient Father; to interpret these words, for David's
sake to signify, for Gods promise sake made to David. But if they be demanded,
where Bible 160^.
and when God promised to David, that he would protect and save the city of
Jerusalem from sacking by enemies, or from ruin, they can never show it. God
made David conqueror of Jerusalem, extirpating there the Iebusites, who until
his time kept the tower of Sion (2. Reg. 5. v. 7.) and protected the same
city God promised to protect the city of Jerusalem from certain dangers, but
not perpetually.
al his time, and long after. And in certain particular dangers, promised to
Achaz a wicked king (Isaie. 7.) and to this good king Ezechias here ^and 4.
Reg. 19. ^ that he would save and deliver Jerusalem, from oher particular
distresses vvherin it was at those times, but he promised not this to king
David. Neither did God make a general promise to protect that city
perpetually. For if he had so promised, it should not have been subdued,
brought into captivity, and defaced as it was by the Babylonians. And therefore
this gloss of Protestants 4. Reg. 25.
is built upon false ground. And the words are as manifest, as if the kings
Majesty The Protestants gloss is il grounded.
should say: I vvil protect the ^^^^ of London, that I may save it for mine
own sake, and such my former subjects sake, that have faithfully heretofore
served their kings. Or if he should say: I vvil protect such a noblemans
chief* Manor place for mine own sake, and for such his progenitors sake, who
This similitude does not prove but explain the truth otherwise proved.
served me loyally. VVherby is plainly signified, that the king do^^ this
^ouour not only forth is own sake, but also for the merits of some that
lived there and deserved well before* Neither do we produce this similitude:
to prove that is in controversy, but to explain the Catholic doctrine,
apparent by this text, and approved by the ancient Fathers, and the whole
Church of God.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Ezechias being sick* and advertised by the prophet that he
shall then dye, by prayer (...) prolongation of life: 6. with promise of
victory, confirmed by a sign. 9. For which he rendereth thanks to God with a
Canticle of praise.
IN After the Assyrians were slain king Ezechias was visited with dangerous
sickness, to keep him in the fear of God le^t much joy should bring him into
obl^^^on, of his duty.
those days Ezechias was sick even to death, and Isaie 4. Reg. 20.
to him: Thus says our Lord. Take order with thy house, for 2. Par. 32.
:: thou shall die, and shall not live. And Ezechias turned his It was first
reveled to the Prophet that the kings sickness was deadly.
I will add upon thy days fiftene years: and out of the city, and will
protect it. And this shall be a sign to thee

Secondly that God would add 15. years to his life: which could not be said,
to be added, except his life according to natural causes, had been at an end.
S. Aug. li. 6. c. 17. de Gen* ad ^^^.
In the mids of my days shall I go to the gates of hell. I have sought the
residue of my years.



In this Canticle the king recites his afflictions of mind, for that he should
part out of this world, in the flower of his age.
generation is taken away; and is wrapped together from me, as the tent of
shepehards:

My life is cut of, as by a weauer: whiles I yet began he cut me of: from
morning until night thou will make an end of me.



From morning until evening thou will make an end of me.



Lord I suffer violence, answer for me.

And without children. for Manasses was borne three years after being 12.
years old when he begane to reign. 4. Reg. 21.




Behold in peace is my bitterness most bitter:

But thou have delivered my soul that it should not perish, thou have cast al
my sins behind thy back.







The prophet ordained this medicine:
that they should take a lump of figs, and plaster it upon the wound, and he
should be healed.

and the king also demanded a sign before he song the Canticle.
: What shall be the sign that I shall go up into the house of our Lord?

CHAP. XXXIX. The king of Babylon sent legates, to visit king Ezechias, and
congratulate his recovery of health. 2. He shows them al his riches, 5. for
which I say reprehendeth him: and prophecieth that the Babylonians will spoil
Jerusalem.
AT THAT time Merodach Baladan the son of Baladan, 4 Reg. 20.
king of Babylon, sent letters and gifts to Ezechias: for he had heard that he
had been sick, and was recovered. And Ezechias In this honorable embassage
Ezechias rejoiced immoderatly; and unwisely showed his treasures, which
therefore the prophet reprehended. And upon this occasion prophesied that the
Babylonians should carry away all that treasure, and his children into captivity.
rejoiced upon them, and he showed them Not for want of affection toward his
posterity, but seeing he durst not request more, he prayed for peace in his
own days.
Only be there peace and truth in my days.

CHAP. XL. The prophet comfort the people with Christ's coming to remitte
sins. The sixth part Of the delivery from sin by Christ.
3. Before whom S. John Baptist shall preach penance. 6. shows man's
imbecilitie. 9. Gods Majesty, 18. the vanity of idols: 27. and fall of them
that fear not God.
BE The prophet alludeth to the comfort of the Jews, when they should be
delivered from captivity of Babylon: but principally prophicieth of man's
delivery from sin by Christ.
comforted, be comforted my people, says your God. received of the hand of our
Lord duble for all her sins. An evident prophecy of S. John Baptist.
The voice of one crying in the desert: Prepare the way Mat. 3.
of our Lord, make straight the paths of our God in the wilderness. Mar. 1.
Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain Luc. 3.
and little hill shall be humbled, and crooked things shall become Joan. 1.
straight, and rought ways, plain. And the glory of our Iac. 1.
glory thereof as the flower of the filde. The grass is withered, 1. Pet. 1.
and the flower is fallen, because the spirit of our Lord has blown on it. In
deed the people is grass: the grass This is also manifest of Christ's
preaching in the mountain: and of his Apostles, and Apostolical preachers.
Upon an high mountain get thee up, Mat. 5.
thou that euangelizest to Sion: exalt the voice in strength, which
euangelizest to Jerusalem: exalt it, fear not. Say to the cities of Judah:
Behold your God: behold our Lord God shall Joan. 10.
together the lambs, and in his bosom shall he lift them up, and them with
young himself shall carry. Gods power and benevolence in creating and governing
all this world, is a sign that he both can and will bestow these great benefits
of grace upon al nations.
Who has measured Romans 11.
him? With whom has he taken counsel, and who has 1. Cor. 2.
instructed him, and taught him the path of justice, and taught him knowledge,
and showed him the way of prudence? Behold the Gentiles are as a drop of a
bucket, and are least dust, or atomus.
the moment of a balance: behold the islands are as a little dust. And Libanus
shall not suffice to kindle the fire, Act. 17.
goldsmith figured it with gold, or the siluersmith with plates of silver?
Strong wood, and that which will not putrify a sculptile which may not be
moved. Why, From the beginning the law of nature, afterward the law of
Moysestaught that he which made the world is God.
do you not VVisest Philosophers know nothing neither can consist but by him.
the searchers of secrets as if Psa. 14^
by name: by the multitude of his force and strength, and power, not one of
them was missing. Why say thou Jacob,

CHAP. XLI. God pleading against idolaters, shows his power and goodness by
his benefits bestowed upon the Jews; 17. With promise of perpetual
protection. 21. Whereas their vain idols can no way profit them.
LET Gods expostulation with Islands, and other Gentiles living in idolatry,
which implies a prophecy of their conversion to Christ, perteyneth amongst
others ^^ry particularly to our great Brit(...) the grea(...) and most ^^n^wmed
I^an^ of Europe. See D. Bristo^^. Mot. 11.
the islands hold their peace before me, and the pass in peace, there shall no
path appear after his feet. Who has wrought and done these things, calling
the Apoc. 1. and 22.
last I am. The islands have seen, and have been afraid, You that are as
abiectes contemned, and as dead men in the world, fear not, because Christ
has care to protect, and to reward you.
worm of Jacob, ye that are dead of Israel: know, and recount, and understand
together that the hand of the Lord has done this, and the holy one of Israel
has created it. Make your judgment approach, says the Lord: Only God, and
those to whom he reueleth, can tell things to come, and therefore idols can not
foreshew what shall be, neither could tell before hand things that are already
come to pass.
Let them come, and tell us what things so ever are

CHAP. XLII. God the Father is well pleased with his Son. 6. whom he sends
into this world to teach justice, whereby men are justified. 11. Many Gentiles
shall be converted. 25. Jews, and other obstinate infidels shall be severely
punished.
BEHOLD Christ according to his humanity is the servant of God, by whom al
other servants are redeemed, none else being able to satisfy for themselves,
much less for others.
my servant, I will receive him: mine elect, my Mat. 1^.
soul has pleased itself in him: I have given my spirit upon him, he shall
bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He Mat. 12.
flax he shall not quench: he shall bring forth judgment in truth. He shall not
be sad, nor turbulent, til he set judgment spirit to them that tread
thereupon. I the Lord have called Such hautie and covetous minds as expect
their Messiah to be a worldly and warlike conqueror, that will advance his
folowers to kingdoms or princedomes, and to abundance of temporal riches, shall
be frustrate of their vain hopes. Vvheras Christ our Savior both by example
and doctrine teaches the contrary, willing his folowers to learn of him to be
poor in spirit meke and humble in heart, and their reward shall be great in
heaven, not in earth; they shall be happy not in external, but in eternal
glory.
mountains and little hills desolate, there that says: Restore. Who is there
among you that

CHAP. XLIII. God comfort his Church, promising ever to protect the same:
11. blames the Jews, expostulating their ingratitude.
AND now thus says our Lord that Christ calls, and ind^eth sinners with
grace, without any precedent good work or desire in them, even as he creates
of nothing.
created thee o In all tribulations and persecutions Christ protecteth his
servants, not suffering them to be tempted further then they may resist ^f
they will. VVherby the Church still remaneth incontaminate, and shall never be
destroyed.
shall pass through the waters, I will be among you. You are my witnesses,
says our Lord, and I God. And from the beginning I my self, and there is not
that can God made Cytus conqueror of Babylon not for his own sake, but for
Israel, that h^ might release their captivity. For God perpetually disposes
of kingdoms for the good of his Church.
ships. I the Lord your holy one, that created Israel your 2 Cor 5
and now they shall spring forth, verily you shall know them: Apo. 21.
I will make a way in the desert, and rivers in the place not haunted. The beast
of the field shall glorify me, the dragons The sin of Adam contaminating al
mankind was not purged by any:
Thy first father sinned, and thy Al Patriarchs Priests Prophets and al
others sinning; til Christ the innocent lamb came to take away the sin of
the world.
interpreters

CHAP. XLIIII. Christ foundeth and establishes his Church: 6. Inueigheth
against idolaters: 26. and promises deliverance from the captivity of Babylon.
AND now hear o Jacob my servant, and Israel whom Iere 30. and 48.
I have chosen. Thus says the Lord that made and Gods election preuenteth*
man's good endeavor for without grace none could return to God.
from the womb: fear not o my servant Jacob, and thou most righteous whom I
have chosen. For I will power out waters upon the thirsty ground, and Idolaters
are foolish in leaving God, who is eternal and to trust in idols that neither
can show what was from the beginning, nor prophecy things to come.
the first, and I the last, and Apoc 1. and 2^.
beside me there is no God. Who is like to me? let him call All that is here said
of the vanity of idols and foolish impiety of idolaters, may be referred
(says S. Ierom in this place) unto heresy, and heretics, who artificially
devise the fictions of their own doctrines and lying: and adore the things
which they know were feaned by themselves neitheir are so content, but draw
the simple to embrace and adore the same inventions. A little after he shows,
that the Catholic Church of Christ shall be ever free from such idolatry:
quite contrary to Protestants assertion that the Church should have fallen
and been in idolatry many hundred years together.
Them selves are their witnesses, that they do not see, nor understand, that
they may be confounded. Who has formed a god, and molten a sculptil Sup. ^^.
carpenter has stretched out a rule, he has formed it with a plain: he has
made it with corners, and has fashioned it round with the compass: and he
has made the image of a man as it were a beautiful man dwelling in a house. He
has made a god, and a sculptil to him self: he boweth before it, and
besecheth, saying: Deliver me, because thou art my God. They have not known,
nor understood: for they have In all this prophecy of the Church of Christ the
prophet alludeth to the history of Jerusalem to ben destroyed by the Chal dees
and reedified by permission of Cyrus, and Darius in the times of Aggeus, and
Zacharias.
to Jerusalem: Thou shall be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah: You shall be
built, and I will raise up the deserts thereof. Which say to the

CHAP. XLV. The 7. part. The delivery of the Jews from Babylon by Cyrus king
of Medes and Persians, now also of Assirians.
Cyrus, by Gods providence ouercoming Babylon, will deliver the Jews from
captivity. 4. Yet is reprehended because he acknowledges not God. 8. Upon
which occasion the prophet foresheweth the coming of Christ; 14. in figure of
whom he adds more of Cyrus: 18. and avouches that there is but one true God.
THVS says the Lord to my Because al kings that reigned among the Jews were
anointed with oil, Cyrus is called christ though he was not ordained with
this ceremony of anointing.
christ Cyrus, whose right S. Ierom notes here out of Josephus ( l. 11. Antiq)
that Cyrus finding his name long before prophe cied by Isaias, became very
beneuolous to the Jews, loving them as the familiar servants of God.
by thy name: I have resembled thee, and 2. Par. ^^.
But though he knew and professed one God, and no other (1. Esd. 1.) yet he was
not converted in all points of religion, neither served God according to that
general knowledge he had, and so knew not God rightly.
thou have not known me. I the Lord, and there is none else: The prophet in the
former prophecy contemplating Christ as in a figure now elevated more in
spirit, prophecieth of Christ only, who built his Church upon a sure rock.
Not of Cyrus, who being advanced by God yet perfectly knevv not God v. 4. nor
of Zorobabel who did not release the people from captivity, but together with
others, was released, neither had the title of a king, but lived in subjection
to other kings. S. Ierom. in hunc locum.
Drop dew ye heavens Romans 9. Iere. 18.
his maker, a sheard of the earthen pottes: shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it: What make thou, and thy work is without hands? Woe to him
that says to his father: Why for ever and ever. Because thus says our Lord
that created Romans ^4. Phil. 2.
shall be bowed to me, and every tongue shall swear. Therefore

CHAP. XLVI. Bell, Nabo, and other idols shall be destroyed, 3. Whereupon the
Jews are admonished to return from sin, to Gods true service. 12. And
salvation is promised by Christ.
BELL Bell or Belus, called also Saturnus, was of such estimation, that they
offered to him insacrifice not only men that were taken captives, but also
their own sons. Nabo, otherwise called Da gone, was an especial idol amongst
the Philistims. 1. Reg. 5.
is broken,:: Nabo is destroyed: their idols are made Romans ^.
their shoulders carrying, and setting him in his place, and he shall stand, and
shall not move out of his place. Yea when they shall cry also unto him, he shall
not hear: from tribulation he shall not save them. Remember this, and be
confounded: return Not Cyrus (says S. Ierom) but Christ the Orient ^^arre
prophec ed by Balaam. Number. 24 whom the Sages came to adore from the East Mat. 2.
a bird from the east, and from a far

CHAP. XLVII. The destruction of Babylon is further prophesied, for their
pride, 8. arroganeie, 10. and sorcerie.
COME down, sit in the dust Babylon not hitherto overcome at last was
brought to misery and destruction.
o Virgin daughter of Nahum. 3.
thy reproach shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and no man shall resist me.
Our redemer, the Lord of hosts is his name Gods people co^taminating
themselves with sin, were suffered to fall into ignominious captivity; but
God gives them grace of repentance, and then severely punishes their
unmerciful afflicters and pe^^ecuters.
have contaminated mine inheritance, and have given them into thy hand: thou
have not showed mercies to them: upon the ancient thou have made thy yoke
exceeding heavy. And thou have said: I will be a lady for Apoc. ^.
shall not sit a widow, and I shall not know barrenness. Insea 51.
These two things shall come to thee suddenly in one day, because of the
multitude of thy sorceries, and for the vehement

CHAP. XLVIII. The prophet inueigheth against the Jews vain boasting of the
name of Israel, not having true virtues. 3. Only God, not idols, foresheweth
things to come: 9. for his own names sake, conserueth his people, 16.
Inuiteth them to repent, and to be gratful for his benefits.
HEAR ye these things o house of Jacob, which are By waters in the Hebrew
phrase, is here understood the fountain, or spring, the prophet speaking to
those that were of the tribe of Judah. who especially halenged the preeminences
and blessings of Israel the Patriarch, but had not his virtues of fortitude,
and internal fight of God, signified by the name Israel.
the waters of Judah, which swear in the name of our Lord, and are mindful of
the God of Israel not in truth, nor in justice. For things, and my sculptils,
and moltens have commanded these things. See all the things which thou have
heard: but have God spares and conserueth his people not for their merits but
of his mercy, shevving his benignity that they may repent if they vvil.
For my names Iere. 2^.
to be heard, and speak it out even to the ends of the earth. Say: Our Lord
has redeemed his servant Jacob. They Exo. 17.
out of the rock he brought forth to them, and he cloue the Nu. 20.
rock, and there flowed waters. There is These promises of reconciliation to
God, and of peace perteine to the penitent not to the obstinate in impiety.
no peace to the

CHAP. XLIX. The 8. part. Al nations shall be converted to Christ: some Jews in
the primitive Church, and many nere the end of the world.
Christ shall lead the Gentiles to salvation, even of the islands and uttermost
parts of the world. 10. By him the faithful shall receive much grace, 14. and
comforth. 18. The Church still increasing, 21. admiring herowne felicity: 25.
and the destruction of her enemies.
HEAR ye islands, and attend ye peoples This word from afar (and the like)
does convince (says S. Ierom) that the prophet speaks of al nations to be
converted to Christ. And as this Prophet has already spoken much of Christ and
his Church, so hence forth more especially he shows him self rather an
Evangelist, or an Apostle then only a Prophet. which S. Ierom testifies of
him. Epist. ad Paulin.
from a far. Act. 13.
that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
convert the dregs of Israel. Behold, I have given thee to be the light of the
Gentiles, that thou may be salvation even to the fardest part of the earth.
Thus says 2. Cor. 6
time acceptable I have heard thee, and in the day of salvation I have helped
thee: and I have kept thee, and given thee to be a covenant of the people, that
thou might raise up the land, and possess the inheritances dissipated: that
thou Apoc. 7.
because he that is merciful to them, shall govern them, and all the fountains
of waters shall give them drink. And I will the North and the sea, and these
from the South country. Ye heavens praise, and earth rejoice, ye mountains
give The Church of the old testament lamenteth that she seems to be forsaken,
in respect of the many great benefits bestowed on the Church of Christ.
Sion But God answers that he can not, and will not forget, nor forsake his
Church which in deed is al one in the old and new testament, only differing in
state, and therefore that which he does to her in the new testament, perteyneth
to the whole Church in general of al times and al places.
can a woman forget her infant, that she will not Isa. 6^.
these are gathered together, they are come to thee: I live, says our Lord,
for thou shall be clothed with all these as with an ornament, and as a bride
thou shall put them about thee. Because thy deserts, and thy solitary places,
and the land of

CHAP. L. The Sinagogue shall be divorced for her iniquities. 4. Christ will
omite no ordinary means, but for her sake will endure ignominious afflictions.
10. Al which she contemning shall perish.
THVS says our Lord: What is this God divorced not the Synagogue from him of
hardness of heart.
bill of the divorce Neither delivered her for payment, as though he were in
debt to any creditor.
my creditour, to whom I sold you? Lo you are sold But her own revolt, and
iniquities separated her from Christ.
for your wicked deeds, I have dismissed your mother. Because I Isa. 59. Number. 11.
little one, that I can not redeem? or is there no strength in me to deliver?
Behold, in my rebuke I will make the sea desert, I will turn the floodes into
dry land: the fishes shall rot without water, and shall dye for thirst. I will
clothe the heavens Skill of tongue how to speak, and discretion when and
where, was given to Isaias, chapter 6. v. 6. Much more (says S. Ierom) to Christ
who spoke in his life, was silent in his passion, and now speaks by his
Apostles, and other pastores.
a learned tongue, that I may know to stay him up that is weary, with a word:
he stirs up in the morning, in the morning he stirs up mine ear, that I
may hear him as a master. The Lord God has opened mine ear, Mat. 26.
given my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to the pluckers: I have not
turned away my face from the rebukers and spitters. The Lord God is mine
helper, therefore am I not confounded: Romans 8.
who shall gaynesay me? let us stand together* who is mine adversary? let him
come to me. Behold the Lord God, my

CHAP. LI. God encoregeth Sion to trust in his promised comfort^, by example of
Abraham. 3. For the spiritual Sion, the Church of Christ, shall receive much
grace by his Euangelical law: 12. and her children shall not fear persecution,
nor be overcome; 23. but her enemies shall fail.
HEAR me ye that follow that which is just, and that In the next verse the rock
and cave are explicated to signify Abraham and Sara; who are proposed for
examples to be imitated, being so noble progenitors of the Jews* S. Paul
exhorts his country men, and in them al Christians the like in spiritual
progenitors, that first plant Catholic Religion in any place saying:
Remember your Prelates which have spoken the word of God to you: Heb. 13.
the rock whence you are hewn out, and to the cave of the lake from the which
you are cut out. Attend to Abraham your father, and to Sara that Psalm. 36.
have my law in their heart: fear ye not the reproach of men, and be not afraid
of their blasphemies. For as a garment, As God destroyed Pharao the proud
dragon in the sea, which he dried up for his people to pass; so he will
overthrow the devil and deliver captives from sin and tyranny.
Have not thou stricken the proud, wounded the dragon? Have not thou dried the
sea, the water Exo. 14.
of the vehement, which made the depth of the sea a way, that the delivered
might pass. And now they that are redeemed unto utter destruction, neither shall
his bread fail. But I Isa. 49.
have protected thee, that thou might plant the heavens, and found the
earth: and might say to Sion: Thou art my people. Be lifted up, be lifted
up, arise Jerusalem, which have drunken Spoil and destruction shall happen by
famine and sword.
Spoil, and destruction, and famine, Isa. 47.
and the sword, who shall comfort thee? Thy children are

CHAP. LII. The prophet alluding to the delivery of Sion and Jerusalem from
Babylonical captivity, sturreth up the Church of Christ, to rejoice for the
delivery from sin: 7. which Christ's Apostles preached: 10. with great fruit
in all nations.
ARISE, arise, put on thy strength o Sion, put on the garments The Jews had
not wronged the Babylonians, neither had mankind sinned against the devil, but
both had offended God
were sold Who of his bounty paid man's ransom: which no other man was able
to pay.
without silver you shall be redeemed. Because Genesis 46.
without any cause did oppress them. And now what have Romans 2. Ezec. ^^.
all the day my name is blasphemed. For this cause shall Communication with
infidels in spiritual things is in no case lawful. as S. Paul shows by this
text. 2. Cor. 6. v. 17.
Depart, depart, go ye out from thence, touch

CHAP. LIII. Al will not believe Christ's Gospel to whom it shall be preached: 2.
as the mystery of his ignominious death for all men's sins: 7. which he will
suffer most mekely: 10. for which his name shall be glorified in all places.
WHO That many hearing the truth preached do not believe it, is by their
obstinate freewil, because they do not obey the Gospel. To. 10. v. 16. when
their understanding directs them that it is not disagreable to reason.
has believed our hearing? and the arm him. He surely has borne our
infirmities, and our sorrows Our Savior died and was buried where the wicked
were commonly punished.
shall give the impious Yet was buried richly and honorably by Joseph of
Aromathia and Nicodemus.
the rich for his death: because he has not done iniquity, neither was there
guile in his mouth. And our Lord would break him in infirmity: if he shall

CHAP. LIIII. Gentiles who were barren, shall multiply in the Church of Christ:
10. from which Gods mercy shall never be separated.
PRAISE In the old testament Gentiles were barren bringing no fruit to God,
but in the new testament they are fructful, and the Jews are barren, til the
later end of the world, when they also shall be fructful again.
o barren woman which bear not: sing praise, Gal. 4.
and make joyful noise, which did not bear: because many are the children
of the desolate more then of her, that has a husband, says our Lord. Enlarge
the place of thy tent, thou shall remenber no more. Because he shall rule over
thee Lut. ^.
For as a woman forsaken and mourning in spirit has our Lord Genesis 9.
I swear, that I would no more bring in the waters of Noe upon the earth: As it
is assured that the world shall never be drowned again with water: so it is,
that the Church of Christ shall never be suppressed.
so have I sworn not to be angry with thee, and not to rebuke thee. For An
other assurance that moutaines and hills shall rather be moved, yea some
mountains shall be removed, but the Church shall be always firm and perpetual.
the mountains shall be moved, Joan. ^. v. 45.
to thy children. And in justice thou shall be founded: depart

CHAP. LV. God promises abundance of spiritual graces to the faithful, 4. that
shall believe in Christ of al nations: 7. and sincerely serve him.
ALYE Grace is offered to al, but those only are justified, and replenished
with more grace and spiritual gifts that cooperate, doing that which in them
lies, desiring and thirsting justice, for such (says our Savior) shall have
their fill. Mat. 5. v. 6.
that thirst come to the waters: and you that Apo. 22.
have no silver, make have, bye, and eat: come, bye without silver, and
without any exchange wine and milk. Why soul shall be delighted in fatnes.
Incline your ear, and come Act. 13.
Behold I have given him for a witness to the peoples, for a The beginning of
Gods service is to forsake the way of wickedness.
Let the impious forsake his way, and the unjust The ways of Gods service, and
of serving this world, are so opposite and contrary, that it is impossible to
walk in them both at once. No man can serve these two masters, God and this
world* we must therefore so use this world, that we may serve God, and inherit
heaven.
For as the heavens

CHAP. LVI. God inuiteth al men in thought and deed to keep his law: 4.
promises blessing and reward to those that profess, and keep perpetual
chastity. 9. and reproves evil pastors.
THIS says our Lord: Keep ye Judgment is a right resolution to do Gods will,
and justice is the perfect performance thereof: as before is noted. cha. 32.
judgment, and do Sap. 1.
justice: because my salvation is nere to come: and my justice to be reveled.
Blessed is the man that does this me from his people. And " let not the eunuch
say: Behold I Under the name of Sabbath is understood the observation of all the
law.
Sabbathes, and Those that of free election choose good things not commanded
deserve greater reward.
shall choose the things that I would, and shall hold my covenant: I will give
Mat. 21. Mar. 11. Luc 19.
victims shall please me upon mine altar: because my house shall be called the
house of prayer to al peoples. Says our Lord The prophet foreseing in spirit
the careless negligence of some pastores, of just zele and charity, inueigheth
against them: watning them of their grievous punishment.
Al ye beasts of the Iere. 6. and 8. Sap. 2.
al have declined into their own way, every one to his own avarice, from the
highest even to the last. Come, let us take

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. LVI.
4. ^^^ not the Eunuch say: I am a dry tree.] To be barren without children
Issue of children was a blessing of the old Testament Virginity is a greater
blessing in the Church of Christ.
Exo. 2^. Deuteronomy. ^.
was ignominious amongst the Jews in the old testament, because God having
then chosen that only nation for his peculiar people, the conservation and
increase of his Church depended much upon their multiplication. But seeing the
Church of Christ in the new testament, should be gathered, and consist of al
Nations: the Prophet here forsheweth, that Christian Eunuchs living virgins,
or continent, should not be ignoble or inglorious, but more glorious and have a
better name then (Gods other servants) sons and daughters: an everlasting
name, which shall not perish: because keeping Gods precepts (such as was the
Sabbath) they also of their free election, choose this state of life to keep
perpetual chastity, more then is commanded. Against which plain sense of the
text, Protestants oppose their own glosses. Peter Martyr ( li de calibatu and
votis Monasticis) Protestants expositions of this place not true.
says God prefers not Eunuchs before others that keep the law, but only
before them that transgress the law. Which commentary is faulty in two
respects. For God here calls them not transgressors, but his sons and
daughters, before whom he prefers holy Eunuchs: neither speaks of such
as shall be excluded from good place or good name, but of such as shall enjoy
both; and says these Eunuchs shall have a better place, and better name* that
is, more renovvme, and greater revvard. Other Protestants expound this better
name, to signify, that such Eunuchs shall be called after (or according to)
Gods Bible 1603.
people, and be of the same religion: which imports no excellency at al, in
place or name, as the text expresses: nay scarce equality with other
servants of God. Lastly they add (lest perhaps this former sense satisfy not
the reader) yea under Christ (say they) the dignity of the faithful, shall be
greater then the Jews were at that time. As though the comparison made in
this place, were to signify the general difference between Gods servants
before and since Christ, and not particularly between Eunuchs, and such as
have children. How much more meet The ancient fathers understand this
prophecy of vowed chastity. Preferring it before Marriage.
therefore is it, to see and embrace the explications of the ancient holy
Fathers? Who uniformly understand and expound this prophecy, of such as vovv
perpetual chastity in the Church of Christ, preferring that state before
Marriage? S. Basil. ( li. de virginitate) amongst other reasons and testimonies,
brings this place in proof of the excellency of virginity, that the
revvard thereof shall be, that for a humane name, God will give to virgins the
name of immortal Angels, which shall not fail, that they shall possess a
special place in heaven, not only the glory of Angels, but an excellent
dignity amongst Angels. S. Cyril of Alexandria in his commentaries upon Isaie:
shows by this doctrine, that the rewards of continency are ( eximia)
excellent, and exceeding great; so that such as be continent in body, do also
keep al Gods commandments. S. Ierom in his commentaries proves that
virginity, or perpetual chastity is a singular good work of supererogation,
not of precept but of Euangelical counsel, by the word elegerit, shall choose
the things which God would, rather then which he condescending to man's
weakness allows. Such an Eunuch (says he) elegit quae Dominus voluit, vt
plus offerat quam praeceptum est, has chosen the things which our Lord
would, to offer more then is commanded. And such an Eunuch (keeping also Gods
commandments) shall have locum optimum, a chief good place in Gods house, where
be many mansions, he shall be made a tower of our Lord, be placed in
Sacerdotali gradu, Priestlie degree, and in stead of carnal chrildren shall have
many spiritual children. Thus S. Ierom. The like we might cite of Ipsi sunt
qui habent in c^^lo praemia ^aeteris prestantiora.
S. Ambrose in exhort. ad Virg. Gloriam prepriam excellentemque nec erit quid
commune cum multis.
S. Augustini, l^de sancta virginitate. c. 24. and 25. In aeternae mansione
silijs preferuntur.
S. Gregory. 3. p. Pastorali* c. 29. etc. and others so expounding this
prophecy.

CHAP. LVII. The prophet lamenteth that men regard not, when the just dye; 3.
reprehendeth those that scorn the godly; 5. and commit horrible idolatry;
11. for getting God: 14. who uses al benignity to recall them: 20. but they
contemn him.
THE just:: perishes, and there is none that considers Just men dying seem
to the wicked to perish.
gathered away, because there is none that understands; for But they are
gathered to the happy society of other blessed souls.:: And commonly God so
takes away the just, when he will punish the wicked people, that they may not
in this world see the general calamity of others.
at the face of malice, is the just gathered away. Let peace come, let him rest
in his tongue? Are not you wicked children, a lying seed? Which take comfort
in the gods under every thick greenetree, Isa. 62. 7. 10.
stumbling blocks out of the way of my people. Because To the humble and
contrite penitents God shows al benignity, and grants wished good
things: as prosperous winds to sea fa^ring traue^ers. and the like.
the spitit shall proceed from my face, and breathinges I will make. For the
iniquity of his avarice I was is nere, said our Lord, and I have healed him.
But the impious Those that persist obstinate can have no remission of sin.
There is no peace to the impious, says our Lord God. Isa. 46. v. 22.


CHAP. LVIII. God commands the Prophet, to cry unto the sinful people
vehemently, and incessantly to keep the law, not only in show and pretense, but
sincerely, leaving their own wills, and seeking Gods will: 9. so they shall
receive their good desires, and reward of well doing.
CRY, Many sinners are so fast a sleep in their wickedness, that they can not,
or rather will not hear ordinary admonitions: to such therefore Gods preachers
must cry, and not cease to cry, as with a loud trumpette exalt their voice,
opportunely, importunely, with all patience, and longamitie, til they make the
dease to hear, to believe the truth, and the du^me to speak, that is, to
prosesse virtue in word and deed. Mar. 7.
cease not, as a trumpet exalt thy voice, and tell Zach. 7.
his soul? Is this it, to wind his head about like a circle, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes? will thou call this a fast, and a day acceptable to the
Lord? Is not this rather the fast that I Ezec. 18. ^at. 25.
and the needy, and herberles bring in into thy house: when thou shall see the
naked, cover him, and despise not thy flesh. Then shall thy light break forth
as the morning, and thy always, and will fill thy soul with brightness, and
deliver thy bones, and thou shall be as a watered garden, and as a fountain of
waters, whose waters shall not fail. And the deserts Isa ^1.
up the fundations of generation and generation: and thou shall be called the
builder of the hedges, turning the paths into rest. If thou turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. LVIII.
5. Is this such a fast, as I have chosen?] Fasting is so often and clerly
commended in holy Scriptures, that Protestants (though not greatly affected
thereto) confess Protestants de tract from the praise and profit of fasting.
it to be a good thing of it self, but in diverse respects detract much from
it: denying it to be an act of religion, but only of bodily mortification:
neither do Cultus. Des. Luc. 2. v. 37.
al generally allow of prescript times, nor of abstinence from flesh those
days, which they think good to fast: and those which do abstain from
flesh, say they do it not for religion, but for the ordinance of civil policy.
For which opinion they allege out of this, and other places ( Iere. 14. v. 12.
Zacha. 7. v 5.) that such affliction is not the fast, which God has chosen.
But if they would consider the coherence of the text, they should find the
contrary. For albeit fasting alone without amendment of evil manners, and
without other good works, does not appeaze Gods wrath, no^ is agreeable to
Gods vvil, yet being joined with contrition of heart, and sincere piety, does
then greatly please him. And therefore our Lord God here (says S. Ierom) lest
he might seem to reprove fasting, which himself had commanded, teaches how
it behooves to Leuit 16. 33.
fast: Non enim querit Deus afflictionem solam, and humiliationem animae per
iniuriam This seripture reproves not fasting, but admonishes to fast
especially from sin.
corporis, vt inslar circulitorqueat corpus, and colla submi^tat, ac tristis
incedat: etc* Sed Number. 29.
vt cum istis haec saciat quae sequuntar. For God seeks not only affliction,
and humiliation of the ^oule by injury of the body; that one should vvrith
his body about like a circle, hold down his neck, and go pensive, etc. But
that with these things, he do those which follow* to wit, Dissolve the
bands of impiety, and v. 6. and 7.
the rest, as in the text. Whereupon this Doctor discourses at large, shevving
that it profits not to carry an empty belly, and do those things that
displease God. But fasting from meat, so that fasting from sin (by declining
from evil, and doing good deeds) be joined vvithal: then (says he) thy
fasting vvil be acceptable: For then shall thy light break forth as the
morning, and thy health shall sooner v. 8
arise, and thy justice shall go before thy face, and the glory of our Lord
shall embrace thee. Further declaring the great profit thereof by examples: that
by fasting Daniel, Christ's fast an example of the 40. days fast in Lent.
Dan 9. Ione. 3. 3 Reg. 19. Exo. 24. and 34.
the man of desires knew things to come: the N^niuites pacified the wrath of
God Elias and Moses by forty days hunger were filled with the familiarity
of God: And our Lord him self fasted so many days in the wilderness, vt nobis
sollennes ieiuniorum dies relinqueret, to leave unto us the solemn days of
fastes.

CHAP. LIX. Sins do separate men from God: 3. as manslaughter, theift, and
lying, with contempt of judgment and justice. 12. Men are otherwise judged
just or unjust in the world, then in deed they are before God: 16. who sees
and judges al rightly.
BEHOLD the hand of our Lord is not abridged that he can Number. 11. Isa. 50.
hear. But No defect is in God spowre nor will, that he delivers not the
faithful from afflictions, but their sins are the impedimen t;for which he
punishes them, that they may repent, and then he will deliver them, v. 20.
your iniquities have divided between you and Job. 15.
have broken the eggs of aspes, and have wouen the spiders webbes: he that
shall eat of their eggs, shall die: and that which is nourished, shall be
hatched into a cockatrice. Their Prou. 1. Romans 7.
to evil, and hasten to shede innocent blood: their cogitations are
unprofitable cogitations: waste and destruction are in their ways. They have
not known the way of peace, and there backward, and justice stood far of:
because truth has fallen down in the street, and equity could not enter in.
And No pure man being able to redeem, and deliver mankind from captivity of
sin, God became man to accomplish this work.
his own arm saved to himself, and his justice it self confirmed him. He is
clothed with justice Ephesians. 6. 1. These. 5.
as with a brestplate, and is an helmet of salvation on his head: he is clothed
with garments of revenge, and is covered as with a mantel of zele. As unto
revenge, as it were unto retribution Romans ^^.
iniquity in Jacob, says our Lord. This is my covenant The Church has still
the spirit of truth; and therefore can never err.
My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says our Lord, from this present and for ever.

CHAP. LX. In the Church of Christ shall shine the light of true faith, and
sincere charity: 8. which shall be spredde in all nations, and continue al
times: 15. replenished with many joyful graces: 18. and eternal glory.
ARISE, God preventing with his grace, every one must cooperate by gratfully
accepting this benefit, and so dispose him self to justification.
be illuminated Jerusalem: because thy light is Only those that come into the
Church receive the light of true faith, al others are in darkness.
upon thee shall our Lord arise, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the
Gentiles shall walk in thy light, Isa. 49.
round about, and see al these are gathered together, they are come to thee:
thy sons shall come from a far, and thy daughters shall rise from the side.
Then shall thou see, and abound, This prophecy began to be fulfilled when the
3. Sages came on swift beasts to adore Christ, and offered gifts. Mat 2.
the dromedaries of Madian and Epha: al of Saba shall come, bringing gold and
frakincense: and showing forth praise to our Lord. All the cattle of Cedar shall
be gathered This is fulfilled in great Britanie, Ireland, and other islands, as
Tertullian, Origin. and S. Beda prove against the Jews: and S. Chrysostom
against the Gentiles.
the islands Apoc. 21. ^. 25.
thy gates shall be open continually: day and night they shall not be shut, that
This was accomplished when the Roman Emperors, and other Monarchs and
nations received the faith of Christ.
the strength of the Gentiles may be brought to thee, and their kings may be
brought. For the nation S. Ierom compelled (as he says) to leave the histo
rical sense, because it is not convenient to say: the walls and sundation of
Jerusalem were adorned with precious stones, and the temple which should be
most glorious, was made of wood expounds this place of excellent men. The
holy mosteloquent man Cyprian the Mar* tyr, and the confessor of our time
Hilarious do they not seem to thee the high trees that have built the Church of
God?
The glory Apoc. 21. v. 23.
and praise thy gates. Thou shall have the sun no more Apoc. 22. v. 5.
down no more, and thy moon shall not be diminished: because the Lord shall be
unto thee for an everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be
ended. And thy people al

CHAP. LXI. Christ announceth himself to be sent from heaven to teach the
truth, to heal and pardon the penitent, to comfort the desolate, and
streingthen the weak. 4. whose Apostles shall constantly preach justice in all
the world. 10. And his Church shall rejoice.
THE spirit of the Lord upon me, because the Lord Our Savior was not, neither
needed to be visibly anointed, as Aaron, David, and others were; but inuisibly
by God, with oil of gladness, above al others. Ps. 44. v. 8. with the Holy
Ghost, and with power Act. 10. v. 39. of whose fulness al others receive. Joan.
1. v. 16.
has Luc. 4. v. 18.
anointed me: to preach to the mild he sent me, that I should heal the
contrite of heart, and preach indulgence to the captives, and deliverance to
them that are shut up. That It was a grief and sorrow to the Apostles and first
preachers of Christ's Gospel that both the Jews departed from God, and Gentiles
st^l followed idolatry, but shortly after, many were converted.
double confusion and shame, And preferred their own happy lotte before al
other Jews and Gentiles.
they crown, and as a bride adorned with her jewels. For as the

CHAP. LXII. The prophet avouches that he will not cease from preaching Christ,
4. to whom al nations shall be converted: 8. and whose Church shall continue for
ever.
FOR Sion True preachers and pastors cease not from preaching the truth, for
any threats, terror, or torment. But say with this prophet. For Sion (that
is, for the good of the Church) I vvil not cease etc and with S. Paul. The
word of God is not tied. 2. Tim. 2.
I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem, I The Church of Christ's is
perpetually visible in her watchmen the pastors and gouerners thereof.
Upon thy walls, Jerusalem, Mat. 21. Zach. 9.
Behold thy savior comes: behold his reward is with him, and his work before
him. And they shall call them. The holy

CHAP. LXIII. Christ is described as a vistorious conqueror, ascending into
heaven with triumph, embrued with blood. 7. For all whose benefits the Prophet
renders thanks: 10. expostulating the peoples ingratitude, that provoked God
to wrath.
WHO S. Dionyse, H^er^r. caelest. c 7. supposes this to be the quaestion of
the hieghest order of Angels, admiring Christ's beauty to be so excellent, not
withstanding that he is emb^ewed with blood ascending from Edom (which
signifies terrestrial) from Bosra ( a vvalled city overthrown) that is,
from Jerusalem into heaven with triumph after a bloody victory.
is this that comes from Edom, with died Apoc. 19. v. 13.
red, and thy garments as theirs that tread in the wine press? I have trodden
the press alone, and of the Gentiles there is The Angel guardian of the
Church, which stands before the face of God; Christ testifying that also the
particular guardians do always see the face of his Father. Mat. 18
the angel of his face saved them: in his love, and in his indulgence he
redeemed them, and bare them, and lifted them up all the days of the world. But
they provoked Exo. 14.
people: where is he that brought them out of the sea, with the pastors of his
flock? Where is he that put in the mids of him the spirit of his holy one?
He that brought out the beast that goes down in the plain filde, the spirit
of our Lord was their conductor: so did thou bring thy people that thou
might make thee a name of glory. Attend from Deuteronomy. 26. ^a%, 2.
where is thy zele, and thy strength, the multitude of thy bowels, and of thy
mercies? they have held back them selves toward me. For thou art our father,
and " Abraham has God is never the cause of error or harnes of heart: but by
indulgence not punishing, sinners harden their own hearts. so S. Ierom.
Why have thou made us err o Lord from thy ways:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. LXIII.
16. Abraham has not known us.] The faithful people considering their The
Jews supposed that for their sins the Patriarchs did not acknovvlege them
for their children. Yet hoped that God of his mercy would releue them in
distress.
own great, frequent, and inueterate sins, with the extreme calamities
wherinto they were fallen for the same, supposed that their progenitor Abraham
(whom God had particularly called out of his country) and Jacob (of whose
twelve sons the whole nation was propagated) did no longer acknowledge them
for their children, because they had so grievously offended God, and were not
vvorthie of any favor. Al which notwithstanding, yet they hoped in Gods
incomparable mercy, that his divine goodness, being Creator of al, who had
elected them for his peculiar people, brought them out of Egypt, and often
delivered them from sundry afflictions, would again reduce them from
capti^itie, and as their merciful father, remitte their sins, and releue
their miseries, though Abraham, Jacob, and other Patriarchs had justly
rejected them as lost children This being the proper literal sense of this
place, according to S. Ieroms, and other ancient Doctors explication, it makes
nothing at al for the old and new heresy of Vigilantius, and Luther, denying
that Saints in an other life do know what is done in this world. For
albeit the Patriarchs in zele of justice, did not acknovvlege their carnal
posterity (because of their great sins) for their children: yet they knevv
their state, as S. Augustine How the old patriarchs knevv the state of men in
this world.
( li. de cura pro mortuis) interpreting this, and other places of holy
Scripture, ^ap. 15.
teaches, partly by relation of such as passed from hence to them; partly by
holy Angels; and especially by divine inspirations. As it is clear that
Abraham Luc. 16.
knevv the state of poor Lazarus, and of the rich glutton, describing what
each of them had deserved, and consequently received Much more both the old
Patriarchs, and al other Saints, in eternal glory know ^^h other, though
Saints in glory see more cle^ly then Prophets in this life.
never seen nor known before in this world. as S. Gregory teaches: li* 4
c. 33. Dialogi. The glorified Saints see also in God that which perteyneth
to their clientes, that pray unto them in earth, so far as God does ordain,
more li. 22. c. 29. ciuit,
clerly by light of glory, then prophets see by light of prophecy: as S.
Augustine teaches. But touching the manner he says it exceeded the reach of his
understanding, how Martyrs do help those, who, it is certain, are helped by
them. So discoursing That Saints know, and help mortal men's necessities is
certain: but the manner how, is obscure.
^ura pro mort. c. 16.
at large of the uncertain manner, shows that there is no doubt at al of the
thing it self, that Saints in heaven do know mortal men's necessities, hea^e
their prayers, and help them by their intercession and merits. which he
confirms also. li. 20. c. 21. cont. Faust. Tract. 8. in Joan. Ser. 5. de
Sanctis. Likewise. S. Ierom against Vigilan^ius. S. Gregory. li. 3. Epist.
ep. ^0 li. 7. ep. 126. li. 9. ep. 38 and others in many places.

CHAP. LXIIII. The Jews in captivity pray to God for release: 4. acknowleging
his former great benefits, and their own sins, fleing now to his mercy.
VVOVLD God thou The good people, with Priests and Prophets of the old
Testament most fervently desired Christ's coming.
would break the heavens 1. Cor. ^.
with the ears: the eye has not seen o God beside thee, what things thou
have prepared for them that expect thee. Thou And, signifies for, as Genesis 14
v. 18. And the English Bibles translate for, in this place, though the Hebrew
text has va^, that is, and. But we with S. Ier^m and other ancient Fathers
follow the authentical Latin: which has, e^ in this place, and enim in the
other.
and we have sinned: we have been always in them, Likewise the same particle
and signifies yet, as if he had said: yet we ^^al be saved.
and we shall be saved. And al we are become as one unclean, and al Psalm. 78.
enough, and remember no more our iniquity: lo regard, al we are thy people.
The city of thy holy one is made desert,

CHAP. LXV. The gentiles shall seek and find Christ, 2. Whom the Jews will
persecute, and shall be rejected, only a few relics reserved. 13. So the
Church shall multiply, and abound in graces.
THEY This can not be meant of the Jews, but necessarily of the Gentiles.
have sought me that before asked not, they have Romans 10.
to a Gentilitie that did not invoke my name. I have spread But this is
evidently spoken of the Jews: and so S. Paul testifies of both these places.
To. 10. v 20. 21.
an incredulous people, which goes in a way not good after their own
cogitations. A Prou. 1. Iere. 7.
not answered: I spoke, and you have not heard, and you did evil in mine eyes:
and you Nothing can be more plain lyvttered then is here the doctrine of man's
freewil.
have chosen the things, that I would not. Likewise of revvard and punishment
of good and evil works.
For this cause thus says our Lord God: Behold

And you shall leave your name The name of Jews shall be exectable.
for an Oath of execration.
oath to mine elect: And Gods servants shall be called Christians.
an other name. In which he that is blessed upon the earth, Apoc. 21.
I create After the general Resurrection the heavens and earth shall be altered
in qualities, not in substance.
new heavens, and a new earth: and the former things shall not be in memory,
and they shall not ascend upon the heart. But you shall be glad and rejoice for
ever in these Psalm. 31.
they call, I will hear: as they are yet speaking, I will hear. The The greatest
and proudest Gentiles being converted to Christ, do humble themselves to the
simple manners of Christians, to penance, fasting, praying, and al works of
mortification.
shall eat straw: and to the serpent dust shall be his bread: they shall not
hurt, nor kill in all my holy mountain, says our Lord.

CHAP. LXVI. God who fills heaven and earth, will dwell in the heart of the
humble. 3. For the sins of the Jews Jerusalem shall be destroyed. 5. The
faith of Christ shall be propagated by the preaching of the Apostles. 15. And
Christ coming to judge, 19. al shall receive according to their deserts.
THVS says our Lord: "Heaven is my seat, and the Act. 7. v. 49*
earth my foot stool: A prophecy that the Temple shall cease:
what is this house that you will build to me? and what is this place of my
rest? My hand and sacrifices of the old Testament shall become unlawful.
immolateth an ox, is as he that should stay a man: he that kills a sheep
in sacrifice, as he that should brain a dog: he that offers oblation, as he
that should offer swines blood: he that remembers frankincense, as he that
should bless an idol. Al these things have they chosen in their ways, and in
their abominations their soul is delighted. Wherefore I also will choose their
delusions: Prou. ^4. Iere. 7. ^. 13.
and they heard not: and they have done evil in mine eyes, and have chosen the
things that I would not. Hear the Josephus expounds this of the Angels
voice uttered in the temple before the destruction, saying: Migremus hinc. Let
us depart from hence. S Jerome confirms the same by the words of the Psalm.
54 I savv contradiction in the city.
a voice God gives natural power to al l^uing creatures of generation: but
himself bringe^h forth children of his Church.
that make others to Immediately before Christ come to judge, this whole world
shall be destroyed by fire.
will come in fire, and his thought them selves clean in the gardens behind the
gate within, they that did eat swines flesh, and abomination and the mouse:
they shall be confounded, says our Lord. But I Christ ascending to his Father
left the sign of Thau ( Ezech 9.) the cross, unto us, or put it in our
foreheades, that we may freely say: the light of thy countenance is signed upon
us. S. Ierom. in hunc locum.
a sign in them Men of al nations shall be brought into the Church by the
mynistrie of particular Angels. S. Iero. ibid.
they shall bring al Apoc. 21.
and a new earth, which I make to stand before me, says our Lord: so shall your
sede stand, and your name. And there, General resurrection of al men.
al flesh shall come to adore before my face, says our Lord. And they shall go
out, and see the carcasses of the men, Mar. 9. v. 44.
that have transgressed against me: their worm shall not die, and their fire
shall not be quenched: and they shall be even unto satietie of sight to al flesh.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. LXVI.
1. Heaven is my seat.] Lest any should interpret these prophetical promises
As God was served more specially in the temple, so he is now in Churches, but
is in all places* See Act. 7. v. 48.
(as the Jews do) only of the restoration, and reedification of Jerusalem
and the Temple, the Prophet here shows that albeit God sanctified the
temple, and granted many benefits to those that served him therein, yet his
proper seat is not in any material temple or terrestrial place, but in
heaven. And therefore Temples and Churches are in deed ordained for faithful
people to serve him in, and to signify, that as these places are more holy,
then ordinary houses, so heaven is infinitely more glorious then any earthly
palace: yet God is not contained in any place, but exceeds al. To which
purpose S. Steven (Act.7.) alleges and urges this place: and also S. Paul.
Act 17. that God dwells not, or is not concluded in temples, neither needs
them for his own use, but is rightly served in them, by those that lift up
their minds to him, as dwelling in heaven, and replenishing al places.
Clergimen in the old law succeeded by blood, in the new by election.


21. I vvil take of them to be Priests.] In the Law of Moses Priests and
Levites were al of one Tribe, by succession of natural kindred, nor by
election; but the law being changed, necessarily also Priesthood is changed.
And Byshopes, Priests, Deacons, and other Clergy men, are taken, and ordained
not by uerenes of blood, but by election, according to their merits of virtues.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOKS OF JEREMY.
JEREMY the son of Helcias, Priest and Prophet, being sanctified The sum
of Ieremies life.
in his mothers womb, begane to prophecy as yet a child, in Judah; in the
thirtenth year of the reign of king Josias; continued the rest of his time,
which was nintene years more; and the eleven years of Ioakim 4. Reg. 23. 24.
(wherein are counted the three months of Ioachaz, and other three of
Iechonias, otherwise called Ioachin) and eleven years of Sedecias; in all
forty one years; before he went into Egypt. Where he also prophesied, ^ha.
44. v. 8.
and finally was stoned to death by the people, in the city of Taphnis. His He
wrote two Books and one Epistle. The contents of his books.
whole work conteyneth two distinct Books, besides an Epistle, which follows
after the Prophecy of Baruch. The former book is called his Prophecy, the
other his Lamentations. S. Ierom comprehends the sum of al briefly, saying:
Jeremy connecteth a nuttie ( or watching) rod, Epist. ad Paulin.
and a pot boiling hot, from the face of the north, the leopard spoiled of
his colors; and the fourefold Alphabet in diverse meeters. Signifiing, that
God will correct his people with a rod, in his hot fury, from the north, to
wit, by the king of Babylon, for their pertinacitie in sundry kinds of
sins. Al which the Prophet lamenteth with his doleful verse of diverse meeter.
The Prophecy may be divided into five parts. His propheci^ divided into five
parts.
First he shows the conditions and qualities of himself, with the manner eb.
1.
of his mission: then Gods great clemency in recalling the people from sin,
denouncing dangers imminent for their obstinacy: in the twelve first chapters.
Secondly, in the eight chapters following by diverse Metaphorical, and 13.
other figurative descriptions, he declares the ingratitude, and other sins
of the people, threatening punishment, for which they persecute him. Thirdly, 21.
in other eight chapters, he reprehendeth the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
especially the King, evil Priests, and falseprophetes, some being already
carried into captivity: for which free preaching, he is again persecuted.
Fourtly 29.
in the next eleven chapters, he mixteth consolations and threats, especially
the destruction of Jerusalem, captivity of king and people, and their release
after seventy years. Fifthly in the other thirtene chapters, he prophecieth
the destruction 40.
of the Jews, that go into Egypt: and of sundry nations for their
idolatry, and for their cruelty against the Jews. In every part interposeth
many prophecies of Christ, and his Church: besides the mystycal sense included
in the historical.

THE PROPHECY OF JEREMY.
CHAP. I. Jeremy prophesied in the times of Josias, Ioakim, and Sedecias
Kings of Judah: 5. being sanctified in his mothers womb, is sent in his tender
age to prophecy, 11. the destruction of Jerusalem. 17. God giving him corege
The first part. Gods clemency inuiteth to repentance, and his justice
punishes obstinate sinners.
against his persecutors.
THE words of Jeremy the son of 4. Reg. 22. ^. 8.
Helcias, of He prophesied also inbanishment (chapter 44.) in Egypt.
even unto the transmigration of Jerusalem* in the fifth month. And the
Jeremy had five special prerogatives: He was sanctified in his mothers womb;
a Priest* a Prophet; a perpetual virgin; and a Martyr.
before thou came forth of the matrice, I sanctified thee, and a prophet in
the Gentiles I gave thee. And I said; A a a, o Lord God: Behold, Isa. 51. v.
16. and 59. v. 21.
words in thy mouth: Behold I have appointed thee this He prophesied not only
of the Jews but also of the Gentiles.
the Gentiles, and over kingdoms, that thou may pluck up, and destroy, and
waste, and dissipate, and build, and plant. And the word of our Lord was made
to me, saying: or a nuttie rod.
watching. And our Lord said to me: well have thou seen; because I God is
watchful to perform his word: and a nuttie rod (as the 70. translate) that
is, his Law is outwardly hard, and bitter, like a nut shel, but sweet and
pleasant, as the kernel, when the shel is broken S. Theodoret.
will watch upon my word to do it. And the word of our the North shall evil be
opened upon all the inhabitants of the land. Because lo I will call together all the kinredes of the God promised not peace in his life, but victory in his
death.
not prevail: because I am with thee, says our Lord, to deliver thee.

CHAP. II. God expostulateth with the Jews, 6. that they regard not his great
benefits* 8. Some priests, and (pretended) prophets serving false gods,
23. and denying their fault, 25. are obstinate in idolatry: 36. for which they
shall be confounded.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: God multiplied Israel in
Egypt, and delivered, them from servitude.
thy youth, and the charity of thy despousing, when thou did follow me in
the desert, in a land that is not sown. Israel Not of any desert, but of Gods
mere grace Israel was preferred before other nations.
is holy Mi^h. 6. ^ ^*
become vain? And they have not said: Where is our Lord, Into a fruitful land.
Carmel, that you might eat the fruit thereof, and the best things thereof:
and being entered in, you have contaminated my land, and made mine inheritance
an abomination. The priests have not said: Where God commanding two things to
flee from evil and to do good: the Jews contrariwise left God and served idols.
two evils has my people done, Isa. ^.
will not serve. For on every little high hill, and under every green thick
tree thou wast laid down as an harlot. But Mat. 21. v. 33.
I planted thee an elect vineyard, God created al things good, planted his
Church in justice and sancti^ie and no evil proceeded from him.
al true seed: how then art thou turned unto me into that which is depraved, o
strange vineyard? If thou shall wash thyself with nitre, and multiply in the
desire of his soul, has drawn the wind of his love: none shall turn her
away: all that seek her shall not fail: in her monethlie flowers they shall
find her. Stay thy foot Iere. 32. v. 33.
not the face: and in the time of their affliction they will say: Arise, and
deliver us. Where are the gods, whom thou Iere. 11. ^. 13.
were thy gods o Judah. What will you contend with me Gods intention when he
punishes, is to move sinners to repentance: afflicting them in this life, that
they may escape eternal damnation.
In

CHAP. III. I dolaters (and other sinners) are invited to repent, with promise
of remission: 6. but neither the kingdom of Israel, nor Judah will return. 14
God still calling; some Jews, and many Gentiles come to Christ.
IT IS commonly said: If a man put away his wife, and No idolat^ie nor other
sin whatsoever can be so great, but God will remitte it, if the sinner be
penitent.
but thou have committed fornication with many lovers: nevertheless return
unto me, says our Lord, and I will receive thee. Lift up thine eyes direct: and
see The ten tribes.
Israel has done? she has gone of herself upon every high mountain, and
under every thick green tree, and has fornicated there. And I said, when
she had done al these things: The two tribes.
Judah her transgressing sister saw, because the rebel Israel had played the The
kingdom of Judah receiving more benefits was more faulty then the kingdom of
Israel, but neither of them excusable.
in comparison of the transgressour Judah. Go, and cry these words against to
my heart, and they shall feed you with knowledge and doctrine. And when you shall
be multiplied, and increase in After the captivity many ^evves returned to
God, but especially this prophecy is fulfilled in the Gentiles since Christ.
al Gentiles shall be gathered together to it, in the name of our Lord into
Jerusalem, and they shall not walk after the peruersitie of their most wicked
heart. In those days The kingdom of Israel being in captivity long before
Judah, at last they were released al together. S. Theodoret in hunc locum.
they shall come together from the land of the North to the land, which I gave
to your fathers. But I said: How shall I make

CHAP. IIII. An admonition to sincere repentance, and circumcision of the heart:
5. with threats of grievous punishment to those, that persist in sin. 19.
Which the Prophet foreseing lamenteth the vastation of the land. 27. yet mixed
with consolation, that it shall not be utterly ruined.
IF thou will return o Israel, says our Lord, return to An oath is an act of
religion: and lavvful, so it be made by God almighty, not by false gods; and
with other three conditions; in truth not falsely in judgment with due
consideration not rashly: and in justice in matter that is just, and of
importance.
Our Gentiles shall bless him, and shall praise him. For thus says our Ose^. ^0.
new fallow ground, and sow not upon thorns: be circumcised Sap. 1.
bitter, because it has touched thy heart. My belly, my belly aketh, the
senses of my heart are trubled in me, I will not hold my peace, because my soul
has heard the voice of the trumpet, the cry of battle. Destruction is called
upon destruction If they were in deed natural fools they should be excused.
wise to do evils, but to do well they have not known. I beheld the earth, and
lo it was void, Gods providence never suffers the Church to be destroyed.
but yet I will not make a consummation. The earth

CHAP. V. Al sorts of higher and lower degrees transgress Gods law: 9. and
shall be punished.
GO round about the ways of Jerusalem, and look, and Except al requisite
conditions be observed in an oath it is unlawful: as when one svveareth by
God almighty but untruly, of rashly, or to do an unlawful thing, it is
perjury.
this also they will swear falsely. O Lord thine eyes regard fidelity: thou
have stricken them, and they were not sorry: thou have broken them, and they
have refused to receive discipline: they have hardened their faces more then the
rock, and they would not return. But I said: Perhaps they are poor and By
the lion the prophet seems to understand Nabuchodonosor.
the lion out of the wood stricken By the vvulf Nabuzardan.
the woolf in the evening has wasted them, By the leopard Alexander the great,
or Antiochus Epiphanes.
the leopard watching upon their cities: every one of them that shall come
forth, shall be taken, because their preuarications are multiplied, their
reuoltinges are strengthened. Whereupon Ezec. 22.
every one neyed at his neighbors wife: Why, shall I not As before v. 10. and
chapter 4. v. 27.
will not bring you into consummation. And if you shall say: Why has the Lord
our God done al these things to us? thou shall say to them: As you have
forsaken me, and served a strange god in your own land, so shall you serve
strange ones in a land not your own. Declare Isa. 1. Zach. 7.
they have not judged; the cause of the pupil they have not directed, and the
judgment of the poor they have not judged. It is against Gods just judgment
to omit such things unpunished. v. 9. and chapter 9. v. 9.
Shall I not visit upon these things, says our Lord? or upon

CHAP. VI. Jerusalem shall be destroyed for trangressing Gods law: 8. and
contemning admonitions. 16. Yet God admonishes again the Jews, and they
contemning, 18. he calls the Gentiles, and rejects the ^ewes.
TAKE courege ye children of Benjamin in the mids Captains are called
pastors, because they feed and govern their soldiars.
pastors come, and their flocks: they have pitched tents in her round about:
every one shall feed them that are under his hand. Sanctify ye battle upon
her: Isa. 56.
from the lesser even to the greater, al study avarice: and from the prophets
even to the priest, al commit guile. And they Mat. II.
way, and walk ye in it: and you shall find refreshing for your souls. And
they said: We will not walk. And I appointed After all the Prophets of the old
testament* Christ himself, and lastly his Apostles, called the jews, who
still contemning, the Gentiles are called, and they hear, and obey* Mat. 10. v.
5. Act. 13 v. 46.
Therefore great things I will do to them. Hear o earth: Behold I Isa 1.
country? your holocaustes are not acceptable, and your victimes have not
pleased me. Therefore thus says our Lord: That is from Babylon which is
northward from Jerusalem.
North, and a great nation shall arise up from the ends of the earth. It shall
take

CHAP. VII. God promises to dwell with those that walk right ways: 8.
otherwise the material temple will not save them: 16. neither the prayers of the
prophet shall help them, persisting in their sins: 21. nor sacrifice, but
obedience to Gods law.
THE word, that was made to Jeremy from our Lord, place. Trust not in words
of lying, saying: The Jews presumed that God would never suffer his Temple to
be destroyed; they thought also that external sacrifices without internal
repentance should take away the sins; but for their impenitence they and
their sacrifices are rejected, and the temple destroyed.
The temple of Mat. ^1.
house then wherein my name is inuocated, in your eyes become a den of
thieves? I, even I am: I have seen, says our Lord. Go ye to It is true that
God sanctified the tabernacle in Silo, and afterward the temple in Jerusalem,
but if the people be not sanctified, he is not ^ied to the place.
my place in Silo, where my name Ios. 18. Iud. 18. 1. Reg. ^.
dwelt from the beginning: and see what I have done to it for the malice of my
people Israel: and now, because you have Isa. 65. 1. Reg. 4.
house, wherein my name is inuocated, and wherein you have confidence: and to
the place which I have given you and your fathers, as I did to Silo. And I will
cast you away from The Kingdom of ^ene tribes.
the whole seed of Ephraim. Thou therefore pray not for this people, hosts
the God of Israel; Add your holocaustes to your victims, and eat ye the
flesh. Because I spoke not with your God gave his perfect law comprised in the
ten commandments: which alone being kept will suffice: and afterward added
ceremonial precepts, to exercise the people in external sacrifices of beasts
and other corporal things to be offered to him self, as well to keep them from
idolatry, as to lead them thereby to internal virtues, and to signify
Mysteries of the new testament. As is noted. Leuit. 1.
commanded them not in the day, that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
touching the word of holocaustes and victims. But this word I commanded them,
^^^^. ^^.
cease out of the cities of Judah, and out of the streets of Jerusalem, the
voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the
voice of the bride: for the land shall be in desolation.

CHAP. VIII. The Babylonians spoiling Jerusalem will cast the bones of Kings,
Priests, Prophets, and others out of their sepulchers, and most cruelly
afflict the living: 5. God so permitting, because they would not repent, when
the true Prophets admonished them so to do. 18. Al which the prophet forseing
lamenteth.
AT THAT time, says our Lord, Persecuters spoil the shrines of kings and
other principal persons of cruelty; and also of avarice if they be richly
adorned.
they will cast out the Those that profess knowledge of the law, and observe it
not in works, have not true wisdom.
have cast away the word of our Lord, and there is no wisdom in them.
Therefore will I give their women because they have done abomination: yea rather
they are not confounded with confusion, and they have not known how to blush:
therefore shall they fall among them that fall, in the time of their visitation
they shall fall, says our Lord. Gathering As serpents can not be hindered by
enchantments from hurting men, no more can the furious Chaldees be dissuaded by
any speech from killing, spoiling, and ransaking the Israelites.
serpents basaliskes,

CHAP. IX. The prophet lamenteth the future calamity of the people, and their
false dealing each with others. 12. willing al to consider that their wickedness
is the cause of their misery, 17. and to mourn, 23. and return to God: 25.
Who otherwise will punish both Gentiles, and Jews not circumcised in heart.
WHO Not a few tears; but a fountain, or river is scarce sufficient to
lament the slaughter of
will give water to my head, and to mine eyes their tongue, as a bow of lying
and not of truth: they have taken courege in the land, because they have
proceeded from evil to evil, and me they have not known, says our Lord. Let
every man take heed to himself of his neighbor, and Psa. 27.
his mouth he has spoken peace with his friend, and secretly he lays wait
for him. Shall I not visit upon these things, After the destruction of
Jerusalem most of the people, especially the richer sort were carried into
ca^t^uitie; others were persecuted til they were consumed, that is, even to
death and destruction But not all the nation consumed, for he prophesied the
contrary. chapter 4. v. 27. and chapter 5. v. 10. and 18 And after 70. years the
relics were released, and returned into Iewrie, many also remained still
there. As is evident in the books of Esdras.
have not heard my voice, and have not walked in it. And upon us: let our eyes
shede tears, and our eieliddes rune down with waters. Because a voice of
lamentation is heard from ^ Cor. ^. ^ Cor. 10.
strong man glory in his strength, and let not the rich man glory in his
riches: but he that glories, let him glory in this, to These nations are also
circumcised in flesh, but neither they no^ the Jews are circumcised in heart
which argue^h them of hypochrifie.
Egypt, and upon Judah, and upon Edom,

CHAP. X. Influence of stars, nor imagined power of idols, is not to be
feared: but God only. 6. whose Majesty is infinite, and idols have no power at
al. 19. Jerusalem lamenteth, 24. and prays God to pardon and protect his own
people.
HEAR ye the word, which our Lord has spoken concerning Heathnis^ idolaters
thought the^^ was divine power in the planetes, and other stars. But the
faithful know th^^ they are the creatures of God, made for the benefit of men,
not that men should serve or fear th^^.
of the fignes of heaven, which the heathen fear, be not afraid: Because the
laws of the people are vain: because the because Of other idols made of
vvood, silver, gold, and the like, it is more easy to see the vanity.
they are not able to go. Therefore fear them not, because they can neither
do il nor well. There is not the like Mich. 7.
strength. Who shall not fear thee o king of Nations? For thine Apoc. 15.
kingdoms there is none like unto thee. They shall be proved Psa. 134.
earth: he makes lightninges into rain, and brings forth the wind out of
his treasures. Every man is become a fool cities of Judah a desert, and an
habitation of dragons. I know Man can not do any good thing without Gods
help, nor any evil without his permission neither of which destroys
freewil* As in the present example Nabuchodonosor could not afflict the Jews
but by Gods permision.
man's way is not his own: neither is it in a man to walk, and to direct his
steps. Correct me o Lord, but yet Psalm. 6.
in judgment: and not in thy fury, lest perhaps thou bring me to nothing.
Power out thine indignation upon the Gentiles, Psalm. 78.
that have not known thee, and upon the provinces, that have not inuocated thy
name: because they have eaten Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and
have dissipated his glory.

CHAP. XI. The Prophet being commanded to preach the observation of Gods
covenant is not heard. 9. The people follow their fathers example, adoring
idols. 11. and shall therefore be severely punished, neither shall their idols,
nor prayers of the just profit them. 15. their malice against Christ is
described 20. and the revenge thereof.
THE word that was made from our Lord to Jeremy, saying: Not for the
priuilegies of kindred ( being the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) nor for
suffering circumcision nor for the rest of the Sabbath, but for obedience ( in
keeping the covenant and precepts) our Lord is the God of Israel, and Israel
his people S. Ierom.
commanded your fathers in the day, have gone after strange gods, to serve
them: the house of Israel, and the house of Judah has made void my covenant,
which I made with their fathers. For which thing thus says Chapter 7. v. 16. ch*
14. v. 11.
Thou therefore pray not Flesh offered in sacrifice is hol^e, but profits not
those that are obstinate in sin.
the holy flesh take away from thee thy malices: in which thou have bosted?
The Lord has called thy name, a plentiful olive tree, By consent of al
Churches (says S. Ierom) this is spoken of Christ.
But thou Lord have showed me, and I Who so bore himself, as if he had not
known when the Jews condemned him in their council. For otherwise he knew,
and foretold, that he should be betrayed and crucified Mat. 20. v* 18. 19 and
chapter 26 v. 2.
knew not that they devised counsels against me, saying: Let us cast wood on
his bread, and raze him out of the land of the living, and let his name be
mentioned no more. But thou o Lord of Sabbath, He speaks only of the wicked
for still some relics remain. Isa. 10. Ier. 4. To. 9.
no remains of them: for I will bring in evil upon the men of Anathoth, the
year of their visitation.

CHAP. XII. It seems strange that the wicked prosper. 5. The Jews heretofore
afflicted by weaker enemies, shall be more oppressed by the Babylonians. 10.
Evil pastors shall be punished. 14. and foreign enemies destroyed.
THOU in deed o Lord art just, if I dispute with thee, Prophets, and other
holy men, not ignorant nor doubtful of Gods providence, speak sometimes in
the person of the weak, as desirous to know why God suffers the wicked to
prosper in this world, and the godly to be afflicted. Job. 21. v. 7. David
Psalm. 72. v. 2. 3. Abacuc. 1. v. 3.
Why does the Job. 21. Abac. 1.
way of the impious prosper: why is it well with all that transgress, and do
wickedly? Thou have planted them, and S^gregate.
sanctify them in the day of slaughter. How long shall the land mourn, and the
herb of every After that the children are chasticed, the rod is to be
burned.
which touch the inheritance that I have distributed to my people of Israel:
Behold I will pluck them out of their land, and the house of Judah I will pluck
out of the mids of them. And when I shall have plucked them out, I will
return, The 2. part. The peoples ingratitude s^ning against God, and
persecuring the Prophet.


CHAP. XIII. By a girdle first used and after leaft of, 8. is prefigured the
reiection of the Jews: 12. til Gods mercy recalleth them. 17. The Prophet
lamenting their obstinacy, 22. shows that their sin is the cause of their
misery.
THVS says our Lord to me: Go, and get thee Prophecies uttered in factes have
more force to persuade, then only words. And therefore the Prophets by Gods
commandment use both these ways. Heb. 1.
a girdle An other prophetical similitude to signify that the Jews shall be
perplexe, not knowing what to do in extreme disstresse: as sensles men overcome
with much wine.
Every bottle shall be filled with wine. And they shall say to thee: Why, are we
ignorant that every bottle shall be filled with wine? And thou shall say to
them: Thus ^am. 1.
our Lord is taken. Say to the king, and to her that rules: Custom is as it
were an other nature, hard to be altered: yet Gods grace raises some
inueterate sinners to true repentance, but this is rare And of them selves
without grace no sinners can rise nor repent.
If the Ethiopian

CHAP. XIIII. Jury shall be afflicted with drought and famine. 11. Neither shall
the prophets prayer, nor their fastes, nor sacrifices avail them. 14.
Falseprophetes shall perish with the seduced people. 17. Jeremy lamenting
exhorts them to repentance.
THE word of our Lord that was made to Jeremy concerning The Jews suffered
famine and thirst by reason of drought, for their sins, which also signifies
deprivation of God^ grace for their former wickedness.
of the drought. Jury has mourned, As one that braggeth, and esteems him
self strong.
strong that can not save? but thou o Lord art in us, and thy name is inuocated
upon us, forsake us not. Thus says our False prophets seducing the people,
can not excuse them from sin. For when the blind leads the blind, both fall
into the pit.
the Prophets say to not, that say: There shall not be sword, and famine in
this land: In sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed. And the
peoples to whom they prophecy, shall be cast forth Lam. 1. and 2.
the Notwithstanding there were very many grievous sinners, yet in respect of
the just the Church is a virgin.
virgin daughter of my people, is afflicted with great affliction, with a
very sore plague exceedingly. If I shall go

CHAP. XV. Though Moses and Samuel should pray for this people, yet God has
determined to punish them with plague, war, famine, and captivity, 6. for
their impenitencie. 10. The prophet lamenteth that for his preaching the people
is become worse, 15. and persecuteth him. 19. but God promises to deliver and
to reward him.
AND our Lord said to me: " If Moses and Samuel The Geneua Bible is corruptly
translated contrary to the Hebrew and Greek: Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me.
shall This Hebrew phrase signifies, that some shall dye by sickness, some by the
sword, some by famine, some shall be lead into captivity, as God has feuerally
ordained.
They that to death, to death, Zach. 11.
and they that to sword, to sword: and they that to famine, to famine: and they
that to captivity, to captivity. And I will the earth to devour and to
destroy. And I will give them 4. Reg. 21.
the son of Ezechias the king of Judah, for all things that he did in
Jerusalem. For who shall have pity on thee Amos. 8.
to her, when it was yet day: she is confounded, and ashamed: and the residue
of them I will give unto the sword in the sight of their enemies, says our
Lord. Woe is me, my mother: There can hardly be concord between potent kingdoms.
iron be confederate with the iron from The weaker is easily afflicted by the
stronger.
brass? Thy riches and thy treasures I The Prophet fearing his own weakness
prays to be delivered from persecution.
Thou know o Lord, be mindful of Defer not to deliver me. As Psalm. 12. v 2. 3
thy patience, know that I have sustained reproach for thee. Thy words were
found, and I Psalm. 1. and 2^.
gloried at the face of thy hand: I sat alone, because thou have filled me
with threaning. Why is my sorrow made perpetual, Vain hopes.
unfaithful waters. For this cause the precious thing from the vile, thou shall
be as my mouth: they shall be turned to thee, and The people shall yield to the
prophets admonition, not he to their peruersitie.
thou shall not be turned to them. And I will give thee unto this people as a
brazen

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XV.
1. If Moses and Samuel shall stand before me.] As before God reveled to this
No prayers of others do aauaile for obstinate and impenitent sinners.
prophet Jeremy, that the people should assuredly be punished, and therefore
prohibited him (chapter 7. v. 16. chapter 11. v. 14* and chapter 14. v. 11.) that he should
not pray for them: so here he confirms the same determinate sentence of their
punishment, saying: If Moses and Samuel shall stand before me, my soul is not
toward this people. That is, though not only Jeremy (a zealous holy prophet
now living) but also Moses and Samuel (departed from this world long before)
shall pray for this people, yet they shall not escape the designed punishment,
for their great sins. By necessary consequence of which confirmation, is
Saints after their death pray for men in this world.
also proved, that Moses and Samuel, after their death, both could and did
sometimes pray for the same people. For otherwise the particular mention of
these prophets* were not to the purpose, if they never did, nor could pray for
them. And whereas the English gloss (in the Geneua Bible) supposes Gods
meaning to be, that if there were any man living moved with so great zele
toward the people, as were these two, yet he would not grant this request,
for as much as he had determined the contrary, it is evident that Jeremy,
Ezechiel, Daniel, and This text is understood of Moses and Samuel them selves.
some other prophets then living, had also great zele, very like to the
others, and therefore this text speaks not of others like unto them; but as S.
Ierom (in his commentaries, upon this place) S. Chrysostom ( ho. 1. in 1 Thessalonians. 1.) and S. Gregory ( li. 9. Moral* c. 12.) understand it, of Moses and
Samuel them selves, being in assured happy state, where their former great
zele and charity were now greater, and more perfect then in this life.

CHAP. XVI. The prophet is forbid to marie, trublesome times not suffering the
cares of family: 5. He must neither go to places of feasting, nor mourning,
more dying then can be mourned or buried. 10. Al which is for their idolatry.
15. but after captivity the people shall be released. 16. And both Jews and
Gentiles converted to Christ.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Jeremy not only lived single
in the time of tribulation, but also rema^ned a virgin al his li^e. S. Ier^m
li* 1. aduer Iouian. post medium.
Thou shall not take a wife, and thou shall not have borne in this land: by the
deaths of diseases they shall die: After long expectation of amendment, and
generation after generation adding more sins, at last comes great punishment.
you But again after punishment God shows his mercy.
Therefore behold the days come, says our The Apostles.
fishers says our Lord, and they shall fish them: and after this I will send
them many Other Apostolical men.
hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every little
hill, and out of the caves Not only Christ is a rock, but he has also given to
his Apostle Peter to be called a rock. In whose judgments they that rest are
rightly said to be translated from the rock. S. Iero. in hunc locum.
of rocks. Because mine eyes are upon al their ways: To make men is the work
of God, and therefore it is very absurd, that a man can make gods. S. Iero.
ibidem.
shall a man make

CHAP. XVII. For obstinacy in sin the Jews shall be led captive. 5. He is
cursed that trusts in flesh: 7. and bl^ssed that trusts in God. 9. Only God
searches the heart, giving to every one as they deserve. 11. The prophet
prays to be delivered from his enemies: 19. preaches observation of the Law:
24. so they shall pr^sper, otherwise perish.
THE sin of Judah is written with These metaphorical terms signify that
their sins were inueterated, and hard to be blotted out.
iron pen in nail Chief and principal trust must be in Gods help, not in
man's strength or policy.
in man, and makes flesh his arm, and his heart departs Isa. 30.
from our Lord. For he shall be as little bushes in the desert, Psalm. 1.
upon the waters, that spreddeth his roots toward moisture: and it shall not
fear when the heat comes. And the leaf thereof shall be green, and in the
time of drought it shall not be careful, neither shall it cease at any time to
bring forth fruit. The heart of man is perverse, and unsearchable, It is
proper to God only by his own power to search the heart of man and to know his
secret thoughts which men, nor Angels can not naturally know; but holy
Angels and glorified Saints do know the thoughts of men by light of glory
when mortal men pray unto them; and prophets know by light of prophecy, as
Elizeus savv when Giezi took bribes; and by special inspiration, S. Peter
knew the fraud of Ananias and Za phira. Act. 5.
that search the heart, and Psa. 7. v. 10. Apoc. 2. v. 23.
By the sabbath, as often else where, is meant the observation of all the law.
the Sabbath day: neither bring them in by the gates of Jerusalem. And cast not
forth burdens out of your houses on Such temporal rewards were commonly
promised in the old testament, but in the new is promised life everlasting,
and eternal glory.
there shall enter in by the gates of this city kings and princes, sitting
upon the throne of David, and mounting on chariotes and horses, they and their
princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabiters of Jerusalem: and this city shall
be inhabited for ever. And they shall come from the

CHAP. XVIII. As clay in the hand of a potter, so is Israel in Gods hand. 8. He
pardons penitents, 10. and punishes the obstinate. 18. They conspire against
Jeremy, for which he denounces miseries hanging over them.
THE word that was made to Jeremy from our Lord, saying: A potter can make a
new vessel of the same clay being misformed in casting, so it be yet fresh,
and moist; but God can also reform man being hardened in heart, as if he made a
new pot of an old one, broken into pieces or deformed.
he made it an other vessel, as it pleased in his eyes to make it. And the word
of our Lord Isa. 45. Romans 9.
as clay in the hand of the potter, so are you in my hand, o house of Israel. I
will suddenly speak against nation, and against do every one the peruersitie of
his evil heart. Therefore Alluding to his own persecution the prophet here
speaks expressly of Christ, as S. Ierom shows it verified when the Jews
crucified Christ, crying Crucify him, crucify him.
Come, and let us find devises against Jeremy: for the law shall not perish
from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet:
come, and let us strike him with the tongue, and let us not attend to al his
words. Attend o Lord unto me, and hear the voice of

CHAP. XIX. The prophet holding an earthen bottel in his hand, preaches the
destruction of Jerusalem, 4. for their idolatry: 10. and in sign thereof
breaks the bottel in pieces: 11. denouncing that God will so break the people
that contemn his word.
THVS says our Lord: Go, and Words and actions together instruct both by
the ears and eyes, and so move more effectually. as S. Ierom often notes.
take a potters earthen of the priests: and go forth to the valley of the
son of That which is impossible to men, is possible to God. Mat. 19. See
Annot. chapter 18. v. ^*
no more be repaired: and they shall be buried in Topheth, because there is no
other place to bury in. So will I do to this place, says of the house of our
Lord, and said to all the people: Thus

CHAP. XX. Phassur a priest beats the prophet, and puts him in the
stocks. He still prophecieth their captivity in Babylon. 7. Lamenteth that he
and his preaching is derided: 11. confideth in God: 14. and utters his
afflicted mind.
AND Phassur the son of Emmer priest, who was appointed Phassur signifies
multiplying principality, but his name was changed into Fear on every side,
to signify that he should be terrified by many enemies.
Phassur, but fear on every side. Because thus As Job (says S. Ierom) so
this holy prophet in hyperbolical words she weth his afflicted mind,
signifying that which our Savior also affirms ( Mat. 26.) It were better not
to be then to be in misery; and as Jacob having lived in much travel and
affliction, calls his days few and evil ( Genesis 47.) Amos also ( ^^. 5.)
says: The day of our Lord ( afflicting) is darkness, not light. Likewise S.
Paul calls this world wicked ( Gal. 1) and the days evil. Ephesians. 5.
I will ye, and let us persecute him: of all the men, that were my peaceables,
and garding my side: if by any means he may be deceived, and we prevail
against him, and be revenged on him. But our Lord is with me as a strong
warrier: therefore they Job. 3.
be the day, wherein I was borne: the day in which my mother bare me, be it not
blessed. Cursed be the man that told

CHAP. XXI. The 3. part. Comminations to Jerusalem, especially to the King,
evil priests, and false prophets: for which Jeremy is again persecuted.
The prophet answers the kings messengers, that Jerusalem shall be punished
with plague, sword, famine, and captivity. 9. Those shall escape best that
yield themselves captives: 11. exhorts to correct their lives, lest al be
utterly destroyed.
THE word that was made to Jeremy from our Lord, This revelation was made to
Jeremy and uttered by him long after those, which are in the former chapters:
yea and after some of those which are recorded in the chapters following. For he
speaks here of the time when Nabuchodonosor invaded the country.
when king Sedecias sent Phassur the son of Melchias unto him, and Sophonias
the son of Maasias priest, saying: Ask our Lord for us, because
Nabuchodonosor the this city. And I will vanquish you in stretched out hand,
Gods grace is ever ready that sinners may convert if they vvil.
I give before you the way of life, and the way of death. He that Deuteronomy. 7. 11
30.
shall dwell within this city, shall dye with the sword, and with famine, and
pestilence: but he that shall go forth, and flee to the Chaldees, that besiege
you, shall live, and his life shall be to him, as a spoil. For I have set my
face upon this city to evil,

CHAP. XXII. The Prophet going to the palace admonishes the king, and his
officers to judge and govern rightly: 5. threatening that otherwise they shall
fall into calamity: 10. prophecieth that Sellum shall not return into
Jerusalem: 13. reprehendeth unjust builders; 18. that Ioakim shall dye and be
buried ignominiously: 24. and I cchonias with his mother shall dye in the
captivity of Babylon.
THVS says our Lord: This was prophesied before that which is written in the
chapter precedent; for the prophets do not observe the order of history.
Go down into the house of which sit upon the throne of David: thou and
thy servants, and thy people, which enter in by these gates. Thus By Galaad he
signifies the kings palace.
Galaad thou art unto me the head of By Libanus Jerusalem.
Libanus: if I make thee not a wilderness, cities not habitable. And I will By
sanctify segregate, separate, or design to this office.
sanctify Deuteronomy. 29. 3. Reg. 9.
so to this great city? And they shall answer: Because they The fourth son of
Josias. 1. Par. 3. v. 15.
Sellum To whom (as is probable) Nabuchodonosor gave the title of king, after
the death of Sedecias.
has reigned for Josias his father, who is gone forth out of this place. He
shall return hither no more: but in the place, to which blood, and to crafty
oppression, and to the course of evil work. Therefore thus says our Lord to
Ioakim the son of Josias Otherwise called Ioachin the son of Ioakim. 4.
Reg. 24. v. 6.
Iechonias the son:: This Ioachin (or Iechonias) was restored to good estate,
4 Reg. 25. v. 27. but not to the dignity or power of a king, neither
Salathiel, Zorobabel, or others of his posterity til Christ.
country, in the which you were not borne, and there you shall dye: and into
the land, whereto they lift up their mind

CHAP. XXIII. God reproves the evil gouerners, promising to reduce the
relics of the people from dispersion; 4. to send good pastors; and Christ the
chief Pastor. 9. Falseprophetes are threatened: 16. The people warned, not to
hear them, preaching without mission, 27. against Gods will, 33. and calling
Gods word a burden.
VVOE to the pastors, that destroy and tear the flock Ezec 13. and 34.
says our Lord the God of Israel to the pastors, that feed my people: You
have scattered my flock, and cast them out, and have not visited them: Behold
I will visit upon you the malice of your studies, says our Lord. And I will
gather together Isa. 4. 40. 45.
Christ who is just of himself, who makes others just, and without whom no man
can be just.
a just branch: and he shall reign a king, and shall be wise: and he shall do
judgment and justice in the earth. In those days shall Judah Ezec. 34. Dan 9.
Ioa. 1. v. 45.
Deuteronomy. 33.
wormwood, and will give them galle to drink, for from the prophets of
Jerusalem is pollution gone forth upon all the land. Thus says the Lord of
hosts: He are not the words To trust their own judgment, not believing the
definitions of the Church, and relying every one upon his private spirit is a
manifest note of heretics, false* prophets or Apostataes.
of their own heart, not from the mouth of the Lord. They say to them that
blaspheme me: Mission of Pastors and Prophets was alvvayes so necessary in
Gods Church, that whosoever comes without right mission is a false prophet, a
woolfe and not a pastor.
sent False prophets may do false miracles, that is, strange things to
deceive others: but can not work true miracles. Because therefore it is hard
for vulgar people to judge which are false miracles, the former note of right
mission is a more secure mark to know true and false prophets.
miracles: when I had not sent them, nor commanded them, who have not profited
this people, says our Lord. If therefore

CHAP. XXIIII. By a parable of good and evil figs, is signified, 5. the
reduction of the penitent from captivity: 8. and the vexation of those, that
stayed in Jerusalem, or fled into Egypt.
OUR Lord showed me: and behold two baskets full of Literally he prophecieth
that king Ieconias and others carried in the first tra^smigration into Babylon
should be released or exalted; and king Sedecias with his children and
folovvers should perish: but mystically he prophecieth that the good shall
prosper and be high ly rewarded, and the wicked shall be miserable and most
severely punished.
exceeding good, and the naughty figs, exceeding naught: which can not be
eaten because they are naught. And the word of our place into the land of
Chaldees, unto good. And I will set

CHAP. XXV. After the peoples contemning to hear Jeremy, and other Prophets,
preaching three and twenty years, 8. he denounces their assured captivity
seventy years in Babylon: 12. and then the ruin of their enemies. 15. Al
which wrath of God, Jeremy forshsweth to the Jews, 19. and Gentiles. 29.
Which shall first happen to Gods proper people: 36. and so extend to al nations:
34. the principal gouerners bewayling their common misery.
THE word that was made to Jeremy concerning all the As is noted before (chapter
21.) these prophe cies are not written in order of the time when they were
uttered. For this vision perteyneth to Ioakim, who was father to Ieconias, and
elder brother to Sedecias, of whom the for mer chapters make mention.
the fourth year of Ioakim the son of Josias king of Judah (the same is the
first year of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon.) Which Jeremy the prophet 4.
Reg. 17.
every one from his evil way, and from your most wicked cogitations: and you
shall dwell in the land, which our lord has given you, and your fathers from
everlasting and for evermore. And go ye not after strange gods to serve
them, and adore and I will not afflict you. And you have not heard me, says
This wicked king is called Gods servant in that he was his instrument o^
minister to punish other sinners.
my servant: and I will bring them upon this land, and upon the inhabitants
thereof, and upon all the nations that are round about it: and I will kill them,
and make them into astonishment and hyssing, and into everlasting desolations.
And I will destroy out of Dan. 9. 1. Esd. 1. 3. Esd. 1.
desolation, and into astonishment: and al these nations shall serve the king of
Bebylon These seventy years begane in the eleventh year of Sedecias.
seventy years. And when the This metaphor of a cup signifies that Gods
wrath is powered out to punish sinners. As Psa. 74. v. 9. Isa. 51. v. 17.
the cup of wine of this fury at my hand: and thou shall drink thereof to
al nations, unto the which I shall send thee. And they shall drink, and be
trubled, and be kings of the land of the isles, who are beyond the Sea. And The
Ismaelites, and Agarenes (otherwise called Sarazens) powled their hear to the
ears, and left the lowest part long; as now the Polonians and Hungarians use
to be powled.
that have their hear powled. And to all the kings of Arabia, and to all the 1.
Pet. 4.
and shall you be as innocent and escape free? you shall not escape free: for I call
the sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, says the Lord of hosts. And
thou shall prophecy unto Joel. 3. Amos. 1.
on high shall roar, and from his holy habitation shall give his voice: roaring
he shall roar upon his beauty: the cry as it were of them that As those that
labor in the vinepressesing to encorege each other, so in affliction it will be
necessary to do the like.
tread grapes shall be sung against all the inhabitants of the earth. The sound
is come even to the presence of the wrath of the fury of our Lord. He has as
a Though God of his nature is most meke like to a dove, yet provoked by sin
he powers out wrath*
the dove, and at the presence of the wrath of the fury of our Lord.

CHAP. XXVI. The prophet for preaching Gods commination, 7. is apprehended by
the priests, and false prophets: 10. but delivered from death by the
ancientes of the people: 18. alleging the examples of Michaeas, 20. and Vrias
prophesying the same before.
IN THE beginning of the kingdom of Ioakim the son Men of the cities.
cities of Judah, out of the which they come, to adore in the house of our Lord,
all the words which I have commanded thee to speak unto them: withdraw not a
word, Gods co^m^nations are conditional, if the people persist in sin they
shall be punished, as is threatened, but if they repent the punishment shall be
mitigated.
if perhaps they will ^. Reg 4.
Silo, and this city I will give into malediction to all the nations of the
earth. And the priests, and prophets, and all the It is a most common phrase
of holy Scripture to say, al, for most part.
all the people apprehended him, saying: Let him dye the death. Why has he
ears. And Jeremy spoke to all the princes, and to all the Chapter 25. 2. Par. 36.
this house, and to this city all the words that you have heard. Now therefore
make your ways good, and your studies, and 1. Esd. 1. 3. Esd. 1.
hear the voice of our Lord your God: and our Lord will repent him of the evil,
that he has spoken against you. But Common people do easily change their
judgment, sometimes to the better, as here to save the prophets life,
sometimes to worse, as when they had received our Savior with joy on
palmesunday, within few days after they cried: Crucify him.
all the people Mich. 3.
shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall be as an heap of stones: and
the mount of the house as the high places of woods. Did Ezechias the king of
Judah, and al Judah, condemn

CHAP. XXVII. Jeremy puts chains about his own neck, and then sends
them to sundry kings, admonishing them, that they must either be subject to
the king of Babylon, 8. or perish by sword, famine, and pestilence. 14.
Inueigheth against false prophets preaching the contrary. 16. and falsely
affirming that the vessels already taken away shall quickly be restored. 18.
whereas in deed the rest shall also be carried away, but al at last restored.
IN THE beginning of the kingdom of Ioakim, the son Bands and chains are
apt signs of captivity, because they are the very instruments wherewith
captives are bond.
bands, and chains: and thou shall put them on thy neck. And thou shall send
them to the king of Edom, and to the Hangmen, or executioners are Gods
instruments, and his servants in punishing the wicked.
my servant: more over also the beasts of the field I have given him, to serve
him. And al nations shall serve him, and his son, and his sons Chapter 23. and
29.
out, and you perish. But the nation, that shall submit their words, saying:
Submit your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, and
his people, and you shall live. Why will you dye, thou and thy people with the
sword, and Chapter 14.
I sent them not, says our Lord: and they prophecy in my name falsely: that
they may cast you out, and you perish, as well you, as the prophets that
prophecy unto you. And to the It is so false that the treasures carried away
shall quickly be restored, that in deed more shall be carried away before the
former be recovered.
if they be prophets, and the word of 4 Reg. 25.
and to the rest of the vessels, that are remaining in this city. Which
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, took not 4 Reg. 24.
of Judah, from Jerusalem into Babylon, and all the great men of Judah and
Jerusalem. Because thus says the Lord of hosts the 4. Reg. 25.
be until the day of their visitation, says our Lord: and I will cause them to
be brought, and to be restored in this place.

CHAP. XXVIII. Hananias a false prophet avouches that within two years the
holy vessel and king I echonias with other captives shall be restored. 5. I
eremie prays that it may be so. 7. but prophecieth that it will not so be. 10.
The false prophet in confirmation of that he says, breaks I eremies chain.
12. But I eremie again prophecieth the contrary. 16. and that Hananias shall
dye the same year.
AND it came to pass in that year, in the beginning of Sedecias reigning
eleven years, the fourth year of his reign may well be called in the
beginning of his reign.
fourth year, in the fifth month, Hananias the son of Azur the prophet of
Gabaon spoke to me, in the house of our Lord before the priests, and all the
people, saying: Thus says the Lord The prophet hearing a good thing falsely
avouched wishes it might be so, but left others be deceived, warns the
people not to believe it, because it is false and shall not happen as the false
prophet affirms.
Amen, Our the prophet: Hear Hananias: Our Lord sent thee not, and thou have
made this people to trust in a lie. Therefore thus says our

CHAP. XXIX. The 4. part. Consolations and threats as the people shall deserve,
with the destruction of Jerusalem, cap tiuitie of the king and people and their
release after 70. years
Jeremy writes to the captives in Babylon, exhorting them to live in peace,
8. and not harking to falseprophetes. 10. For they must remain there seventy
years, and then shall be delivered. 16. And those that remain in Jerusalem
shall suffer sword, famine, and pestilence. 21. And Achab, Sedecias, 24. and
Someias false prophets, shall dye miserably.
AND these are the words of Against the flatery of false prophets affirming
that the captives shall shortly be reduced, Jeremy sincerely writes unto them
that they must remain in Babylon a long time.
the book, which Jeremy Chapter 14.
your diuiners seduce you: and attend not to your dreams, which you dream:
because they do falsely prophecy to Chapter 25. 2. Par. 36. I. Esd. 1. Dan. 9.
to be expired in Babylon, I will visit you: and I will raise up upon you my
good word, to bring you again to this place. For I know the cogitations, that
entend upon you, says our Lord, cogitations of peace, and not of affliction,
to give you an end and patience. And you shall invoke me, 3. Isd. I.
al nations, and from al places to the which I have expelled you, says our
Lord: and I will make you to return from the place, to the which I have
transported you. Because you The seduced people thought the false prophets had
been true prophets of God.
Our Lord has raised up prophets to us in Babylon: for thus says our Lord to
the king, that sits upon Chapter 24.
pestilence: and I will make them as naughty figs, that can not be eaten,
because they are very naught. And I will persecute Their misery shall be so
great that it shall be as a proverb of them that wish evil to others, to say:
The malediction of the Jews fall upon you, as is more clerly explicated. v. 22.
malediction, and into astonishment, and into hyssing, and into reproach to all the Nations, to which I have cast them out: because they have not heard my
words, says our Lord: Sophonias the son of Maasias, the priest, and to all the priests, saying: Our Lord has made thee priest for Ioiada the

CHAP. XXX. The prophet is commanded to write the same which he preaches: 4.
first pensive things, 8. Then joyful. 9. Especially in the new Testament, when
God will raise David (towitte Christ) 16. Who shall destroy al enemies. 19, And
whose Church shall be great, glorious, and perpetual.
THIS is the word, that was made to Jeremy from our It is probable by this,
and Chapter 31. Ezec. 33. and other places that with the evvo tribes of the
kingdom of Judah many of the ten tribes, returned also from captivity whose
chief city was Samaria.
Israel and Judah, says our Lord: and I will make them return to the land,
which I gave their fathers, and they shall possess it. And Iod. 1. Amos. 5.
Sopho. 1.
day, neither is there the like to it: and it is the time of tribulation to
Jacob, and he shall be saved out of it. And it shall be in that day, says the
Lord of hosts: I will break his yoke from of thy neck, and will break his
bands: and strangers shall no more rule over him: but they shall serve our Lord
Only the true Church is perpetually consetued without interruption; al other
nations, kingdoms, and co^gregations do change and are consumed.
a consumation in all the Nations, in which I have dispersed thee: but thee I
will not make into consummation: but I will chastise thee in judgment, that thou
may not seem to thy self innocent. Because thus says our Lord: Thy After
seventy years captivity the temple shall be reedified, but more fully and
more perfectly this prophecy is fulfilled in Christ and his Apostles, when the
city was built in a hiegh place, the city which can not be hid, set in a
mountain.
will convert the Christ of the issue of Jacob.
his duke shall be of himself: and Who according to his divinity is the Son
of God as he says of himself. Joan. 14. I am in the Father and the Father in
me.
nere, and he shall come to me. For who is this, that applies his heart to
approach unto me, says our Lord? And you shall be my people: and I will be your
God.

CHAP. XXXI. God will reduce Israel from captivity, 4. and give them abundance
of al things: 9. after their tribulation. 15. Rachel (The afflicted Church)
shall cease from mourning: 18. confessing that she is justly chastised. 20.
Christ a perfect man shall be contained in his mothers womb, 26. He rising from
sleep (death) will build his Church. 31. with a new covenant: 36. that it shall
be large, and perpetual.
AT THAT time, says our Lord: I will be the God of Together with the two tribes
many also of the ten tribes were reduced from captivity. And when Christ
came into this world they were more ready to receive him, then the other two
tribes. Mat. 13 Mar. 6: Luc. 4. Joan. 4.
all the kindredes of Israel, and they shall be my people. Thus says our Lord:
The people that remained from the Isa. 2. ^^ich. 4. Zach. ^.
watchmen on mount Ephraim shall cry: Arise, and let us go up unto Sion to the
Lord our God. Because thus says our God will also ^^evv his mercy to the tene
tribes (signified by Ephraim) as a father loves his first begotten.
Ephraim is my firstbegotten. Hear him: and he will keep him as the pastor
his flock. For By Rachel the mother of Joseph and Benjamin, are signified all the women of both kingdoms (Israel and Judah) mourning the miseries of the
captivity. And particularly of the mothers lamenting the slaughter of their
children nere Bethlehem. Mat. 2.
Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to be comforted for them,
because Mat. 2,
they are not. Thus says our Lord: Let thy voice cease Gods grace is the
principal cause of justification.
Convert me, and Man's cooperation by freewil is the seco^darie cause.
I shall be converted: because thou art the Lord my God. For after thou did
convert me Christ in his mothers womb in stature an infant: but in all
perfection a man.
A MAN. Thus the flocks. Because I have inebriated the weary soul: and God
promised the Jews multiplication of men.
the seed of men, and with the seed And of catle which were a principal
riches, as appears by the word, pecunia derived of pecus.
of beasts. And as I have watched Isa. 54
Know our Lord: for all shall know me from the least of them even to the
greatest, says our Lord: because I will be propicious Ioa. 6.
to their iniquity, and their sin I will remember no more. Thus says our
Lord, that gives the sun for the The seed of Israel remains forever; not
in the incredulous Jews (says S. Ierom) but in those which with the Apostles,
and by the Apostles believe in Christ.
the seed of Israel shall fail, that it be not a nation before me for ever.
Thus says our Lord: If the heavens above shall be able to death, even to the
torrent of Cedron, and to the corner of the East gate of horses, the Holy of
our Lord: shall not be plucked up, and it shall no more be destroyed for ever.

CHAP. XXXII. Nabuchodonosor besieging Jerusalem, Jeremy in prison 7. byeth by
Gods commandment a field of his cousin. 17. Prays for the whole nation,
reciting Gods former benefits, 26. Prophecieth their captivity in Babylon,
30. for their idolatry: 36. and delivery from thence, 40. With a new covenant
to serve God sincerely.
THE word that was made to Jeremy from our Lord When the city was besie ged,
and Jeremy in prison prophesied that it should be taken, and subdued by the
enemies; yet he bought lands, to signify that in time they should be
delivered from captivity.
in Sedecias was brought to the king of Babylon in Reblatha where they put out
his eyes, and thence carried him blind to Babylon. 4. Reg. 25. and so coming to
that city he could not see it. Ezech. 12. v. 13.
his eyes shall see his eyes. And he shall lead Sedecias into And I gave the
book of the possession to Baruch the son Exo 3^.
the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them. o
Most strong, great, and mighty, the Lord of hosts is thy name. Great in
counsel, and incomprehensible in cogitation: By the force of the sword, famine,
and pestilence, as Psa. 59. v. 6. that they flee from the face of the bovv.
the presence of the sword, and of famine, and of pestilence: and what things
soever thou have spoken, are come to pass, as thy self see. And say thou
to me o Lord God: Bye the field al flesh: shall any word be hard for me?
Therefore thus says When they were in the wilderness newly delivered from
Egypt, they committed many heinous crimes: in murmuring schism, idolatry,
and other carnal and spiritual sins.
from their youth: the children of Israel which even until this present
exasperate me in the work of their hands, says our Lord. Because in fury
Psalm. 35. 1. Reg. 21.
And they have set their idols in the house, wherein Lest any should think
that by Gods just and severe punishment, or by any reuolting from his service
the Church might be utterly destroyed, he still promises mercy toward the
relics of his people, that they shall never al fail, but continue til the
Redemer of mankind Christ shall come. And much less shall Christ's Church ever
fail after his coming.
I will gather them together out of al lands, to in this land in truth in my
whole heart and in all my soul. Because

CHAP. XXXIII. God promises remission of sins: 10. reduction from
captivity, and many other benefits. 14. He will give judgment and justice in
David (Christ) whose throne (the Church) 19. shall be glorious. 24. and
permanent.
AND the word of our Lord was made to Jeremy Besides many other revelations,
this prophet had two visions in prison, in confirmation that God would conserve
his people and Church for ever, notwithstanding their manifold great sins and
great affliction and destruction of many for the same.
the Thus says our Lord: Yet there shall be heard in this place, An evident
prophecy and promise of Christ.
I will raise up the good word, Iere. 23. v. 5.
that I have spoken to the house of Israel, and to the house of Judah. In those
days, and in that time, I will make Borne of the seed of David.
the spring David's progeny shall continue unto Christ: whose kingdom, which is
his Church, shall have no end. Luc. 1. v. 33 Psalm. 88. v. 30.
There shall not fail of David a man, to sit upon the throne of the house of
Israel. And of the Priests and S Hypolitus and al ancient Fathers teach that
the holy Eucharist is the co^plement of al sacrifices of the old Testament.
holocaustes, and to burn sacrifice, and to kill victimes al days. And the
word of our Lord was made to Jeremy, Gods most special providence blessed the
families of David and Aaron above al other kinreds.
two kinreds, which our Lord had chosen, are cast of: and they have despised my
people, because it is no more a Nation before them? Thus says our Lord: If I
have not set

CHAP. XXXIIII. King Sedecias shall fall into the hands of Nabuchodonosor, and
Jerusalem shall be burned: 8. because he has broken the covenant, of releasing
Jews from bondage, 14. in the seventh year; and contrary to particular
promise of observing that law.
THE word that was made to Jeremy from our Lord, See chapter 32. v. 4. and 4. Reg.
25. v. 7.
thine eyes shall see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and his mouth shall speak
with thy mouth, and thou shall enter into Babylon. But yet hear the word of
free: and that they should not have dominion over them, that is, on a Jew and
his brother. All the princes therefore heard, Recidiuation into sins after
remission, offends God more then the former sins, as ou^ Savior teaches
by a parable. Ma. 18.
they turned Exo. 21.
brother an Hebrew, that was sold to him, and he shall serve Deuteronomy. 15.
thee six years: and thou shall dismiss him free from thee: and your fathers
have not heard me, nor inclined their ear. And you were converted this day,
and did that which is right I will give into the hands of their enemies, and
into the hands of them that seek their lives, and into the hands of the
armies of the king of Babylon, which are retired from you. Behold I God was not
the cause of the Babylonians cruelty, but permitted and directed the same to
punish the Jews.
command, says our Lord, and I will bring them

CHAP. XXXV. By example of the Rechabites voluntarily keeping their fathers
rule, 12. God expostulateth with the people that keep not his praeceptes; 17.
denouncing that they shall be punished, and the Rechabites rewarded.
THE word, that was made to Jeremy from our Lord in Here again it appears
that the prophet observes not the order of time in vvriting his visions. For
the thing here recorded happened before the prophecies mentioned in the former
chapters.
of Ioakim the son of Josias the king of Judah, saying: Go to " the house of
the Rechabites: and This Ionadab was a man of power and estimation, very
familiar with Iehu king of Israel. 4. Reg. 10. v. 15
Ionadab the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying: You shall not
drink wine, you and your children for ever. And you shall not build house, The
Rechabites descended not of Israel, but of Iethro a Madianite, Moses father in
law: as both Hebrew and L^ in Do(...) by (...) on.
strangers. We therefore have obeyed the voice king of Babylon was come up to
our Land, we said: In case of necessity they entered into the city, otherwise
remained in tents.
Come, and let us go into Jerusalem from the face of the host of the Chaldees,
and from the face of the host of Syria: and we have tarried in Jerusalem. And
the word of our Lord was made Seeing these religious Rechabites observed
obediently the rule of their father and founder, in works of supererogation,
otherwise not commanded: much more al are bound to keep Gods commandments.
The words of Ionadab the son of Rechab have prevailed, which he commanded
his sons not to drink wine: and they have not drunk until this day,
because they have obeyed the commandment of their father: but I have spoken to
you, early rising and speakeing, and you have not obeyed me. And I have sent to
you al my Iere. 18. v. 11. and 25. v. 5.
Return ye every one from his most wicked way, and make your studies good:
and follow not strange gods, nor worship them, and you shall dwell in the land,
which I gave you and your fathers: and you have not inclined your ear, nor
heard me. The children therefore of Ionadab the son of

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXV.
1. The house of Rechabites.] We have here (according to the state of Gods
Religious Orders in the old Testament.
Church in the old Testament) a clear example of religious life, by professing
and performing good works of supererogation, not commanded by God, but piously
instituted by a holy man called Ionadab. Which, not only himself, and his
proper children, but also their posterity many ages after him, voluntarily
observed by a prescript Rule: Not to build houses, nor dwell in any (but in
tents) not to sow seed, nor to plant, nor have vinyardes, nor to drink wine.
A like rule but not the same in all points, was prescribed by God himself The
rule of Rechabites differed from the Nazareites and children of the Propheces.
They were figures of more perfect orders in the Church of Christ.
( Number 6) for such as would voluntarily embrace it. And Elias and Elizens with
then disciples observed an other form of religious life: as appears, 4. Reg.
1. 2. etc. Al which were figures of more perfect Religious Orders in the
Church of Christ, consisting in three essential vows, of voluntary Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience: not commanded but commended, and for the better
attayning to perfection counseled by our Savior; vvherof they are called
Euangelical Counsels, observed by the Apostles, leaving al their worldly
substance, and al desire of having any proper possessions: such also as had
wives leaving them, the rest no^ marying; and al renouncing their own wills,
subjected the same to Christ's will; following him. Whose example others
imitating, this holy manner of Mat. 19. v. 12. 21.
life has still continued in the Church, as is evident by the Ecclesiastical
histories even from the Apostles time But al observed not the same particular
rules, nor Diverse kinds of Religious Orders.
Luc 18. v. 22.
were called by the same titles. For as in the time of Moses law, some were
called Nazareites; some the Children of the Prophets; and some Rechabites,
after the name of their founders father Rechab, a renowned godly man: so now
some are called Eremites, some Monks, some Freares, and some Religious
Clerks. And of each of these kinds, diverse sorts are distinguished by
variety of rules, habites, special functions, and titles either of their first
Institutors, or of the Institutes themselves, or of the places, or other
occasions. As Carmelites, Augustines (as well Monks, as Canons Regular)
Benedictins, Bernardins, Carthusians, Dominicans, Fra^c scans, Iesui^es,
Theatines, Capuchines, Varieties of Religious Orders make no difference in
Catholic Religion. But do much adorn the whole Church.
and the like. As also many distinct Orders of Nuns. But none of them al
differ from the rest, nor from other Catholic Christians in points of faith:
nor make any Sects of Religion, as Heretics ridiculously object. For all
believe and confess the self same Catholic Faith, in all the Articles thereof;
al use and acknowledge the same, and no other holy Sacraments; and al are
united in one universal Church; under one visible Head: Every Order good and
holy in their profession; and al together excellently a^o^ing the whole body
Psalm. 44. v. 11. 1^.
with sacred semelie varieties, make the same universal Church more glorious.

CHAP. XXXVI. Jeremy in prison sends Baruch by Gods commandment, to read a
book of comminations before the people: 7. exhorting them to repent: 9. which
being read in a porch of the Temple, 11. Micheas reports it to the Nobles in
the court, 14. whither Baruch being called reads the same before them: 20.
they inform the king: 21. who hearing part thereof, causes the book to be
burned: 26. and commands to apprehend Baruch, and Jeremy. 27. The book is
write again by them with addition of more.
AND it came to pass in the fourth year of Ioakim, the Besides preaching,
which the evil disposed did either not duly regard, or quickly forget, God
commanded that his will should also be written, for a perpetual admonition, if
they would read it, or hear it read, and for a testimony against them, and a
warning to others.
a volume of a book wicked way: and I will be propicious to their iniquity,
and to their sin. Jeremy therefore called Baruch the son He was not now in
prison; for ( v. 19.) certain noble men of the court advised both Baruch and
him to hide themselves; but kept himself close in some secret place; as most
Priests do now in England, that they may better exercise their function, then
if they were in the persecutors hands.
shut up, neither am I able to go into the house of our Lord. Go thou in
therefore, and read out of the volume, ^h^^ ears. Therefore when they had
heard all the words, The secretary cut out the leaves and burnt them by the
kings commandment: as appears. v. 25. etc.
he cut it with the penknife of a scribe: and he cast it into the fire, that
was upon the hearth, til all the volume was consumed with the fire, that was on
the hearth. And the king and al his servants, that heard al God did not
translate them to an other place, but they hyding themselves by Gods direction,
the searchers could not find them.
our Lord hid them. And the word of our His son Iechonias reigned but three
months: which is counted as no reign. Theodoret.
There shall not be of him to Chapter 22. v. 19.
sit upon the throne of David: and his carcass shall be cast forth to the
heat by day, and to the frost by night. And I will visit against him, and
against his seed, and against his servants Nor any of his issue in wordlie
glory, as their predecessors had reigned* S. Tho. p. 3. q. 3^* a. 2. ad. 3.
their iniquities, and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah all the evil, that I have spoken to them:
and they have not heard. And Jeremy took an other volume, and gave it to
Baruch

CHAP. XXXVII. Sedecias appointed by the king of Babylon to reign in Judah,
requesteth Ieremias prayers. 4. The Chaldees besieging Jerusalem, and hearing
that the Egyptians come against them, part away. 5. But Jeremy prophecieth
that they will return, and burn Jerusalem. 10. For which he is imprisoned. 16.
After many days the king examineth him of his prophecy, who still affirming
the same, 20. is kept in the entry of the prison.
AND king Sedecias the son of Josias reigned for 4* Reg. 24. 2 Para. 36. ^*
Esd. 1.
Iechonias the son of Ioakim: whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon made
king in the Land of Judah. And he obeyed not, he and his servants, and the
people of As Herod dealt afterward with S. John Baptist: so this king esteemed,
reverenced, and feared Jeremy, and yet persecuted him.
Pray the Lord our God for us. And Jeremy walked freely in the mids of the
people: city with fire. Therefore when the army of the Chaldees It is an old
devise of persecuters to pretend false causes against the innocent; so Julian
the Apostata charged Cristian Catholics, with treason and sedition. Hist.
tripart. li. 6. c. 27. so did also the Arrians, Vandals, and other heretics
against Catholics. as Raffinus and Victor testify.
Thou fleest to the Chaldees. And Jeremy answered: It is not so, I flee not

CHAP. XXXVIII. The nobles being offended with Ieremies preaching, solicit to
have him slain: 5. the king putting him in their hands, they cast him into a
dyrtie dongeon, 7. from whence at the instance of Abdemelech an Ethiopian, he
is drawn forth, 14. and having license to speak, he advises the king to yield
himself to the Chaldees, so he and the city shall be safe: 18. otherwise shall
be taken captive, 24. which the king commands him to keep secret.
AND Saphatias the son of Mathan, and Gedelias the Iere* 2^. ^. 9.
sword, and famine, and pestilence: but he that shall flee to the Chaldees,
shall live, and his life shall be safe and The Hebrew phrase life shall beliuing,
and, living he shall live, signifies that he shall live most securely.
Mystically this saftie in voluntary banishment signifies, that voluntary
temporal penance saves from eternal damnation.
living. Thus says our Lord: By delivering this city shall be delivered God
ever moves some to pity the innocent afflicted, til at last he gives them
acrowne of glory for their constant patience.
Abdemelech the Ethiopian an eunuch, that entry of the prison. And king
Sedecias sent; and took to Prophecies are not only certain when a thing is
absolutely affirmed, but also when they are conditional, as this was, and the
event should have been accordingly if the king had followed the prophets advise,
though by not going the contrary captivity, and much misery happened to the
king and people.
If going forth thou will go out to the princes of the king of Babylon, thy
soul shall live, and this city shall not be burnt with fire: and thou shall be
safe, and thine house. But if thou will not go out to the princes of the king
of 4. Reg. 25
shall be taken in the hand of the king of Babylon: and he shall burn this
city with fire. Sedecias therefore said to Jeremy: them according to all the
words, that the king had commanded him, and they left him: for nothing had
been heard. But Jeremy remained in the entry of the prison, until the

CHAP. XXXIX. Jerusalem after two years siege is taken by the Chaldees: 4.
king Sedecias with others, fleing by a posterne gate, is taken, brought to the
king of Babylon, al his sons are slain, his eyes put out, and so led into
Babylon. 8. The kings palace and the town house are burned; the walls of the
city destroyed, the people carried captive, only the poorest left to til the
ground. 11. Ieremias is delivered. 15. And Abdemelech is saved from danger.
IN THE ninth year of Sedecias the king of Judah, the ^ Reg. 25. Iere 52.
tenth month, came Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and al his army to
Jerusalem, and they besieged it. And Possession of one gate gave sufficient
entrance to the whole army; whereupon the king and his chief nobles fled by a
posterne gate.
sat in the middle gate: Neregal, Sereser, Semegarnabu, Sarsachim, Rabsares,
Neregel, Serezer, Rebmag, and all the rest of the princes of the king of
Babylon. And when Sedecias the king of Judah, and all the He expostulated, and
justly reproved Sedecias for rebelling breaking his oath, showing ingratitude,
for so much as Nabu chodonosor had made him king, and reposed confidence in him.
judgments. And the king of Babylon killed the sons of Sedecias in that had
nothing at al, Nabuzardan the master of the soldiars let alone in the land of
Judah, and he gave them vineyards, and cesternes in that day. But Nabuchodonosor
the king of Babylon

CHAP. XL. The fifth part. Jeremy prophecieth the destruction of the Jews
going into Egypt; and of sundry nations for their idolattie, and cruelty.
Jeremy being permitted to go whither he will, 6. repayreth to Godolias,
governor of the country. 7. To whom also many Jews come from sundry
places. 13. Godolias warned of danger, does not believe it.
THE word that was made to Jeremy from our Lord, after This heathen prince
seeing the Jews afflicted for their sins, confesses the justice of God, not
sparing to punish his own elected people.
The Lord thy God has spoken this evil upon this place, and has brought it:
tarry: behold all the land is in thy sight, that which thou shall choose, and
whither it shall please thee to go, thither go. And come not with me: but dwell
with Godolias 4. Reg. 25.
them, and to their companions, saying: Fear not to serve the Chaldees: dwell
in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you. Behold
I dwell in Masphath, Being chief governor he promises according to his place
to defend the people, to answer for them, and to be their agent, and procurator
in whatsoever the Chaldees should command, or require of them.
the commandment of the Chaldees, that are sent to us: but you gather ye
vintage, and harvest, and oil, and lay it up in your vessels, and abide in
your cities which you hold. Yea and all the Jews, that were in Moab, Ismahel
the son of Nathanias to kill thee. And Godolias the son of Ahicam believed
them not. But Iohanan the son This thing.
this word: for thou speak false of Ismahel.

CHAP. XLI. Godolias with other Jews and some Chaldees are slain by Ismael,
sent from the king of Moabites: 8* ten are ransomed for their riches, 11.
Iohanan taking arms to revenge the slaughter, Ismael flies away, delivering
those whom he held captives: 17. and they prepare to flee into Egypt.
AND it came to pass in the seventh month, came Ismahel 4. Reg. 25.
the son of Nathanias, the son of Elisama of the kings blood, and the
nobles of the king, and ten men with him, to Godolias the son of Ahicam into
Masphath: and Such cruel tragedies are commonly atchiued by falsehood and
treachery, pretending freindshipe, and intending mischief.
they did eat bread there together in Masphath. And Ismahel Not sincerely
weping, but hypocritically fea^ing to lament the destruction of the Temple, and
City.
and weeping: and when he had met them, he said to them: Come to Godolias the
son of Ahicam. Who when they were Avarice tameth cruelty when nothing else
can.
he ceased, and slew not them with their brethren. And the whom he stroke for
Godolias, is the same It seems that Asa made this lake when he built Maspha.
3* R^g. 15. v. 22.
that king Asa made, for Baasa the king of Israel: the same did Ismahel the
son of Nathanias fill with them that were slain. And Ismahel This Iohanan and
his fellows rose up against Ismahel, lest otherwise they might have been judged
to have been of the same conspiracy against Godolias, being fugitives as
Ismael was.
But Iohanan

CHAP. XLII. Jeremy praying and consulting God, 7. answers that al those
which remain in Jerusalem shall be safe: 13. but those that go into Egypt
shalperish.
AND This consultation was piously begune seeking to know Gods will by his
prophet: but the same people erred grievously in not following his direction, as
he forsaw they would not* v. 21 And he further records that they rebelliously
opposed against him. chapter 43. v. 2.
there came all the Princes of the men of war, and great: And they said to
Jeremy the prophet: Let our prayer the thing.
word that we must do. And Whether it seem to bring prosperity or adversity.
good, or evil, we will obey pestilence: none of them shall remain, nor escape
from the face of the evil, that I will bring upon them. Because thus An oath of
execration. as Isa. 65. v. 15.
an oath, and into astonishment, and into a curse, and into reproach: and you
shall no more see this place. The It was a dull le fault, in that they neither
obeyed God speaking by his prophet, not stood to their own promise. v. 5.
you have not heard the voice of the Lord your God concerning al things, for
which he has sent me to you. Now therefore knowing you shall

CHAP. XLIII. The relics of the Jews, against Ieremies admonitions, go into
Egypt, 6. carrying Jeremy and Baruch with them. 8. where Jeremy prophecieth
that the king of Babylon shall spoil that land, 12. and their idols.
AND it came to pass, when Jeremy had finished speaking Sinful people are
easily changed to worse and worse from their good motions. For this insolent
calumniation is far from their promise, chapter 42. v. 5. and 6.
Thou speak a lie: the Lord our God sent thee not, saying: Go not into
Egypt, to dwell there. But Baruch the son soul, which Nabuzardan the prince
of the war had left with Godolias the son of Ahicam, the son of Saphan,
and Jeremy the prophet, and Baruch the son of Nerias. And The obstinate
people forced also Jeremy and Baruch to go with them. into Egypt.
Jeremy in Taphnis, Where both by words and other signs he prophecieth that
the king of Babylon will build his palace in the chief city of Egypt, and in
sign thereof lays great stones as the fundation of the same. As else where he
prophesied by factes. chapter 19. v. 10 c. 27. v. 2. c. 32 v. 7.
Take thee great stones in thy hand, and

CHAP. XLIIII. The Jews admonished by Jeremy to leave their idolatry, 15.
obstinatly answer, that they will persist therein. 20. whereupon he prophecieth
their destruction; 28. few escaping that return into Jerusalem. 29. And that
the king of Egypt shall also fall into his enemies hands.
THE word, that was made to Jeremy, to all the Jews, that It is a very
couenient motive, and ought to be effectual unto sinful natio ^s to see their
neighbors fallen into Heresy, Tur^isme or Paganism, for their obstinacy in
other sins.
You have they heard not, nor inclined their ear to return from their evils,
and not to sacrifice to strange gods. And mine indignation Amos* 9.
I will set my face upon you to evil: and I will destroy al Judah. And I will take
the remnant of Judah, which have set their Not al absolutely, but the greatest
part and well nere al: for some shall flee from thence. v 14. and 28.
from the least even to the greatest, by the sword, and by famine Chapter 42. v 18.
shall they dye: and they shall be for an oath, and for a miracle, and into
malediction, and into reproach. And I will thee: but doing we will do every
word, that shall proceed They reputed the moon as queen, and the sun as king
of the stars: more peculiarly men did sacrifice to the sun, and women to
the moon, but so that al did cooperate in both. For the children gathered
sticks the fathers kindled the fire, and the women tempered the dough, and
made cakes unto the queen of heaven. chapter 7. v. 18. 4. Reg. 23. v. 5.
the queen of heaven, and to offer libaments unto her, as we and our fathers
have done, our kings, and our princes in the cities of Judah, and in the
streets of Jerusalem, and we were filled with bread, and it was well with us,
and we saw no evil. But from that sword, and famine, til they be utterly
consumed. And they

CHAP. XLV. Jeremy reprehendeth Baruch for lamenting in affliction.
THE word, that Jeremy spoke to Baruch the son of Baruch seeing the people
much afflicted and understanding by Ieremies prophecy, that they should yet be
more punished, lamented the same.
sorrow to my sorrow: I have labored in my mourning, and have not found rest.
Thus says our Lord: Thus shall thou say to him: Behold, God granted not his
prayer for the people but for himself only.
thee thy life into safety in all places, whither soever thou shall go.

CHAP. XLVI. Jeremy prophecieth that the king of Babylon shall invade Egypt,
13. and waste the cites and land: 25. which shall again be repaired. 27. And
the relics of the Jews shall be delivered from sundry places of captivity.
THE word of our Lord that was made to Jeremy the As partly before so more
especially in the chapters following the prophet foresheweth the punishment of
diverse gentiles which were the chiefest enemies to the Jews.
the Gentiles, to Egypt against the stand in helmets, furbish the spears, put
on coats of maile. What then? It is the common manner of Prophets to speak in
the pretertence of things to come for the infallible certainty thereof.
I saw them fearful, and turning their backs, Egypt accounted itself
invincible and so the prophet ironiously calls it the virgin daughter, as in
this whole passage he speaks by the same figure ironia, willing them to do
those things which should nothing help nor profit them, as appea reth by the
next words: Thou do in vain multiply medicines. or remedies, and v. 5.
10. 16.
o virgin the daughter of Egypt: thou do in vain multiply medicines,
there shall not be health to thee. The Gentiles have heard thine ignominy, as
^h. 25. v. 38.
the dove. Call ye North, shall come to her. Her hyrelings also that conuersed
Seeing God will reduce the Egyptians from captivity, much less need the
Israelites to fear Gods promise, that he will restore them being his own
peculiar people.
thou my servant Jacob fear not, and be not I^a 43. and 44. Iere 30.
thou afraid Israel: because lo I will save thee from a far, and thy seed
out of the land of thy captivity: and Jacob shall return, and rest, and
prosper: and there shall be none to terrify him. And thou my servant Jacob
fear not, says our Lord:

CHAP. XLVII. The desolation of the Philistims, Tire, Sidon, Gaza, and Ascalon
is prophesied.
THE word of our Lord that was made to Jeremy the Isa. 14. and 21.
Gaza: Thus says our Lord: Behold there come up waters Babylon which is
northward from Palestina.
the North, and they shall be as ^torrent ouerflowing, and they shall cover the
earth, and the fulness thereof, the city and the inhabitants thereof: men shall
cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl at the noise of the pomp
of coming of the day, wherein all the Philisthims shall be wasted, and Tire, and
Sidon shall be destroyed with all the rest of their aids. For our Lord has
spoiled the Palesthines, the remnant of the i will of Cappadocia. Baldnes is come
upon Gaza.

CHAP. XLVIII. A prophecy of the vastation of Moab, 29. for their pride: 47.
but their capliuitie shall at last be released.
TO Moab thus says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel: Isa. 15. and 16.
Woe upon Nabo a chief city of Moab (as also Medaba, Isa. 15.) and Cariathaim*
Hesebon, Oronaim; and the rest, v. 18* etc. shall be destroyed.
Nabo, because it is wasted, and confounded: Cariathaim is taken: the strong
one is confounded, and has trembled. There is no more rejoicing in Moab:
against Iere. ^^
in the desert. For that thou have had confidence in thy munitions, A great
idol of the Moabites. Number 21. v. 29. 3. Reg. 11. v. 7 33 and 44. Reg. 23. v.
13. shall be overthrown; to show the vanity in trusting to false gods.
Chamos shall go into transmigration, his priests, and his princes together.
And the spoyler shall come to every city, days come, says our Lord: and I
will send unto him those that shall order and dispose of his pottes, and they
shall overthrow him, and shall empty his vessels, and dash their pottes one
against an other. And Moab shall be ashamed of Chamos, The kingdom of the ten
tribes trusted as vainly in their calf set up by Jeroboam in Bethel. 3. Reg.
12.
of Israel was ashamed of Bethel, wherein it had confidence. How say ye: We are
valiant, and strong men Moabites descending from Lot, Abraham's nephew derided
their kindred in miseries, and are therefore more severely punished.
Israel has been in derision unto thee: Men that brag of more strength then
they have, are resembled to an earthen wall, v. 36.
of the earthen wall that lament. Of the mourning of Iazer I will weep to thee o
vineyard of Sabama: thy branches have passed over the sea, they are come even
to the sea of Iaser: the spoiler has violently entered upon thine harvest, and
thy vintage. Joy and gladness is taken away out of Carmel, and out of the Isa.
16.
Land of Moab, and the wine out of the presses* I have taken away: the treader
of the grapeshal not sing the accustomed cheereful note. From the cry of
Hesebon unto Eleale, and Isa 15. Ezech. 7.
Amongst the Jews and others in those parts, cutting of their hear was a
sign of mourning, but with the Romans contrariewise mourners suffered their
hear grow long. Cicero Orat. pro Pub-Sestio, and pro On. Plancio.
baldnes, and every beard shall be shaven: in all hands binding together, and
upon every back cloth of hear. Upon all the house tops of Moab, and in the
streets Isa. 34.
he that shall come up out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare: for I will
bring upon Moab the year of their visitation, says our Lord. They stood in
the shadow of Hesebon that Number. 21
fled from the snare: because there came a fire out of Hesebon, and a flame out
of the mids of Sehon, and it has devoured part of Moab, and the top of the
children of rumult. Woe Al Nations shall be converted to the Church of Christ.
For other conversion of Moab, Ammon, Aelam, or the like, is not recorded in
holy scripture, nor other history.
in the last days, says our Lord. Hitherto the judgments of Moab.

CHAP. XLIX. The like vastation of Ammon (6. who shall be again restored.) 7.
destruction of Idumea: 27. of the Syrians, 28. Agarenes, 34. and Aelamites: 39.
whose captivity shall at last be released.
TO THE children of Ammon. Thus says our Lord: When the ten tribes were
carried into captivity, the Ammo ^ites possessed the inheritance of Gad by
intrusion as next neighbors, and of their kindred, as though all the Israelires
had been utterly destroyed.
has Israel no children? or has he not an heir? why then has And therefore
God expostulateth this injury and absurdity, that the people of Melchom, the
idol of the Ammonites (4. Reg. 23.) should invade the inheritance of his own
people.
Melchom by inheritance possessed Gad: and his people dwelt in his cities?
Therefore behold the days The Idumeans were worldly wise, but became foolish
in the way of serning God.
Why is wisdom Lord, that Bosra shall be into desolation, and into reproach, and
into a desert, and into malediction: and al her citics shall be into everlasting
desolations. I have heard a brute from our Abdi^ v. 1.
Lord, and a legate is sent to the Nations: Gather your selves together, and
come against her, and let us rise up into battle. For behold I have made thee a
little one in the Gentiles, Abd. v. 4.
thee down, says our Lord. And Idumea shall be desolate: As excessive
merueling at strange and unexpected events, makes men to be astonished: so if
the same do please them, they hiss thereat, signifiying contempt. Terms often
used by this prophet.
astonished, and shall hiss upon all the plagues thereof. As Sodom is overthrown
and Genesis 19. Iere. 50.
Gomorrha, and her neighbors says our Lord: there shall not a man dwell there,
and there shall no son of man inhabit it. Behold as a lion he shall come up
from the pride of Jordan, Job. 41.
Therefore hear ye the counsel of our Lord, which he has This prophecy
pertains to Syria, whereof Damascus is the chief city. Isa. 7. v. 8.
To Damascus. Emath is confounded and Cedar was one of Ismaels sons, and A^or
the chief city of the Agarens, to whom this prophecy pertains.
To and go ye up to Cedar, and waste the children of the East. They shall take
their tabernacles, and their flocks: their The Aelamites inhabiting in a part
of Persia, did assist the Chaldees against the Jews, and therefore were
punished.
Aelam, in he beginning of the kingdom of Sedecias king of Judah, saying: Thus
says the Lord of hosts: Behold I will break the bow This and the like
prophecies, are understood of the conversion of the Gentiles to Christ: begune
to be fulfilled, when the Holy Ghost descended. Act 2 v. 7.
But in the last days I will cause the captives of

CHAP. L. Babylon which afflicts the Israelites in captivity, 4. after their
reduction into their country, 8. shall be utterly destroyed.
THE word that our Lotd has spoken Babylonians and other Chaldees the greatest
enemies of the Jews were at last overthrown by the Medes and Persians.
of Babylon, and Isa. 13. and 21.
the Land of the Chaldees in the hand of Jeremy the prophet. Declare among
the Gentiles, and make it heard, lift Bell and Merodoch greatest idols of the
Chaldees could neither save their ^hen^s nor them selves.
Bell is confounded, Merodach is overcome, their sculptiles are confounded,
their idols are overcome. Because a nation is come up against them from the
North, which shall bring her Land into desolation: and there shall be none to
dwell therein, from man even to beast, and they are removed, and gone away. In
those days, and in that time, The Jews Returning from captiuirie wept for
joy; as Joseph did seeing his brethren. Genesis 42. 43. and 45.
weeping they shall hasten, and shall seek the Lord their God. Into Sion they
The Medes and Persians dwelling on the North to Babylon overthrew al Chaldea.
the North: and they shall be prepared against her, and thereby she shall be
taken: his arrow as a valiant man's that is a killer, shall nor return void.
And Chaldea shall be for a pray: all that waste The whole country of Chaldea is
made a pray to the spoylers.
Mother is confounded exceedingly, God resembled to a dove in meeknes, is
severe when he punishes enormious sinners, chapter 25. v 38 and 46. v. 16. Or, the
king of Babylon is resembled to a dove for his swiftnes.
dove every man shall return to his people, and every one shall slay to his
own land. Israel is a flock dispersed, lions have cast him out: first the king
The Assirians led the ten tribes into captivity. 4. Reg. 18. and the
Chaldees the two tribes. 4. Reg. 25.
of Assure did eat him: last this Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon has
spoiled his bones Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts the God things round
about him. Thus says the Lord of hosts: All the Jews of both kingdoms being
holden captives in strong hands.
The children of Israel, and the children of Judah fusteyne calumny together:
all that have taken them, hold them, they will not let them go. Their Were
redeemed by a stronger arm, by God him self.
strong redeemer, Genesis 19.
Lord: there shall no man dwell there, and son of man shall not inhabit it.
Behold a people comes from the North, As the king of Babylon like a lion
destroyed and devoured others: so at last others destroyed him, and al his
forces, coming suddenly upon him.
as a lion As when ^o^d^^ swelling ouerfloweth the land.
from the pride of Jordan to the strong beautifulnes: because I will make him
run suddenly to her: and who shall be a chosen one, whom I may appoint over
her? For who is like to me? and who shall abide me? and who is this Job. 4^.
pastor, that can resist my countenance? Therefore hear ye Apoc. 16.
of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is heard amongst the Nations.

CHAP. LI. More misories shall fall upon Babylon (11. by the Medes) with
destruction of her idols.
THVS says our Lord: In all this chapter the prophet amplifieth the same he
writ in the chapter precedent of the utter destruction of Babylon.
Behold I will raise upon Babylon a coat of male.
a brigandin, spare not her young men, kill al her host. And 2. Cor. 6.
every one save his own life, hold not your peace upon her iniquity: because
it is the time of revenge from our Lord, he will requite her the like. Babylon
is a golden cup in the Isa. 21. Apoc. 14.
her, take resine for her sorrow, if perhaps she may be healed. We have cured
Babylon, and she is not healed: let us forsake Amos. 6.
thee with men as it were with the locust, and upon thee shall the merry shoute
be song. He that made the earth in his strength, has prepared the world in his
wisdom, and with his prudence stretched out the heavens. He giving a Call
together al nations by public proclamation to fight against Babylon.
sanctify the Gentiles upon her: declare against her to the kings of Ararat,
Menni, and Ascenez: number Taphsar against her, bring the horse as the stinging
locust. Sanctify valiants of Babylon have ceased from battle, they have dwelt
in holds: their strength is devoured, and they are become as women: her
tabernacles are burnt, her bars are broken. A runner shall come to meet the
runner, and messenger to Sion in behalf of all the Jews, shows that the
Chaldees are justly plaged, for their cruelty against Gods people.
Nabuchodosor the king of Babylon has eaten behold the days come, and I will
visit upon the sculptiles of Babylon: and al her land shall be confounded and
al her slain shall fall in the mids of her. And the heavens and the This
Saraias was a principal Leuite, to whom it perteyned to read and publish the
words and writings of prophets.
the prince of prophecy. And Jeremy wrote all the evil, that was man even unto
beast, and that it be a perpetual wilderness. And when thou shall have
finished reading this book, Thus much Jeremy prophesied against Babylon.
Hitherto the words of Jeremy.

CHAP. LII. A Recapitulation of the taking of Jerusalem after two years siege.
7. king Sedecias taken in flight, 10. his children slain before his eyes, with
other nobles, 11. his eyes put out, and so lead into Babylon, 12. the Temple,
the Palace, and other houses burnt, the people carried into captivity (15. few
excepted to til the land) 17. the two brazen pillars, lauatorie, and all the
treasure taken away. 24. All the captives at diverse times four thousand six
hundred. 31. Finally king Ioachin is exalted in the court.
A Child of one and twenty years was Sedecias when he This whole history is
written more largely in the two last chapters of the fourth book of kings*
and in the last of Paralip pomenon.
began to reign: and eleven years he reigned in Jerusalem: and the name of
his mother was Amital, the daughter of Jeremy of Lobna. And he did evil in the
eyes of our to him judgments. And the king of Babylon killed 3. Reg. 7.
king Solomon had made in the house of our Lord: there was no weight of the
brass of al these vessels. And concerning pomegranates an hundred, were
compassed with little nets. And the master of the warefare took Saraias the
chief

THE ARGUMENT OF IEREMIES LAMENTATIONS.
THESE Lamentations, in Greek called Threni, and by the It is probable that
the Lamentations were written before his other prophecies.
Hebrew Rabhins entitled Cinoth, were written by Jeremy before the greatest
part of his other prophecies (as seems most probable to S. Ierom) 2* Paral.
35. v. 25.
and were first songue at the death of Josias king of Judah. Again when king
Sedecias with many others were taken captives, many also slain, and the
Temple and city of Jerusalem destroyed. But most especially he prophecieth the
Jews miserable estate, and just cause of Lamentation after Christ's coming, and
their rejecting him. And therefore his Church sings the same in the
Aniuersarie, or Commemoration of his Passion and Death; and most piously
inuiteth al sinners, both Jews and Gentiles, to return unto Christ our
Redemer, saying: Jerusalem, JERUSALEM conuertere ad Dominum Doleful speeches
are commonly uttered without connection of sentences.
Deum tuum. In this little book the diligent reader will easily observe many
doleful patheticalspeaches, powered out from a pensive heart, as in great
calamities it commonly happens, with little connection of sentences; but
otherwise four whole chapters are very artificially compiled in verse; not by
number of times, with measure of long and short syllables, as the Greeks and
Latins use, but after the Hebrew manner, observing number These Lamentations
are artificially composed. And besides the historical sense contene hidden
mysteries.
of syllables, and beginning every verse, with a distinct letter, from the
first to the last in order, with some small variety, of the Hebrew Alphabet.
Doubtless with great mysteries, as S. Ierom judges, and therefore explicateth
the significations, and certains connexions, of the two and twenty Hebrew
letters: as we have noted upon the 118. Psalm: but above the capacity of our
understanding. In the last chapter the Prophet omitting the observation of
Initial letters, in twenty two verses prays lamentably; as the whole people
shall pray in captivity.

THE THRENES, that is to say, THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMY THE PROPHET. These
words are not Ieremies, but added by the 70. or other Interpreter, as a
Preface to his Lamentations.
And it came to pass, after that Israel was brought into captivity, and
Jerusalem was desolate, Jeremy the prophet sat weeping, and he mourned with
this lamentation upon Jerusalem, and with a pensive mind sighing, and wayling
he said:
CHAP. I. The miserable change in Jerusalem made the beholders astonished.

Aliph.
is the lady of the Gentiles become as a widow: the princess of provinces is
made tributarie?

Beth.
her cheeks: there is none to comfort her of al her dear ones: al her
freindes have despised her, and are become her enemies.

Some Jews seeing their brethren led captives into Babylon, went into
Egypt, but there also were in misery.
gone into transmigration because of affliction, Ghimel.
and the multitude of bondage: she has dwelt among the Gentiles, neither has
she found rest: al her persecuters have apprehended her within the straites.

Daleth.
come to the solemnity: al her gates are destroyed: her priests sighing: her
virgins loathsome, and herself is oppressed with bitterness.

It is a desolate misery when enemies obtain dominion.
in the head, her enemies are enriched: He.
because our Lord has spoken upon her for the multitude of her iniquities: her
little ones are led into captivity, before the face of the afflicter.

^au.
her princes are become as Fleing from place to place to seek relife*
rams not fynding pastures: and they are gone without strength before the
face of the pursewer.

Zain.
preuarication of al her things worthy to be desired, which she had from the
days of old, when her people fell in the enemies hand, and there was no helper:
the enemies have seen her, and have scorned her sabbathes.

Jerusalem has sinned a sin, therefore is she made unstable: Heth.
all that did glorify her, have despised her, because they have seen her
ignominy: but she sighing is turned backward.

Idolatry which is spiritual adultrie.
filthiness is on her feet, neither has she remembered Teth.
her end: she is pulled down excedingly, not having a comforter: see o Lord
mine affliction, because the enemy is exalted.

Iod.
to be desired: because she has seen the Gentiles enter into her sanctuary,
of whom thou gave commandment that they should not enter into thy church.

Caph.
al precious things for meat to refresh the soul, see o Lord and consider,
because I am become vile.

Lamed.
sorrow like to my sorrow: because he has made First Nabuchodonosor took away
much treasure 4 Reg 24 afterward his captain Nabuzardan spoiled al 4 Reg. 25.
vintage of me, as our Lord has spoken in the day of the wrath of his fury.

Mem.
taught me: he has spread a net for my feet, he has turned me backward: he
has made me desolate, all the day consumed with sorrow.

Nun.
together in his hand, and put upon my neck: my strength is weakened: our Lord
has given me into the hand, from which I can not rise.

Samech.
the mids of me: he has called a time against me, to destroy mine elect: our
Lord has trodden the winepresse to the virgin the daughter of Judah.

Ai^.
because a comforter is made far from me, converting my soul: my children are
become desolate because the enemy has prevailed.

Phe.
her: our Lord has commanded against Jacob, round about him are his enemies:
Jerusalem is become as a woman polluted with menstrous floores among them.

Sade.
wrath: hear I beseech al ye peoples, and see my sorrow: my virgins, and my
pong men are gone into captivity.

I have called Egypt wherein the Jews trusted to sinde aid, could not, or at
least, did not help them Iere 2. v. 18. and 37. v. 4. and 6.
my freindes, they have deceived me: my Coph:
priests and my ancientes are consumed in the city: because they have sought
meat for themselves, to refresh their soul.

Res.
heart is ouerturned in myself, because I am full of bitterness: the sword kills
abroad, and at home it is At home i^ famine.
like death.

Sin.
me: al mine enemies have heard mine evil, they have rejoiced, because thou
have done it: thou have brought a day of consolation, and they shall be made
like to me.

Tha^.
thou have vintaged me for all mine iniquities: for my sighings are many, and
my heart is sorrowful.

CHAP. II.
Punishment permitted by God is truly ascribed to him as his fact.
has our Lord in his fury covered the daughter Aleph.
of Sion with darkness: cast forth the noble one of Israel from heaven to the
earth, and has not remembered the footestoole of his feet in the day of his
fury.

Beth.
the beautiful things of Jacob: he has destroyed in his fury the munitions
of the virgin of Judah, and cast it down to the ground: he has polluted the
kingdom, and the princes thereof.

Streingth and forces are called horns, so every horn signifies al their
strength.
every horn of Israel in the wrath of G^imel.
fury: he has turned away his right hand backward from the face of the
enemy: and he has kinled in Jacob as it were the ^yre of a flame devouring
round about.

Daleth.
hand as an adversary: and he has killed al, that was fair to behold in the
tabernacle of the daughter of Sion, he has powered out his indignation as fire.

H^.
headlong, he has cast down headlong al her walls: he has destroyed the
munitions thereof, and has replenished in the daughter of Judah the humbled man
and humbled woman.

Van.
down his tabernacle: our Lord has brought festiuitie and sabbath in Sion to
oblivion: and king and priest into reproach, and into the indignation of his
fury.

Our Lord has rejected, he Suffered his Sanctuary to be polluted.
has cursed his sanctification: Zain.
he has delivered the walls of the towers thereof into the hand of the enemy:
they have made a noise in the house of our Lord, as in a solemn day.

^^th.
Sion: he has streched out his cord, and has not turned away his hand from
destruction: and the forewal has mourned, and the wall is destroyed together.

Te^^.
broken ber bars: her king and her princes in the Gentiles: there is no law,
and her prophets have not found vision from our Lord.

Iod.
ground, they have held their peace: they have sprinkled their heads with
dust, they are girded with hear clothes, the virgins of Jerusalem have cast
down their heads to the ground.

Caph.
my liver is powered out on the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people, when the little one, and the sucking faynted in the streets of the
town.

Lamed.
when they faynted as the wounded in the streets of the city: when they yielded
up the ghostes in the bosom of their mothers.

Me^.
o daughter of Jerusalem: whereto shall I make thee equal, and comfort thee o
virgin daughter of Sion? For great is thy destruction As the sea exceeds al
other waters, so the affliction of Jerusalem surpasses other afflictions,
which is spoken by hyperbole, to signify the grenousnes thereof.
as the sea: who shall heal thee?

Nu^.
neither have they opened thine iniquity, to provoke thee to penance, but they
have seen false burdens and banishements for thee.

Samech.
thee: they have hissed, and moved their head upon the daughter of Jerusalem,
saying: Is this the city of perfect beauty, the joy of all the earth?

Phe.
have hissed, and gnashed with the teeth, and have said: We will devour: Lo
this is the day, which we expected: we have found it, we have seen it.

Our Lord has done the things that he meant, he has Ai^.
accomplished his word, which he commanded from the days of old: he has
destroyed, and has not spared, and he has made the enemy joyful over thee,
and has exalted the horn of thine adversaries.

Sade.
daughter of Sion: Shede tears as a torrent by day, and night: give no rest to
thyself, neither let the aple of thine eye cease.

Coph.
power out thy heart as waters before the sight of our Lord: lift up thy hands
to him for the life of thy little ones, which have fainted for famine in the
head of al high ways.

Res.
This happened before in Samaria. 4. Reg 6 and in the siege of Jerusalem, by
Titus and Ves pasian. Joseph. lib 7. and 8. de bello Iudaico.
shall women then eat their own fruit, little ones of the measure of a spanne?
is the priest, and the prophet slain in the sanctuary of our Lord?

Si^.
virgins and my yongmen are fallen by the sword: thou have killed in the day of
thy fury: thou have strooken, More severely then thou art accustomed.
neither have thou had mercy.

Tha^.
should terrify me round about, and there was none in the day of the fury of
our Lord, that escaped and was left: whom I brought up, and nourished, mine
enemy has consumed them.

CHAP. III.
Jeremy him self felt his part of this affliction.
that see my poverty in the rod of his indignation. Aleph.


Aleph.
light.

Aleph.
hand all the day.

Beth.
my bones.

Beth.
with Jerusalem was ransaked by Nabuchodonosor.
gaul, and and worse by Nabuzardan.
labor.

Beth.


Ghimel.
he has aggrauated my fetters.

Ghimel.
prayer.

Ghimel.
subverted my paths.

He is become unto me a bear lying in wait: a lion in Dalei^^
secret places.

Daleth.
made me desolate.

Daleth.


He.


He.
the day.

He.
me with wormwood.

He describes his grievous pains, as if his teeth were broken one by one.
has broken my teeth by number, he has fed Va^*
me with ashes.

Va^.
things.

The end of my life is come.
perished, and mine hope from Va^.
our Lord.

Zain.
and the gual.

Zain:
in me.

Zain.


Heth.
his commiserations have not failed.

Gods mercies are every day renewed.
New in the morning, great is thy fidelite. Heth.


Heth.
him.

Teth.
that seeks him.

Which God will give.
of God. Teth.


Teth.
youth.

Iod.
lifted himself above himself.

Iod.


Especially understood of Christ. Mat. 26.
shall give the cheek to him that strikes him, he Iod.
shall be filled with reproaches.

Caph.


Caph.
to the multitude of his mercies.

God punishes his servants not to hur^ them but for their good.
from his heart, and cast of the Caph.
children of men.

To stamp under his fete all the prisoners of the earth. Lamed.


Lamed.
Highest.

Lamed.
known.

Mem.
not commanding it?

Mem.
neither evil things, The speech of such as deny Gods providence.
nor good.

Mem.


Nun.


Nun.
the heavens.

Nun.
thou art inexorable.

Samech.
killed, and not spared.

Samech.
pass.

Samech.
mids of the peoples.

Phe.


Preaching of false prophets has brought these evils upon us*
Prophecy is made unto us, fear, and snare, and destruction. Phe.


Phe.
of the daughter of my people.

Ain.
there was no rest:

Ain.


Ain.
city.

Sade.
cause.

Sade.
upon me.

Sade.
undone.

Coph.


Coph.
my sobbings, and cries.

Coph.
have said: Fear not.

Thou have judged o Lord the cause of my soul, redemer of Res.
my life.

Judge thou that which they have judged unjustly.
judge Res.
my judgment.

Res.
me.

Sin.
against me.

Sin.
against me all the day.

Sin.
psalm.

Tha^*
to the works of their hands.

Give them the pain of hearty sorrow:
a shild of heart VVherwith thou afflictest the wicked.
thy labor. Tha^*


Tha^*
under the heavens o Lord.

CHAP. IIII.
VVheras the Temple before gli^tered with gold, now there appeared burnt smokie
walls, and pitiful ruins.
the gold darkened, the best color changed, the Al^p^^*
stones of the sanctuary dispersed in the head of al streets?

Beth*
the principal gold: how are they reputed as earthen vessels, the work of the
potters hands?

Lamia has a face like a woman, a body as other bru^^^h beasts, is cruel to
others, yet kind to her own brood: but w^men of Jerusalem in extreme
disstresse were cruel to their own children
the lamiaes have opened their breast, they have G^im^^*
given suck to their young, the daughter of my people is cruel, as as the
ostrich forsaking her eggs.
the ostrich in the desert.

Dal^th.
mouth for thirst: the little ones have asked bread, and there was none that
brake it unto them.

H^.
that were brought up in scarlet, have embraced the dung.

Va^*
greater then the sin of Sodom: which was overthrown in a moment, and hands
took nothing in her.

Z^^^.
^u^dier then the old yuorie, fayrer then the sapphire.

One could not know an other, though they were acquanted before.
not ^^^^.
known in the streets: their skin has cloven to their bones, it is
withered, and is made as wood.

It was better with them that were slain with the sword, ^^^^.
then with them that were killed by famine: because these pyned away consumed
by the barrennes of the country*

Women being by nature pitiful, were cruel to their own children
pitiful women have sodden their own Io^.
children: they were made their meat In the siege of Jerusalem.
in the destruction of In Hebrew phrase cities are called the daughters of the
country.
the daughter of my people.

Caph.
the wrath of his indignation: and he has kindled a fire in: Sion, and it has
devoured the fundations thereof.

Lamed.
did not believe, that the adversary and the enemy should enter in by the
gates of Jerusalem.

False prophets were called by the name of prophets, as they seemed in the
world to be.
prophets, and the iniquities of her ^^m.
priests, which have shed the blood of just men in the mids of her.

Nun.
blood: and when they could not, they held their skirtes.

Sa^ech.
hence, touch not: for they brawled, and were moved: they said among the
Gentiles: He will add no more to dwell among the^.

Phe.
to respect them: they have not reverenced the faces of the priests, neither
had they pity on the ancients.

Ain.
help, when we looked attentive to a nation, that was not able to save.

Sade.
draws nere: our days are accomplished, because our end is come.

Coph*
upon the mountains they pursued us, in the desert they lay in wait against
us.

This pertains either to king Josias ^^^ne by the Ae^^p^i^ns. 2. Par. 35 or
to Sedecias taken by the Chaldees. Mystically of Christ our Savior. I^. 53. v.
5. ^. Aug. li. 18. c* 33 (...).
Christ our Lord is taken in our Res.
sins: to whom we have said: In thy shadow shall we live among the Gentiles.

Sin.
the Land of Hus: to thee also shall the cup come, thou shall be made drunken,
and naked.

Th^^*
add no more to transport thee: he has visited thine iniquity o daughter of
Edom, he has discovered thy sins.

CHAP. V. The The prophet foreseing in spirit their future state as if it had
been present, prayed in the same manner, as the whole people should pray when
they were in such calamity.
prayer of Jeremy the Prophet.
REmember o Lord what is fallen to us: behold, and regard Many were orphans
with out fathers, and al were deprived of their king who was as a father of all the people.
pupils without father: We have put ourselves to work and travel in strange
countries to get bread to eat.
have given our hand to Egypt, and to the Assyrians, in danger of thy svvord.
at the face of the sword in the desert. Our skin was They were made to grind
^^nked in the ^ille:
unchastly: and the children fell And beaten with staves.
in wood. The They lost the glory of a kingdom, and were subject to strange
and barbarous nations.
crown of our head As Iere 31. v. 18. and S. Augustine li, de Gratia. and lib.
arb. c. 2. 4. etc.
Convert us o Lord to thee, and we shall be converted: Having so seuerly
punished us, we beseech thee now to cease from more.
thou art angry against us excedingly.

THE ARGUMENT OF BARVCHS PROPHECY.
MANY ancient Fathers supposed this Prophecy to be Ieremies: though none
doubted but Baruch his scribe was the writer This prophecy is supposed by many
to be Ieremies.
thereof. So S. Xistus Epist. ad omnes fideles. S. Ireneus, li. 5. c. 35. S.
Clement of Alexandria, li. 1. c. 10. and li. 2. c. 3. Pedag. S. Cyprian, li. 2.
c. 5. and 6. contra Iudaeos. Eusebius Coesariensis, li. de Propheticorum libor.
appellationibus, Cap. de Ieromia. and li. 6. c. 19. Demonst. Euangel.
Lactantius, li. 4. c. 13. Divine. Instit. The first Council of Nice, li. 2. fol.
105. and 109. S. Hilarie, li. 5. de Trinit. sub finem. S. Cyril of Jerusalem,
Catechesi. 4. and 11. and de Concursu Domini. S. Basil. li. 4. cont. Eunomium.
S. Ambrose, li. de fide. c. 7. cont. Arianos. li. de Paenit. c. 8. and li. 3.
Examer. c. 14. S. Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 49. deside. and Epist. 2. ad
Cled^nium. S. Epiphanius, cont. Nazaraeos. and cont. Ebionaeos. S. Chrysostom,
Ser. de Trinit. and aduers. Gentiles. S. Augustine, li. 18. c. 33. de Ciuit. and
Quest. Vet. and Noui Testat. q. 102. S. Prosper. par. 2. c. 9. and p. 3. c. 3.
de promiss. and predict. S. Theodoretus, Dialogo. 1. Eranistes. (who also
writes Comentaries upon this book, as upon divine Scripture) c. 2. v. 9.
These and others allege this Prophecy, as Ieremies. By others accounted
Baruchs.
Some also under the name of Baruch. As Origin, li. 2. c. 3. Periarch. S. Cyril
of Alexandria, li. 10. in Iulianum, S. Gregory Nyssen, Orat. 1. de pauperibus
amandis. S. Athanasius, Orat. 2. cont. Arianos. Though in his Synopsi he
mentions not Baruch, yet he, as also S. Augustine, l. 2. c. 8. Doct. Christ.
S. Gelacius, did. 15. and others in their Catalogues of Canonical Scriptures,
comprehend this book under the name of Jeremy. But whether Baruch was the
immediate Auctor under God, or the writer thereof By all holden to be Canonical
Scripture.
as of an other man's Prophecy (as the Evangelists writ the words of
Christ, and others, in the Gospels, and in the Acts of the Apostles) always
it is certain, the Holy Ghost directed him, that he could not err in writing
it. And the ancient Fathers, and Councels ever accepted this book as Divine
Scripture. The Council also of Laodicea, in the last Canon, expressly names
Baruch, Lamentations, and Ieremies Epistle. And lastly The Councels of
Florence, de Union Armenorum; and of Trent. Sess. 4. expressly define that
Baruch is Canonical Scripture. In the Greek Why S. Ierom urges it not against
the Jews. The contents.
this book is placed before the Lamentations. which S. Ierom not finding in
Hebrew, nor in the Canon of the Jews, urges it not against them. Yet
testifies that he found it in the vulgate Latin Edition, and that it
contains Pr^fat. Ierem.
many things of Christ, and the later times. According to the historical
sense, the auctor in five chapters exhorts the Jews to repentance, and
patience, prophesying that they should be brought into more distress and
captivity, then as yet they were; but should afterward be released. The sixth
chapter is Ieremies Epistle.

THE PROPHECY OF BARVCH.
CHAP. I. The Jews in Babylon having heard Baruchs book read, 6. send the
same, with money to Jerusalem, 10. requesting their brethren there to offer
sacrifice, and to pray for the king and prince of Babylon; and for them, 15.
acknowleging their manifold sins.
AND these be the words of the book, that Baruch the The whole time of taking
Ieru alem endured eleven years before it was burned. In the fifth year of
which space this book was written For as yet there were Priests in Jerusalem:
v. 7. some holy vessels, v. 8. the Altar, v 10* and the temple, v. 1^.
the time that the Chaldees took Jerusalem, and burnt it with fire. And Baruch
read the words of this book or, manah sacrifice.
manna, and offer for sin at the altar of the Lord our God and pray ye for
the life of Nabuchodonosor the eyes, that we may live under the shadow of
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, and under the shadow of Balthazar his
son, and Seeing it was Gods will they should be in captivity, they desired
rather to be under the Chaldees then any other foreine nation.
may serve them many days, and may find grace in their sight. And for our
selves pray ye to the Lord our corrupted in judgment.
we might not hear his voice. And many evils and maledictions

CHAP. II. The same captives further confess, that their calamities are justly
comen upon them for their iniquities, 11. and therefore lamentably pray for Gods
mercy, as he promised by Moses to penitents.
FOR the which thing the Lord our God has established That this happened in
the siege of Jerusalem, is noted before ^^nent. 2. v. 20. ^^, chapter ^. v. 10.
should eat the flesh of them under the hand of all the kings, that are round
about us into reproach, and into desolation among al peoples, into which our
Lord has dispersed us. And we are made underneath, Deuteronomy. 28. v. 43.
and not above: because we have sinned to the Lord our God, in not obeying his
voice. To the Lord our God justice: Gods commandments are commonly called
justices ( Psa. 118.) and many other places because by observing or not
observing the commandments men are made just, or unjust.
justices. Let thy wrath be turned away from us: because Iere. 2. v. 8.
have sent thy wrath, and thy fury upon us, as thou have spoken by the hand
of thy servants the prophets, saying: Thus the king of Babylon: I will make you
to fail out of the cities of Judah, and from without Jerusalem, and I will take
from:: The tempi^ was not as yet destroyed but the prophet speaks of it, as
he saw it should come to pass.
famine, and by sword, and by casting forth. And have made Deuteronomy. 28. v. 62.
the children of Israel, saying: If you will not hear my and. 32. v. 20.
I know that the people will not hear me. for it is a people of a stiff neck:
and they shall be converted to their heart in the land of their captivity: and
they shall know that I am the The law of Moses ceased after Christ, but
Christ's law continues to the end of the world.
an I^. 31. v. 3^. etc.
other testament everlasting, that I be their God, and they shall be my people:
and I will no more move my people, the children of Israel from the land, that I
have given them.

CHAP. III. With further confession of their sins, 8. they acknowledge their
just captivity: 12. because they have left true wisdom: 16. which was given
to their fathers: 23. not to rich men, or mighty giants, 29. but to those that
serve God. 34. whom the stars obey. 36. with a clear prophecy of Christ.
AND now o Lord omnipotent, God of Israel, the soul Men in sins and misery
are as if they were dead ( v. 11.) yet by Gods mercy may receive new grace of
spiritual life.
the dead of Israel, and of their children, that have sinned before thee, and
have not heard the voice of the Lord their God, and evils have stoocke fast to
us. Remember not The Church reads this prophecy as other divine Scriptures
in the Eues of Easter, and Pentecost; according to the most ancient Roman use.
Hear Israel the commandments of life: harken with Shall they not find the
fruit of their works?
neither is there invention of their works? They are destroyed, and are gone
men saw the light, and dwelt upon the earth: but the way of discipline they
knew not, neither understood they the ^abulatores, those that did frame, or
explicate moral examples, for instruction of manners, were worthily esteemed in all ages not such as seaned false, and ridiculous gods, with their filthy and
wicked acts, of which S. Augustine writes against Varro. l 6. c. 5, 6. and 7.
deciuit
fablers, and searchers of prudence and understanding: but the way of wisdom
they have not known, neither have they remembre^d the paths thereof. O Israel
how great is the house of It is impossible to find true wisdom without Gods
grace, and by his grace it is easily ^ound. Deuteronomy. 30. v. 1^. Mat. 11. v. 30. 1.
Ioa. 5. v. 3.
These did not our Lord choose, By this text most of the Fathers cited in the
argument of this book prove Christ to be God against Jews Paganes, and
Heretics.
This is out God, and there shall none other be esteemed

CHAP. IIII. Gods people neglecting his grace offered to them, more then to
other nations, 6. are severely punished, 15. by captivity: 18. but are
reserved 22. and repenting shall be released: 31. and their enemies destroyed.
THIS is Wisdom whereof he spoke in the former chapter (v. 12.) is the law and
commandment of God.
the book of the commandments of God, Jacob, and take hold of it, walk by the
way to the brightness of it, against the light thereof. Deliver not thy glory to
an Deuteronomy. ^8. v. 49. Iere. ^. v. 15.
tongue: which have not reverenced the ancient, nor pitied Jerusalem exhorts
her children to patience in their just punishment, assuring them of Gods mercy
and relaxation.
as For as the neighbors of Sion have seen your captivity

CHAP. V. A consola^orie prophecy to Jerusalem, that her children shall be
reduced with joy from captivity.
PVT of Jerusalem the robe of mourning, and of thy vexation: Mercy is here
called justice in respect of Gods promise, for although ^^ promise was of his
only mercy, yet the performance proceeds also from his justice.
of justice, and will put upon thy head the mitre of everlasting honor. For God
will show his brightness in about toward the East, and see thy children gathered
together from the rising of the sun to the going down, in the word of the
holy rejoicing at the memory of God. For they

CHAP. VI. Jeremy by his epistle forwarneth the Jews, that they shall be
captives in Babylon: and after seventy years shall be released: 3. exhorting
them, all that time to avoid idolatry: 7. largely showing the vanity of idols.
A COPY of the Epistle that Jeremy sent to them that were Jeremy writ this
Epistle before the common people were in Babylon, but Baruch read it unto them
in Babylon, and so it was sent back to the rest, which were yet in Jerusalem.
to be led away captives into Babylon, by the king of Babylon, to tell them
according to that which was commanded him of God.

For the sins that you have sinned before God, you shall Iere 1^. v. 8. 9. etc.
be led away captive into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon. Being
entered therefore into Babylon, you Ten, being the firstarticle number,
signifies a general number; and so seven generations signify seven times
ten, that is, seventy years. Sometimes seven ^^ signific a generality,
because this whole world is counted by seven days: sometimes. 100. signify
the same; as Genesis 15. v 16. 400. years are called four generations.
seven generations: and after this I will bring you forth from thence Isa 44.
with peace. But now you shall see in Babylon gods of c Angel is d will ask
account of your souls. For their tongue polished by the craftesman, them
selves and they deck whores: and again when they receive it of the harlots,
they deck their gods. But these are not delivered c The Angel which guided
this people coming out of Egypt. Exo. 12. 33. protected them also in Babylon.
vessel being broken is made unprofitable: such also are their gods: they
being placed in the house, their eyes are full of d The innumerable absurdities
in forging and adoring false gods here recited by the prophet show how
foolish and sensles they are, that serve idols, or any images for gods.
which they can see none: but they are as beams in the house. And they say
that the serpents which are of the earth, gnaw Idolaters imagining that sensles
idols had diuiue power, foolishly esteemed them of great value, and price.
al price are they bought, whereas there Is. 46. v. ^.
is no breath in them. As being without feet they are carried rent, and their
heads, and beard shaven, whose heads be bare. And they were crying before
their gods, as at the supper of the dead. The priests take away their
garments, no gods, but the works of men's hands, and no work of God is with
them. Whence then is it known, that they keeps nothing, so are their gods
of wood, and of silver, and laid over with gold. After the same sort also in a
garden

THE ARGUMENT OF EZECHIELS PROPHECY.
EZECHIEL a Priest, and a Prophet, and at last a (...), as Martyrol 10. Apri.
1. Maij.
Ezechiel and Jeremy like in many respects, prophesied for most part the
same things.
likewise Jeremy was, nere of the same age, prophesied for the most part the
same things; but Jeremy began to prophecy a child; in Jerusalem, and
finally in Egypt: Ezechiel when he was about thirty years old, in Babylon,
where he was in captivity with King lechonias and others. The 4. Reg.
44.
beginning and end of his Prophecy are so obscure, that amongst Ep. ad
the Hebrews (says S. Ierom) none may read these parts, nor Paulin.
the beginning of Genesis, before the age of thirty years. The three first
chapters conteyne a wonderful vision, wherein the Prophet saw God Chapter 1.
The contents divided into fine parts.
as sitting in a glorious throne, resting as it were upon four living
creatures, drawing strangely four wheels. Secondly, in one and twenty
chapters following

THE PROPHECY OF EZECHIEL.
CHAP. I. The first part. The prophets first vision, and mission to preach.
By the river of Chobar nere Babylon, Ezechiel sees in vision a tempestious
whirlewinde, 5. and strange shapes, 10. of a man, a lion, an ox, and an eagle:
15. of four wheels, 22. and of a man sitting gloriously on a throne in the
firmament.
AND The conjunction, And, being the first word, either joins the context to
the title, or (as S: Gregory expounds it) the exterior words uttered to the
interior reveled to the prophet in spirit.
IT came to pass in Either the thirtith year of his age; or the 30. since the
captivity was prophesied, in the reign of Josias. 4. Reg. 22. v. 18.
the thirtith year, in ^animahum.
their look: the similitude of a man in them. There were four They turned not
about (v. 12.) but having faces on every side were ready to go every way.
returned not when they went: but every one went before his face. And the
thither they went: neither did they return when they went: neither did they
return when they walked. And the similitude S. Gregory expounding this vision
of the four Evangelists, or of the whole new Testaments teaches that the old
and new Testaments are each in the other; both teaching the same things in
diverse manners. ho. 6. in Ezech.
a wheel in the mids of a wheel. By their four parts going they went: and
they returned In this chapter the prophet descriheth four parts of a vision
which he saw at one time: of a whirlewinde ^ 4. of four living creatures* v 5*
of four wheels v 15. and of a man sitting in a throne in the firmament v 16.
For understanding of al which, learned large commentaries do hardly suffice
above the firmament, that hung over their the form of amber, as the
resemblance of fire within it round about: from his loins and upward, and from
his loins downward, I saw as it were the resemblance of fire glistering round
about. As the form of the bow when it is in a cloud on

CHAP. II. The Prophet terrified with the vision, is encoreged by Gods spirit.
3. And is sent to preach 9. penance, and the service of God.
THIS was the vision of the similitude of the glory of Our Savior of his
great humility and his singular love toward mankind, often calls himself
the Son of man, but no other so called him. Here the Angel most frequently
calls Ezechiel the Son of man, as well to distinguish between Angelical and
humane kind, as in honor of Christ, of whom this and other prophets were
figures: but why Ezechiel, and scarce any other ( Dan. 8. v. 17.) had this
title is hard to explicate.
Son of man stand upon thy feet, and I will speak with thee: And
Lamentations perteine to the penitent:
lamentations, and Songue to the praises of God
a song, and VVoe to the desperate damned.
woe.

CHAP. III. Against a stubborn people, to whom he must preach, 8. the prophet
is streingthened, 12. by increase of spirit: 17. charged to execute his
office. 22. But first to be silent for a time,
AND he said to me: Son of man whatsoever thou shall By this Metaphor of
eating a book is signified, that the prophet received revelations from (...),
as appears. v. 10. etc.
eat this volume, and going speak to the children of Israel. And I opened my
mouth, and he fed me By this place and the like ( Mat. 11. v. 21.) it seems
that the same grace being offered to diverse persons, some do accept it, and
some do not: but the cause of difference is by more grace added to the former
which was sufficient before, and by this super add^d^tion is made effectual.
That God gives this abundance to some is of his mercy, and that he gives it
not to others is no injury. To 9.
they would hear thee. But the house of Israel and live: the same impious man
shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at thy hand. But if thou
denounce I will take away my grace from him, in punishment of his reuolting from
me.
will lay a stumbling block before him, he shall dye: because thou have not told
him, he shall dye in his sin, and his justices which he has done shall not be
in memory: but his blood I will require at thy hand. But if A preachers office
is as well to warn the just to persevere in justice as to admonish the wicked
to repent, and return to God.
thou warn the just that the just sin

CHAP. IIII. The 2. part. The destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, with the
captivity of the people for their sins.
The future siege of Jerusalem is discribed in a brick. 4. The time of
captivity of Israel, and of Judah is signified by sleeping. 390. days on the
left side, and forty on the right. 9. Famine is also signified by bread
sprinkled with dung.
AND thou son of man take thee a brick, and thou shall To make a banck, a
ditch is also made, ordinarily above three foot deep, and so the earth cast up
toward the town besieged make covert passage about seven foot in height by
which trench men approach more safely toward the wall, where they purpose to
make battery, breach, and assault.:: It is very hard to explicate, how the
ten tribes were 390. years in captivity.
a bancke, and pitch camps against it, and place engines round about. And thou
take thee an and it shall be besieged, and thou shall compass it: which is a
sign to the house of Israel. And thou shall sleep upon thy And from what time
the 40. years are counted, seeing it is certain, that the two tribes were in
captivity. 70. years. See S. Ierom in Ezech.
forty days. a day for a year, a day, I say, for a year I have given thee.
And thou shall turn As a staff aydeth the weak, so bread sustaineth al men.
the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread in weight, and in
carefulnes: and they shall drink water in measure, and in distress. That bread
and water failing,

CHAP. V. By the hear of the prophets head and beard powled, and diversely
destroyed, 5. is signified the destruction of the Jews. 10. The fathers and
sons eating one an other, 12. in extremity of pestilence, famine, and sword.
AND thou son of man take thee a sharp knife, shauing In other cities of
Judah nere Jerusalem.
the circuit thereof: but the other third part thou shall scatter into the
wind, and I will draw the sword after them. And thou shall Jeremy, Lament. 2
and Bar^ch. ch 2 prophesied of the same distress by samine in the siege of
Jerusalem.
the fathers shall eat the sons in the mids of thee, and the sons shall
eat their fathers: and I will do judgments in thee, and I will scatter al thy
remnant into every wind. Therefore I live, says our Lord God: Unless for that
thou have in the mids of thee and a third part of thee shall fall by the sword
round about thee: and thy third part I will scatter into every wind, and I will
draw a sword after them. And I will accomplish Blasphemy is here taken
improperly, and signifies that other nations shall not only reproach Jerusalem,
but also ^a^^^ and scoff at her miseries.
blaspemie, an example, and astonishment amongst the nations, that are round
about thee, when I shall have done judgments in thee in fury, and in
indignation, and in the rebukes of anger. I the Lord have spoken: When I shall
send very

CHAP. VI. For idolatry the people shall be diversely destroyed: 8. til the
relics convert to God.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: (...) was most especially
committed in mountains, ^^ ^^lles, and therefore both idols and idolaters were
destroyed in the same places.
the mountains Gods perpetual providence still preserves some relics that
serve him sincerely, and before those depart from this world,
I will leave in you them, that shall escape the sword in the Gentiles, when I
shall disperse you in the lands. And your delivered shall remember me amongst
others do repent and return to God.
they shall mislike with them selves upon the evils which they had done in all
their abominations. And they shall know that I the Lord

CHAP. VII. Miseries shall be so great, 8. and shall come so presently, 16. that
few shall escape, and those also shall be in great terror, and affliction.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: By Israel is ^ere meant all the country of Jury, as appears by the general peach following. the four
quarters of the land.
of Israel: The end is come, come is the end upon the four quarters of the
land. Now an end upon thee, and of mountains. Now streightway I power out my
wrath In the year of Iubeley the lands which were sold, returned to the
seller or to his heirs* Leuit. 2^ but in the captivity there could be no such
recovery.
shall not return Adorning of idols with much gold was occasion that the
Chaldees spoiled the city more eageily.
a scandal of their iniquity. And the ornament of their Jewels they have
turned (...).
secret: and spoylers shall enter into it, and shall contaminate it. Make a
conclusion: because the land is full of the judgment of blood, and the city
sul of iniquity. And I will bring the worst of the nations, and This and other
like places signify sea^sit^e of Priests to teach the law, in the captivity,
but not an universal destruction or want of al. Io^ even then also God
conserved some relics, as appears, Malach. 2.
the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancientes. The king
shall mourn, and the prince shall

CHAP. VIII. In an other vision the prophet sees innumerable most abominable
idolatries, 11. committed by all sorts of men, and women, 17. for which God will
no longer spare them.
AND it came to pass in After that the prophet had* ested in his house. ^9^.
days in which time* when soever he s^^p^, he lay only on his left side, and
4^. days in like manner on his right side, which was in all. 430. days, which
make one year two month, and five days, the next day he had this other
vision before he went forth to preach.
the sixth year, in the sixth month, ^^. 3. 7. ^^.
Israel according to the vision which I had seen in the filde. And he said to
me: Son of man, lift up thine eyes to the he said to me: Son of man dig
the wall. And when I had dug the wall, there appeared one door. And he said to
Wicked men either do not believe, or little consider Gods knowledge, and
providence, of al things, and so fall into idolatry.
they say: Our Lord sees us not, our Lord has forsaken the earth. And he said
to me: Yet turning Rabbi David and Rabbi Solomon write that the image of this
idol being made of brass had eyes of lead, and when the brass was made hot,
by fire secretly put under, the lead beginning to melt, the image seemed to
vvepe, whereupon the women of compassion ^id weep with their goddess.
Adonis. And he said to me:

CHAP. IX. The prophet seeing six men, by Gods commandment, kill al, 6. that are
not marked with THAV in their forehead: 8. lamenteth so great a slaughter. 9.
and God answers, that their iniquity may not be longer tolerated.
AND The prophet being first instructed by a voice that the destruction is nere
at hand:
he cried in mine ears with a loud voice, saying: has Vas intersectionis.
a weapon of slaughter in his hand. And behold forthwith in the same vision,
(...) men coming to kill the idolaters.
six men came from the way of the upper gate, which looks to the North: and
every man's weapon of destruction in his hand: Yet one is s^^t before the six
to ^a^ke some, whom Gods mercy vvil save from the slaughter, because he never
suffers his Church to be wholy destroyed.
one man also in the mids of them was clothed with linen ga^m^^^s, and the
ink^horne of a writer at his reins: and they entered in, and stood by the
brazen altar. And the glory of the Lord of Israel was taken up from the Mark
with
Thau upon the foreheades of the men that mourn, and lament upon all the
abominations, that are done in the mids thereof. And to them For abuses of
holy Sacrifices, Sacraments, and other sacred Rites, God suffers first
Churches and Monasteries to be destroyed, and clergy men and other religious
persons to be persecuted, and so punishment proceeds to other offenders as,
1. Pet. 4. v. 17. judgment begins at the house of God.
begin ye at my Sanctuary. They began therefore at the ancient men, which were
before the face of the house. And he said to them: Contaminate

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IX.
4. Sign Thau upon the sorchcades.] Most of the Hebrew Rabbis, as also the
Some translate, Sign a sign, or, set a mark upon the foreheades.
Septuagint* likewise ^^u^la, and Symmachus translate THAV according to the^
g(...) of the Hebrew word, a sign: as if it were commanded only in general
to se^te one sign or other, not any determinate certain sign or mark on
the foreheades of the men that mourn, and lament upon the abominations, that
are done in Jerusalem. But as well some other Hebrew Rabbis, with the Chaldee
Paraphrasis, as also Theodotion, and in manner al other ancient Latin
Interpreters, whom S Ierom follows, translate as in the vulgate Others
translate more distinctly: Sign Thau upon the foreheades. or Mark the
foreheades with Thau, or. T. That is with the letter which has the form of a
Cross. It was in the time of Ezechiel in figure, now is in remembrance of
Christ's Cross. The ancient Fathers testify the continual use of the sign of
the Cross in the Church.
Edition, Signa Thau super frontes viroru^ gementi^m, etc. Sign Thau upon the
foreheades of the men that mourn, etc. That is* mark their foreheades with
THEY, the last Hebrew letter: which in the old Hebrew characters, used even to
^* Ieroms time by the Samaritanes, has the similitude and form of a Cross.
So expressing a particular determinat sign; as when the Angel slew the first
borne of Egypt, the Israelites houses were distinctly marked with blood,
sprinkled on Exo. 1^.
the posts of their doors: mystically signifying our B. Saviors most sacred
blood to be shed for Redemption of man kind: so also this letter THAV bearing
the form of a Cross, formed in the foreheades of the mourners, signified the
Cross, whereon Christ our Lord should dye, and redeem us from si^^e. Which
sign, as it was then p^efiguratiue, and prophetical; so now it is
representative, and commemoratiue of our Redemption made by our B. Savior, on
the holy Cross. That we may truly glory in Christ, and that with our great
Apostle S. Paul, in CHRIST CRVCIFIED. With great reason therefore has the 1.
Cor. ^.
whole Church of Christ singularly esteemed, and continually used this holy
Sign of the Cross in all Di^^ne Mysteries, and godly works, even from the
Apostles time VVitnesses hereof are the ancient Fathers: S. Dionyse Ariopagite,
Eccles. Hierarch. c 2. reciting the sign of the Cross amongst other sacred
Rites in administration of Baptism: who also c. 5. and 6. makes like mention
of the same sign in making Priests, and professing of Religious persons.
Likewise S. Ireneus. li. 2. c. 42. describes the form of the Cross. S.
Justinius Martyr, Dialogo cum Tryphon^, shows livers figures in the old
Testament of the Cross. Tertullian, Aduersus Marcionem, testifies that the
Apostles, and all the faithful of Christ were signed in their foreheades with
the sign of THAV, the last of the Hebrew letters, bearing the form of a
Cross: the same (says he) with the Greek letter, TAV, and our Latin T. Who
further both in that place, and li* de corona ^^luis, and li^de resurrect.
carnis, testifies the most frequent use of this holy sign of the Cross
After him S Cyprian witnesses the same in his time. Epist* ad Tybaritanos.
li. ad Dem^tr^anum, and li. 1. ca. 8. Testimoniorum aduers. Iudaeos More
especially, li. 2. c. 22. proves by this place amongst other holy Scriptures,
that in this sign of the Cross, is health to all that are signed therewith in
the foreheades. S. Chrysostom. li. cont Gentiles, Amongst other demonstrations,
shows by the honor, and daily use of the Cross, that Christ Honor of the
Cross proves Christ to be God.
is God; because none but God could make a thing, which before was so
execrable, to be now every where so highly esteemed And in his Homilies. 55.
in Mat. 16. and 84. in Joan. 19. and other places, witnesses that in
Baptism, in the most holy Eucharist, in the Sacrament of holy Orders, and in all most excellent Mysteries, the Ensign of Victory, the sign of the Cross
is ever present unto us: in all his discourse teaching, to glory not only in
Christ crucified, but also to honor the sign of the Cross. And that who
soever despises the sign of the Cross, despises in deed Christ Crucified.
To omit others, S. Augustine records, li. 1. Confess. c. 11. that himself
when he was a child, and dangerously sick, was by his mothers pious care,
signed with the sign of the Cross* and li. de catechizandis rudibus. c 20.
teaches that every one is to be signed in the forehead with the sign of the
Cross, and that al Christians are so signed. Also Tract 118. in Joan. What is
the sign of Christ (says he) which al know, but the Cross of Christ? which
sign unless it be adjoined, as well to the foreheades of them that believe in
Christ, as to the vv^ter it self vvherevvith they are regenerate, The sign of
the Cross used in Baptism, in Confirmation, in the B Eucharist, and in a^
holy Rites.
and to the chri^^^ne oil, vvherevvith they are anointed, as also to the
Sacrifice, vvherevvith they are nourished; none of these things is rightly
performed. Or vvil you have him to speak more plainly, or more generally? Ser
101. de tempore* With the sign of the Cross (says he) our Lords body is
consecrated, and al things, whatsoever are sanctified, are consecrated with
the invocation of Christ's name in this sign* Who pleases to see more
testimonies of ancient Fathers, may also read S. Basil, li. de Spiritu Sancto.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem* Catechesi. 4. and 13. S. Ambrose, Orat. ^unebri de obitu
Theodosij. S. Gregory. Epist 126.

The apparition also of this sign to Constantin the great, with this
inscription: Miraculous apparitions of the sign of the Cross.
IN HOC VINCES, is most famous; written by Eusebius Caesariensis li. 1 c. 22:
and 23. de vita Constantini* and many others. The same sign also appeared in
Jerusalem in the time of his son Constantius, as S. Cyril of Jerusalem
testifies in his Epistle to the same Emperor. And Nicephorus. li. 10. c. 2.
Hist. Eccles vvriteth that the forms of Crosses, fell with the dew upon the
garments of Julian the Apostata, and of his folovvers. And many other
histories, both ancient and modern make mention of the like apparitions.

But above al others, the most principal is to come: The Sign of the Son The
sign ^^^ the Cross shall appear before Christ, coming to judge.
of man; as our B. Savior himself fortelleth, which shall appear in the
heaven at his coming to judge the whole world: his most proper Ensign the
Cross; by which he conquered the devil, sin, death, and al enemies of God
and men. So al ancient Fathers undoubtedly understand his prediction. Mat. 24.
Then vvil this sign appear to the great confusion of al vnsigned miscreants,
with other wicked enemies of the Cross, and Crucifix. For then shall all the
world, The vnsigned shall be confounded.
both men, and Angels see, what infinite charity, our most blessed Redeemer
has used for man's salvation; and how justly those that either do not believe,
or not regard his so unspeakable mercy, shall be adjudged to everlasting
damnation in the pity and fire of hell. And on the other side, al those that
are The rightly signed shall be glorified.
rightly signed in their foreheades, and have accordingly performed that, which
in Baptism they promised, shall mete this saving Ensign, with incomparable
comforth, ^oy, and gladness; who coming clothed ^n white robes, with palms
of victory in their hands, shall then receive glorious crowns in eternal
life.

CHAP. X. Destruction of the city is again signified by appearance of fire
sprinkled therein, 9. with description of Cherubims, four wheels, and of the
four living creatures.
AND I saw, and behold In this vision appeared in the air as it were a man
sitting in a throne of sapphire stone, over the image of Cherubs and four
wheels under them.
in the firmament, that was over on the right hand of the house, when the man
went in, and a cloud filled the inner court. And the glory of our Lord The
strange form of these four pair of wheels, signified the consonant agreement
of the old and new Testament. S* Greg. ho. 6. in Ezech.
a wheel in the mids of a wheel. And when They were ready to go forward,
backward, on the right hand, on the left, or to what part soever without
turning about.
four parts: and they returned not walking: but to the place, whereunto, that
which was first, declined, the rest also followed, neither did they turn. And
It seems every one had as it were four faces, v. ^t, al like men's faces but
one more resembling a man's face then the other, one some what resembling an ore
face ( c. 1. here called the face of a cherish) another, the face of a lion,
the other of an eagle.
of a Cherub, gate of the house of our Lord: and the glory of the God of
Israel was over them. The same is the living creature, which

CHAP. XI. Against falseprophetes affirming that the people should not be
carried into captivity, 4. Ezechiel prophecieth that they shall not escape it.
13. Pheltias a falseprophet dies: 14. and God promises to conserve some
relics: 19. and to give a new spirit in their hearts.
AND the spirit lifted me up, and The prophet in Chaldea saw in spirit what
was don't in Jerusalem.
brought me into the Were not new houses builded (say the false prophets)
sine* Jeremy said, that al our houses should be destroyed? whereupon they
inferi^ that his prophecy is false.
Were not houses and so counted themselves as secure, in Jerusalem: as flesh in
the pot.
This is the caldron, and we the flesh. Therefore The false prophets feared
wars, but not captivity, therefore the prophet assures them that the people
shall feel both sword, and captivity.
The sword you have feared, and the sword done according to the judgments of
nations, that are round about you. And it came to pass, when I prophesied,
Pheltias He lamented not the death of the false prophet, but feared great ruin
of the people seeing this wicked man dye so suddenly.
fell upon my face crying with a loud voice: and said: Alas, alas, alas, o Lord
God: make thou a consumation of the remnant of Israel? And the word of God
still conserueth his Church from utter ruin, as the prophets do often affirm.
Iere. 4. v. 27. chapter 5. v. ^^. 18. Psalm. 88. ^* ^* ^^.
a little sanctification to them in the lands, to which they are come. Therefore
speak: Thus says our Lord God:

CHAP. XII. By providing furniture for a journey, and carrying it from one place
to an other, 5. and flying through a hole in the wall, 10. the prophet
signifies that the king, and people shall go into captivity. 17. By eating,
as if he were trubled, foresheweth their famine. 21. Al which shall come quickly.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: house: which have eyes to
see, and see not: and ears to hear, and hear not: because it is an
exasperating house. Thou therefore o son of man, make thee Provide furniture
for travel.
vessels of transmigration, Trusse up and carry bag and bagage from one place
to an other.
shall flitte by day before them: and thou shall flitte out of thy place to an
other place in their sight, if perhaps they will behold: because it is an
exasperating house. And thou shall carry forth thy vessels as the vessels of
The false prophets argued here Ezechiel of contradiction that the king should
be carried into Babylon,:: and should not see Babylon. But the event convinced
their rash judgment. For he was carried thither blind* 4. Reg. ^^.
will bring him into Babylon into the land of the Chaldees, and he shall:: not
see it, and there he shall dye. And all that truble: yea and drink thy water in
have, and sorowfulnes. And That which is commonly said of many is called a
proverb.
proverb with you in the land False prophets persuaded the people, that seeing
the captivity foretold by the prophets was not yet come therefore it would
never come. As heretics shall deny the day of general judgment. ^. Pet. ^.
The days shall be differred to a long time, and al vision shall perish.
Therefore say to them: Thus says our

CHAP. XIII. God threatens false prophets, 5. that flatter the people with
lies: 10. without the fear of God. 17. Likewise false prophetisses, that
deceive themselves and others with flaterie, 19. for worldly gain.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: they divine lies, saying: Our
Lord says: whereas our Lord sent them not: and they perseuered to confirm the
word. Why have you not seen vain vision, and spoken lying divination? As a
wall of clay, or mortar without straw or other temperature, is washed away with
rain, so vain hopes of security, without repentance and good works deceive
the careless people that live in sin.
without straw. Say to them, that There were also false prophetisses feaning to
be illuminated with the spirit of Prophecy; as Debora ( Iud 4) Holda (4. Reg
22.) and other holy women were in deed true prophetisses* but these, by
the daughters of thy people, which prophecy of their own heart: and do thou
prophecy upon them, and flaterie deceived the people, saying they were in
good state and in security, when they were in sin, and in ex^teme danger
of both temporal and eternal ^^^^.
viuificate their souls. And that believes lies. For this cause thus says
our Lord God:

CHAP. XIIII. Idolaters inquiring of Gods will by his prophets, 6. must first
depart from idolatry: 8. otherwise God will permit fals-prophetes to deceive
them, and both shall perish together: 12. by famine; 15. by ravenous beasts,
17. sword; 19. and pestilence; yea Noe Daniel, and Job interceding shall not
deliver them (v. 14. 16. 18. 20.) 21. yet God will conserve some that the whole
Church perish not.
AND men of the ancients of Israel came to me, and sat God reveled to the
prophet that these men came not sincerely to learn, but were settled in their
heart to serve the idols. As worldly men in heretical countries do inquire of
Catholic Priests what they should do but remain resolved to participate
with heretics.
These men have put their uncleanness Such men are first of al to be admonished,
to depart from idolatry heresy, schism, and from al practice thereof: which
is the first step of true conversion to God
Convert, and depart from your idols, and from al your contaminations turn
away your faces. Because man that man, and will make him for an example, and a
for a proverb, and will destroy him out of the mids of my people: and you
shall know that I am the Lord. And the prophet God permits false prophets
to be deceived, and to deceive in punishment of their own sins, and of the
people that hear them. 3. Reg. 22. v. 19. 2. Par. 18. v. 18.
have deceived that prophet: and I will strech forth my hand upon him, and will
raze him out of the mids of my people Israel. And they shall carry their
iniquity: according to the iniquity Daniel then living, Noe and Job, departed
from this life did sometime pray for the people; else this allegation of their
interceding, were not to the purpose of confirming Gods immutable decre to
punish this obstinate people. As is noted of Moses and Samuel. Iere. 15.
Noe, Daniel, and Job: they by their justice shall deliver their own souls,
says the Lord of hosts. And Noe is named for example of spiritual Pastors of
the Church, Daniel of al religious orders, and Job of holy lay people S.
Gregory, li 1. c. 1^. ^or.
Noe, and Daniel, and Job shall be in the mids thereof: live I, says our Lord
God, that son and daughter they shall not deliver: but themselves by their
justice shall deliver their own souls. Because thus says our Lord: That and
if I shall send There shall alvvayes be Pastors to bring forth and seed
spiritual children of God.
of brought upon Jerusalem in all things, that I have brought in upon it. And
they shall comfort you, when you shall see their

CHAP. XV. Gods Church is very often and fitly compared to a vine, in respect
of the excellent fruit: and so the branches cut of from the Church, are most
like to wild superfluity of the vine, good for nothing but to the fire. S.
Aug. Tract. 81. in Io.
As a vine cut down is profitable to no use, but to burn: 6. so the Jews
(and other people) separated from the Church, are to be burned in the fire.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: In burning a faggot the mids
being first consumed (v. 4.) the rest of both ends are likewise put in the
fire til al be consumed, so none that are out of the Church can escape the fire.
out of the fire shall they come forth, and fire shall consume them: and you shall
know that I am the Lord, when I shall set my face against them, and shall make
their

CHAP. XVI. God by his prophet setting his benefits, 15. and the Jews
wickedness, before their eyes, 31. compares them with other idolaters: 35. and
after threatened punishment, 45. with further comparison of other nations, 52.
exhorting them to repentance, 60. offers mercy by a new covenant of Christ's
Gospel.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Ezechiel was now in Babylon,
and therforce this admonition which he should give to Jerusalem was to be
notified there by letters, and messengers sent thither for this purpose.
to Jerusalem her abominations: And when thou wast borne, in the day of thy
birth thy By all this is signified that God made the Israelites of a barbarous
nation to be civil, and gave them not only things necessary, but also
I saw thee to be ornaments, above the state of other nations; especially in
spiritual benefits, giving a Law, with Sacrifices, Sacraments, and other holy
rites.
adorned thee with ornament, and gave my bread, which I gave thee, the flower,
and oil, and honey, wherewith I have nourished thee, thou did set in their
sight for an odor of sweetness, and it was done, says our Lord God. And thou
have taken Adulterous women do deceive their husbands, bringing them other
men's children, but the Jews gave their lawful children to the vvorst
adulterers, sacrificing them to idols 4. Reg. 16. 17 21. 23.
thy sons, and thy daughters, which Al fornication is abominable, but that is
must detestable when vve^^^ g^ue rewards to men for fornication or adultrie.
al is powered out, and thine ignominy is reveled in thy fornications upon thy
lovers, and upon the idols of thine abominations in the blood of thy children,
whom thou gave them: Behold I will gather together al thy lovers, with whom
thou As Jerusalem was wont to be wicked in former times, so it is now.
As the mother, so also her daughter. Thou art the daughter of thy mother,
Ambition, (...), and idleness are cause of much more sins; temperance and
labor bring forth much good fruit. Olla si tollas per^ere cupidinis arcus
Take away idleness, and Cupids bovv is vveake. Labor omnia vincit.
pride, fulness of bread, and abundance, and the idleness of her, and of her
daughters: and they raught not the hand to the needy, and the poor. And they
were elevated, and did By Sodom and other cities are understood al nations,
which shall come to Christ.
Sodom, and her daughters After that al other nations are converted the Jews
shall also return to Christ. To. 11. v. 26.
thou, and thy daughters shall return to your antiquity. And Sodom thy Al
gentiles elder and younger shall be converted to Christ.
thy sisters elder then thee with thy younger: and I will give them to thee for
daughters, but not by Not by the covenant made with the Jews in the Law of
Moses, but by the Euangelical covenant.
thy covenant. And I will

CHAP. XVII. By a parable of two eagles (6. and of a vinyard) is prophesied, 9.
that Sedecias being made king by Nabuchodonosor, 15. and rebelling, shall be
carried captive, and dye in Babylon: 22. with prophecy, that God will plant, and
propagate the Church of Christ.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Nabuchodonosor like an eagle
ravenous to the pray, and speedy in seazing thereon, spoiled the vineyard
(signifying Jerusalem) not vvithstanding they sought help of an other eagle,
the king of Egypt. v. 7. see v. 12. etc.
reach of members, full of feathers, and of variety, came to Libanus, and took
the matow of the ceder. He plucked The explication of the parable.
Behold the king of Babylon comes into Jerusalem: and he shall take the king
and the princes thereof, and shall bring them to himself into Babylon. And he
shall take of The king of Babylon making Sedecias king of Judah took of him an
oath of allegiance to be under him, which oath Sedecias breaking was therefore
justly plaged.
the sede of the the king that made him king, whose oath he made frustrate, and
brake the covenant, that he had with him, After the ruin of Jerusalem, the
slaughter of his sons, the plucking out of his own eyes, and many other
miseries this king at last dyed a captive in Babylon. Iere. 32. Ezech. 12.
in the mids of Babylon shall he dye. And not in a great army, nor in
Nabuchodonosor planted a kingdom under Sedecias, which prospered not the
kingdom also of Babylon was afterward destroyed: ou^ Gods Church planted by
Christ shall never fail.
I will take of the marow of the high ceder, and will set it: of the top of the
boughs thereof the tender one I will strippe of, and will plant it upon a
mountain high and eminent. On the high mountains of Israel will I plant it,

CHAP. XVIII. One shall not bear the sins of an other, but every one their
own: 21. If the wieked truly repent, he shall be saved: and if the just leave
his justice, he shall be damned.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: The people suffering
affliction would not confess it to be for their own sins, but cast the
fault upon their fathers: which error is here convinced, God declaring by his
prophet that not only the fathers but also the children had finned, and were
therefore justly pu^nished, every one is for his own sins.
The fathers did eat a sour grape, and the teeth of the children are set on
edge? Live I, says our Lord God, if this parable shall be unto you has not
eaten on the mountains, and not lifted up his eyes An other general rule is
here given that as men alter their manners from evil to good or from good to
evil, so they shall be ^^dged and finally revvarded or punished, according to
the state wherein they end this life.
if the impious shall do penance from al his sins, which he has wrought, and
shall keep al my precepts, and do judgment, and justice: living he shall live,
and shall not dye. Al his iniquities, which he has wrought, v* ^.
ways, and live? But if the just man shall turn away himself As a soul in
mortal sin is spiritually dead: so truly repenting it return^^^ to spiritual
life* ^ Not only repentance, which is auersion from sin, and conversion to
God, but also (...) that is, satisfaction for sins past is necessary to
salvation.
he shall ma^^ his soul to live.
vi^^si^ate his soul. For considering, and turning away himself

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVIII.
^^. Is the death of a sinner my vvil?] In many places of holy Scripture it
is Psalm* 11^.
Though God conditionally would have ^^ men to be s^u^d: yet many are justly
damned.
cl^^^, that Gods vvil is most assuredly fulfilled in all things, whatsoever
he v. 11.
would: and none can resist his vvil. etc. Nevertheless here, and in other
places Romans 9.
it is also expressly affirmed, that God would have al sinners to repent, and
none v. 19.
to dye in their sins; which seems to repugne with the former doctrine. For
Ezech. 33.
solution of which difficulty* S. Damascen, li. 2. c. 29 de Orthodoxa side.
and other v. 11.
Doctors distinguish Gods vvil, which is either called Antecedent, and
conditional; 1. Tim. 2.
and so God would have al men to be saved, as appears by creating v, 4.
al to that end, by his frequen: admonitions, precepts, threats, temporal
punishments, 2. Pet. 3.
v. 9.
and rewards; and especially by our Saviors death, and redemption ^. The. p.
^. q 19. a. 6.
of al mankind, vvherby he merited most sufficient means, and offers his A
^ust Judge would condemn no man yet condemns murderers, ^hee^^^ etc.
sufficient grace to every one, that they may be saved if they vvil.
Otherwise Gods will is called Consequent and absolute; and so for justice sake
his divine vvil is, that impenitent sinners shall be damned, and eternally
punished for their sins. As a just Judge condionally, and antecedently would
have al men to observe good laws, and to live so long as they can by nature,
but absolutely and consequently finding some to be murderers, or otherwise
pernicicious to the commonvvelth, he panisheth them with death.

CHAP. XIX. The Israelites calaminitie is described by two parables, of lions,
10. and of a vine planted and plucked up.
AND thou take up lamentation upon the princes of Israel, Jerusalem brought
forth* cruel kings, as Ioachaz, Ioakim Iechonias, and Sedecias* 4. Reg. 2^.
and 24. of the which two reigned but three months each one, and the others
but each of them eleven years.
thy mother a lioness Rouers of Chaldea, of Syria, of Moab, and of Ammon. 4.
Reg. 24* v. 2.
the The kingdom of all the Israelites was planted and prospered under David
and Solomon, but decayed under other kings: and first ten tribes,
afterward the other two were ca^^%d into captivity.
Thy mother as it were a vine in And there came forth fire from the rod of her
boughs,

CHAP. XX. God will not answer the elders of Israel asking by the prophet, 4.
but by him sets his benefits before their eyes, and their own heinous
sins; 30. threatening yet greater punishments: 40. but still mixed with mercy.
AND it came to pass in Ezechiel begin to prophecy in the fifth year after
the transmigration of Iechon as chapter 1. v 2 after which he was silent 390. days
and 40. days ( chapter 4. v. 8.) which make 430. that is, a year two months and
five days. In the sixth year the sixth month he prophesied again chapter 8. v.
1. And now in the seventh year fifth month tenth day the elders coming to
demand prophecy it was reveled to him not to answer.
the seventh year, in the fifth, According to their deserts al should have
been destroyed, but God for his names sake saved his people as he had promised.
I did for my name sake, that it might not be violated them. And the houses of
Israel provoked me in the desert; As v. 9 and 22 God still conserved a
succession.
I did for my name sake, lest it should be violated Number. 26. Psa. 105.
before the Gentiles, from which I cast them out, in their sight. I therefore
lifted up my hand upon them in the desert, God lifts up his hand either to
deliver, as v 5 6 15. or to threaten and punish as here.
Again I lifted up my hand upon See ^. 39.
not they saw every high hill, and every wooddie tree, and there they
immolated their victims: and there they gave the irritation of their oblation,
and there they put the odor of their sweetness, and offered their libations.
And I said to them: By long custom of sacrificing to idols upon the Excelleses
(that is, on hiegh places, of little hills) the people also called the Altar of
God an Excelse whereupon the prophet argues against the^ that even by the false
name used by evil custom, they are convinced to have been great idolaters. As
those who have been heretics, do commonly use terms and phrases belonging to
heresy. As Communion for Mass, Table for Altar, Service for Sacrifice.
the excelse, unto which you go? and the name thereof was called Excelse even
to this day. Therefore say to the God vvil rather have idolaters to leave him
wholly then to halt between two, 3. Reg 18. neither h^te nor cold, but luke
vvarme Apoc. 3.
Walk you every one after your idols, and serve them. But and if in this also
you hear me not, and shall pollute my holy name any more in your gifts, and
in your idols: in my holy mount, in the high mount of Israel, For such do
especially pollute Gods name. Romans 2. v* 24.
peoples, and shall have gathered you out of the lands, into which you are
dispersed, and I will be sanctified in you in the eyes of the nations. And you
shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have brought you into the land of
Israel, into the Land, for which I lifted up my hand to give it to your
fathers. And there you shall remember your ways, and al your By southeren
forest is meant Jerusalem, full of al sorts of people good and bad.
of the south, and drop toward the sotherne wind, and prophecy to the
forest of the sotherne filde. And thou shall say to the sotherne forest: Much
of his prophecy was so hard, that al seemed to ^^ parables.
Does not this man speak by parables?

CHAP. XXI. Destruction of Jerusalem by sword is further described: 10. With
translation of the kingdom. 28. The ruin also of the Ammonites is foreshewed.
30. And finally Babylon, the destroyer of others, shall be destroyed.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Cease not to instill and incul
^ate the punishment of the people.
drop Temporal afflictions s^l also upon the just; not for punishment, but
for their merit, and that they may escape the miseries of captivity, whereas
the wicked are punished both temporally and eternally. S. Ierom. in chapter 20. v
47.
the just, and the impious. And for that I have killed in thee the just, and
the spirit shall be weakened, and waters shall run by all knees: behold it
comes, and it shall be done, says our Lord God. And the word of our Lord was
made to me, saying: The whole people of Israel was the peculiar adopted son
of God, called also his first begoten. Exo. 4. v. 22.
of my son, have cut down every tree. And I gave it to be made smooth, The
Babylonians consulting the idols whether they should invade the Ammonits or
the Jews, were ditected to assault Jerusalem.
put thee two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come: both shall
come forth out of one land: and he shall take conjecture with the hand, in the
head of the way of the city shall he choose it. Thou shall make way that your
preuarications, and your sins have appeared in all your cogitations: for that,
I say, that you remembered, you shall be taken by hand. But thou profane,
impious prince of Israel, The Ammonites reproching the Jews when they were
afflicted by the Babylonians, were for the same destroyed also by the
Babylonians.
to their reproach, and thou shall say: Sword, sword draw out thyselfe to kill,
fourbish thy self to slaye, and to glitter. When vain things were seen for
thee, and lies were diuined: At last the like svvord, and ruin fell upon
Babylon.
Return to thy scabbard in the place, wherein

CHAP. XXII. For diverse enormious sins, 14. Jerusalem, and al Israel shall be
plaged: 25. namely false prophets, priests, ravening princes, and wicked
people.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Why do thou cease from
admonishing, and blaming the people for their blood sins?
do thou not judge, do calumniated in the mids of thee, the pupil and
widow they have made sorrowful in thee. My sanctuaries you have God of his part
desiring the salvation of al men, signifies here his sorrow for the peoples
sins not that God is subject to any such passion, but to infinuate the
enormitie of sin* as Genesis 6. v. 6.
have wrong my hands upon thy covetousness, ravening the pray, have they
devoured souls, they have taken the riches and the price, her widows they
have multiplied in the mids thereof. Her priests have contemned my A marvelous
force of just men's prayers, by which God suffers himself to be overcome And
it is most gratful to God when some do so oppose themselves to entreat mercy
for sinners, that they may repent. S. Iero. Epist. 12. ad Gaudentium.
and between the polluted and the clean they understood not: and from my
sabbathes they have turned away their eyes, and I was defiled in the mids of
them. Her princes in the mids of her, as

CHAP. XXIII. By a parable of two harlottes, Oolla and Ooliba, 5. the idolatry
of the two kingdoms of Israel, 11. and of Judah is described: 22. with threats
(31. as Israel is partly afflicted already) 36. of more affliction to them both.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: He speaks here as of two
peoples by anticipation, for when the Israelies were in Egypt, they were but
one people, and then also they committed idolatry
two women daughters of Though they were but beginning to increase
in their youth God called the ten tribes Oolla, which signifies their own
habitation, because they made gods to themselves, in Bethel and Dan; and the
two tribes he called Ooliba, signifying my halitation, because the temple
there was Gods habitation.
Oolla d Ooliba her younger sister: and I had them, and they bare sons, and
daughters. Moreover their names, Samaria Oolla, and Jerusalem Ooliba. Oolla
therefore fornicated Egypt she left not: for they also slept with her in her
youth, and they brake the breasts of her virginity, and powered out their
fornication upon her. Therefore have I delivered her into In all this and the
like discourses the prophet speaks not of carnal fornication, but of
spiritual which is idolatry, by the most frequent figure Metaphora.
their fornications, and she was polluted of them, and her soul was filled of
them. She reveled also her wheel, a multitude of peoples: with brigin^ine, and
buckler, and helmet they shall be armed against thee, on every side: and I will
give judgment before them, and they shall judge thee by their judgments. And I
will put my In that the Chaldes were the ministers of Gods wrath they are
called his ^ele, as Assure is called the r^dde of his fury. Isa. 10. v. 5.
zele in thee, which By the nose S. Ierom understands the king by the ca^es
the Priests and Judges, who were not ^^^^e but ^ut of from the people, and
carried into captivity 4. Reg 25. Iere. 52.
thy nose, and thine ears they shall cut of: and the things that remain shall
fall by the sword: they shall take thy sons, and thy daughters, and thy very
last thing shall be devoured with fire. And they shall This demand is an
admonition to judge and condemn ^he^^ wickedness, without intermission, as* c^
20. v. 4.
do Circumstances of places, and
my sanctuary in that day, and profaned my times do aggrauate sins very
much: which are therefore more severely punished.
sabbathes. And when they immolated their children to their idols, and went
into my sanctuary in that day to pollute it: these things also they did in
the mids of my house. They sent to men coming from Amimonium.
stibikestone, and wast adorned with wemens ornaments. Thou satest in a very
fair bed, and a

CHAP. XXIIII. Jerusalem many ways chasticed of God, and not amended, 11.
shall at last be melted like a brass pot: 15. and shall not dare to mourn for
the death of her dearest.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, in Jeremy in Babylon saw what was
done the same time in Jerusalem, and therefore is bid, ^^to write the day, v. 2.
that thereby the certainty of his prophecy may appear. For the very same day
Nabuchodonosor laid siege to Jerusalem. 4. Reg. 25. v. 1.
the into it. Heap together the pieces thereof into it, every When sinners
are not amended by fire of tribulation; God after that they are parted from
this world, punishes them everlastingly.
no not by fire. Thine uncleanness is exectable: because I would cleanse thee,
The sudden death of nere freindes causes ^ore sorrow, then if it were feared
before: yet the prophet was commanded not to show sorrow for the sudden death
of his wife, to signify that the great calamity of every one would take away
the particular (...) for the lode private freindes.
my wife died at even: and I did in the morning as he had commanded me. And the
people said to me: Why do thou not tell us them: The word of our Lord was
made to me, saying: Speak

CHAP. XXV. The 3. part. The destruction of diverse other nations, besides the
Jews.
The Ammonites, 8 Moabiles, 12. Idumeans, 15. and Philistians (for their malice
against the Israelites) shall be overthrown.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Amongst other heathen
nations, especially the Ammonites rejoiced at the miseries of the Jews, and
were therefore plaged.
For that thou have said: Ha, ha, upon my sanctuary, because it is polluted:
and upon the Land of Israel, because it is made desolate: and upon the house of
Judah, because they are led into captivity: Therefore will The Chaldees, or
rather the Armenians or Agarens (who are more direct eastward, and
of the east for an inheritance, and they shall place their shepecotes in thee,
and shall set their tents in thee: they shall eat thy fruits: and they shall
drink thy milk. And I will give Rabbath to be an habitation of and stricken
with the foot, and have been glad withal thy affection upon the land of
Israel: therefore behold I will stretch I will take away all the streingth and
force of Moab, which consists in his strong cities.
I will open the shoulder of Moab

CHAP. XXVI. Tire a most noble maritime city shall be destroyed, by the king of
Babylon, because they rejoice at the desolation of Jerusalem. 15. At the sight
whereof many shall be astonished.
AND it came to pass in Years are still counted from the transmigration of
Ioachin, as chapter 1. 8 20. 24. v. 1. and 29. v. 1. 17.
the eleventh year, the first of I shall be filled, she is desert. Therefore
thus says our Lord Tire which is a most frequented sea town, shall be made
desolate and to no use but to hang nets therein to dry.
The drying of nets shall be Less cities and towns perteyning to Tire shall
likewise be destroyed.
Her been strong in the sea with thine inhabitants, whom al did fear? Now shall
the ships be astonished in the day of thy As Tire was exalted in pride, so it
was brought to great ruin, yet was it restored, after seventy years
according to Isaias prophecy, chapter 23 v. 15. And our Savior retired sometimes
into the quarters of Tire and Sidon. Mat. 15. v. 21.
lowest ground as old desolations, with them that are brought down into the
lake, that thou be not inhabited: moreover when I shall give glory in the land
of the living, I will bring thee to nothing, and thou shall not be, and being

CHAP. XXVII. The prophet lamenteth the ruin of Tire: 3. describing her former
glories 10. and traffike in all sorts of rich merchandise, with sundry
nations. 26. Al which shall be overthrown by the Chaldees.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: This large description of the
Tyrians glory shows their greater ruin.
I am of perfect beauty, and situated in the heart of were with thine army
upon thy walls round about: yea and the Pygmeians, that were in thy towers,
hung up their quiuers on thy walls round about: they accomplished thy beauty.
They of Carthage thy merchants, for the multitude of al S. Ierom in Isaie. 54.
v. 12. translating this word a jasper stone, here leaves it untranslated, and
so do also the Septuagint; neither do the Hebrew Doctors describe it in their
commentaries. The Chaldee paraphrasis translateth it in general precious
stones, or margarites: some in particular, think it to be a carbunkle, some a
rubie, others a crystal, others an adamant.
chodchod they did set forth in thy market. Judah and the land of Israel they
were thy merchants shall the nauies be trubled. And al they that held ore shall
With these Gentiles, cutting or shauing of their hear was a sign of sorrow,
which the Jews were commanded not to imitate. Deuteronomy. 14. to show difference
from other nations: yet they also did cut their hear in great calamities. Isa.
22. v. 12.
baldnes upon thee, and

CHAP. XXVIII. For most insolent pride Tire shall be utterly destroyed. 20.
Sidon likewise overthrown. 24. And the people of Israel at last restored.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Daniel was so famous for
wisdom, that thereof came a proverb in Chaldea, to compare wisemen with
Daniel; and to reproach those that arrogated more wisdom then they had, that
they seemed vainly to themselves. vviser then Daniel.
art wiser then Daniel: Why, shall thou speak saying: I am God, before them
that (...)* pl^^^ ta^ing breath*
pipes were prepared in the day, that thou wast created. Thou Cherub streched
out, and protecting, and I Tire had much ^niquity long before, but when the
king thought himself to be God. v. 2 this iniquity could not be longer
tolerated.
until iniquity was found in thee. In the As Sidon was nere in situation to
Tire, so it was made like in ruin for their like pride.
against Sidon: and that are against them: and they shall know that I am the
Lord God. Thus says our Lord God: Al nations will praise God when they see that
he justly punishes his own people, and afterward restores them to their
former state.
When I shall have gathered

CHAP. XXIX. The king of Egypt shall be overthrown: 9. and the kingdom wasted
forty years: 13. It shall be repared to a mean state. 17. And shall be given
to the king of Babylon, for his service in destroying Tire.
IN Prophets do not write their prophecies in order of time as they were
reveled; for in former chapters he wrote that which he saw in the eleventh
year: chapter 26. v. 1. but that which was sooner fulfilled: or because Tire and
Sidon were nerer in situation to Jerusalem then Egypt he writ that prophecy
before this.
the tenth year, the tenth month, the eleventh day of the borders of
Aethiopia. The foot of man shall not pass This vision against Egypt is in
confirmation of the former 17. years before. v. 1.
the seven and twenteth year, in Of this place S^^e^om proves that God
reward^ ^halso Infidels for their moral good works temporally, though they
can not merit an eternal revvard as the just do.
there has been no reward rendered him, nor his army concerning Tire, for the
service that he served me against it. Therefore thus says our Lord God:

CHAP. XXX. Egypt shall be so wasted, 5. that Aethiopia, and other neighbors
shall tremble; 9. seeing the cities and country destroyed. 20. Al which is
confirmed again by an other vision.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: and The day of just
punishment is called the day of our Lord. As the Apostle calls the day of
general judgment the day of our Lord. 1. Cor* 5. 2. Cor. 1 and 1. These. 5.
the day of our Lord approaches: the day of a cloud, the The time when the
Chaldees, the most potent nation shall conquer, and triumph over Egypt.
time of the Gentiles shall be. And the sword shall come into cover her, and her
daughters shall be led into captivity. And I Part of the kingdom of Egypt was
subd^^ed before this time by the king of Babylon. 4. Reg. 24. v. 7.
have broken

CHAP. XXXI. The glory of Assirians excelling al other kingdoms, 10. was
overthrown, God so ordayning, by the Chaldees: 18. much less shall Egypt
escape.
AND it came to pass in the eleventh year, the third month, Thou that semest
to thyself invincible yet art thou not equal to the king of Assirians, who
already is over thrown; and so ^halt thou likewise be.
To whom art thou made like in thy greatness? Behold Assure as it were a ceder in
Libanus, made nests, and under his leaves al beasts of the forests engendered,
and under his shadow dwelt the assembly of very many nations. And he was
most fair in his greatness, and Although ^ Egypt thou art like to the most
potent kingdoms, yet as the assirians and others so thou also shall be ruined.
To whom art thou likened lowest earth: in the mids of the uncircumcised
shall thou sleep, with them that are slain by the sword, the same is Pharao,
and al his multitude, says our Lord God.

CHAP. XXXII. The Prophet lamenteth the destruction of Egypt. 11. prosecuting
his prophecy of the most lamentable destruction thereof. 17. foreshewing that
the more it is exalted in strength and glory, so much more miserable shall be
the fall thereof.
AND it came to pass, Here it is manifest that this prophet counts the
years by the time of transmigration of king Iechonias, for it is clear that
Sedecias ^eigned only eleven years. 4. Reg. 24. and 25. Iere. ^^. and 52
the twelth year, in the twelth This hyperbolical speech describes the former
glory of Egypt, as if al lights were much diminished, when this kingdom was
darkened.
all the lights invincible are al these Gentiles: and they shall waste the pride
of Egypt, and the multitude thereof shall be dissipated. And The country of the
Aelamites:
her couche among al her peoples: round about and the king of Aelam^^es shall
also perish with Assirians, Egyptians and other infidels.
him their gra^e: al these uncircumcised, and slain by the sword, for they
gave their terror in the land of the living, and have borne their ignominy
with them, that descend into the lake: they are laid in the mids of the
slain. There Mosoch, sword: because they gave their fear in the land of the
living* And they shall not sleep with the valients, and them that fell,

CHAP. XXXIII. By example of a watchman, 7. God charge the prophet to declare
whatsoever dangers he sees imminent to the people. 10. Sinners repenting shall
be saved, and if the just leave their justice they shall be damned 21. The
promise made to Abraham makes not the Jews secure: 23. but for their
enormious sins they shall be carried out captives. 33. Then they shall know that
the prophet said the truth.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Pastors are not excused,
omitting to admonish their flock either for fear of danger, or for despare of
the sinners amendment.
a watchman over them: and see the sword coming, and sound not with the
trumpet: For every one shall be judged as he discargeth or neglects his own
office. S. Iere.
and the people look not to them selves, and the sword come, and take a soul
from among them: he certes is caught in his iniquity, but his blood I will
require of the hand of the watchman. And thou son of man, I have made thee a
watchman Gods absolute or consequent will is alvvayes fulfilled: but not his
conditional or an ecedent. As is noted chapter 18. v. 23.
I will not the God being always ^e^dy to show mercy, knocking at the door of
our heart Apoc. 3. v. 20. it is of men's own vvilfulnes that they are not sa^e^:
according to that general Axiom. Man doing that in him ^^^th God ^^ not
vvanting of his part to save al. S. Tho 1. 2. q. 109. a. 6. and q. 112. a. 3.
why will you dye o house of Israel? Thou therefore will I judge of you, o house
of Israel. And it came to pass As he prophesied chapter 24. v. 2 the very day
when the siege begane: so he foreshewed also. v. 26. that one flying away
should tell of the taking and spoiling of the city three years after.
the twelfth year, in the tenth month, in the fifth of the month of our
transmigration, there came to me one that was fled from Jerusalem, saying: The
city is made waste. And

CHAP. XXXIIII. Acommination to evil pastors: 11. and a prophecy of the coming
of Christ, the true Pastor; who will gather his flock from al parts of the
earth. 25. and conserve it for ever.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Pastors do lawfully eat of
the milk of their flock. 1. Cor. 9. v. 7. but they ought not to take the wool,
nor flesh to themselves, which belong to their master.
prophecy, and thou shall say to the pastors: Thus faith our Lord God: Woe to
the pastors of Israel, which fed themselves: are not the flocks fed of the
pastors? You did eat the He that has spiritual charge of souls, and seeks
his own temporal profit, not the spiritual good of his flock, is in deed no
pastor, but a hyreling, or if he also teach false doctrine, he is a woolf.
Joan. 1^.
no pastor: and they came to be devoured of all the beasts of the filde, and
were dispersed. My flocks have wandered in all mountains, and in every the
lands, and will bring them into their own land: and I will feed them in the
mountains of Israel, in the rivers, and in all the seats of the land. In the
most plentiful pastures will I Not only Christ himself but also others shall do
these right Offices of true pastors in the new Testament. as S. Paul
conformably teaches* Ephe. 4. that God gives Apostles, Prophets Evangelists,
Pastors and doctors to the consummation: of Saints, tilvve mete al into the
v^itie of faith etc.
That which was lost, I will seek: and that which was cast away, I^^. 1^.
PASTOVR: who shall feed them, my servant No Jew is so obstinate; nor heretic
so blind, but al confess that Messiah, Christ is here called by the name of
David. For king David was now dead long before this prophet lived. See the same
chapter 17. v. 24. 25. and in many places of holy Scripture.
David: he shall feed them, and he shall be their Pastor. And I the Lord
terror. And I will raise up unto them a bud of name: and

CHAP. XXXV. An other prophecy against the Idumeans, 5. because they afflicted
the Israelites.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: This frequent phrase here and
in other places signifies, turn thy speech to speak of such and such people:
or, speak boldly and freely fearing no man.
set thy face against mount Seir, and God accounts al injuries done against
his Church, as done against himself. So our Savior charged Saul persecuting
the Church, as persecuting himself. A^^. 9. v. 4.
For that thou rejoiced upon the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it
was dissipated, so will I do to thee: Thou shall be dissipated mount Seir, and
al Idumea: and they shall know that I am the Lord.

CHAP. XXXVI. The 4. part. The reduction of the Jews from captivity: and the
Redemption of mankind by Christ.
The Jews shall be reduced from captivity, 13. their manners amended. 16. which
are enormious, 22. by special grace of God, for the glory of his name: 25.
fulfilled by Christ's baptism.
AND thou son of man, prophecy concerning the Your captivity and distressed
state has given occasion to al nations to speak. and discourse of you. As
Jeremy prophesied. chapter 24. v. 9. I vvil give them into reproach, and to be a
parable and a proverb. etc.
upon the lip of the tongue, and the reproach of the people: therefore ye
mountains of Israel hear the word of our and increase: and I will make you
dwell as from the beginning, and will endewe you with greater gifts, then you
have had from the beginning: and you shall know that I am the Lord. And I will
bring men upon you, my people Israel, Jews by their sins provoking God to
punish them with captivity, gave occasion that other nations said: God could
not defend his people: blaspheming against his power, when he exercised justice.
have polluted my holy name, when it was said of them: This is the people of
the Lord, and out of his land they are come forth. And I have spared my holy
name, Rabbi David and the Chaldee Paraphrasis expound this place of remission
of sin. And al Christian Doctors understand it of Baptism, which in deed is
in water clensing sins. Ephesians 5. v. 26. ^it 3. v 5.
clean water, and you shall be cleansed from al your contaminations, and from al
your idols will I cleanse you. And I will give you a new heart, and will put a new
spirit your flesh, and will give you a fleshie heart. And I will put An evident
text, that by Gods grace some men do keep the commandments.
will make that you walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments, and do them.
And you shall dwell in the land: which I gave to your fathers,

CHAP. XXXVII. By dead bones rising to life (which also signifies the general
resurrection) 11. is prophesied the reduction of the Jews from captivity: 15.
the kingdoms of Judah, and Israel shall be reduced into one kingdom: 23. in figure
that al Nations shall be united in Christ.
THE hand of our Lord was made upon me, and brought And I said,: Lord God, thou
know. And he said to me: A duble prophecy of two great benefits, the
reduction of the Jews from captivity; and of the Gentiles from idolatry to
Christ, wherein also is included the mystery of resurrection.
I will put spirit into you, and you shall live. And I will give sinowes upon
you, and will One cause of distrust that the people of Israel should not be
restored from captivity, was because they were like to dry bones.
bones are withered, Secondly they had al generally lost their hope of
restitution.
our hope is perished, and we Thirdly they seemed like to trees or plants cut
of at the very root.
are cut of. Therefore prophecy, and thou shall say to them: Thus says Yet God
by his power and goodness restored them.
Behold I will open your graves, and will bring you out of your sepulchers o my
people: and will bring you into the land of Israel. And you shall know that I am
the Before Christ joined the Gentiles to his Church he first united the two
kingdoms of Judah and Israel: signifying that Catholics which labor for
conversion of heretics (as now in England) must first agree amongst
themselves, and then shall their endeuoures be more effectual. For so al shall
sooner be made one fold under one shepherd.
join them, one to the other for thee into one piece hand of Ephraim, and the
tribes of Israel, that are adjoined to him: and I will give them together with
the piece of wood of Judah, and will make them into one piece of wood: and they
shall be one in his hand. And the pieces of wood whereupon Fulfilled by Christ
the good Pastor, who brings al nations into one fold under one pastor. Joan.
10. v. 16.
one pastor of them al, they shall walk in my judgments, and shall keep my
commandments, and shall do them. And they shall dwell upon the land,

CHAP. XXXVIII. Gog and Magog most tyrannically persecuting the Church, 17. as
other prophets have also foretold, 20. shall be mightyly overthrown.
AND the word of our Lord was made to me, saying: Gog, signifying hid or
covered, was the common surname of the Scithian kings.
Gog* and the Land M^gog, out of the hid, were the people and adherents of Gog
persecuting the faithful.
Magog, the prince of the head of Mosoch, and Thubal: and prophecy of him and
thou shall say to him: Thus says our Lord God: Behold I to thee Gog prince of
the head of Mosoch and Thubal. And I will turn thee about, and will put a bitte
in thy jaws: and will bring forth thee, and al thine army, the horses and
horsemen clothed with brigantines, a Alluding to those that endeavored to spoil
and oppress the Jews after their relaxation from captivity, he prophecieth
of Antichrist, and al heretics, that seek to pervert, or to suppress
Catholic Christians, who are delivered rom the bondage of the devil, by
Baptism and other Sacraments of Christ.
had been desert, and afterward restored, and upon the people that is gathered
together out of the Gentiles, which has begune to possess, and to be
inhabitant of the nauel of the earth. Saba, Antichrist signified by Gog shall
persecute the Church nere the end of the world.
In the later days shall thou be, and I will bring thee upon my land: that the
Gentiles may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee before their eyes o Gog.
Thus says our Lord God: Thou then art he, of whom I spoke in the days of old,
in the hand of my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in the
days of those times, that I would bring in thee upon them. And it shall be in
that day, in the day of the coming In every part of the universal Church God
will at last destroy Antichrists power confounding him, and al his adherentes.
in all my mountains the sword,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XXXVIII.
2. Against Gog, and the Land of Magog.] Gog and Magog, according to Gog and
Magog, the king and kingdom of Scithia.
the most common opinion, were the king, and people of Scithia, in the North
part of the world, a barbarous, savage, and cruel nation, the offspring of
Magog G^^. 10.
son of Iapheth, whereto the prophet alluding describes here, as S. Ierom in
this place, S. Augustine. li. 20. c. 11. de ciuit. and other Fathers expound it,
al persecuters of the Church; most especially Antichrist, and his accomplices.
Signifying al persecuters of the Church, especially Antichrist.
Of whom likewise, by the same mystical names, S. John prophecieth. Apoc. 20 v.
7. that Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go forth, and seduce
the nations, that are upon the four corners of the earth, Gog, and Magog, and
shall gather them into battle, whose number is as the sa^d of the sea. For the
Church being spread on all the earth (as S. Augustine notes in the same Psalm. ^*
Isa 11. Dan. 1^.
place) her enemies also spread every where, shall most vehemently persecute
her. Who shall be destroyed.
But the holy Prophets, namely Ezechiel here. v. 21. etc. and S. John. v. 11.
foreshew, that Christ our Lord will destroy them al.

CHAP. XXXIX. Our Lord permitting Gog, most vehemently to afflict the Church,
3. after a while will destroy him, with all this troops: 9. their weapons shall
be burned, 11. their sepulchers infamous, the earth not fully cleansed of their
carcases in seven months. 17. Gods people shall rejoice; 22. and al men ^hal
know that their sins were the cause of their captivity.
BUT thou son of man, prophecy against Gog, and thou Antichrist persecuting
the Church in all parts of the world, shall be resisted by some in every place,
and at last vanquished.
the mountains of Israel shall thou fall, and Not with material fire but with
zele and ^eruour Catholics shall resist him and finally overcome him.
burn Gog, and al his multitude, and it shall be called the valley of the
multitude of Gog. And the beside it, til the buriers bury it in the valley of
the multitude of Gog. And the name of the city Amona, and they shall Gods
people were not made captives by the power of their enemies, as if God could
not defend them, but by his permission for punishment of their sins.
was taken in their iniquity, for that they forsook me, and I hid my face
from them: and delivered them into the hands of the enemies, and they fell al
by the sword. According to their uncleanness, and wickedness

Annotations upon Ezechiels last vision: written in the nine last chapters.
Of the true sense of this obscure vision there be four opinions: two of the
Four expositions of this vision.
Jewish Rabbis, and other two of Christian Catholic Doctors. The more
ancient Jews understand this vision wholy and only of the temple and city
of Jerusalem, reedified by Zorobabel and Nehemias with others, after their 1.
Of the temple and city reedified after the captivity.
captivity in Babylon, assisted by the Persian kings: But this opinion can
not consist with the holy text, chapter 42. v 16. describing the utter wal of the
temple in length on every side (being four square. v. 20) five hundred
reeds, every read containing six sacred cubits ( chapter 40. v 5.) which are
above ten foot, or two passes; and so. 500. reeds making a thousand passes,
or a mile, the whole wall was four miles in compass. Likewise the city is
described ( oh. 48. v. 16.) to have in length on the north quarter, four
thousand five hundred reeds, with the same length on the west quarter, and
consequently on the east, and south, that is, nine thousand passes, or nine
miles on every side: in all the circuit thirty six miles. Of which greatness
it is certain the temple and city never were. No not after the temple was
augmented by Herod Ascolo^ites, vvherof Josephus writes. li. 15. c. 14. Antiq.
Iud^icarum. Neither were there any such waters issuing from the material
temple, nor such trees on the banks 2. That Messiah shall build a material
temple and city.
thereof, bringing forth fruits every month, as are described, chapter 47. v. 1.
and 12. Al which, with other like dissonances considered, the later Jews
confessing that this prophecy is not hitherto fulfilled, say that their
Messiah, whom they expect, shall build such a terrestrial city, and temple,
with all the appertinances, as are showed in this vision. Rejecting therefore
these Jewish errors, and ridiculous 3. That this prophetical vision was
conditional.
imaginations. Richardus de Sancto Victore, Hugo Cardinalis, Nicolaus chapter 18 v.
23.
Lyranus, and some other Christian Doctors, suppose that God in deed
conditionally, according to his antecedent will, promised al these things, even
as the chapter 33. v. ^1.
letter sounds, to the Jews, if after their delivery from captivity, they
should sincerely serve him, walk rightly in his ways, and perfectly keep his
commandmentes. And that besides this supposed literal sense, all the same should
more excellently be performed in the mystical temple and city of God, our
Savior Christ, and his Church. But for so much (say these Doctors) as the
Jews performed not that which was required of their part, in perfect life and
due service of God, this vision was not fulfilled, but only in some part,
according to the virtues, and merits of the better sort of that people, by
the restoration of the city, temple and other things, as in the books of
Esdras: and that lastly for their general revolt from Christ persecuting him to
death, their temple and city were again destroyed, the people slain,
dispersed, and rejected, except only the few relics converted to Christ. In
whom, with the multitude of Gentiles, the whole vision has full effect. This
opinion albeit grounded in 4. That it cannot al be expounded according to the
history but only mystically.
probability, yet seems not so certain, nor in deed so probable, as the
judgment of S. Ierom, and S. Theodoret in their commentaries, as also of S.
Gregory in his homiles upon Ezechiel, and of many others, both ancient and
late writers. Who not finding how to apply this vision in all parts to the
state of the old testament, neither that promise of such a huge great temple,
and city with the rest were agreeable to Gods vvisdome, do only expound this
vision to perteine in some parts to the Jews reduced from temporal
captivity, as in figure of al mankind redeemed by Christ, and of his Church
gathered of al nations, enriched and adorned with al spiritual graces,
virtues, and power. Neither yet expounding al of the militant Church, but some
part of the triumphant only, as surpassing the perfectest state of this
transitory life. We therefore out of their large discourses shall abridge a
fevv, and brief marginal notes, for some light of understanding the text, and
entrance into the spiritual sense, principally intended by the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XL. The fifth part. Restoration of the temple, with things perteyning
thereto: more especially the glory of the Church militant and triumphant.
In a vision the prophet sees the reedisication of Jerusalem. 5. with the
measures of diverse parts thereof; 47. and of the court, and entry of the
temple.
IN the five and twentieth year of our transmigration, in Into the destroyed
city of Jerusalem.
thither. In the visions of God he brought me into Mount Sion:
a mountain called exceeding heigh mystically, in that it signifies the Church
of Christ: for historically Sion was not so exceeding hiegh.
exceeding high: upon which there was as it were the building of a city bending
toward the south. And he brought me in thither: In the Hebrew text in the
Chaldee Paraphrasis, and in the 70. Interpreters, it is thus, of six cubits,
in a cubite and a palm, to signify that these cubits used in measuring
sacred things contained six palms, vvheras the ordinary cubite contains
but five palms. See. chapter 43. v. 13.
and a palm: and he measured the breadth of the building with one reed, the
height also with one reed. And he came to the gate, that looked to the and
twenty cubits: door against door. And he made fronts Larger within then
without, to spread the light within the place, and to avoid the danger of hurt
from abroad: as the windows of Salomons temple. 3. Reg. 6. as also in casties,
and towers is commonly used. In explicating this vision by reason of the
obscurity, is great variety amongst the expositors, but al agree that God
here reveled to the prophet, that he vvil reward the good, tevvitte, in the old
Testament temporally, and in the new spiritually, first with grace in this
life, and with eternal glory in life everlasting.
oblique windows in the chambers, and in To the gates of the utter wal was
ascent of seven steps, but of the inner wal ( v. 32.) of eight steps, to
signify that m^^e perfection is required in the new Testament then was in the
old, for which more grace is given and better revvard. S. Greg.
seven steps was the ascent to it: and an and the windows thereof, and entry
thereof round about fifty cubits of length, and of breadth five and twenty
cubits. And looked to the way of the North. And he said to me: This For that
the pillars are not measured, it seems they were of the same height and
bigness, as the former were built by Solomon. 3. Reg. 7. v. 1^.
pillars in the fronts: one on this side, and an other on that side.

CHAP. XLI. A description of the temple to be reedified, and all the parts
thereof.
AND he brought me into This description of the temple and order of priesthood,
with the partition and fertility of the land is much more excellent, then was
in Salomons time: and the new temple reedified by Zorobabel, was much meaner
then Salomons, and therefore this prophecy (as likewise the prophecies of
Aggeus and Zacharias) cannot be understood of the temple in Jerusalem but of
the Church of Christ. S. Ierom* in chapter 40 Ezec. S. Aug. li 18. c. 45. ciuit.
the temple, and he measured And I saw in the house the height round about, the
sides In the wal of the temple were interchangeably painted a Cherub
signifying knowledge, and a palmetree signifying victory, representing to men
that they must be instructed in divine knowledge, and ^o sight for victory.
Cherubs and palmetrees wrought, and a Signifying our Savior, who in his
humanity suffered miseries but as a lion overcame al enemies.
two faces. The face of a man by the palmetree on this side, and of the doors.
And there were Cherubs also graven in the

CHAP. XLII. Description of the courts, chambers, and other places pertening
to the temple.
AND he brought me out into the utter court by the way:: S. Ierom finding the
Hebrew text and the 70. interpreters, and others to differ not only in words
but also in the sense, explicating as seemed to him most probable avouches
vvithal that saying of Socrates: Sci^ quodnescio. I know, that I do not ^novv
any thing perfectly. For it is a part of knowledge (says he) to ^novv that
thou art ignorant.
that leads to the North, and he brought me into the celle, that was against
the separated building, and against the house bending to the North. In the face
of the length, an which way was before the entry separated by the way of the
East going in. And he said to me: The celles of the North,

CHAP. XLIII. The glory of God returns to the new temple, 7. The prophet
hears, that the Israelites will no more pollute Gods name with idolatry: 10.
is commanded to show them the measure, and form of the temple, 13. and of the
altar: 18. with sacrifices to be offered seven days.
AND he brought me to the gate that looked to the way All the world is lightened
by the preaching of Christ's Apostles, and their successors: and the triumphant
Church shall perfectly shine when that which is so wne i^ corruption ^hal
^^^e in incorruption ^^ c. 1. Cor. 1^. S. Ierom. S. Thomas also exponndeth this
place of the ^. virgin conceiving the Son of God p 3. q* 27. a 3.
the earth shined at his majesty. And I saw a vision chapter 9.
according to the form which I had seen, when he came to destroy the city:
and the shape according to the sight, which I had seen by the river Chobar:
and I fell upon my face. And chapter 1.
the majesty of our Lord went into the temple by the way of the gate that
looked to the East. And the spirit lifted me up, speaking to me out of the
house, and a man stood by me, said God has left the house of the Jews
desolate. ^a^. 23. v. 38 but remains with the Church of Christ al days to
the end of the world. Mat 28 v. 2^.
for ever: and the house of Israel shall no more pollute my holy name, they,
and their kings in their fornications, and in the ruins of their kings, and
in the excelses. Who have built their threshold by my threshold, And the
perfect impolluted Church, without spo^ or vv^^ncle (Ephesians 5 v. 27.) is only the
(...)hant Church.
all the order thereof, and all the laws thereof show to them, and thou shall
write in their eyes: that they may keep all the descriptions thereof, and the
precepts thereof, and let them do them. This is the law of the house in the
top of the The sacred cubite or cubite used in sacred things was longer then
the common cubite by one palm.
which had a cubite and a palm: in the bosom thereof was a cubit, and a cubite
in breadth: and the limite thereof even to the brimme thereof, and round about,
one palm* this also was the trench of the altar. And The altar is called
Ariel* the lion of God* because fire sometimes descending from God upon the
altar consumed the sacrifice* as a lion consumes his pray S. Ierom.
Ariel it self of four cubits: and from Ariel And thou shall give to the
Priests, and Levites, that are of

CHAP. XLIIII. The East gate of the Sanctuary shall be always shut. 5. The
incircumcised shall not enter into the sanctuary: 10. nor the Levites, that
have served idols* but shall do other service belonging to sacrifices: 15. and
the children of Sadoc shall do the priestlie functions: 17. observing the
prescribed rites thereof.
AND he turned me to the way of the utter sanctuary, S. Ierom expounds this
of the hardness of scripture, which no man vndersta^ndeth fully but the son of
God. Mat. 11. v. 27. Likewise of of our B. Lady a perpe^ual virgin, also
after the birth of Christ. The same does. S. Augustine, ser. 6. and 18 d^ temp.
S Amb. cp. 81. S. Chrysostom. ho. de ^^ Bapt.
shall not be opened, and man shall not pass through it: Because our Lord the
God of Israel is entered in through it, and it shall be shut for the prince. The
prince himself shall sit in it, to eat bread b fell on my face. And our Lord
said to me: c set thy heart, and see with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears
al things, that I speak to thee concerning all the ceremonies of the house of
our Lord and concerning all the laws thereof: and thou shall set thy heart in the
ways of the temple, by all the goings out of the sanctuary. And thou b This
astonishment, and reverence of the prophet. c and the great attention which he
is admonished to have, import the great mysteries of Christ and his Church, and
not only the temple and rites of the old law which were but figures of the new.
and to pollute my house, and you offer my breades, the fat, and the blood:
and you dissolve my covenant in all your wicked abominations. And you have not
kept the precepts court and within. There shall be linen mitres on their
heads, Holy things are ordinarily to be done in holy places; and therefore
sacred vestures (by touching vvherof men were sanctified. Exo. 29. v. 37.)
must not be used out of the temple.
shall not sanctify the people in their vestures. And they shall not shave their
head, nor nourish Leuit. 10. v. 9.
inner court. And widow, and her that is divorced they shall Deuteronomy. 18.
you shall not give them in Israel, for I am their possession. The victime both
for sin and for offense they shall eat:

CHAP. XLV. In distribution of the land (after the captivity) several portions
are assigned for the Priests, the Levites, the City, and the Prince: the rest
was for the people. 9. Rulers are admonished to observe just measures: 15. and
to offer due sacrifices.
AND when you shall begin to divide the land by lot, separate The land that was
assigned to holy uses, was called sanctified, and could not be alienated to
private men nor other purposes.
a piece sanctificatum.
sanctified of the land, in length twenty five thousand, and in breadth ten
thousand: it shall be sanctified in all the border thereof round about. And it
shall be sanctified on every side by five hundred The princes portion of land
was round about the clergies portion, that he might defend them, and the
peoples part round about the princes, that they might defend him.
the prince also on this These measures were of equal capacity, but the ephi
served for dry things; and the bat for liquid, as appears. v. 13. and 14.
ephi, and the bat shall be equal, and of one core: and ten battes make a core:
because ten battes fill a core. And one ram of a flock of two hundred, of
those things As the people were bond to pay certain first fruits to their
temporal prince:
the so he was mutually bond to pay the charges of public sacrifices for all
the people. S. Ierom also expounds this mutual obligation to consist between
the people and hiegh priest.
upon the prince shall the holocaust be,

CHAP. XLVI. A prescription at which gate, and what sacrifices shall be offered
for the prince, every sabbath, and first day of the month. 16. The prince may
give perpetual inheritance to his sons, but to his servants only til the
year of Iubiley. 19. with description of the places, where sacrifices shall be
prepared.
THVS says our Lord God: The gate of the inner court, After the captivity
albeit king David's progeny continued in Salathiel, Zorobabel and others, yet
they had not the state of kings or temporal princes; and therefore not only
Christian Doctors, but also Rabbi David and other Hebrews understand this
prophecy of Christ the true Messiah, and of the sacrifices and rites of his
Church: the letter nevertheless alluding to the form of the old law.
the prince shall enter in by the way of the entry of the gate from without,
and he shall stand in the threshold of the gate: and the priests shall make his
holocaust, and his pacifiques: and he shall adore upon the threshold of the
gate, and shall go out: but the gate shall not be shut til evening. And the
people of Lord God: If the prince shall give a gift to any Al works done by
the true children of God, that is to say, done in the state of grace, do merit
eternal reward.
of his sons: his inheritance shall be to his sons, they shall possess it by
inheritance. But if he give a legacy of his inheritance to one But other moral
good works done in state of mortal sin are only revvarded temporally in
this world, and not in life everlasting.
of his servants, it shall be his until the year of remission, and it shall
return to the prince: and his inheritance shall be to his sons. And the
prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance

CHAP. XLVII. The prophet sees waters issuing from under the Temple: 4.
increasing to an vnpassible torrent: 9. whereto come al sorts of fishes: 12.
with trees on the banks bringing forth fruit every month. 13. And the land
is given in portions to the twelve tribes.
AND he turned me to the gate of the house, and behold See cha. 36. v. 25.
There is no history, nor probability that waters issued out of the temple,
which was reedified by Zorobabel.
waters issued forth under the threshold of the house toward the East: for the
face of the house looked to the East: but the waters descended into the right
side of the temple to the South part of the altar. And he led me out by the
way:: Neither did al sorts of fishes live in any such water nere the temple
as are mentioned. v. 9. And therefore this prophecy has an hiegher and truer
sense, of the Church of Christ and the water of Baptism.
flowing on the right side. When the man went out toward cubits: and he brought
me through the water even to the ankles. And again he measured a thousand, and
he brought S. John savv this river of living water as clear as crystal,
proceeding from the seat of God, and of the lamb. And the tree of life yelding
twelve fruits rendering his fruit every month. etc. Apoc. 22.
over the torrent shall rise Joseph's two sons had each one a whole portion,
and so there were twelve tribes besides the Levites, who had other better
means then the rest.
because Joseph has a duble cord. and you shall possess it every man in like
manner the mids of Auran, and from the mids of Damascus, and from the mids
of Galaad, and from the mids of the land of Israel, Jordan making the bound
to the East sea, you shall measure also the East quarter. And the South quarter
toward

CHAP. XLVIII. Further description of every tribes part of the land. 8.
likewise of the portions of Priests, 13. Levites. 15. City, 21. and Prince.
31. with twelve gates named of the twelve tribes.
AND these are By the twelve tribes of Israel S. Ierom understands the
universal multitude of al glorified Saints, noting that no mention is here
made of the cities of refuge (as in the books of Numeri, and Iosue) because in
the glorious habitation of Saints, there can be no need of refuge, where al
are perfect al secure.
the names of the tribes from the borders As the first borne of living things,
and first fruictes of al things springing, so the first portion of land
all^^ed to Gods service is called the first fruits.
first fruits, which you shall separate, five and twenty thousand of breadth
and of length, as every portion from the East quarter to the quarter of the
Sea: and the sanctuary shall be in the mids thereof. The first fruits, which
you shall separate The North side of the city being in length 4500. reeds, of
six sacred cubits, every read, the west side also, and consequently the
other two sides east and south, in all 18000. reeds which make 36. mi^les, of
1000. passes every mile, it is certain that this description agrees not to
the terrestrial city of Jerusalem, which was nothing nere so large, And
therefore the later Jewish Rabins hold opinion, that when their Messiah comes
the city of Jerusalem shall be built so great. But al Catholic Doctors
understand it mystically of the Church of Christ.
the North quarter five hundred and four thousand: and to the South quarter
five hundred and four thousand: and to the East quarter five hundred and four
thousand* and to the West quarter, five hundred and four thousand. And Yea and
to the sea over against the five and twenty thousand, unto the border of the
Sea, likewise it shall be in the portions of the prince: and the first fruits of
the sanctuary, and the sanctuary of the temple shall be in the mids thereof.
And of S. John the Apostle had the same vision of this new Jerusalem Christ's
triumphant Church. Apoc. 21. and 22.
This is the land, which you shall divide by lot to The Synagog of the Jews
being left desert. Mat. 23. v. 38. Christ is with his militant Church al days
even to the consummation of the world Mat. vlt. and with his Church triumphant
illuminating and glorifying it for ever and ever. Apoc. 22. v 5.
Our Lord there.

THE ARGUMENT OF DANIELS PROPHECY.
DANIEL of the tribe chapter 1. v. 6.
of Judah, and chapter 1. v. 3 and 4. Reg. 20. v. 18.
royal blood, about the age of Daniel of the royal blood.
ten years, was carried into Babylon with other children for hostage, when
Nabuchodonosor invaded the kingdom of Judah, in chapter 1. v. 1.
the third year of king Ioakim. His whole life (in all about an hundred and
ten years) He was most holy:
was most pious, with such zele of Gods honor, and common good of his
country, that he was called by an Angel, chapter 9. v 23.
vir desiderioru^, the man of (godly) desires: Ezech. 14. and 28. f chapter 6. v.
5.
whom also Ezechiel, elder in years, prophesying part of the same time, joined
with Noe and Job for example of holy men; recounting most wise: and most loyal.
him also the most renowned of his time for wisdom. Whose loyal fidelity
toward the king of Babylon, was so clear, that his malignant enemies said
expressly of him: f We shall not find against this Daniel, any occasion, unless
perhaps in the law of his God. His book as well in respect His book is
excellent: but hard to be understood.
of various important narrations of things done: as of most hiegh divine
Mysteries is very excellent: but withal very obscure, for that many things
here inserted, seem hardly to agree with other authentical histories; some
things also are intricate in themselves; nor placed in order of time as they
happened: and many things so briesly related, that they can not be
understood, without the knowledge of profane histories. As S. Ierom affirms
Epist. 103. But as for an other difficulty which some make, denying the chapter 3.
v. 24. chapter 13. chapter 14.
Certain parts of this book are denied by the Jews, and some others. It is
probable that these parts were some times in the Hebrew, or the Chaldee.
Prayer of Azarias, with the Hymn following, and the histories of Susanna, Bell,
and the Dragon, to be Canonical Scripture, it is partly solued already, in the
Annotations before the Book of Tobie: where is showed, that it is no just
exception against these, and other parts of holy Scripture of the old
Testament, because they are not in the Hebrew Edition, being otherwise accepted
for Canonical by the Catholic Church. And further it is very probable that
these parcels were sometimes either in the Hebrew or Chaldee tongue, in which
two languages (part in one, part in the other) the rest of this book was
written. For from whence else could the Septuagint Interpreters, Theodotion,
Symmachus, and Aquila translate them? In whose Editions S. Ierom found the
same. But S. Ierom, some will say, calls these Objection out of S. Ierom.
histories fables, and so did not account them Canonical Scripture. First we
answer, that he reporting the Jews opinion uses their terms, not explicating
his own judgment, intending only to deliver sincerely that which he First
solution.
found in the Hebrew: Yet would he not omite to insert the rest, aduertising
withal that he had it in Theodotions translation. Which answer is clerly
justified by his own testimony (li. 2. c. 9. aduersus Ruffinum) in these
words: Whereas I relate (says he) what the Hebrews say against the history
of Susanna, and the Hymn of the three children, he that for this reputeth me a
fool, proves himself a sycophant. For I did not explicate what myself judged,
but what they are wont to say against me. Secondly we Second solution.
answer, that if S. Ierom did not think these parts to be Canonical, yet
seeing so many other ancient Fathers, and now the whole Church hold them for
Canonical, we so believe them to be. For albeit the ancient Councels, and They
are proved to be Canonical by the Councels, and other Fathers.
others that recite catalogues of holy Scriptures, do not expressly say, as the
council of Trent lastly does (Sess. 4.) that all the parts of books by them
recited, are Canonical; yet they do not except any parts of this Book: and
therefore speaking indefinitly, do in deed include al, and not exclude any
parcels usually read in the Church as these are. Moreover very many ancient
Fathers do expressly allege these parts as Divine Canonical Scriptures. Of
many we shall cite some.

The prayer of Azarias is alleged as divine Scripture by S. Cyprian, The
prayer of Azarias.
Ser. de lapsis. by holy Ephrem, li. de humilitate comparanda. ca. 9. by S.
Chrysostom, ho. de tribus pueris. Leontius Cyprius, apud Eutym. par. 1.
Panopliae, tit. 8. Patianus, Parenesi in Poenitentiam. S. Augustine, Epist. 122.
and li. de natura boni. c. 16. S. Fulgentius, ad Venatiam de poenitentia. c.
16. Likewise the Hymn of the three children is alleged The Hymn of the three
children.
by most of the same, and by diverse others. As by S. Ierom himself, in c. 3. ad
Galatas, and Epist. 49. de muliere septiesicta: S. Ambrose, Praefatan Psalmos;
and li. 6. in Lucanum, c. 2. Concilium Toletanum, c. 13.

In like manner the history of Susanna is cited as holy Scripture by S.
Ignatius, The histore of Susanna.
Epist. ad Magnesianos. Tertullian, li. de corona militis. S. Cyprian li. 1.
Epist. ep. 8. and 40. S. Chrysostom. Ho. 1. in fine, has a whole sermon of
Susanna, as upon holy Scripture. S. Ambrose, li. 1. de Officijs, c. 18. li. 3.
c. 14. and li. 3. de Spiritu Sancto. c. 7. S. Augustine, Trast. 36. in Joan. and
Ser. 118. and 242.

Finally the histories of Bell, and of the Dragon are judged Divine Scripture
The histories of Bell, and the Dragon.
by S. Cyprian, li. 1. Ep. ep. 4. and li. 3. ep. 1. and li. 4. ep. 6. S. Basil,
ho. in diuites auaros. S. Athanasius, in Synopsi briefly explicating the
argument of this whole book, makes express mention of the Hymn of the three
children; and of the histories of Susanna, and of Bell, and the Dragon.

To conclude therefore with whom we begane, S. Ierom speaking of this The
contents in general.
whole Book, says: Daniel temporum conscius, and totius mundi philoistor,
Epist. ad Paulm.
lapidem praecisum de monte sine manibus, and regna omnia subuertentem, claro
sermon pronuntiat. Daniel skilful of times, a studious historiographer, in
clear speech shows the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which
overthrows al kingdoms. Signifying the principal contents of this book to
be, that al other kingdoms (namely for example sake, the four great
Monarchies, the fist of the Chaldees, the second of the Medes and Persians, the
third of the Grecians, and the fourth of the Romans) should be overthrown,
one after an other; and only the kingdom of Christ our Savior, borne of a
perpetual virgin, shall In particular.
be permanent for ever. More particularly this Book may be divided into three
parts. In the first six chapters especially are declared (for most part
Divided into three parts.
in manner of history) certain acts of Daniel, with the other three Hebrew
children, and of the kings of Babylon. In other six chapters is more directly
prophesied of Christ; and of Antichrist; of the perpetual glory of Christ's
kingdom, and utter destruction of the others; with the end of world, and
general judgment. In the two last chapters are contained the histories of
holy Susanna; and of the idols Bell, and the Dragon.

THE PROPHECY OF DANIEL.
CHAP. I. The king of Babylon by force entering into Jerusalem, spoyleth the
temple: 6. amongst others carries captive Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias:
S. who abstayning from the kings meats, 15. are fayrer then other children.
17. and wiser (Daniel also understanding dreams) then all the magicians of
Chaldee. The first part. Acts of Daniel with the other three Hebrew children;
and of the kings of Babylon.

IN THE third year of the kingdom of Ioakim king 4. Reg. 24. v. 1.
of Judah, came Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon into Jerusalem, and besieged it.
And our Lord Part of the holy vessels and some especial persons were carried
away, but the king was released at this time: for he reigned in Jerusalem eight
years more, eleven in all. 2 Par. 36. v 5.
them away into the land of Sennaar, into the house of his god, and the vessels
he brought into the house of the treasure of his god. And the king spoke to
Asphenez the governor of kings sight. There were therefore among them of the
children Daniel as chief was an example to the other three children in their
manner of life, vvherby is also probable that they being al of the tribe of
Judah, v. 6. he was nerer of the royal blood: of which some were taken into the
kings court. v. 3.
Daniel purposed in his heart, that he would not Three causes moved them to
abstain from the kings meats: left they might eat any thing offered to i
dols, or forbid by the law of Moses, and because such delicare diet might
prouok to gl^tonie; or in time when they should be elder, to other sins.
Theod.
Prove I beseech thee, leanes p(...), etc.
pulse be given us to eat, and water to drink: and look upon our faces, and
the faces By mention of the first year of Cyrus is sufficiently signified that
Daniel lived all the time of the captivity. And ^^. 10. it is farther clear
that he lived in the third year: and very like, longer.
the first year of Cyrus the king.

CHAP. II. Nabuchodonosor dreameth, and forgeteth his dream, 4. which the
magicians not able to tell, 12. are adjudged to dye. 14. But Daniel (praying
with his three fellows) by revelation, 24. tells, 36. and interprets the
dream. 46. the king adoreth him confessing his God to be the only true God,
and aduanceth him and his fellows.
IN Nabuchodonosor had this dream the second year after his great conquest of
the Moabites, Ammonites, Syrians, and Egyptians, making his kingdom a great
Monarchy* so it was in the 25 year of his reign: when Daniel was about
the age of 35. years.
the second year of the kingdom of Nabuchodonosor, prosessors of Astrology.
Chaldees: to declare unto the king his dreams: who when they were come, stood
before the king. And the king said to them: I saw a dream: and being It is in
deed more easy to tell by the devils help, what one has dreamed; because
dreams being past might either proceed from the devil, or by some external
signs be known unto him: but to declare the signification which is to come,
and ^ncertaine, i^ above the devils or man's power: who can only conjecture
what is probable, and do often err therein. See the Annotations. Genesis 40.
that you speak a true interpretation also thereof. The Chaldees therefore
answering going in desired the king, that he would give him a time to tell the
solution to the king. And he went into his house, and he By shevving the kings
former cogitation before his dream, he gave great assurance of the true
spirit of prophecy, that the king might securely believe the interpretation of
the dream.
Thou o king beganst to think The four kingdoms of the Chaldees Persians,
Grecians, and Romans signified by the four parts of this statua, consisting
of diverse metals or matter did succeed in order of time:
as it were one great statua: that statua, great and high of stature stood over
against thee, and the sight thereof was terrible. not each one meaner, or baser
then the former, as gold is best and iron and earth the vvorst, for the last
rather excelled the former; but when this vision appeared the kingdom of the
Chaldees was the greatest, and most excellent and that being destroyed the
M^des and Persians became greater then it had been: again the Grecians under
Alexander became far greater then an^e before, and finally the Roman
greatest of al, til Christ's kingdom, his Church was spread over the whole
world.
The head of this statua was of the best gold, but the breast The Church of
Christ is the only kingdom that can not be destroyed.
a kingdom, that shall not be dissipated for ever, and his kingdom shall not be
delivered to an other people: and it shall break in pieces, and shall consume al
these kingdoms: and itself shall stand for ever. According as thou saw, that
the stone was cut out of the and the iron, and the brass, and the silver, and
the gold, the great God has shwed the king what things are to come hereafter.
and the dream is true, and the interpretation thereof faithful. Then king
Nobuchodonosor fell on his face, and He thought Daniel to be a little god;
subject to the great God. v. 47.
adored Daniel, Notwithstanding this confession, shortly after he erected an
idol to represent his own greatness, and to be adored therein.
your God is the God of gods, and Lord of kings, and he that reueleth
mysteries: because thou could open this mystery.
sacrament. Then

CHAP. III. Nabuchodonosor setteh up a statua, commanding al under pain of
death to adore it: 8. which Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago refusing to do, 14.
are cast into a burning furnace, 24. wherein they walk, defended by an Angel
from burning: praying, and praising God, 51. with an hymn, 57. inuiting al
creatures to praise him. 91. which the king admiring confesses, and
proclameth, that their God is the only true God.
NABVCHODONOSOR the king made This huge statua of ninty foot in height and nine
in breadth contained a great mass of gold. Which the king made to show his
riches, to terrify his enemies and to represent himself, that he might be
adored therein as a god. S. Ierem.
a statua of gold the king has set up. But if any man shall not adore Practice
of this idolatry consisted in falling prostrate on the ground before the
statua; some times it consists in offering incense to idols: and the like:
Now in England personal presence at heretical service or sermon is a
distinctiue sign of conformity to the protestants pretended religion; because
such presence is there exacted for this purpose.
prostrate, By this most modest and confident answer they professed their
assured faith of Gods omnipotent power, not knowing whether it was his divine
will to deliver them from the fire or no: resolving to suffer with patience
what soever he would permit to fall unto them.
can save us from the furnace of burning fire, and out of thy hands, o king,
deliver us. But if he will not, be it Abdenago, and he commanded that the
furnace should be heated seven times more, then it had been accustomed to be
heated. And commanded the strongest men of his host, or cappes.
and head attire, and shoes, and garments were cast into the furnace of burning
fire. For the commandent of the king did urge, and the

That which follows I found not in the Hebrevve volumes. Though these
parcels were not in the Hebrew, in S. Ieroms time, yet either had been in the
Hebrew or Chalde, or at least were Canonical scripture; as we have proved in
the argument of this book.


And they walked in the mids of the flame praising God,

Blessed art thou o Lord the God of our fathers, and laudable, In the very same
manner Moses prayed, and pacified Gods wrath. Exo. 32.
for Abraham thy beloved, and Isaac thy servant, and Israel thy holy one: to
whom their seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is in the sea
shore. Because o Lord we are diminished more then

And there is not at this time Sedecias being dead, and Ioachin kept in prison,
there was none in state of a king amongst the Jews: neither was there at
this time any prophet in all Ievvrie: for Daniel himself and Ezechiel were in
Babylon: and Jeremy was either dead or in Egypt.
prince, and duke, and prophet,

As in holocaust of rams, and bulls, and as in thousands chalkie clay, or
lime:
Naphtha, and tow, and pitch, and dry sticks, and the flame mounted out above

But the Angel of our Lord descended with Azarias, and his













Al Holy Angels do incessantly praise God, and therefore need not to be invited
thereto: sensible creatures do not properly praise God, because they have not
understanding nor vvil: but the meaning of this inuitation is, to congratulate
that Angels do alvvayes without intermission praise God, and to exhort al men
in consideration of al Gods works spiritual and corporal, to praise him, as
most worthy to be praised by all men.
works of our Lord bless ye our Lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.





























Priuations of things have also their decent course in the vinuersal state of
creatures: Darkness prayseth God, that is, brings forth praise in the hearts
of consideratiue men: S. Aug. li. de natura boni c. 16.
darkness bless ye our Lord: praise and superexalt him for ever.











Seas and rivers bless ye our Lord: praise and superexalt him for ever.





















Because he has delivered us from hell, and saved us out of the hand of death,
and delivered us out of the mids of the burning flame, and out of the mids
of the fire has he rid us.





Hitherto it is not in the Hebrew: and that which we have put, ^. Ieroms
^^ordes.
is translated out of the Edition of Theodotion.

Then Nabuchodonosor the king was astonished, and he arose The fire burned their
bands, but not their garments nor bodies: so God uses the service of his
creatures to give comfort to his servants, and not torment. S. Greg. li. 3.
c. 18. dialo. Where he vvriteth the like miracle, when the Goths would have
burned S. Benedict.
fettered into the mids of the fire? Who answering the king, said: It is true
o king. He answered, and said: Behold I see This fourth was the Angel that
auerted the force of the fire from them. v. 49. and 95.
the fourth is like to the son of God. Then came Nabuchodonosor and come. And
forthwith Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago went out of the mids of the fire. And
the nobles, and the They were not only restored to their former authority, as
prefectes over the works. chapter 2. v 49. but were also more advanced, as this
place insinuates.
promote Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago in the province of Babylon.
Nabuchodonosor the king, to al

CHAP. IIII. King Nabuchodonosor having an other dream, tells it to Daniel,
demanding of him the interpretation: 16. who encoreged and warrented to speak
freely, shows that the king shall become like a beast in form seven years:
28. the same is confirmed by a voice from heaven: 30. and being fulfilled, he
is at last restored to his own form, and state.
I It seems that Daniel inserted this particular history as the king in his
own person and words reported it after his restauratio^ It is also probable
that the king had this dream about the 34. year of his reigue. For he
reigning in all 43. years, lived seven years among beasts into which state
he fell one year after this dream* v. 26. and lived about a year more or
less after his restoration.
Nabuchodonosor was quiet in my house, and flourishing who has the spirit of
the holy gods in himself: and I told the dream before him. Baltassar prince
of the southsayers, Seven times signify seven years, because al ordinary
varieties of times are in one year.
times be changed over him. In the sentence of the watchman is the No meruel
that the prophet was trubled in mind being loath to declare the calamity
which should fall unto the king, and yet must needs utter the truth.
his cogitations trubled him. But the king answering said: Baltassar, let not
the dream and the interpretation thereof truble thee. Baltassar answered, and
said: My Lord, the dream be to them, that hate thee, and the interpretation
thereof be thine enemies. The tree which thou saw fair, and the fruit thereof
exceeding much, and the food of things in it, under it the beasts of the filde
inhabiting, and in the boughs thereof the fowls of heaven abiding: It is thou
And therefore with mild words, wishing the king might escape the evil, which
was decreed against him, he makes his entrance to the true interpretation of
the dream.
king, which art magnified, and become mighty: and thy greatness has grown,
and is come even to heaven, and thy power unto the ends of the earth. But in
that the king saw a watchman, Gods threats being conditional that if sinners
truly repent he vvil pardon al, or part of the punishment, the prophet
proposes the most sovereign remedy of alms deeds that by works of mercy
this sinful king, or any other sinner may procure the mercy of God. As in
deed this king found mercy after some punishment: the prophet proposes the
sovereign remedy of alms deeds, that by works of mercy, he might procure
Gods mercy.
redeem thou thy sins with alms, and thine iniquities with the mercies of
the poor: perhaps he will forgive thine offenses. Al these things came upon
Nabuchodonosor fore after the end of the days, I Nabuchodonosor lifted up mine
eyes to heaven, and my sense was restored to me: and I blessed the Highest, and
praised him that lives for ever, and glorified him: because his power is an
everlasting power, and his kingdom in generation and generation. And all the
inhabitants Being restored to his wits he went up right, cut his hair and
nails, and so appeared to himself as returned to his former figure or shape.
figure returned to me: and my nobles, and my magistrates sought for me, and I
was restored in my kingdom: and more ample magnificence was added to me. " Now
therefore I Nabuchodonosor praise, and magnify,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. IIII.
13. Let his heart be changed.] In what manner king Nabuchodonosor was changed
Nabuchodonosor was not changed in substance; but became mad, and lived seven
years like a beast.
is hard to explicate. But omitting other opinions, the most probable and
common is, that he was not deprived of his reasonable soul, nor the form and
parts of his body substantially changed from the nature of a man: but he was
distracted losing the use of reason, and in his own melancholy imagination
and fantasy, thought that he was a beast: And therefore easily refused the
conversation of men, and consorted himself with beasts; went naked; his
hair growing very much, and covering al his body; his nails likewise
extreme long; he went on his hands together with his feet, like fourfooted
beasts; did eat grass as an ox, putting his mouth to the ground, to shere
and swalowe it, the space of seven years. Then God restoring to him the use v.
13.
of reason, and inspiring him with grace, he lifted up his eyes to heaven ( v.
31.) and in perfect sense blessed God, the Hieghest, and praised him; was
again received, yea sought for by his nobles and magistrates: so was restored
to his kingdom, and had more magnificence then before.

34. Now therefore I Nabuchodonosor praise, magnify, and glorisie God] Albeit
It is probable that he died shortly after his restoration.
holy Scripture does not report, when and how king Nabuchodonosor died, yet
by this last thing written of him, it is very like he lived not long after his
great chatisment: for if he had, it is probable that Daniel would have
written more of him, and that he being so fully converted to God, would have
delivered ^oach in king of Judah, out of prison (which his next successor
Euilmerodach did. 4. Reg. 25. v. 27.) and all the Jews from captivity, if God
had longer spared him life, he being now well affected toward them. And that
he died in state And most like that he is eternally saved.
of salvation, may with great reason be supposed, seeing his repentance and
conversion to God is so fully expressed in holy Scripture, and no mention that
he fell again. Which is also the judgment of most learned vvriters. Namely of
Josephus. li. 10. Antiq. Dorotheus in Synopsi. S. Epiphanius, in vita Danielis.
S. Ierom. epist. 7. ad Letam. S. Augustine epist 122. ad Victoriam. and li de
predest* and gratia c. 15. Where he compares Pharao with Nabuchodonosor, and
their diverse ends, by Gods grace moving the one to penance for his iniquity,
the other wilfully fighting against Gods merciful verity. as we have noted.
Exo. 7. Page 174.

CHAP. V. King After Nabuchodonosor, and before Baltassar, Euilmetodach reigned
in Babylon, who delivered Ioachin king of Judah out of prison, and used him
with great respect in the 37. year of the transmigration. 4. Reg. 25. There
reigned also before Balthassar other two of an other lineage, called Niglissar
and Labosardach: as testify. Euse. S. Ierom. S. Beda. and others.
Baltassar making a great banquet, with his nobles drink in the holy vessels,
which were taken from the Temple of Jerusalem. 5. Fingers appear writing on
the wall: 10. which only Daniel reads, and interprets: 18. signifying the
ruin of the king: 30. happening the same night.
BALTASSAR The ruin of this Baltassar* happened in the 17. and last year of
his reign: when Daniel was nere an hundred years old.
the king made a great feast to his nobles the kings mother* v. 11.
queen for the thing changed. There is a man in thy kingdom, that has the
spirit Al progenitors are commonly called the fathers of their of spring: so
Nabuchodonosor is called the father of Baltassar being his grand father: as may
be gathered ler. 27. v. 27. where is prophecised that Nabuchodonosor and his
son, and sons son should reign over many nations.
thy father knowledge and wisdom were found in him: for king Nabuchodonosor
also thy father appointed him prince of the magicians, inchanters, Chaldees and
southsayers, thy father, I say o king: Because more ample spirit, and prudence,
and thing written.
word. Moreover His imagination that he was a beast made him forsake the
company of men, and to dwell amongst wild beasts. chapter 4*
heart was set with the beasts, and with the wild asses was his habitation:
grass also he did eat as an ox, and with the dew of heaven his body was
embrewed: til he knew that the Highest had power in the kingdom of men, and
whomsoever it shall please him he will raise up over it. Thou also his The Medes
being at this time in the siege of Babylon, took their opportunity to assault
it this night, when the king and most part of the city were drunk.
The same

CHAP. VI. King Darius making Daniel one of the three chief rulers of his
kingdom: 4. and intending also to advance him higher, other princes accuse him
for praying to God, contrary to the kings edict. 16. whereupon he is cast into
the lions den: 21. but is conserved without any hurt: 24. his accusers are
devoured by the lions, and commandment is given, that al men shall fear the God
of Daniel.
IT pleased Darius (king of medes now also of Chaldees) otherwise called
Astyages ( chapter 13 v. 65.) reigned but one year, and so Cyrus succeeded.
Darius, and he appointed over the kingdom he was faithful, and no fault, nor
suspicion was found in him. Those men therefore said: An old and continual
malignant practice, to c^l religion treason. And for that purpose to procure
laws or statutes to be enacted.
We shall not find against this It is not probable that Daniel opened the
windows of purpose, that he might be senne to pray: for so ^e should have
indiscreetly contemned the king, and provoked the infidels to persecute him; but
having accustomed to open the windovves of his upper chamber, which gave
prospect toward Jerusalem, according to Salomons prayer. 3. Reg. 8. v. 47. and
48. he observed the same custom still: and was not senne publicly of many,
but his enemies searching curiously (v. 11.) found him praying, and accused him
of breaking the kings Edict.
the windows being opened in his upper chamber, three times in a day toward
Jerusalem bowed he his knees, and adored, and confessed before his God, as also
he had accustomed to do before. Those men therefore searching curiousely, found
Daniel that nothing should be done against Daniel. And the king To this miracle
wrought by the power of God in defense, and for the merits of this holy
prophet, S. Paul alludeth. Heb. 11. v. 33.
My God has sent his Angel, and has shut up the The law of like-punishment is
so agreeable to the law of nature, that this Pagane king punished Daniels
accusers, when it appeared to him, that Daniel had not committed treason, but
only used his religion and devotion.
they were cast into the lake of the lions, themselves, and their children, and
their wives: and they came not to the pauement of the lake, til the lions
caught them, and brake al their bones in pieces. Then Darius the king wrote to
al

CHAP. VII. The 2. part. Prophetical visions of Christ and of Antichrist.
Daniel sees four winds fighting, and four terrible beasts rising from the
sea: 9. God sitting in a throne, and served by innumerable Angels. 11. The
greatest beast is slain, and the power of the rest diminished. 13. The Son
of man receives eternal power of God. 15. The prophet much terrified, is
instructed that the four beasts signify four kingdoms. 19. The greatest
shall prevail for a while, 26. but shortly perish.
IN In order of time these two visions, were before the histories written in
the two precedent chapters.
the first year of Baltassar the king of Babylon, Daniel sum comprising it,
he said: I saw in my vision by night, Four winds may signify the great
tumultes which happen in the beginning of monarchies by vvarres and bloodshed
of much people.
the four winds of heaven fought in the great sea. And Four beasts do
signify the four Monarchies of the Chaldees, Medes and Persians, the
Grecians, and the Romans: as was also signified before in Nabuchodonosors
dream. chapter 2.
four great beasts came up, out of the sea diverse A lionesses cruelty, and
the pride of an eagle do resemble the Chaldees monarchy.
alyonesse, and she had A bear of rude shape, and vveake sight, content with
little and base meat, represented the Medes and Persians.
a bear stood a side: and there were three rewes in the mouth thereof, and in
the teeth thereof, and thus they said to it: Arise, eat very much flesh. After
this I beheld, and The leopard with wings and four heads, signified the
speedy victories of the Grecians under Alexander in four quarters of the
world: after his death divided into four kingdoms. g By the fourth beast
without name is understood the incomparable power of the Romans: governing
first by kingly authority; afterward by Consuls; then joining to them
Tribunes; sometimes Dictators; finally Emperial. h The little horn becoming so
great and strong, as to overcome all the other, signifies Antichrist; whose
outrageous fury shall continue but a short time. v. 25.
a leopard, and it had wings as of a bird, four upon it, and there were four
heads in the beast, and power was given to it. After this I beheld in the
vision g a fourth beast terrible and marvelous, and strong excedingly, it had
great iron teeth, eating and breaking, and treading the rest with her fete: and
it was unlike to the other beasts, which I had seen before it, and it had ten
horns. I considered the horns, and behold an other h little i the ancient k
thousands of thousands ministered to him, and l ten thousand hundred
thousands assisted him: judgment sat, and the books were opened. I beheld
because of the voice of m the son of man, and he came even to the ancient of
days: and in his sight they offered him. And he came to one of the assistants,
and I asked the truth of him concerning al these things, who told me the
interpretation of the words, and taught me: These four great beasts, are
four n to a time, and times, and half a time. n. chapter 12. v. 7. 11. and 12.
Apoc. 11. v. 2. and 3. Apoc. 12. v. 6. and 14. and Apoc. 13. v. 5.
And judgment shall sit, that might may be taken away, and ^ God the Father
is called the Ancient of days, not as though one Person of the Blessed
Trinity were more ancient then an other: for every Person is eternal; and al
are one eternal God. But in order of proceeding, one from an other, the Father
is the beginning: of whom the Son is begotten; and from whom, as also from
the Son, the Holy Ghost proceeds. k By multiplication of these cardinal
numbers, is signified the innumerable multitude of Angels: who do excede al
corporal creatures in number, as the celestial spheres excede terrestrial
bodies in greatness. l And the hieghest Hierarchy ( who are Assitants) do
far excede the other Hierarchies in multitude. S. Dionys. c. 14. Hierar.
caelest. S. Tho p. 1. q. 112. a. 4 m Our Savior Christ is here clearly
prophesied: by whose power Antichrist shall be utterly destroyed.
power, and the greatness of the kingdom, that is under all the heaven, be given
to the people of the saints of the Highest: whose kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and al kings shall serve him, and shall obey him. Hitherto the end of
the word.

CHAP. VIII. Daniel sees a ram with two horns ouercomen by a goat with one
horn: 8. Which shall also be broken, and four less rise in place thereof: one
of them prophaneth the temple in Jerusalem, and takes away the daily
sacrifice. 15. And Gabriel the Archangel expounds the vision.
IN:: the third year of the reign of Baltassar the king, a He insinuates
that this vision was in explication of some part of the former, which he had
two years before. chapter 7. where four monarchies are mentioned so here is
foretold the great conflict between the Persians and Greciaus, about 220.
years after.
saw in my vision, after or river.
eyes, and saw: and behold one The ram represe^ted the king of Persians and
Medes.
ram stood before the marrice, having high horns, and one higher then an
other and growing under. Afterward I saw the ram pushing with the The goat
signified Alexander the great:
a buckgoate came from breaking the two horns, that is conquering the two
nations of Persians and Medes.
brake his two horns, and the ram could not resist him: and when he had cast
him on the ground, he trod him, and no man could deliver the ram out of his
hand. And the buckgoate became exceeding King Alexander died when he was very
young and strong not fully 33. years of age.
was broken, and there rose up Four of his solovvers possessed every one a
kingdom of his Monarchy.
four horns under it by the four winds of heaven. And out of one of them
came forth g one little horn: and it was made great against the South, and
against the East, and against the strength. And it was h one of the saints
spea king, and one saint said to an other, I know not to whom that spoke: How
long the vision, and the continual sacrifice, and g Antiochus Epiphanes
persecuting the people of God destroyed the sacrifice, polluted the temple
setting up the image of Jupiter Olimpius.
the sin of the desolation that is made: and the sanctuary, and the strength
shall be conculcate? And he said to him: 2300. euenings and mornings, that is,
2300. days; which make six years and well nere four months, the whole time
from the beginning of Antiochus persecution unto his death: for he begane to
persecute in the year 143. 1 M^^ 1. v 21. and he died an. 149. 1. Mac 6. v 16.
within which time an. 148 the temple was purged 1. Mac. 4. v 52. l Ezechiel is
very often called by the name of son of man, here also Daniel is so called by
an Angel, as well to distinguish Angelical and humane nature, as in honor of
mankind, which Christ would assume: and therefore calls himself by the very
same rule in the Gospel.
the evening and morning, two thousand three hundred: and the sanctuary shall
be cleansed. And it came to pass when b One Angel demanded of an other to know
a thing to come.
he was come, trembling I fell on my face, and he said to me: Understand k son
of man, that in the time of the end the vision shall be accomplished. And when
he spoke to me I fell flat Historically Antiochus; mystically Antichrist, as chapter
12. and Mat. 24.
there shall arise a king impudent of face, and understanding obscure speeches.
propositions. And his strength So much as perteyned to the profanation of the
temple was fulfilled above 300. years after this prophecy: as the same is
also a figure of Antichrist, it shall happen toward the end of this world. S
Greg. li. 30. c. 12. Moral.
after many days. And I Daniel languished, and was sick

CHAP. IX. Daniel confessing that they are justly afflicted for their sins,
15. prays for speedy mercy. 20. An Angel signifies to him, that within
seventy wekes of years, Christ will come; 26. and be slain; his people the
Jews denying him, whom he will therefore reject.
IN the first year of Darius the son Assuerus, or achasuerus, not a proper
name signifies a great prince, or head of people.
of Assuerus of the Darius had reigned in Persia before this time, but this
was the first year of his reign over the Chaldees, and also the last,
neither did he reign a full year: for Cyrus reigned some part of the seuentith
year of the Jews captivity in Babylon: in which also Baltassar was slain
Ier. 25. v. 12. and Ier. 29. v. 10. 2 Par. 36. v. 22.
the first year of his kingdom, I Daniel understood Daniel seeing the seuentith
year of captivity was comen, in which God promised to deliver his people.
Ier. 29. v. 10 prayed with great zele, and confidence for their release.
seventy Iere. 29. v. 10.
years should be accomplished of the desolation of Jerusalem. And I set my
face to our Lord my God to pray and beseech Deuteronomy 17. v. 14.
we have sinned to him. And he has established his words, our God, that we
might return from our iniquities, and might think on thy truth. And our Lord
has watched upon the This singular devotion with austere works of penance and
zele of his country merited this commendable title to be called the man of
desires.
a man of desires: and do thou mark the word, and understand the vision. And
vvheras the prayed particularly for the release of the Jews from captivity
of Babylon a far greater thing is promised and reveled to him, that within
seventy vvekes of years (that is* ^^. years) the Messiah Christ vvil come
and redeem mankind from captivity of finne and the devil.
Seventy weeks are abbridged upon These four things (v. 24) Forgeuenes of
sins; Infusion of justice; Fulfilling of prophecies; and Annoiated Holy of
holies agree only to Christ.
that preuarication may be consummate, and sin take an end, and iniquity be
abolished; and everlasting justice be brought; and vision be accomplished, and
prophecy; and the Holy one of holies be anointed. Know Hebd^mas or
Septenarius signifying seven, understood of days imports a week: of years
(as Leui. 25) seven years so seventy weeks 490. years. S Bed. li. de rat.
temp. c. 6. 7. 8.
weeks, and sixty two weeks, and the street shall be built again, and the
walls in * straitnes of the times. And after sixty truble some (...)
two weeks Christ shall be slain: and it shall not be his people, that shall
deny him. And the city, and the sanctuary shall the people dissipate with the
prince to come: and the end thereof waste, and after the end of the battle the
appointed desolation. And ^^at. 24.
even to the consummation, and to the end shall the desolation endure.

CHAP. X. After fasting and other voluntary afflictions, 4. Daniel seeing a man
in a strange form, and much terrified therewith, 8. is comforted. 13. The
Angels of Persians, and Grecians resist his prayer, 20. S. Michael assisting
the Jews.
IN the third year of Cyrus king of the Persians, a word was Pharao had a
vision in sleep, Genesis 41. Baltassar waking, savv a hand writing in the wal,
Dan. 5. but neither of them understood their visions, and therefore were not
prophets. Joseph understood the former, and Daniel this other, and so they
were prophets. For as this text teaches, understanding is required that a
vision be prophetical. ^. ^^o. 2. 2. q 175 a. 2 and 4.
there is need of understanding in vision. In those days I Daniel mourned The
Angel iepereth this honorable new title to encorege him being sore frighted.
thou man of desires, understand I stood trembling. And he said to me: Fear
not Daniel: because prayers*
been heard: and I am come for thy words. But The Angel guardian of Persia. S.
Ierom, S. Theodoret. S. Gregory.
the prince This Angel for his office sake, not yet knowing Gods vvil in this
particular, prayed that the Jews might remain among the Persians for their
edification and spiritual good.
resisted me one and twenty days: and behold Michael one of the chief
princes came to aid me, and I tarried there by the king of the Persians. But I
am come to teach thee what things shall come to thy Daniels proper Angel joined
his prayers with him for the delivery of the Jews from captivity. f S.
Michael the guardian Angel of the whole Church also prayed for the same purpose.
may fight against the prince of the Persians. when I therefore went sorth,
there appeared the prince of the Greeks coming. But yet I will tell thee that
which is expressed f your prince.

CHAP. XI. The Angel declares what shall happen to the Jews under the kings
of Persia, and by occasion of wars between Egypt and Syria.
AND I from the first year of Darius the Mede The Angel prosecuting his speech
to the prophet shows that he had prayed for the king of Persians, from the
first time after the overthrow of Babylon, seeing him well affected toward the
jews, as was also the next king Cyrus, who in deed released them.
stood Cambyses. 1. Smerdes magus. Darius Histaspis.
three kings as yet shall stand in Persia, and Xerxes. Alexander. come to his
height.
the fourth shall be enriched with exceeding riches above al: and when he is
grown mighty in his riches, he shall raise up al against the kingdom of
Greece. But there shall rise * a strong king, and shall rule with much into the
four winds of heaven: but not unto his posterity, nor according to his
mightines wherewith he ruled. For Scarsely touching other successors of
Alexander, the holy scripture here prophecieth of the kings of Egypt on the
south side of Jury, and Syrians on the North: by whose wars the Jews were
most molested.
his kingdom shall be rent even unto foreners, beside these. And Every
prophecy (says S. Ir^n, li. 4. c. 43) before it be fulfilled is aenigma, a
ridle; or obscure proposition. But when it is past may more easily sometimes
certainly, be interpreted. So by histories of things now past he gathers very
probably that by this king of the south was understood ^^olomeus son of
Lagus king of Egypt.
the king * of the South shall be made strong, and there d of his princes
prevail above him, and he shall rule in dominion: king of Egypt.
for his dominion shall be much. And after the end of e the king * of the North
to make king of Syria.
amity, and shall not obtain the strength of the arm, neither shall his sede
stand: and she shall be delivered, and they that brought her, her yongmen and
they that strengthened her in the times. And there shall stand of the bud of her
roots g his sons h but he shall not prevail. For the king of the North shall
i the children Isa. 19. v. 19.
also of the preuaricatours of thy people shall be extolled to fulfill the
vision, and they shall fall. And the king of the shall do right things with him:
and he shall give unto him a d His son called Ptolomeus Philadelphus excelled
his father in power and magnificence.
daughter of women, to overthrow it: and she shall not stand neither shall she be
his. And he shall turn his face to the e This king of the North seems to be
Antiochus Theos king of Syria.
he shall stumble, and fall, and shall not be found. And there shall k there shall
stand in his place one despised, and kingly f Ptolomeus Euergetes king of
Aegipt invaded and spoiled Syria.
shall obtain the kingdom by fraud. And the arms of him l of the league. And
g Seleucus Ceraunus, and Antiochus magnus sons of Seleucus callinicus shall
raise new wars against Ptolomeus Philopator king of Egypt, but the elder
brother being slain in the way, Antiochus shall prosecute the war.
go up, and shall overcome with few people. And he shall h He shall in uade and
kilmanie, but not prevail.
shall prosper and shall return into his own land. At the i Many Jews
deceived by Onias fleeing into Egypt shall erect a temple and sacrifice, falsely
auouching that they fulfill the prophecy of Isaie. chapter 19. v. 19.
shall come upon him galleis, and the Romans, and he shall be strooken, and shall
return, and shall fret^e against the testament of the sanctuary, and he shall
speed: and shall return, and shall devise against them, that have forsaken the
testament of the sanctuary. And of him shall stand m arms, and shall
fraudulently: but Even in the hotest persecution of Antiochus, Nero or
Antichrist some shall constantly confess true religion.
the people that knows their God, shall k According to the history al
expositers understand this of Antiochus, Epiphanes, who lived and died basely:
but mystically of Antichrist, very potent and glorious in this world, yet shall
have base beginning and an ignominious end.
obtain, and shall do. And the learned in the people shall l This title Prince
of the league or covenant, perteyneth directly to Antichrist: who will join
himself with the Jews pretending to observe the law of Moses and so they
vvil receive him as their Messiah. Joan. 5. v. 43. S. Ireneus li. 5. c. 25. S.
Ierom. and alij.
shall he care for any of the gods: because he shall rise up against al
things. But god The God of power or strength, either Jupiter the Grecians
great god, or their own streingth, vvherin Antiochus, and Antichrist shall
trust.
Maozim he shall worshipe in His royal tabernacle or palace, between the dead se
a and the mediteranian.
Apadno

CHAP. XII. The Angel describes the persecution of Antiochus, as the figure;
and of Antichrist prefigured. 6. the shortness also of his reign is clearly
prophesied.
BUT in that time shall rise up ^. Michael the guardian Angel and protector of
the Jews in the old testament. chapter 10. v. 13. and 21. and now of the Church
of Christ vvil defend the same against Antichrist nuisibly as the
Ecclesiastical pastors shall do visibly.
Michael the great prince, Al shall rise in body but al shall not be changed
into better. 1. Cor. 15 v. 51.
some unto life everlasting, and others unto reproach to see it always. But
they that be learned in the law of God.
shall A glorious A^reola or accidental revvard (besides the essential be
atitude) shall be ge^en to those that duly perform the office of pastors, in
teaching others: as there is an other like to Martyrs, and an other to Virgins.
as stars unto perpetual eternities. But thou Daniels prophecy is shut and
sealed, not to be interpreted by humane vvitte, but by the spirit of God,
vvhervvith the Church is illuminated, taught, governed, moved, and viuificated:
S. Iero. in Gal.
shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time appointed: very
many shall pass over, and there shall be manifest knowledge. And I Daniel saw,
and behold there A time ordinarily signifies one year, as chapter 4. v. 13 so
here is signified the space of three years and a half, as. chapter 7 and Apo. 12.
v. 14. etc.
f From the taking away of the daily sacrifice, and placing of abomination
(tovvite the practice of heresy) to desolation, that is, abolishing so much as
is possible, the holy Sacrifice of Mass, to the end of that persecution shall
be 1290. days.
g Why 45. days are added to the former number, is marvelous obscure: neither
may we presume amongst diverse expositions, to censure which seems most
probable.
h But we are content to go away with Daniel, (v. 9. and 13.) without
further searching the profound sense of so hiegh mysteries.
a time, and times, and the half of a time. And when the dispersion of the
hand of the holy people shall be accomplished, al these things shall be
accomplished. And I heard, and f when the Mat. 24.
to desolation shall be set up, a thousand two hundred ninety days. Blessed is
he that expects, and comes unto days g a thousand three hundred thirty
five. But thou h go, until

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XII.
7. Unto a time and times, and half a time. Our Savior saying (Matt. 24. v.
22) Antichrists persecution shall not be long. Ancient fathers understand this
term to be three years and a half. Agreably to other scriptures.
that the days (of Antichrists great persecution) shall be shortened: and Apoc.
17. v. 10. the great persecutor that is to come, must tarry a short time, it
is necessary S Iren li. 5. cont. here is. 8. Ierom S. Theod. in hun lo S. Aug.
li. 20. c. 23. ciuit. S. Prim. S. Beda. etc.
to say, that the time of the same persecutor here signified to Daniel, as also
before chapter 7. v. 25. and repeted Apoc 12 v. 14 by these terms of a time, and
times, and half a time, can not possibly importe any long time. And therefore
the ancient Fathers uniformly understand by a time, one year, by times two
years, and so by half a time, half a year. Which is somewhat more clear in
other terms, in this chapter v. 11. by a thousand two hundred ninety days; and
v. 12. a thousand three hundred thirty days, and Apoc. 11. v. 3. Two
witnesses shall prophecy (against Antichrist) a thousand two hundred sixty
days: Apoc 12. v 6. The Church shall be fed in the wilderness, the same number
of days 1260. But most clerly Apoc. 11. v. 2 and Apo. 13. v. 5. this great
persecution shall endure 42. months, that is, three years and a half.

Hitherto we read Daniel in the Hebrew volume. That which follows even to
the end of the book, is translated out of Theodotions Edition.

CHAP. XIII. Two old judges ouercomen with carnal concupiscence, tempt chaste
Susanna: The 3. part. Other histories not now extant in Hebrew.
22. who constantly resisting, 27. is by them falsely accused, 41. and condemned
of adultrie. 45. Daniel conuinceth them of false testimony, 60. and they are
punished with death.
AND there was a man dwelling in Babylon, and this name a S. Athanasius in
Synopsi, recites this history in the beginning of Daniel. And S. Aug. ser.
242. de tem. supposes that Daniel about the age of twelve years endued with
the spirit of prophecy discovered the malicious falsehood of them, that accused
Susanna.
Ioakim: and he took a wife named Susanna, the daughter b two ancients
appointed judges in that year, of whom our Lord spoke: That iniquities came
out of Babylon from the seniour judges, that seemed to rule the people. These
they were inflamed to the concupiscence of her: and they b In the
transmigration which was made in the third year of Ioakim king of Judah, the
Jews were better entreated, and had their own judicial tribunal, and other
priuilegies, until the captivity, which happened about 19 years after, in
the eleventh year of Sedecias. At which time they were brought into much more
bondage.
subverted their sense, and declined their eyes that they would not see heaven,
nor remember just judgments. They were come to Ioakim her husband, the two
ancients also came full of unjust cogitation against Susanna, to put her to
death. And they said For more color of just proceeding, these wicked men gave
their false testimony, and sentence before the people.
before the people: Send to Susanna daughter The people gave their opinions
that she deserved death, but the false Judges gave sentence. For so the form
of the law required. which they prerended to fulfill. Leu. 20. Deuteronomy. 22.
they condemned her to death. But Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and
said: Eternal Daniel by the gift of prophecy savv and declared that she was
innocent.
raised up the holy spirit of a VVheras therefore the people had consented to
her death, he denied his consent, and undertook to convince the false
vvitnesses: as he did. v. 54. and 58.
I am clean from the blood of this woman. And all the people turning to him,
said: What is this word, has given thee the honor of old age. And Daniel said
to Iere. 22. v. 3.
innocents, and dismissing offenders, our Lord saying: The innocent and the
just thou shall not kill. Now then if Exo. 23. v. 7.
thou saw her, tell under what tree thou saw them talking together. Who
said: Under a schine tree. And Daniel Deuteronomy. 19. v. 19.
saved in that day. But Helcias, and his wife praised God, for By this first
prophetical act, Daniel begane vvorthely to be esteemed.
Daniel became great in the sight of the people This last verse, of Astyages
otherwise called Darius, and of Cyrus succeeding him, perteyneth to the ninth
chapter. And here mention is made of them to signify that Daniel beginning to
prophecy in his childhood, continued even to old age. For between this
history of Susanna and the death of Darius were about nintie years.
And king Astyages was

CHAP. XIIII. Daniel detecteth the fraud of Bells priests: who pretend that Bell
eats much meat: 21. for which they are slain, and the idol destroyed. 22.
Likewise he destroys a dragon, which the Babylonians held for a god. 27. He
is cast into the lake of seven lions. 32. whithet Habacuc miraculously brings
him meat: 39. the lions hurt him not: and his accusers are devoured.
AND Daniel was It seems most probable that this king was Euilmerodach, who
favored the Jews, and delivered Iechonias (otherwise called Ioachin) out of
prison. 4. Reg. 25. v. 17.
the kings ghest, and honored above Genesis 10. v 10.
day of flower twelve amphor^.
a^ctabaes, and forty sheep, and of wine six great pottes. The king also did
worshipe him, and Which supposed, Daniel was now about the age of 55.
years. For being carried into Babylon at the age of ten years, was there 8.
years before Ioachin, who was there 37. years before he was delivered from
prison, which make in all. 55.
Daniel adored his God. and the king said to him: Why do thou not adore Bell.
Who in: and he said: Behold the pauement, mark whose steps these are. And
the king said: I see the steps of men, and women, Not only the Babylonians as
is manifest in many places, but also the Romans and most nations worshipped
Bell for a great god: But it is more wonderful that both the Chaldees and the
Romans otherwise most wise worshipped a serpent, or dragon, a beast naturally
most hating men, and most abhorred by all men, The cause of this blindness can be
no other but Gods just punishment suffering them for their abominable pride,
and other sins to fall into so sotish conceits as to think, that serpents
could either greatly benefit them, or by such vvorshippe be appeased, and
cease from annoying them, As Valerius vvriteth. li. 1. c. 8. ^. Augustine also
li. 14 c 11. ^^it. and many others testify the same.
there was a great dragon d Habacuc a prophet in Iewrie, and he had boiled
broth, and had broken bread in a bowl: and he went into the field, to carry it
to the reapers. And the Angel of our Lord said to Habacuc: Angel of our Lord
restored Habacuc forth with in his place. d Although about 20 years before,
there was no prophet in Jury (chapter 3. v. 38.) yet now this Habacuc was
endued with the spirit of prophecy. As for Habacuc, the eight in order of the
less prophets, he prophesied before the captivity: yea before the Chaldees
became a Monarchy. As appears, Hab. 1. v 6.
The king therefore came the seventh day to lament Daniel:

THE ARGUMENT OF THE TWELVE LESS PROPHECLES.
WHY Isai, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and Daniel are called the S. Iero. Prologo. li.
Reg. S. Aug. li. c. 18. c. 29. ciuit. Theod Isidorus.
Four are called the greater prophets, and twelve the less.
four greater Prophets, and these twelve the less: there seems no other
certain and proper reason, but because they writ more largely, and these
more brifely. For otherwise without essential difference, all the sixtene, as
also Baruch (whose book is inserted with Ieremies) and Moses, Samuel, the
Royal Psalmist David, Nathan, Elias, Elizeus, Esdras, Nehemias, Al these and
many others were as properly prophets as the chiefest.
and many others, some writing books, some not, were absolutely true Prophets
of God, endued with the holy spirit of prophecy; had the like revelations,
with the same assurance of truth, in great part of the same Mysteries, as well
perteyning to the old Testament, as to the New. And so Epist. ad Paulm.
these twelve, contracted into the straitnes of one volume (says S. Ierom)
multo aliud, quam sonant in litera, praefigurant. Prefigurate a far other
thing, then they sound in the letter. Sygnifying, as he elsewhere Of these 12.
six prophesied before the captivity of the 10. tribes
explicateth, that they do foreshew many important things, not only
perteyning In Osee. 1.
no the Jews, and some other peoples of those former times, but also of al
nations to be converted to Christ. They were not al at one time: but O see,
Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, and Micheas, prophesied before the captivity Other
three also before the captivity of the two tribes and three after the
relaxation.
of the ten Tribes. Nahum, Habacuc, and Sophonias, after that captivity, and
before the captivity of the two Tribes. And the other three Aggaeus,
Zacharias, and Malachie, after the relaxation from captivity. Neither did they
al prophecy in the same places: nor concerning the same people; and so have
their particular arguments, as we shall briefly note of every one, as they
follow in order.

Here we may note for instruction of the vulgar reader, that the Prophets
commonly use one of these names, when they direct their speech of the

kingdom of two Tribes.
Judah, Benjamin, Special names signifying the kingdom of two tribes.
Jerusalem, or The house of David.
Because Judah was the chief, and most vvorthie tribe. Benjamin the other only
tribe (besides Leui) that joined with Judah. Jerusalem the Metropolitan and
Royal city, where both the Temple, and Kings palace were situated The House
of David is the family, vvherof succeeded all the kings of that kingdom, so
long as it stood; and of which some remained in more estimation then any
other even to Christ.

Likewise they use some of these other names, when they speak of the

kingdom of ten Tribes.
Ephraim, Joseph, Samaria, Others signifying the ten tribes.
Iezrahel, Bethel, or Bethauen.
For that their first king Jeroboam was of the tribe of Ephraim, and so
descended from Joseph; Samaria, and Iezrahel were the chifest cities of that
kingdom; Bethel was one of the places (Dan the other) where Jeroboam set up
the two calves. Which place was otherwise, and more truly called Bethauen,
the house of the idol, or of vanity, or iniquity. The names also of Israel
and Jacob, were Israel and Jacob ambiguously signify both kingdoms.
more commonly used for the ten tribes; who being more in number usurped, and
appropriated to themselves the names of their general Progenitor, and
Patriarch. Yet sometimes these names importe all the twelve tribes, including
also Leui. And sometimes, especially after the captivity of the ten tribes,
these names signify the two tribes only: which more imitated Jacobs steps
and virtues, then the ten.

THE PROPHECY OF OSEE.
OSEE borne in Belomoth (as writes S. Epiphanius) of the tribe Osee of the
tribe of Issachar prophecieth the captivity of both kingdoms.
de vit^ and inter^tu prophetar. 4 Reg. 17. S. Iero. Ep. ad Paul^^.
of Issachar, prophesied in the reign of Ozias (otherwise called Azarias)
Ioathan, Achaz, Ezechias, kings of Judah, and of Jeroboam the son of Ioas
king of Israel; and of the residue of the kings of Israel, even to their
captivity, which happened in the sixth year of Ezechias king of Judah. This
Prophet taking by Gods commandment a fornicatrixe to wife, and having children
that became also fornicators by these figures, and by a widow long expecting an
other husband, and the like parables, and other preaching, admonishes both the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah, that for their obstinacy in sins, they shall
fall, first the one and Their relaxation. And coming of Christ.
afterward the other, into miserable captivity. Exhorts them to
repentance; foresheweth their release; and the coming of Christ our Redemer,
with abundance of grace, and benefits to al nations.

CHAP. I. In signification of the peoples idolatry, the prophet marieth a
fornicatrix: 4. by his childrens names foresheweth their great, and long
captivity: 11. And afterward their redemption together with all nations.
THE word of our Lord, that was made to Osee the This Jeroboam king of Israel
died 26, years before Ozias: wberby appears that Osee prophesied before
Isaie: who begane nerer the end of Ozias reign. Isa. 6.
of Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel. The beginning to our Lord of
speaking in Osee: and our Take a woman that has been a fornicatrixe:
of fornications, and begette.
make children and begette children, which vvil also be fornicators.
of fornications: because the land fornicating shall fornicate from the Lord.
And he went, and took The issue of Iehu now reigning, solicited the to tribes
called Iezrahel to idolatry, which God here says he vvil revenge.
of Iezrahel upon the house of I^hu, and I will make the kingdom of the house of
Israel to cease. And in that day I will break 4. Reg. 19.
save them in the Lord their God: and I will not save them in bow and sword, and
in battle, and in horses, and in horsemen. And Amongst many sinners, some are
the elected children of God, whom he vvil call to grace and repentance.
Children of the living God. And the children of Judah, and the children of
Israel All the faithful have one head our Savior Christ.
one head, and shall ascend out of the earth: because great is the day of
Iezrahel.

CHAP. II. He admonishes the two tribes of their sins, threatening their
captivity in Babylon. 1. Shows the abundance of grace in the Church of
Christ, and multitude of nations to be converted.
SAY Ye people of Iudad Id^ine not to call the ten tribes and the Gentiles
your brethren and sisters. For God will make them also his people as appears
in the Gospel, more of the ten tribes then of the other king dom believed in
Christ: and afterward more of the Gentiles then of the Jews.
ye to your brethren: My people: and to your sister, She God vvil not
withdraw his punishments til the sinners be penitent.
I will not have mercy on Gods mercy preuenteth by his grace offered to
sinners that they may ^o^ue^t to him if they vvil.
For this, lo I will allure her, and will lead her into And I will make with
them a league in that day, with the beast The Apostles S. Paul. Romans ^. v. 25.
and 5. Peter ep. 1. c. 2. v. 10 expound this place of the conversion of
Gentiles to Christ.
I will have

CHAP. III. The prophet is commanded again to love an aduoutresse: 3. whom he
makes long to expect her husband: to signify Gods love to the Synag gue: 4.
and the Jews state in the new testament. 5. who at last shall be converted to
Christ.
AND our Lord said to me: Yet again go, love a woman Notwithstanding sinners
forsake God, yet he offers them new grace, never hating the persons but
their sins.
as our Lord loves the children of Israel, and they have respect to strange
gods, and love the kernels of grapes. And I ^^^g^t.
dug her The Jews not believing in Christ, but expecting his coming, and in
the mean time abstayning from service of idols, receive of God temporal poor
means to live, not 30. pieces of silver, and three cores of wheat, that is,
believing in the B. Trinity, and keeping the ten commandments, they might
possess life everlasting, but half so much, neither wheat but barley, til
nere the end of the world: when they shall be converted to Christ.
fiftene pieces of silver, and for a core of barley, and for half a core of
barley. And I said to her: Thou shall Theraphim signifying images good or bad,
being here joined with king, prince, sacrifice, altar, and ephod, must needs
signify law full images, such as were religiously used in the temple of God. 3.
Reg. 7. v. 36.
theraphim. And after this the children of Israel shall return, and shall seek
the Lord their God, and David their king: and they shall dread at the Lord, and
at his goodness in the last days.

CHAP. IIII. Diverse great sins of both kingdoms, 3. are the cause of great
punishments threatened, 15. yet the sins of Judah are less excusable, because
they have more means to serve God.
HEAR the word of our Lord ye Children of Israel importe the whole people of
the ten, and two tribes, so he speaks to al til. v. 15.
children of Israel, because Knowledge of God includes the keeping of his
co^mandments For he that says; he knovveth God, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar. 1. Joan. 2. v. 4.
no knowledge of God in the land. Cursing, and Function of priests which is
properly sacrifice, being taken away, al spiritual offices decay therewith.
that thou do not the function of priesthood unto me: and thou have forgotten
the law of thy God, I also will forget thy children. According The hosts
offered for sins.
the Certain sins more then others do obscure man's understanding, but
spiritual fornication blinds the heart above al other vices.
the spirit of fornications has deceived them, and they have fornicated from
their God. Upon the heads of mountains they sacrifice, and the people not
understanding shall be beaten. If thou fornicate It was a greater sin in the
kingdom of Judah to commit idolatry, where they had the public true service
of God in the temple, then in Israel where Jeroboam had set up calves, and
forbid the people from going to Jerusalem.
o Israel, at the least let not Judah offend:

CHAP. V. The prophet reprehendeth the priests, and princes of both kingdoms,
for drawing the people to idolatry. 8. denouncing captivity for the same.
HEAR ye this There were no true priests in the ten tribes (3. Reg. 12) but
he calls them by the title which they usurped falsely pretending to do the
offices of right Priests.
o priests, and attend ye house of Israel, The captivity is here described
not only in bare words but as in fact it shall happen with tumultes of vvare
sounding of trumpets, crying, hovvling etc.
Sound with the trumpet in Gabaa, and with the shaulme in able to loose the
band from you. Because I as it were a lioness

CHAP. VI. By afflictions the people will return to God, and hope in Christ to
come. 4. both the kingdoms sinning (6. and thincking to be spared for their
sacrifices, neglecting works of mercy) 7. shall be punished. 11. but at last
delivered from captivity.
IN their tribulation early they will rise up to me: Come, and God who
punishes, is alvvayes ready to heal finners, if they vvil repent.
has wounded, S Paul (1. Cot. 15. v. 4) not only teaching Christ's Resur.
rection, but also expressly saying the third day, according to the Scriptures
seems to understand this place, where and in no other place; the day is so
de^ly expressed.
the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. We shall know,
and we shall follow, that we may know our Lord. As the morning light, is his
coming forth prepared, and he will come to us as a shower timely, and late to
the earth. What shall I do to thee Ephraim? what shall ^^^. 9. v 13.
would mercy, and not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God more then
holocausts. But they as Adam have trangtessed the covenant,

CHAP. VII. Since Jeroboam made schism in religion that kindom has fallen
into many distresses: 10. and not repenting shall endure more.
WHEN God punishing all the Jews by dividing their kingdom into two ( 3 Reg.
12.) would have cured them: but Jeroboam king of the ten tribes drevv al his
people into grosser sins then before: by making a schism and setting up
idols to be adored for God.
I would heal Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim the robber without. And lest
perhaps they may say in their All the chief men of the ten tribes consented to
the schism and idolatry of their nevy king Jeroboam.
the princes begane to rage by reason Became like to pagane idolaters:
mingled in the peoples: Ephraim is become as harth-baken-bread, and impenitent.
that is not turned. Strangers have For all these sins they shall be severely
punished.
shall be humbled in his face: neither did they return to the Lord their God,
and they have not sought him in all these. And Ephraim is become as a dove
seduced, not having an

CHAP. VIII. The Chaldees shall destroy the temple. 3. But the ten tribes shall
first be carried into captivity, 6. for worshipping the image of a calf.
IN thy throat let there be a trumpet as an eagle upon The temple also in
Jerusalem (though not so sown) shall be destroyed.
the covenant, and have preuaricated my law. Me they shall invoke: But first
the ten tribes of Israel for their general idolatry shall be carried into
captivity by the Assyrians v. 9. and 4. Reg. 17.
Israel have known thee. Israel has The two tribes seeing the miseries of the
other ten, vvil not prevent the like by penance, but think to escape by
fortifying their cities.
Judas has multiplied fensed cities: and I will cast fire on his cities, and it
shall devour the houses thereof.

CHAP. IX. The ten tribes shall suffer famine: 12. be deprived of their
children: and made captive.
Many of the kingdom of Israel by reason of famine and other distresses, vvil
flee into Egypt, as both this place, and the same words. chapter 8. v. 13. do
foreshevv. 8 Ierom. and Theodoret. v. 6.
Ephraim is of the festiuitie of our Lord? For behold they are gone forth
Israel did foolishly prophecy al prosperity to them selves,
o Israel the foolish prophet, not inspired by God, but replenished with
fury of madness.
the mad spiritual man, for the multitude of thine iniquity, the multitude
also madness. The watchman Iudic. 19. 1. Reg. 8. 4. Reg. 9.
remember their iniquity, and will visit their sin. As grapes The kingdom of
Israel was as proud and insolent as Tire. Isai. 23. Ezech. 26. 27. and 28.
was Tire founded in beauty: and Ephraim

CHAP. X. After many benefits, and advancement, much affliction shall fall upon
the ten tribes, for their ingratitude toward God.
ISRAEL a vine a thick of branches, the fruit is made equal By how much more
and greater benefits Israel received of God: so much were they more vngratful.
to it: according to the multitude of his fruit he has multiplied altars,
according to the plenty of his land he has abunded in idols. Their heart is
divided, now they shall perish: he vision, and you shall make a covenant: and
judgment shall spring as bitterness upon the furrows of the filde. The kine of
The house of one of their calves which Jeroboam set up for their God,
otherwise called. Bethel.
Bethauen Isa. 2. Apoc. 6.
to the little hills: Fall upon us. From the Days From the time that the tribe
of Dan, adored an idol which they took from Micheas ( lud. 18. v. 14. which
the other Isra* clites revenged not) they have very often either committed or
suffered idolatry, which they ought to have hindered and therefore shall at
last be punished.
of Gabaa, Israel Iere. 4.
and reap in the mouth of mercy, fallow ground: but the time to seek our
Lord, when he shall come that shall teach you justice. you have ploughed
impiety, you have reaped iniquity, Iudic. 2.
on Baal in the day of battle, the mother being dashed in pieces upon the
children. So has Bethel done to you, because

CHAP. XI. The kingdom of Israel is further admonished, and threatened, 10. of
which tribes many shall believe in Christ.
AS the morning passed, has the king of Israel passed away. Literally this is
spoken of the people of Israel called Gods son ( Exo. 4 v. 23.) whom he
delivered out of Egypt but mystically is verified of Christ called out of
Egypt. Mat* 2* and is no less certain the true mystical sense, the
Evangelist endued with the Holy Ghost, so interpreting then is the literal
sense of this or any other place.
out of Egypt I called my son. They called them, so they departed Mat. 2.
from their face: they immolated to Baalim, and sacrificed to idols. And I as
it were the nurse of Ephraim, carried them b of Adam I will draw them, in the
bands of charity: and I will be to them as lifting up the yoke upon their
cheeks: and I declined to him that he might^ate. He shall not return Genesis 19.
shall I give thee Ephraim, protect thee Israel? how shall I give thee as Adama,
lay thee as Seboim? My heart is turned within, my repentance is disturbed
together. I will not do the fury Gods property is to have mercy and to
pardon.
God, and not Man is prone to revenge and punish.
man: in the mids of thee the Holy one, and I will not enter into the city.
They shall walk after b God draws men by sweet inuitations by great and
many benefits a. greable to man's nature and freevvil by his love and
charity: not as beasts are drawn by fear and force.
bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the Land of the Assyrians: and I will
place them in their houses, says our Lord. Ephraim has compassed me in
denying, and the house of

CHAP. XII. The people by their sins procure their own miseries, 3. not
regarding Jacobs virtues.
EPHRAIM To make show of turning to God; and to trust more in men is as vain
as to think to feed or to govern the vvinde.
feeds the wind, and follows the heat: Genesis 25. and 32.
supplanted his brother: and in his strength he was directed with the Angel.
And he prevailed against the Angel, and Lord thy God out of the Land of Egypt,
I will yet make thee sit in tabernacles, as in the days of festiuitie. And I
have The history of Jacob and his children written in Genesis and Exodus
which the prophet here touches, shows the singular benefits of God
toward this people.
Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served Genesis 28. Exo. 14.
for a wife, and for a wife he kept her. But by a prophet our

CHAP. XIII. For their obstinacy in idolatry, 7. greatest plagues are
threatened: 10. from which none shall be able to deliver them. 14. But at last
Christ coming will redeem al by his death.
EPHRAIM When Iero boam first set up the calves to be adored the people had
horror thereof yet consented thereto.
speaking, horror invaded Israel: and he and shortly after some added the idol
of Baal. 3 Reg. 16.
in Baal, and died. And now they have added to and of other idols: as this
place testifies
a molten of their silver as it were the similitude of idols, the whole is the
work of craftesmen: the these they say: Immolate men adoring calves. Therefore
they shall be as a morning cloud, and as a Isa. 43.
the Lord thy God out of the Land of Egypt: and God beside me thou shall not
know, and there is no Savior beside me. I knew thee in the desert, in the land
of wilderness. According Evils that happen are al of man's own procurement by
his sins: vvherof God is no way the auctor or cause:
Perdition is thine o Israel: who of his part does al for the help of man:
for whether he punish or pardon, al is to save men: so God is only cause of
help and of al good but not of evil as it is euel he is in deed the cause of
punishment, which is called malum paenae, the evil of pain. Amos. 3. v. 6.
but this for amendment during this life, and of justice after death.
only in me thy help. Where is thy king? Now especially 1. Reg. ^.
in my fury, and will take him away in mine indignation. The son not wise:
for now he shall not stand the confraction of the children. This can not be
understood of temporal death, from which God vvil no^ deliuermen, nor of
violent death, from which he would not deliver those that were slain by the
Assyrians, but necessarily of eternal death, from which the just shall be
delivered.
Out of the hand of death I will deliver them, 1. Cor. 15.
from death I will redeem them: I will be thy death o death, thy bitte will I be o
hell, consolation is hidden from mine eyes. Because Heb. 2. Ezec. 19.
he shall divide between brethren: our Lord will bring a burning wind rising
from the desert: and it shall dry up his veins, and shall make his fountain
desolate, and he shall spoil the treasure of every vessel that is to be
desired.

CHAP. XIIII. The prophet forewarning the people of their future afflictions,
2. exhorts them to repentance, and confession of their sins: 5. foreshewing
that God will give much grace to the penitent. 10. Al which mysteries only the
godly wise shall understand.
LET Samaria Such imprecations in holy scriptures are sometimes only
predictions. as Psalm. 68. v. 23. and so here is prophesied what shall happen to
the Israelites in Assyria. S. Ierom. sometimes are the zealous desires of
Saints conformable to Gods justice. as Psalm. 149. v. 6. 7. 8. 9.
perish, because she has stirred up her God I^el. 2. Zach. 1.
in thine iniquity. Take words with you, and convert When the Israelites
shall convert to God, as some did when Christ came, and many will nere the end
of the world, then Christ will heal the^.
will heal their confractions, I will love them voluntarily: because my fury is
auerted from them. I will be as dew, Israel No humane vvitte is able to
understand this (and other prophets) yet the just shall know so much as is
necessary. S. Ierom. in prooem* S. Aug. li. 18. c. 28. ciuit.
Who is wise, and shall understand

THE PROPHECY OF JOEL.
JOEL the son of Phatuel borne in Bethoron, of the tribe of Issachar; S.
Epiph. de vita Patriar^.
prophesied the same time, or part thereof; with Osee, according Joel prophesied
the same time with Osee.
to S. Ieromes rule, approved by most expositers, that when any of these
twelve Prophets expresses not what time he writ, the same time is
understood which the precedent prophet notes. He prophesied to the kingdom of
Judah, as appears by express mention of Sacrifice, Priests, house of God,
Especially to the two tribes.
Jerusalem, and Sion; but describes also the whole land of twelve tribes,
consumed by the Eruke, Locust, Bruke, and Blast. And S. Iero. Epist ad Paulin.
after the euersion of the former people, the coming of the Holy Ghost upon
the servants of God men and women: the 120. faithful The contents.
gathered in the chamber in Sion. Finally foreshewing the general Judgment,
and future eternal world.

CHAP. I. The Chaldees shall miserably waste the kingdom of Judah: 9. take away
sacrifice by destroying the temple: 10. and so make the land barren
spiritually, and temporally.
THE word of our Lord, that was made to Joel the Prophecies perteyne not only
to those that then live, when they are uttered, but also to al post ritie,
even to the end of the world, that it may appear what is fulfilled, and
what yet rests to come in due time.
tell you to your children, When Jerusalem was taken and the Temple destroyed
by the Babylonians, the sacrifice necessarily ceased according to this and
other prophecies.
Sacrifice and libation is perished out of the the wheat is wasted, the wine
is confounded, the oil has languished. The husbandmen are confounded, the
dressers Fasting, praying and other good works of many assembling together*
are an especial means to appeaze Gods wrath, provoked by former sins.
Sanctify ye a fast, call an assembly,



ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. I.
4. The residue of the eruke, loeust, bruke, blast.] Eruca a worm that
destroys The captivity described by the harm of most noisome things.
Jerusalem four times spoiled by the Babylonians.
herbs and fruictes, Locusta, a fleing beast with long hinder legs,
destroying corn, and fruit; Bruchus, an other fleeing little beast, that
deuoureth not only fruit, but also the leaves of trees; and Rubigo, the blast,
or burning mist, that consumes the ears of corn even to dust; do
metaphorically signify the Chaldees, and other souldiars of sundry nations,
in the army of Nabuchodonosor, inuading and wasting the kingdom of Judah. And
that at four several times ever worse and worse. First when Nabuchodonosor
beseeging Jerusalem subdued king Ioakim and his kingdom, taking hostages for
assurance of subjection (amongst Dan. I.
which were Daniel, and the other three children) and carried away part of
the 1.
holy vessel of the Temple. 4. Reg 24 v. 1. The second, when eight years
after 2.
Nabuchodonosor returned, and killed king Ioakim for rebelling, and carried his
son king Ioachin (otherwise called Iechonias) into Babylon, with his mother,
and Jeremy the Prophet, also many other principal persons, and much riches (
ibidem. v. 10.) The third when eleven years after he took and spoiled 3.
Jerusalem, destroyed the Temple, killed al king Sedecias sons in his sight,
then put out his eyes, and carried him blind into Babylon, with much more
people and spoil. 4. Reg 25. Fourthly when shortly after he sent Nabuzardan
general 4.
of his army, and carried away more men and wealth, leaving only the basest
people to til the land. ibidem v. 8. Al which shows clerly the fulfilling
of this Prophecy according to the historical letter, In like sort we might
explicate Why we make not more Annotations.
the rest of this, and other prophets, but it is not our purpose to be so
large. Much less to prosecute the Mystical sense which is manifold, as
appears in the works of the ancient Fathers. VVherof see F. Francis Ribera.

CHAP. II. The Chaldees will assault and afflict the Jews with great violence.
12. After humble repentance in captivity, 18. Gods benignity will comfort
them. 23. with abundance of spiritual grace by Christ: 28. sending also the
Holy Ghost. 30. And terrible signs before the day of Judgment.
SOVND ye Prophets do often speak in such phrase as if they admonished the
people what to do, when in deed they foreshevv what they will do in their
distresses:
with the trumpet in Sion, howl in my holy In the time when God will suffer
affliction to fall upon them for their sins.
the day of our Lord comes, because the day of take no harm.
not demolish. Isa. 13. Ezec. 32. Mat. 24. Iere. 30. Amos. 5. Sopho. 1.
At his presence the earth has trembled, the heavens are moved: the sun and
moon are darkened, and the stars have withdrawn their shining. And our Lord
has given his For better moving the heart to true repentance:
Convert to me in all your heart, God requires these external works of penance.
And where the same are wanting, at least in vvil, it is a manifest sign that
the heart is not truly penitent. S. Ierom.
in fasting, and in weeping, and in mourning. And ^. Psalm. 85.
much mercy, and ready to be gracious upon the malice. Who Zele is an
indignation rising of love: when one sees any person, or thing, which he
loves contemned, or vvronged. So God has zele for his people; when they are
unjustly afflicted, more of the malice of their afflicters then for justice.
Yet God suffers often times his people to be punished for their full
correction and for their more merit.
zealous to his land, and So that which God here promises by his prophet,
touching his protection and delivery of his people, was not fulfilled til
after the seventy years of their captivity, nor then fully, but is verified
in those that believe in Christ. And especially after this life, when his
glorious Saints shall live in eternal joy.
I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be replenished with
them: and I will give you no more to be a reproach in the Gentiles. And him that
is And it shall be after this: That this is a plain prophecy of the mission of
the Holy Ghost performed on VVhitsunday, the fiftith day after Christ's
Resurrection, and the tenth after his Ascension, S. Peter teaches. Act. 2.
I will power out my spirit upon al Isa. 44. Act. 2.
flesh: and your sons, and your daughters shall prophecy: your ancients shall
dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. Yea and upon my servants,
and handmayds in those Romans 1^.
of the Lord, shall be saved: because in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be
salvation, as our Lord has said, and in the residew whom our Lord shall call.

CHAP. III. After the conversion of the Jews to Christ, 2. shortly follows
the general Judgment. 3. where every one according to their deserts, shall
receive (expressed here in parabolical speech) 7. and 19. the wicked
everlasting pain: 18. and 20. and the blessed eternal joy.
BECAUSE lo S Ierom and most other expositers under stand this chapter of the
general Judgment, though some expound it of the relaxation of the Jews from
captivity, and of the punishment of their enemies.
in those days, and in that time when I And so Iosaphat is literally
understood the place on the east side of Jerusalem between the Temple and mount
Oliuet whence our Savior ascended into heaven. Neither is there any reason
why the Judgment should rather be in an other place seeing this is expressed by
name, signifying: The Judgment of our Lord.
Iosaphat: and I will plead with them there upon my people, and mine inheritance
Israel, whom they have dispersed in the nations, and have divided my land. And
upon my people this in the Gentiles: sanctify battle, raise up the strong: let
them come, let all the men of war come up. Cut your Apoc. 14.
because the press is full, the presses run over: because their malice is
multiplied. This duplication of the word peoples imports an innumerable
multitude in that valley of concision (also repeted) to signify, that there al
Gods enemies shall be utterly damned to eternal destruction, as it were cut in
pieces, as fuel to the fire of hell* Psalm. 128. v. 4. Our just Lord vvil cut the
necks of sinners.
Peoples peoples in the valley of d concision, Iere. 21. Amos. 1.
roar out of Sion, and out of Jerusalem he will give his voice: and the
heavens, and the earth shall be moved, and our Lord the hope of his people, and
the strength of the children of Israel. And you shall know that I am the Lord
your God dwelling Amos. 9.
the mountains shall distill sweetness, and the hills shall flow with milk: and
through all the rivers of Judah shall run waters: and a fountain shall issue out
of the house of the Lord, and shall water the torrent of thorns. Egypt shall be
into desolation,

THE PROPHECY OF AMOS.
AMOS a heardesman of Thecua in the tribe of Zabulon, was Amos prophesied the
same time with (). see, and Io^l*
endued with the spirit of prophecy about the same time with Osee, and Joel,
in the reign of Ozias king of Judah, and of Jeroboam son of Ioas king of
Israel; in Metaphores, and other obscure speeches agreeable to S. Ierom* ^^^^^
ad ^^^^^.
his pastoral education, but profound in sense, prophecieth especially against
Especially, Against the ten tribes*
the kingdom of Israel, and diverse Gentiles; partly also against Judah,
foreshewing their afflictions for their sins: but at last the vocation of al
Nations to Christ, with abundance of spiritual graces in his Church.

CHAP. I. In the reign of Iozias in Judah, and of Jeroboam in Israel, this
prophet Amos, 3. threatens Damascus, 6. Gaza, 8. Azotus, and other
Philistians. 9. Tire, 11. Idumea, 13. and Ammon, for their obstinacy in sin,
abusing his long patience.
THE words of Amos, who was among As David was called from keeping sheep, made
a king, and a Prophet: so Amos being a shepherd o^ heard man was also made a
Prophet.
the Josephus. li. 9. c. 1. Antiq. says this earthquake happened when king
Onias presumed to offer incense, but it must needs be understood of a former,
in the days of Jeroboam, v. 1. who died in the 38. year of O^ias ^ Par. 26.
at least 14. years before his deposition: for he reigned in all. 52*
the earthquake. And he said: Our I^el. 3. Zach. ^4.
Lord will roar out of Sion, and out of Jerusalem he will give his voice: and
the beautiful places of the pastors have mourned and the top of Carmel is
withered. Thus says our Lord: Three signify the multitude of their sins:
for three is the first number that is called many or may be called al.
three wickednesses of Damascus, and and four signify excess in multitude,
so that, albeit God does forgive a multitude of sins, yet at last for so
great excess he hasteneth their punishment.
upon four I will not convert it: because they have threshed Galaad with iron
waynes. And I will send fire into the house of Azael, cut in sunder the women
with child of Galaad to dilate his limite. And I will kindle a fire in the wall
of Rabba: and it shall The god of the Ammonites.
Melchom shall go into captivity, himself, and his princes together, says our
Lord.

CHAP. II. God also threatens Moab, 4. Judah, 6. and Israel, 9. that for
ingratitude, 12. and other sins, they shall be brought into captivity.
THVS says our Lord: Upon three wickednesses of Moab Besides other sins of
the Moabites, their cruelty, in dravving the bones of the king of Idumea out
of the grave, as S. Ierom testifies by tradition; and their king immolating
his own son, 4. Reg. 3. exceeded the rest, and therefore were at last more
severely punished.
four I will not convert him: because he has burnt the bones of Idumea even to
ashes. And I will send The most heinous sin in Judah, was that having the law
to instruct them, they contemned, and transgressed it.
of Judah, and upon four I will not convert him: because he has cast away the
law of our Lord, and not kept his commandments: for their idols have deceived
them, after which their fathers went. And I will Israel much more contemned the
same law of God, and committed the sins of al nations.
four I will not convert him: because he has sold the just for silver, and the
poor for shoes. Which bruise Sons committed incest with their fathers
vviues; and the fathers with their daughters in law, which most detestable
sins must needs be seuerly punished.
the son and his father have gone to puellam.
a young woman, that they might violate my holy name. And upon garments laid
to pledge they did lie beside Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 2.
an oak: and I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots beneath. It is I
that made you come up out of the Land of Egypt, swift, and the valient shall
not obtain his strength, and the strong shall not save his life. And he that
holds the bow

CHAP. III. For their manifold sins, all the twelve tribes shall be sore
plaged. 11. and made captives.
HEAR the word, that our Lord has spoken upon you, By Israel is here
understood the whole people all the kindred or offspring of Jacob, delivered from
Egypt.
the kindred that I brought forth out of the Land of Egypt, saying: Only you
have I As two men do not well travel together except they agree: so man can
not walk with God, unless he agree with God, keeping his commandments.
Why shall two walk together, Al evil of pain that is, punishment for sin is
by Gods permission, and ordinance, either to bring sinners to repentance, or
(if they dye in mortal sin) the beginning of etetnal punishment.
evil in the city, which our Lord has not done? Because our Lord God will not
do a word, unless the altars of Bethel: and The fairest and strongest things
that wicked men have shall at last be destroyed.
the horns of the altar shall be cut of, and shall fall to the ground. And I will
strike the winter

CHAP. IIII. The ten tribes are particularly charged for oppressing the
poor, 2. therefore threatened with calamities: 6. blamed for their obstinacy:
12. nevertheless al are admonished to expect Christ.
HEAR this word ye Rich hardharted people, who being vvelthie have no
compassion of the poor.
fat kine, which are in the places of Armenia.
Armon, says our Lord. After many admonitions given in vain God suffers
the idolaters to do all the wickedness they list.
Come Al these afflictions God sent to the children of Israel for their good,
but they murmured and were still obstinate.
have given you dulnes of the teeth in all your cities, and lack of bread in all
your places: and you have nor returned to me, says our Lord. I also have
stayed the rain from you, Agge. 2.
blasting, the multitude of your gardens, and al your vineyards: your olive
groves, and figgroues the eruke has eaten: and you returned not to me, says
our Lord. I sent death upon you thee Israel: but after I shall do these things
to thee, After long captivity Christ vvil offer himself to the Jews, and such
as receive him, he vvil save.
be prepared to meet thy God o Israel. Because lo he that forms

CHAP. V. Notwithstanding great miseries threatened against the ten tribes: 4.
yet if they will repent they shall escape: 7. otherwise they shall fall into
captivity: 14. and therefore they are admonished to return to God: 16. but
being obstinate, 21. no sacrifice can appeaze Gods wrath.
HEAR ye this word, that I lift upon you When the people neither feel nor
fear evil, God forseing their calamities, lamenteth the same in their behal^,
thereby admonishing them to know their own danger, and by repentance to
prevent it.
a lamentation. Soph. 1.
poor, and took the chosen pray from him: you shall build houses with square
stone, and shall not dwell in them: you shall plant most amiable vineyards, and
shall not drink the wine of them. Because I have known many your
wickednesses, hosts will be with you, as you have said. Hate ye evil, and love
Romans 12. Psalm. 96.
good, and establish judgment in the gate: If men seek good and not evil God
vvil assist them, as in the former very, and in innumerable holy scriptures:
but it is here said: perhaps God vvil have mercy by reason of the difficulty
of man's part who conuerteth not alvvayes perfectly, as he has freevvil to do
by Gods grace assisting* him.
if perhaps our Lord the God of hosts may have mercy on the remnant of Joseph.
Therefore thus says our Lord the God of hosts the Isa. 13. Iere. 30. Joel. 1.
Soph. 1.
the same unto you? This day of our Lord, darkness, and not light. As if a man
should flee from the face of a lion, and a Isa. 1. Ier. 6. Mat. 2.
festiuities: and I will not take the odor of your assemblies. And if you shall
offer unto me holocausts, and your gifts, I In the first year of the 40 and
beginning of the second they offered sacrifices to God. Leuit. 8. and 9. Number.
7. But not afterward. S. Aug. q. 47. in Exodus
did you offer hosts and sacrifice to me in the desert Act. 7. Psalm. ^4.
forty years, o house of Israel? And you carried a tabernacle

CHAP. VI. For the avarice, and luxury of both kingdoms, 7. they shall be
carried into captivity.
VVO TO you that are rich It is a foul and odious fault when rich men neglect
the poor, but most detestable when the rich in S^^n, welthie clergy men,
have not compassion on them that want, either spiritual or temporal help.
in Sion, and have confidence Iac 5.
in the mountain of Samaria: ye great men, heads of the peoples, going stately
into the house of Israel. Pass ye into Chalane, and see, and go ye thence
into Emath heard. You that sing to the voice of the psalter: as David Iere. ^^.
says our Lord the God of hosts: I detest the pride VVheras Jacob by
humility, patience, and many other virtues, became great in Gods ^auour: now
his progeny by pride and delicacie become hateful to God in respect of these
sins, and are therefore afflicted, and miserably slain, and carried captives.
of Jacob, and I hate his houses, and I will deliver up the city with the
inhabitants thereof. And if there shall be left ten men in one To turn the
works of judgment and justice, into sins, which are bitter and vngratful,
is as contrary to order, as it is contrary to the course of nature, that
horses should ^unne upon craggierockes or wild bu^les be brought to dravv the
plough.
can horses run upon rocks,

CHAP. VII. In three visions many miseries are reveled, which shall come upon
both the kingdoms. 10. A false priest of Bethel accusing the prophet of
sedition, and endeavoring to chase him away, 14. is by him forewarned of
miseries to his family, and death to himself.
THESE things has our Lord God showed to me: and Locustes svvarming in
multitude signified the Assirian ^^^ld^ars inuading the ten tribes, as is
recorded 4. Reg. 18.
of the locust in the beginning of things that spring of the later rain, and
behold the later rain after the kings mowing. And it came to pass: after it
had finished Sa^manasar king of Assirians having subdued the ten tribes,
invaded the kingdom of Judah, and besieged Jerusalem but his army was
miraculously destroyed* 4. Reg. 19.
It shall c fire, and it devoured the great depth and it did eat a part
together. And I said: Lord God be This third vision signified the calamities
which the ten tribes suffered shortly after in the reign of Manahem. 4. Reg.
15 v. 20.
a masons truel. And our Lord said to me:? What c This second vision of sire
signified the captivity of the two tribes carried into Babylon. 4. Reg. 24. and
25.
excelses of the idol shall be thrown dowen, and the sancrifications of Israel
shall be made desolate: and I will rise upon the house of Jeroboam with the
sword. And Amasias the priest False prophets not enduring the whole some
preaching of true pastores falsely accuse them of rebellion, treason, and
sedition.
has rebelled against thee in the mids of the house of Israel: the land will
not be able to sustain al his words. For In this also the false prophetlyed,
for Amos said not: Jeroboam shall dye by the svvord: but that God would rise
upon the house of Jeroboam with the svvord. v. 9. fulfilled when Zacharias
the son of Jeroboam was slain by Sellum. 4. Reg. 15 v 10.
Jeroboam shall dye by the sword, and Israel shall depart captive out of their
land. And Amasias said to ^yedu^^tion.
, and I am not the son of a prophet: but an heardsman am I plucking
sycomores. And our Lord took me when I followed

CHAP. VIII. In a vision of an apple hook the captivity of the ten tribes
is again foreshewed, 4. with reprehension of their avarice, and oppression of
the poor: 7. for which they shall fall into great miseries.
THESE things has our Lord showed to me: and By this vision of a hook is
signified that not only the nerer parts of the ten tribes should be brought
into captivity which is written. 4. Reg. 15. v. 29. but also the rest which
were further of: as fruit of trees, which can not be gathered with the
hand, is drawn with a hook: and so al were carried away. 4. Reg. 17. v. 6.
behold me: The end comes upon my people Israel: I will add no more to pass
them. And the henges of the temple shall creake In their great prosperity,
when they least suspect, calamities shall fall upon them.
The sun Deuteronomy. ^. Iere 15.
shall go down at midday, and I will make the earth to be dark in the day of
light. And I will turn your festiuities into mourning, Tob. 2. Mar. 1.
and al your songues into lamentation: and I will bring in upon every back of
yours sack cloth, and upon every head baldnes: and I will lay it as the
mourning of an only begotten son, and the later end thereof as a bitter day.
Behold the It can not be doubted but in the siege there was want of bread
drink and of other victuals: but greater want of spiritual food.
not the famine of bread, nor thirst of water, but of hearing the word of the
Lord. And they shall be moved

CHAP. IX. The great destruction of Jerusalem, 8. and dispersion of all the
Jews are again prophesied: 11. with the conversion of Gentiles, and the Church
of Christ shall greatly prosper.
I SAW our Lord standing upon Destruction of the Altar,
the altar, and he said: and the Temple, importe the abolishing of sacrifice,
when the two tribes were carried into Babylon.
the henges, and let the lintels be moved: for there is avarice in the head of
al, and the last of them will I kill by the sword: there shall be no flight for
them: they shall flee, and he Psalm. ^^.
shall not be saved that shall flee of them. If they shall descend shall a scend
enen to heaven, thence will I pluck them down. And if they shall be hid in the
top of Carmel, thence searching Iere. 44.
evil, and not to good. And our Lord the God of hosts, God who defends his
Church as a strong bundel fast bond together, vvil punish the wicked with
just afflictions.
his bundel upon the earth: who calls the waters of the sea, and powers them
out upon the face of the earth, the Lord is his name. Why, are Notvvithstanding
the great ruin of the Jews, slain and led captives, yet God in them
conserved the Church that it was not destroyed.
the house of Jacob, says our Lord. For behold I will command, S. James
conformable to S. Peter's doctrine, interprets this place of the conversion of
the Gentiles to Christ Act. 15. v. 15. etc.
In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David, that Act. 15.
was fallen: and I will reedifie the breaches of the walls thereof, and those
things, that were fallen I will repair: and I will reedifie him as in the days
of old. That they may possess the Joel. 3.
al hills shall be tilled. And I will convert the captivity of my

THE PROPHECY OF ABDIAS. ABDIAS borne in Sichem, of the tribe of Ephraim,
prophesied the S Epiph.
same time with Amos; so briefly that his prophecy is not parted into
chapters: I. against the Idumeans; foreshewing their destruction; 10. for their
perpetual emnitie against the jews, and confederacy with the Chaldees. 17.
The captivity and relaxation of the jews. 19. And redemption of the whole
world by Christ.
THE vision of Abdias. Thus says our Lord God Iere. 49.
to Edom: We have heard a bruit from our Lord, and he God directed the
cogitations of diverse other Gentiles,
has sent a legate to the Gentiles: Rise ye, and let us arise against him into
battle. Behold I:: to join their forces against the Idumeans.
thy heart: Who shall pluck me down to the earth? If thou Isa. 29.
wise out of Idumea, and prudence from the mount of Esau, And thy valients of
the South shall fear, that man may perish Genesis 2^.
iniquity against thy brother Jacob, confusion shall cover thee, and thou shall
perish for ever. In the day when thou stoodest God admonishes them what they
ought not to do, but vvithal foreshevveth that they vvil despise the jews
heir brethren: and vvil rejoice in their miseries.
thou shall not despise in the day Neither shall thou enter the gate of my
people in the day of Historically all this prosperity was promised to the
jews after their delivery from Babylon and so much thereof performed as their
new sins hindered not, the rest is fulfilled in Christians. S Ierom. ep ad
Dardam.
mount Sion shall be salvation, and it shall be holy: The rest of this prophecy
is only of Christ possessingal nations. To whom all the prophets give
testimony that al receive remission of sins by his name believing in him.
Act. 10. v. 43. see. S. Augustine li. 18. c 31. deciuit.
they that are toward the South, shall inherit the luc. 1. v. 3.
Lord.

THE PROPHECY OF JONAS.
JONAS the son of Amathi in Geth, of the tribe of Zabulon, in the Mat. 12.
Luc. 11.
Jonas a figure of Christ prophesied salvation to al nations.
reign of Jeroboam son of Ioas king of Israel, not only in words, but also
in his person prophesied, and prefigured Christ; as our Savior S. Ierom. Epost
ad Paulin.
himself testisieth. And under the name of Niniue announceth salvation to al
Gentiles, that repent, and return to God, as Niniue did.

CHAP. 1. Jonas being sent to preach in Niniue flees by sea, 4. atempest
rises, 8. whereof he being found by lotte, to be the cause; 12. is cast into
the sea, 15. and it is caulme.
AND the word of our Lord was made to Jonas God creator and Lord of all the
world, has also care of al. Romans 3. v. 29 and therefore sent this prophet to
the great city Niniue, as likewise others prophesied to the Babylonians
Egyptians, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumeans, etc.
Niniue the great city, and preach in it: because the malice thereof is
ascended before me. And Jonas shows the cause why he fled, chapter 4. v. 2.
fearing to be counted a falls. prophet.
to flee into Tharsis from the face of our Lord, and he went down into Ioppe,
and found a ship going into Tharsis: and he gave the fare thereof, and went
down into it, that he might go with them into Tharsis from the face of our
Lord. But our Lord sent a great wind into the The mariners seeing no natural
cause of so sudaine and great a tempest, sought to know the reason thereof by
lotte, whereto the prophet agreed, by Gods inspiration, and so was discovered.
let us cast Sacrifice and vows are known to al men by the light of nature
to be gratful to God.
immolated hosts to our Lord, and vowed vows.

CHAP. II. Jonas is swallowed by a great fish; 3. prays with confidence in
God; 11. and the fish casts him on the dry land.
AND our Lord prepared That this great fish was a vvhale, our Savior plainly
expresses. Mat. 12 v. 40.
a great fish to swallow done Mat. 12. Luc. 11.
Jonas: and Jonas was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
And Jonas The prophet doubtless prayed before and when they cast him out of the
ship, and continued the same prayer being in the whales belly, with more
confidence, that he should be safly cast on the brie land v. 5 And therefore
rendereth thanks, vowing sacrifice of thanks giving. v 10.
prayed to our Lord his God

I cried out of my tribulation to our Lord, and he has heard me: Psalm. 119.
and 129.
out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou have heard my voice.







Fu^thest that can be from mountains, even into the depth of the sea, which
is lower then any other valleys.
extreme parts of the mountains: the bars of the earth have shut me up for
ever* and thou will lift up my life from corruption, o Lord my God.



They that keep vanities in vain, forsake their mercy.



Gods vvil is his word by which al creatures were made, and to which, as
well living, as sensles things obey.
spoke to the fish: and it vomited up Jonas upon the dry land.

CHAP. III. Again Jonas is commanded to preach in Niniue, that within forty
days it shall be destroyed: 5. They al fast, and repent: 10. and God recalleth
his sentence.
AND the word of our Lord was made to Jonas the second Diodorus Siculus, li. 3.
c 1. VVriteth that Niniue was in length, 150. stadia or forlo^gs, in breadth.
90. so it was in citcuite of the wales. 480. And every forlong having 125.
paces of five foot the pace, the compass was 60. Italian miles, about 50. or
48. English miles; a sufficient travel of three days, to pass through the
principal streates, and more public places thereof.
the great city: and said: As yet forty days, and Niniue As well this, as
many other like prophecies, show that Gods threats are conditional, if
sinners vvil repent: for then God changes his sentence. S. Chrysostom. ho. 5. ad
popul. S. Iero, in hun:. ^ocum. S. Greg. li. 16 c. 18 Moral. The same is also
clear. Iere 18. v. 8.
shall be subverted. And the men of Niniue believed in God: and they proclaimed
Great remorse and detestation of sin makes penitents to excede in austere
works, which being well meant is accepted at Gods hands, so it be not
indiscreete.
and beasts, and oxen, and cattle let them not taste any thing: nor feed, and
let them not drink water. And let men, and beasts be covered with sackcloths,
Iere. 18.
and cry to our Lord in strength, and let every man convert from his evil way
and from the iniquity, that is in their hands. Who knows if God will
convert, and forgive: and will Joel. ^.
return from the fury of his wrath, and we shall not perish? And God saw their
works, that they were conuerred from

CHAP. IIII. The prophet lamenteth for that he was commanded to preach
otherwise then it came to pass. 5. Going forth he stays nere the city to
see the end; 6. an yuie growing covers his head from the sun; 7. but
withers the next day; 8. and he lamenting desires to dye; 10. and God
shows that it is more meet to save Niniue then the yuie.
AND Jonas Jonas coniectured by their penance that God would for this time
spare Niniue, and so was afflicted fearing that both this, and other
prophecies should be reputed un certain. But this doubt is solued,
understanding Gods threats to be conditional as before. ch 3 v. 4. and so it
proved. For they falling again into former sins were afterward destroyed
Nahum. 1. 2, and 3.
was afflicted with great affliction, and was * Psalm. 58. Joel. 2.
thee o Lord, Why, is not this my word, when I was yet in my country? for this
did I prevent to flee into Tharsis. For I know that thou art a clement, and
merciful God, patient, and of much compassion, and forgeuing upon the evil. And
now his head, and to cover him: for he had labored: and Jonas rejoiced upon
the iuie with great joy. And God prepared a Jonas had just cause to be grieved;
and so God had just cause of compassion, that the city should not perish. In
this prophecy, which is also an history, who could have thought that Jonas
had been a figure of our Saviors death, and resurrection, unless himself had so
expounded it? Mat. 12.
I am grieved.
angry well even unto death. And our Lord said: Thou

THE PROPHECY OF MICHEAS.
MICHEAS a Morasthite of the tribe of Ephraim, prophesied S. Epiph. devita
prophet.
Micheas prophesied the same time with Isai. etc.
part of the time with Isai, and the former five less Prophets: against both
the kingdoms of Israel and Judah: foreshewing their captiuities, and relaxation
of Judah from Babylon: their conversion to Christ nere the end of the world: and
that in the mean time al other nations shall believe in Christ.

CHAP. I. Samaria and all the ten tribes shall be brought into captivity by
the Assirians. 9. The two tribes shall also be invaded and spoiled, even nere to
Jerusalem.
THE word of our Lord that was made to Michaeas If the prophet should not
admonish the people, both he and they should dye in their sin; Iere. 3. v. 18
19 but he dischargin his office (as ^od is witness) they not repenting shall
perish in their iniquity.
let our Deuteronomy. 32. Isa. 1. Isa. 26.
Lord God be unto you for a witness, our Lord out of his holy temple. Because
lo our Lord will go forth out of his place: valleis shall be cloven, as wax at
the presence of fire, and as waters that run down headlong. For the
wickedness of Samaria gathering riches by traffike with idolaters communicated
also with them in idolatry and therefore their riches shall be carried into
Niniue, and other places of Assyria.
unto the hyre of an harlot they shall return. Upon this will I lament, and
howl: I will go Tell not these calamities which I foreshew amongst your
enemies, lest they rejoice thereat.
In Geth declare it But lament in your own houses which shall be ruined, and
replenished with dust. S. Jerome here testifies the hardness of this place
praying for the assistance of the Holy Ghost to understand it.
in the house of dust sprinkle your self with dust. And pass ye to your selves
o fair habitation, Ironiously he says the glory, that is, the misery of
Israel shall be extended to Odolla the uttermost city of Judah.
Odolla shall the glory of Israel come. Be bald, and

CHAP. II. By their great injustice, 7. notwithstanding their vain presumption
of Gods mercy; whereto he is in deed most prone, 8. the Israelites through
their excessive rapine, provoke God to punish them. 12. yet when Christ shall
come some Jews will serve him; and many more in the end of the world.
VVO TO you which think that is By the figure Liptote, that is here called
unprofitable, which is indede extreme hurtful, and has nothing profitable in
it.
vnpofitable, they do it, because their hand is against God. And they The
princes of the people command the prophets not to speak and inculcate so much
of future afflictions.
speaking: It shall not drop upon God answers, that his threats proceed
from his mercy. For he would save al and those that either walk rightly, or
repent shall feel the effect of his mercy, but except they be admonished,
neither the good vvil persevere in goodness, nor the evil return into the right
way.
Are not my words good with him that walks rightly? And on the contrary my
people is risen In further proof of Gods mercy he promises to gather his
Church of al nations by Christ.
Gathering I will gather thee wholly together

CHAP. III. For the sins of the rich opressing the poor, 5. of falfe
prophets flatering for lucre, 9. and of Judges perverting justice, 12.
Jerusalem, and the temple shall be destroyed.
AND I said: Hear ye princes The chief of both the kingdoms (the two tribes,
and the ten) were great extorcioners, and the poor murmuring against the
rich also extorted each from other: imitating the greater sort in evil.
of Jacob, and ye dukes of judgment, which hate good, and love evil: which
violently False prophets sought also their private gain.
the prophets, that seduce my people: that bite with their teeth, nnd preach
peace: and if a man give not something in their mouth, they sanctify battle
upon him. Therefore there Likewise the Judge perverted judgment scraping their
tempo al profit of other men's quarrels.
judges of the house of Israel: which abhor judgment, and pervert al right
things. Which Ezec. 22. Soph. 3.
judged for gifts, and her priests taught for wages, and her prophets diuined
for money: and they rested upon our Lord, saying: Why, is not our Lord in the
mids of us? evils shall not come upon us. And therefore al sorts grievously
offending shall al vvorthely perish.
For this, because of you, Sion shall be ploughed Iere. 26.
as a filde, and Jerusalem shall be as an heap of stones, and the mount of the
temple as the high places of forests.

CHAP. IIII. Many Gentiles shall believe in Christ: 6. and lastly the multitude
of Jews. 8. In the mean time the two tribes shall be carried into captivity,
and be delivered again.
AND it shall be: In The Jews confess this prophecy to be of Christ the
promised Messiah: but deny it to be of our Savior JESUS of Nazareth, framing
for their purpose diverse arguments, which the learned may see very well confuted
by Doct. Franc. Ribera, in this place. The later days are this whole time from
Christ to the end of the world, which is the last time or state, after which
shall be no other stat^ of time, but eternity. Though in some places, the later
days, or last days, signify the time that follows after the thing then
mentioned. as. Isa. 9. v. 1. 2 Timothy 3. v. 1.
the later end of days there shall be the Isa. 2.
mount of the house of our Lord prepared in the top of mountains, and high
about the hills: and peoples shall flow to it. And many nations shall hasten,
and shall say: Come, judge between many peoples, and he shall rebuke strong
nations unto a far of: and they True and sincere christians love and keep,
peace, yea rather sustain injuries with meeknes then contend one against an
other. 1 Cor. 6.
shall cut their swords into culters, and their spears into spades: nation
shall not take sword against nation: and they shall no more learn to make
battle. And every man shall sit under his vine, and under his figtree, Al
such quiet patient people as walk in the name of God our Lord, will keep this
peace, yea even with them that hate peace. P^ 119. suffering persecution with
alacrity of mind. Heb. 10. v. 34. S. Iren l. 4. c 67. aduers haeres. S
Justin. Apolog. 2. pro Christian. S. Cyril in hunc. locu^.
all The Jews shall be at last converted to Christ.
I will gather her that halteth: Soph. 3. Luc. 1. Dau. 7.
and her that had labored into a mighty nation: and our Lord will reign over
them in mount Sion, from this time now and for ever. And thou Captivity of the
two tribes.
the tower of flock, clowdie of the The relaxation from captivity.
But they have not known the cogitations of our

CHAP. V. Jerusalem shall be besieged and taken (2. Christ shall be borne in
Bethlehem) 3. the Jews shall not be wholly rejected, until the Gentiles begin
to embrace the true faith. 4. Which shall be spread in the whole world, 8. pure
from idolatry, 14. and the incredulous punished.
NOW shall thou be spoiled Jerusalem is called daughter of the spoiler, that
is, addicted to spoiling and oppressing the poor as chapter ^. and therefore shall
be spoiled; yet shall be restored, and conserved, til Bethlehem bring forth the
Dominatour, Christ our Lord.
daughter of the spoiler: Mat. 2. Joan. ^.
Ephrata, art Bethlehem a small city, of least account amongst many yet by
Christ borne there, it became not a little one, but more excellent then many
others. Mat. ^. v. 6.
a little one in the thousands of Judah: out of thee shall come forth unto me he
that shall be the dominatour in Israel: and his coming forth " from the
beginning, from the days of eternity. Therefore shall he give them even til the

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. V.
2. From the beginning, from the days of eternitie] To signify that Christ
taking Christ man and God.
man's nature, was nevertheless eternal God with the Father and Holy Ghost,
the prophet adds that he was from the beginning, and from the days of
eternity. which manner of speech, by ^te^a^^ng the same terms, as also
seculum seculi, secu^a saeculo^um. and the like, signify absolute eternity
Though the same words put single* in some places do only importe long time, or
du^ing such a state* as Exo. 21. v. 6. Psalm. 23. v. 7. and* 9.

5. Seven pastors, eight principal men] Christ raises up, and alvvayes
conserueth many, or a great number (signified by the two mystical numbers,
seven The Church has alvvayes true pastors.
and eight) to defend the faithful people of the Church, against Assure, and
Nemrod, that is, against al persecutors and adversaries. These defenders are
the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, especially Bishops, who are here called
Pastors, to admonish them, that their office is to seed^ the people with
spiritual food, doctrine and Sacraments: and are called also princes, or
principal men, to admonish the people to obey, and follow their ordinance* As
S. Paul also admonishes: Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them. For they
vvatch as being to render account for your souls. Heb. 13.

CHAP. VI. God expostulateth with the chief of the Jews, 3. and with the
whole people, their ingratitude, for his singular benefits: 6. who is not
pacified with sacrifices, 8. but by doing justice. 9. which they not doing, 13.
shall be afflicted by their enemies.
HEAR ye what our Lord speaks: Arise, contend in VVheras God shevved most
singular great benefits the vngratful malignant people required him with most
wicked and reprochful cruelty. As is excellently set forth, in the Churches
service on good fri^day.
My people what have I done to thee, or what have Iere. 2. Exo 14. Number. 22.
the Land of Egypt, and delivered thee out of the house of them that served:
and sent before thy face Moses, and Aaron, and Both Moses and Aaron were
figures of our Savior, and their sister Marie a figure of B Marie the mother
of Christ.
Marie? My people remember I pray thee, what Balach Works of justice, and
mercy do far excel external sacrifice of the old law.
to do judgment, and to love mercy, and to walk solicitous with thy God. The
voice of our Lord cries to the city, and salvation the impious, treasures of
iniquity, and a lesser measure full of wrath. Why, shall I justify an impious
balance, and the deceitful Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Agge. 1.
of thee: and thou shall apprehend, and shall not save: and whom thou shall
save, I will give unto the sword. Thou Thou Jerusalem art so wicked and foolish,
as to imitate the most wicked kings and people of the ten tribes Amri, and
Achab. 3. Reg 16. v. 25. and 30.
of

CHAP. VII. The prophet lamenteth, that for all his preaching few are good, and
many corrupt in manners: 5. therefore their miseries approach: 7. from which they
shall be again delivered, 14. and prosper, 20. and al mankind shall be redeemed
by Christ.
VVO is me, because I am become as he that gathers Such general speech does
not importe absolutely al without exception, but that very many or the far
greater part of the wicked remaned so still notvvithstanding the prophets
diligence in preaching, by the which fevv were converted
none righteous among men: al lie in wait for blood, every one hunteth his
brother to death. The evil of their hands they call good the prince In time of
great and general distress ne rest freindes even domestical may not be
trusted, because every one in such case has care of himself, though it be
with prejudice of others.
Believe not a friend, and trust not in prince: from her that Mat. 10. v. 21. ^5.
ryseth against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law: and
a man's enemies they of his own household. But I will look toward our Lord, I
will expect God my savior: in darkness, our Lord is my light. I will bear the
wrath Babylon shall be taken and spoiled by the Medes and Persians, by them the
Jews shall be delivered: vvherat the Chaldees vvil much repine.
she shall be covered Pastors office is to feed and rule,
Feed thy people with thy e rod, the flock of thine inheritance, them that
dwell alone in in the forest, in the mids of Carmel: they shall feed upon
Basan and Galaad according to the days of old. According:: with meat, and
rod; with doctrine and discipline.
the mouth, their ears shall be deaf. They shall lieke dust as Iere. 10. Act.
10. Collos. 2.
shall fear thee. What God is like to thee, which take away Iuc. 1. v. 55.
73. Genesis 22. v. 17.
the botome of the sea. Thou will give God gave truth to Jacob performing that
which was promised,
truth to Jacob, of his mere mercy to Abraham.
mercy to Abraham: which thou have sworn to our fathers from the days of old.

THE PROPHECY OF NAHVM.
NAHVM borne in Elcese a town in Galiley, prophesied shortly S. Ierom. Epist
ad Paulin.
Nahum prophesied about 50. years after Jonas, ^ere 135. before the
destruction of Niniue.
after the captivity of the ten tribes, against Niniue, about fifty years
after Jonas preaching, and their repentance; when they became more wicked then
before: foreshewing their utter ruin, and ignominy. In figure of the
destruction of idolatry in all nations, by Christ euangelizing and announcing
peace, to all that will believe in him.

CHAP. 1. Niniue shall be destroyed not able to escape Gods powreful wrath. 9.
The Asstrians shall not prevail against Jerusalem: 13. but themselves shall be
slain.
THE Burden signifies comminatorie and pen sieve prophecy of ruin and
punishment. Allegorically Nahum according to his name, comfort the just,
shevving that God vvil revenge them by destroying Niniue the beautiful great
city, that is, the terrestrial world called cosmos beautful, and then reward
his Saints in eternal glory.
burden of Niniuie. The book of the vision of The Assirians accounting
themselves assured to take and spoil Jerusalem, and thereupon banketting and
drinking were defeated al in one night.
the feast of them that drink together: they shall be consumed as stuble full of
drienes. Out To Senacherib succeeded his sorne Asar haddon, but presently after
the whole lineage was destroyed ^^g ^^.
shall not be sown of thy name any more: out of the house of thy God I will
destroy sculptil, and molten, I will put thy grave, because thou art dishonored.
Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that Isa. 52* Romans 10.
Euangalizeth, and preaches peace: celebrate o Judah thy festiuities, and
render thy vows: because Belial shall no more add to pass through thee, he is
wholly perished.

CHAP. II. The Chaldees shall mightily invade the Assirians, 5. take and
ransacke Niniue.
HE is come up that Nabuchodo nosor muading the territory of Niniue waste al
things, and then assaulted and took the city.
shall scatter before thee, that shall The Assirians became more proud and
insolent after they had spoiled the two tribes and carried the ten into
captivity and therefore God vvil now revenge this pride.
the pride of Jacob, as the pride of Israel: because the waters have dissipated
them, and have marred their branches. The buckler of his valiants fyrie, the
men of the army in The people of Niniue, when the wall of the city shall once
be broken by the enemies, vvil flee away as water runs out of a pond, or
fishpoole, when the bank is broken
her waters as it were a fishpoole of waters: but Although some of more corege
will exhortethe fugitives to stay, and sight for their city, it vvil not
avail, because the most part vvil seek to escape by running away.
Stand stand, and there is none that will return. Spoil the silver, spoil the
gold: and there is no end Isa. 2.
of the riches of al vessels that are to be desired. She is dissipated, and
rent, and torn: and pyning heart, and dissolution of the knees, and defect in all reins: and the faces of them al as the blacknes of a pot. The king of
Assirians like a furious lion gathered pray out of al countries, and brought
it into Niniue as into his den, but at last shall be spoiled of al.
Where is the habitation of lions, and

CHAP. III. A description of Niniues ruin, 5. made ignominious to al nations:
17. foreign souldiars fleing away, and al their own terrified.
VVO to thee o city Nemrod began with sheeding blood to make himself great.
Gen 10. so Ninus who built Niniue, and their successors were still very
bloody, and otherwise wicked, but at last after 1200 years, under
Sardanapalus their Monarchy decayed much, as most vvriters both Greek and
Latin testify, but yet continued longer and flourished again as Doctor Ribera
shows by the holy Scriptures, and continued in all from Ninus time til it
was destroyed by the Chaldees, about 1440. years, yea and was repaired
again and was great after the relaxation of the Jews from captivity. As
Eusebius. S. Augustine. S. Beda and others write.
of bloods, al of lying full of tearing: Bzee. 14. Habac. 2.
spoil shall not depart from thee. The voice Isa. 47.
will discover thy privy parts in thy face, and will show to the Gentiles thy
nakedness, and to kingdoms thine ignominy. And This city was first called No,
but being destroyed by the Chaldees, and reedified by K. Alexander was then
called by his name. S. Ierom.
Alexandria full of peoples, which dwells in the rivers? waters round about
it: whose riches, the sea: waters the walls thereof. Aethiopia the strength of
it, and Egypt, and there pastors slumbred, o King of Assure, thy princes shall
be buried thy people lay hid in the mountains, and there is none to gather
them together. Thy destruction is not obscure, thy

THE PROPHECY OF HABACVC.
HABACVC borne in Bezochar prophesied the same time with Nahum Habacuc
prophesied of the two tribes: of the Chaldees: and of Christ.
foreshewing the victories of the Chaldees subdewing many nations, namely the
kingdom of Judah, destroying Jerusalem and the temple, and carrying the people
captive into Babylon; and afterward the ruin of the same Chaldees, and
relaxation of the Jews: at last the coming of Christ, with diverse particular
Mysteries described in a Canticle from his Incarnation to the general
Judgment, and eternity of the next world.

CHAP. I. The prophet lamenteth the imminent ruin of the people, by the
insolent cruelty of the Chaldees: 12. especially for that the holy city shall
be ransacked by idolaters, and most wicked men.
THE This prophet expresses not against what kingdom city or person this
burden is the reason vvherof seems to be, because it is against very many and
diverse, yea against al persecuters of Gods servants.
burden that Habacuc the prophet saw. Act 13. v. 41.
and see: meruel, and be astonished: because S. Paul alleges this place in the
mystical sense Act 13 in the literal the coherence is very obscure.
a work is done in your days, which no man will believe when it shall be told.
Because lo I The Chaldees were not yet comen to their greatness; and therefore
this could not be the same Habacucmentioned. Daniel. 14. v. 32.
will raise up the Chaldees, a bitter and wind: and he shall gather together as
the sand, captivity. And he shall triumph over kings, and tyrants shall be his
laughing After that the Chaldees shall have subdued the Assirians, they shall
also be overthrown by others, to wit, by the Medes and Persians.
Then shall the spirit be The Chaldees and other victorious nations conquering
other countries attribute al to their own industry, and forces, honoring
themselves, and not God.
He lifted up al in the hook, he drew it in his train, Men of al nations.
the nations he will not spare.

CHAP. II. The captivity of the two tribes, their relaxation, Christ will
assuredly come though not quickly. 5. Their afflicters (the Chaldees) shall be
destroyed; 18. and al other idolaters.
I The words of the prophet expecting what God will further reuele unto him.
WILL stand upon my watch, and fix my step upon the Isa. 2^.
and what I may answer to him that rebukes me. And our He that comes at the
time appointed though it belong, is not slack.
will not slack. Behold he that is incredulous, The principal comfort of the
just consists in their faith an I confidence of the world to come. VVherby
they live with consolation, vvheras otherwise this miserable life were rather
^ death Heb. 10. v. 38 Sec also S. Aug. li. 3. c. 5. cont. duas epist Pe'ag.
li. 14. de ^rinit. c. 12. and de spiritu and lit c. 9. and 11. explicating
with the Apostle that faith is the beginning of spiritual life by grace to
which works of the law without faith in Christ sufficed not. Romans 1. Gal. ^.
the just shall Joan. ^. Romans 1. Gal. 3. Heb. 10.
live in his faith. And as wine deceives him that drinks: against himself
thick clay? Why, shall they not rise suddenly, For much bloodshed by the
Chaldees for avarice, in justice and other wickedness they shall at last be
ruined.
of man, and the iniquity of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell
therein. Woe to him that Vvhiles thou thoughest by rapine and avarice to eter
n^ze thy family and kingdom thou have merited the ruin thereof.
have thought confusion to thy house, thou Ezec. 24. Nah^. 3.
city in iniquity. Why, are not these things from the Lord Psalm. 10.
Behold, this same is covered with gold, and silver: and there is no spirit in
the bowels thereof. But our Lord is in his holy

CHAP. III. 1. The prayer of Habacuc the prophet for All sins in some sort
proceed of ignorance: for remission whereof the prophet prays in this
Canticle, and that for the same Christ's coming may not be differred: 2. So
prophecieth his Incarnation, 3. Nativity, 4. Miracles and Doctrine, 5.
Passion, Resurrection, and conversion of Gentiles: 16. The general Judgment,
Glory of the blessed, and damnation of the reprobate.
ignorances.
LORD I heard thy hearing, and For the great excellent, and admirable mercy of
God I was astonished as one afraid, seeing God himself vvil take man's nature,
and therein pay ransom and redeem mankind.
was afraid. Lord thy work in in the time disigned for this purpose. The 70.
Interpreters read, between two living creatures thou shall be found and so
the Church has in the office of Christ's Nativity and Circumcision between an
ox and an ass in the shall.
the mids of years, quicken it: In the mids of years shall thou make it
known: when thou art angry, thou will remember mercy.

From Bethlem which is southvvard from Jerusalem.
the South, and the holy one from mount Pharan: Sela. See A^not. Psalm ^.


His glory shall cover the heavens, and the earth is full of his praise.







In Madian a part of Aethiopia the people lived most in tents, not in houses
so here is signified that in the tumulte of wars vvil be much removing of
skins that is, of their tents made of skins.
the skins of the land of Madian shall be trubled.



Who wilt mount upon thy horses, and thy chariots salvation.

Sela.


Thou will curte the rivers of the earth.







Antichrist the head of the malignant house, or conuenticle, shall be destroyed
by Christ. Isa. 11 v. 4 2* These 2.
the head out of the house of the impious, thou have discovered the fundation
even to the neck. Sela.




Their exultation, as his that deuoureth the poor in secret.



That I may rest in All afflictions are to be patiently sustained, that we may
have rest in the day of judgment.
the day of tribulation: that I may ascend to our girded people.



But I will joy in our Lord: and will rejoice in God my JESUS.



THE PROPHECY OF SOPHONIAS.
SOPHONIAS the son of Chusi borne in Sarabatha of the tribe of Sophonias
prophesied the captivity of the two tribes: their relaxation. And Mysteries
of Christ.
Simeon, in the reign of Josias king of Judah, somewhat before Jeremy (who
began in the 13. year of the same Josias. After whom followed Ezechiel, in
the fifth year of the transmigration of king Ioachin, and Baruch in the fifth
year after the destruction of Jerusalem: then Daniel three years after him)
prophesied the captivity of the two tribes, and their relaxation; likewise the
ruin of diverse Gentiles, the coming of Christ; conversion of Gentiles,
excecation of the Jews, with their general conversion toward the end of the
world.

CHAP. I. For certain enormious sins, the captivity of the two tribes, is
threatened, with admonition to repent, otherwise it shall be most terrible.
THE word In saying the word of our Lord, the prophets signify that they are
not the principal auctors of that which they preach or write, but the
ministers by whom God speaks.
of our Lord that was made to Sophonie the son of Chusi, the son of
Godolias, the son of Amarias, the son of Ezechias, in the days of Josias
the son of Amon king of Judah. Gathering more commonly signifies a benefit,
but by that which follows, from the face of the earth, it is manifest, that
God here threatens to destroy sinners, the kingdom of Judah.
Gathering I will gather together al things c by our Lord, and swear by
Melchom. And them that turn away from after the back The day of punishment is
commonly called the day of our Lord. Isa. 2. Joel. 2. 1. Cor. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the day of our Lord is nere, because our Lord has prepared an host, he has
sanctified his called. And it shall be: in the Ioachaz was deprived of his
kingdom and died in Egypt. 4. Reg. 23 Ioakim was continually vered by the
Babylonians and other nations, 4. Reg. 24. at last slain and his body cast
out of the city Iere. 22. Sedecias taken, his eyes put out, so ca^^ed into
Babylon* and al his sons slain, Iechonias otherwise called Ioachin was kept
long prisoner in Babylon, and all the issue of Josias afflicted*
the kings sons, and upon all that are clothed with Whosoever joins false
gods with God Almighty, in deed serves not God.
strange clothing: and I will visit upon every one, that arrogantly the valley
ner^ Jerusalem
Mortar. All the people of Chanaan is hush, al are perished that were wrapped in
silver. and it shall be in that time: I will search Amos ^.
and shall not drink the wine of them. Al these afflictions are nere. g
Repeting and inculcating the same terms, does ^legantly describe the greatness
of the future calamities.
The great day g a day of wrath, a day of tribulation Iere. 3^. Joel. 2. Amos.
^.
and distress, a day of calamity and misery, a day of darkness and mist, a
day of cloud and whirlewind: a day of the trumpet Ezech ^.
silver, and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the
wrath of our Lord: in the fire of his jealousy shall all the earth be devoured,
because he will make consummation with speed to all that inhabit the earth.

CHAP. II. ^^ exhortation to repent: 4 with prophecy of the destruction of the
Philistims* 8. Moabites and Ammonites; 12. Aethiopians: 12. Assirians: 15. with
their chief city Niniue.
COME together, be Ye that deserve not Gods love but rather to be re^ected, yet
by repentance return to him and he vvil receive you.
ye gathered together o nation not It is very frequent in the prophets ^o
speak of things to come as if they were done already for the certainty
thereof. And these prophecies of the destructions of other nations by the
Chaldees, do confirm that which is threatened to the Jews, for all sinning,
al must be punished. And God who is Lord of al will sovvner or later give to al
as they deserve.
is Isa. 34.
on ocratulus, and the Irchin shall abide in the thresholdes thereof: the voice
of one singing in the window, the raven on the upper post, because I will
attenuate her strength. This is Niniue exceeding glorious for antiquity,
greatness, riches, warlike prowese, and most large dominion was at last
destroyed.
the glorious city dwelling in confidence: that said in her heart: I am, and
beside me there is none other else: how is she become as a desert the couche for
beasts? every one that passes by her, shall hiss, and wag his hand.

CHAP. III. Jerusalem for rejecting Gods admonitions shall be destroyed, 7.
Christ being risen from death; the Jews persecuting the faithful shall be
rejected, miserably destroyed, 9. and the Gentiles called. 11. So his Church
shall floorish. 13. and at last the Jews shall be converted.
VVO TO thee thou Jerusalem without proper merits preferred by Gods special
grace before al other places sanctified, adorned, protected most singularly,
yet still provoked him to wrath contemning his admonitions, and persisting and
multiplying sins, can not but at last be severely punished.
provoking, and redeemed city, Ezec ^^* Mich. ^.
of her as lions roarnig: her judges wolves in the evening, left nothing for
the morning. Her prophets mad, men bring*
give his judgment into light, and it shall not be hid: but the wicked man has
not known the confusion. I have destroyed About 40. years after Christ's
resurrection the most part of the Jews persisting obstinate were brought to
marvelous distress and miseries when Titus took and destroyed Jerusalem
which is also a figure of the destruction of this world, and of eternal
punishment of the wicked*
expect me, says c then will I restore to the peoples, a shall lie down, and
there shall be none to make them afraid. Al nation* shall invoke one God in a
chosen lip or tongue, in unity of faith and with one shoulder of fortitude
bear the yoke and burden of Christian life* made svvete and light by Christ's
grace.
Praise o daughter of Sion: make iubilation Israel: be glad, and Men of light
conversation, and contemners of Christ shall also be converted, become grave and
greatly honor him.
triflers that

THE PROPHECY OF AGGEVS.
AGGEVS prophesying in the second year of Darius Histaspis king Aggeus
prophesied after the captivity* of Christ and his Church.
of Persians, that is, in the 18. year after the relaxation from captivity of
Babylon, exhorts to reedifie the Temple, which had been begune and
intermitted; promising much prosperity after the building thereof, and finally
the coming of Christ desired of al nations; who by his presence S Ierom. Epist.
ad Paulin.
will glorify this new temple, more then the former built by Solomon; and
especially prophecieth the glory of his Catholic Church, which shall much
excel the Church of the old Testament.

CHAP. I. The Jews building to themselves excellent houses, are justly
reprehended for not building the Temple of God. 10. Which is the cause of the
barrennes* sickness, and other evils. 12. Whereupon they undertake the holy
work*
IN THE second year of Darius the king, the sixth Zorobabel descending
directly from the kings of Judah was now duke, and chief temporal gouerner of
the Jews, by permission of Darius king of Persians.
Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, duke of Judah, and to b Jesus the son of
Iosedec the grandpriest saing Thus says the Lord of hosts, saying: This
people says: It behooves without delay to set forward restoration of Gods
service, reductio^ of souls from sin, and amending of il manners: because by
fores^owing thereof Gods honor is hindered, and many souls, do eternally
perish.
The time is not yet come of building the house of our Lord. And the word of
our Lord was made in the hand of Aggeus In like sort Jesus secceded in the
office of high priest to Iosedec, who was carried with others captive into
Babylon 1 Par. 6. v. 15.
the Lord of hosts? Set your hearts upon your ways. You Deuteronomy. 28. Mich. ^.
have sowed much, and brought in little: you have eaten, and have not been
filled: you have drunk, and have not been inebriated: you have covered your
selves, and have not been warmed: and he that has gathered the wages, put them
into a broken bag. Thus says the Lord of hosts: Set your hearts upon To incite
the people to just estimation of his preaching, the prophet avouches that he
is a messenger, not coming of him self but sent by God.
of the messengers of our Lord spoke, saying to the people: I am with you,
says our Lord. And our Lord raised

CHAP. II. They are encoreged to proceed in building the temple: 6. with
promise that Christ by his personal presence will bring more glory to this,
then was in the former temple. 11. Their former slacknes in this work was the
cause of their wantes: 19. and now they shall have abundance.
IN the four and twenteth day of the month, in They began the new work
the 24. day of the sixth month:
the sixth and the 21 of the 7* month the prophet had an other revelation
seventh month, the one and twentieth of the month, the word of our Lord was
made in the hand of Aggeus the prophet, saying: Speak to Zorobabel the son
of Salathiel the Heb. 12.
is one little while, and I will move the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and
the dry land. And I will move al nations: AND Jacob the Patriarch. Genesis 49.
prophesied that Christ should be the expectation of the Gentiles. Who is
called the desired of al Nations, because he was hertofore vvanting and
alvvayes necessary to al nations.
THE DESIRED OF AL NATIONS SHALL COME: and I will fill this house with glory,
says the Lord of hosts. Mine That which touched a holy thing was
sanctified. Leui. 6. v 18 but the thing so touched did not sanctify other
things: so the people by touching the sacrifices were legally sanctified but
not really: and therefore their sacrifices were not gratful to God, so long as
they did not endeavor to build the temple, as they ought to have done.
shall it be sanctified? And the priests answering, said: No. And Aggeus said:
If one polluted on a soul Amos. 4.
and there was none among you, that returned to me, says our Lord. Set your
hearts from this day, and hence forward, from spr^ng up.
abreward? and Al other kingdoms perishing the kingdom of Christ, which is his
Church, is never destroyed.
will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, Eccli* ^^.
says our Lord, and will put thee as a signet, because thee have I chosen,
says the Lord of hosts.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. II.
10. Great shall be the glorie] When according to the prophets exhortation The
temple restored after the captivity was not so glorious as that which Solomon
built.
the temple was built again, Esdras chapter 3. v 12 vvriteth, that such ancient
men as had seen the former, lamented, because this new one was not so
excellent as the former had been, which is also clear by other places of holy
scripture. For amongst other differences, Salomons temple had in height, and in
breadth, an hundred and twenty cubits 2 Paral. 3. v. 4. this new temple had
but sixty cubits. 1 Esd. 6. v. 3. Likewise balomons temple was built of
stones hevved and perfectly polished, 3. Reg 6. v. 7. which were also covered
on the innerside with seeling work of ceder vvood. v. 18. This new temple
was built of rugh But Christ's Church of the new Testament in which he
dwells spiritually far excels the material temple.
and unpolished stones. 1. Esd. 5. v. 8 As for the same temple long after
enlarged and adorned by Herod, it continued not long in that state, and the
chiefest glory thereof was by our Saviors presence therein, when he was
presented by his mother, and joyfully received into the arms of Simeon, and
often preached there. And therefore S. Augustine proves li. 18. c. 45. ciuit*
that the prophet here foreshevveth the glory of Christ's mystical temple,
faithful Christian souls of al nations, in whom God dwells by grace of the
new Testament, far more glorious in living stones, then that temple which
king Solomon built, or that which was restored after the captivity.

THE PROPHECY OF ZACHARIAS.
ZACHARIAS the son of Barachias, and nephew of Addo, beginning Zachary
begane to prophecy but two months after Aggeus.
two months after Aggeus, exhorts also to reedifie the Temple: and shows
by diverse visions, that the Church shall floorish, partly in that time of the
old Synagog, but much more after Christ's coming: whose first and chief
promulgators of his Gospel, shall be of the Jewish nation: but the S. Ierom.
Epist ad Paulin.
far greatter number shall be of the Gentiles, the Jews for their obstinacy
rejected. Yet they also in the end shall return to Christ.

CHAP. I. The prophet exhorts the people to convert to God, and not to
imitate the evil examples of their fathers. 7. by a vision of an horseman, and
diverse colored horses, he prophecieth bitter times: 18. confirming the same by
an other vision of four horns.
IN THE eight month in the second year of king Mal. 3. Isa. 21. Iere. 3.
Ezec. 18. and 20. Ose. 14. Joel* 2.
the Lord of hosts: When God in the holy Scriptures says: Convert to me, and
I vvil convert to you. We are admonished that we have freewil. And when we
answer: Convert us o Lord to thee, and we shall be converted, we confess that
Gods grace preuenteth us. Conc. Trid. sess. 6. c. 5.
Convert to me, says the Lord of hosts: and I will convert to you, says the
Lord of hosts. Be not as That this was an Angel in the shape of a man is
manifest. v 11.
a man mounting upon a red horse, and he stood among Seventy years from the
transmigration of Ioachin were complet in the first of Cytus. Dan 9. Seventy
years were also complet from the destruction of the temple in the second of
Darius Histaspis and therefore the prophet now prays God to inspire such as
were able, that they would build the temple again.
the myrtletrees, that were in the botome: and after him horses red, speckled,
and white. And I said: What are these, my been angry? this now is c the
seuentith year. And our Zach. 8*
to me: Cry, saying: Thus says the Lord of hosts: I have been zealous for
Jerusalem, and Sion with great zele. And with From four parts of the world,
to wite, the Moabites and Ammonites on the east of Jury; The Idumeans and
Egyptians on the south; the Philisthims on the vveast* and the Assirians and
Chaldees on the North side had much molested the Jews; al which were
therefore plaged and punished for the same.
four horns. And I said to the Angel, that fabros.
artificers. And I said:

CHAP. II. Under the name of Jerusalem, he prophecieth the progress of the
Church of Christ: 6. by the conversion of some Jews, 8. and many Gentiles.
AND I lifted up mine eyes, and saw: and lo a man, and According to S
Augustins rule in Psalm. 71. when greater things are said then can be verified
as the letter sounds, the same is literally to be understood of the thing
presigured. And so this prophecy perteyneth to the Church of Christ rather
then to the city of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, and to see how great the breadth thereof is, and how great the
length thereof. And behold the Angel that spoke in me, came b flee ye out of the
land of the North, c Sion, flee thou that have spoiled you: for he that shall
touch you, touches the O ye Gentiles that remain in confused Babylon of this
world, flee from it into the Church.
apple of mine eye: because lo I lift up my hand upon them, And ye Jews that
have feloship with Babylon, leave it, and serve God sincerely.
be joined to our Lord in that day, and they shall be my people, and I will dwell
in the mids of thee: and thou shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent me
to thee. And our Lord will

CHAP. III. In a vision the devil appears accusing the hiegh Priest. 4. He is
cleansed from his sins. 8. Christ is promised, and great fruit of his passion.
AND our Lord showed me Literally this vision perteyned to the hiegh priest of
tha^ time:
Jesus the grand priest standing Whose fault is here taxed, for that he
admonished not the people to build the temple; and to abstain from marying
women of strange nations, as. 1. ^sd. 8 9 10.
with Angels are promised to assist the Prelates of the Church
will give thee walkers of them that now assist here. Hear o Jesus thou grand
priest, Christ according to his manh^od is the servant of God. Of who S Luke
expounds this prophecy.
MY SERVANT THE ORIENT. Because lo the stone that I laid Luc. 1. ^. 78.
before Jesus: upon one stone there be seven eyes, behold I will grave the
grauing thereof, says the Lord of hosts: and I will take away the iniquity of
that land in one day. In that day, says

CHAP. IIII. In a vision of a candlestike and candles, 3. and of two olive
trees is prophesied the vocation of the Gentiles, 11. and lastly of the Jews.
AND the Angel returned that spoke in me: and he raised Most Hebrew Doctors
and some Christian expound this vision of the temple, and the old synagog, but
most others understand it literally of Christ and his Church.
lo The candlestick Metaphorically signifies Christ's Church.
a candlestick al of gold, and The lamp or light Christ.
the lamp thereof upon the head of it: and the seven lights all the pastores of
the Church.
seven lights thereof upon it: and seven funnels for the lights, that were upon
the head thereof. And Two olives Enoch and Elias. Apoc. 11.
tow olive trees upon it: one on the right hand of the lamp, and one on the
left hand thereof. And I answered, and I said Which vision was to be declared
to Zorobabel, for his consolation that he might know, that God would protest
his Church.
to Zorobabel, saying: Not in an host, nor in strength: but in my spirit, says
the Lord of hosts. Who art thou o great mountain before Zorobabel? Two
branches the divine and humane natures of Christ.
two branches of oliuetrees, that are beside the two beaks of gold, in which
are the funnels of gold? And he said to me, saying: Why, know thou not

CHAP. V. In a vision of a flying book thieves, and swears are threatened: 5.
in an other vision is foreshewed that the Jews shall be blind, and obdurate.
AND I turned and lifted up mine eyes: and I saw, and In this book or roll of
papers were written the sins of the people, and designed punishment.
behold a volume It appeared flying to signific that this decree of punishment
came from heaven. S. Chrysostom. ho. 27. ad popul.
flying. And he said to me: What see thou? And I said: I see a volume flying:
the length thereof of twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof of ten cubits. And
Excecation and obduration fell upon the Jews for their avarice, and perjury.
two women Antichrist shall begin his reign where Babylon was first built.
Genesis 11.
of Sennaar, and it may be established, and set there upon the foundation
thereof.

CHAP. VI. In a vision of chariots is foreshewed the succession of four
monarchies. 11. In crowns set on the high priests head, the Kingdom, and
Priesthood of Christ: 15. and the rewards of them that receive him.
AND I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and saw: and behold Four Monarchies of
the Chaldees, the Medes and Persians, the Grecians, and the Romans. Dan. 2.
four chariots coming forth from the mids of two mountains: and the
mountains, mountains of brass. In the first chariot red horses, and in the
second chariot black white went forth after them: and the speckled went forth
to the land of the South. But they that were strongest, went When the prophet
set the crown on the high priests head, that he might withal signify that it
perteyned not him, but as in figure of Christ, he explicateth, that God reveled
this mystery, saying: Behold a man who is also God, called Orient, that is
Raising up and establishing the kingdom which was promised to David. S. Iero.
is bunc locum.
saying: BEHOLD Luc. 1. r, 78.
A MAN ORIENT IS HIS NAME: and under him shall spring up, and shall build a
temple to our Lord. And he shall

CHAP. VII. The fast of the fifth and seventh month observed in the captivity,
being good, 5. was imperfect, 8. fasting from sin is always more necessary.
AND it came to pass in the fourth year of Darius the Because the temple was
burned in the fifth month, and Godolias slain in the seventh; 4. Reg. 25. v.
8. 15 the Jews fasted in those two months all the time of their captivity.
the fifth month, or must I san ctifie myself as now I have done many years?
And the word of the Lord of hosts was made to me, saying: Isa. 58.
when you fasted, and mourned in the fifth and the seventh for these seventy
years: Which fast was good, but imperfect, wan ting works of mercy, most
especially required in fastes. Isa. 58 S. Greg. p. 3 past. curae admonie. 20.
and ho 16. in Euang.
did you fast a fast unto me? and when you did eat and drink, did you not
eat for your selves, and drink for your selves? Why, are they not the words,
And therfote the prophet admonishes to fast from al sins.
Judge ye true Judgment, and do ye mercy, and miserations every man with
his brother. And the widow, and Exo. 22. Isa. 1. Iere. 5.
the pupil, and the stranger, and the poor do not calumniate: and let not a
man think in his heart evil to his brother. And

CHAP. VIII. God will give abundance of spiritual benefits to al nations by
Christ: 7. to whom shall be converted 13. many Jews, 20. but many more
Gentiles.
AND the word of the Lord of hosts was made, saying: These benefits here
prophesied are greater then ever were bestovved upon the Jews before Christ
came, and therefore are rather to be understood of the graces of the new
testament.
I am returned to Zach. 1. v. 14.
shall be called the City of truth, and the Mount of the Lord of hosts, the
sanctified mount. Thus says the Lord of hosts: As The ten tribes were
carried captive into Assiria, and the two tribes into Babylon: both which are
northward: not into the east nor vveast. And therefore this prophecy is of al
nations Jews and Gentiles to be called to Christ fromal parts.
the East, and from the land of the Going down of the sun. And I will bring
them, Ephesians 4. v. 25.
his neighbor: truth and judgment of peace judge ye in your gates. And think
ye not every man in your heart evil against Not only the fast of the fifth, and
seventh months (vvherof the question was proposed chapter 7. v. 3.) but also of
the fourth and tenth, were to be leaft of in the times of joy and festinitie.
of the fourth, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the
fast of the tenth shall be to the house of Judah into joy, and gladness, and into
goodly solemnities: truth only, and peace love ye. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, until peoples

CHAP. IX. The bordering enemies of the Jews shall believe in Christ. 9. who will
first come to the Jews in mekenes, yet in solemnity riding on an ass: 11.
deliver the godly from the lake, 12. give great things to the faithful, 17.
and one most excellent thing above the rest.
THE Preaching of true doctrine is at first vngratful to some hearers, and still
to the incredulous, but this burden becomes light to the faithful.
burden of the word of our Lord in the land of acitie of Syria.
Hadrach, and Damascus his rest: because our Lord is the eye of man, and of all the tribes of Israel. Emath also in the Isa. 62. Mat 21. v. 5. Joan. 1. v. 15.
greatly o daughter of Sion, make iubilation o daughter of Jerusalem: BEHOLD
THY KING Christ came often into Jerusalem but this last coming excelled all the
rest, when he came to dye for redemption of mankind.
will come to thee, the just and savior: himself poor, and ryding upon an
ass, and upon a colt the fool of an ass. And I will destroy chariot out of S.
Ierom, S. Cyril and other fathers understand this lake to be Limbus patrum from
whence Christ delivered the Saints of the old testaments.
the lake, wherein is no water. Convert to the munition ye prisoners of hope, to
day also South. The Lord of hosts will protect them: and they shall devour,
Christ is the grane of wheat which dying brings much fruit Joan. 12. And
of this wheat that bread is made that came from heaven Joan. 6. ^ Ierom in
hunc locum.
the corn of the elect, and wine springing virgins?

CHAP. X. The Jews are exhorted to ask good things of God: 4. of their
nation comes the Redemer of al men, 5. and of the same are the Apostles,
spiritual masters of the whole world. 6. The whole nation shall at last be
converted.
ASK of our Lord rain in Latevvard time is when fruit waxes ripe, and so
is here taken for the time of grace which S. Paul calls the acceptable time:
and therefore this prophet exhorts to ask this grace; and al spiritual
benefits of God.
the lateward time, and our Not only the two tribes,
of Judah, but also the ten shall be converted at last to Christ.
of Joseph I will save: and I will convert them, because I will have mercy on
them: and they shall be as they were when I had not cast them of, for I am the
Lord their God, and will hear them. And they shall be as the valients of
Ephraim, Christians are svvetely drawn by internal inspiration without
clamorus, and violent persvvasion of words. S. Cyril.
will hiss to them, and will gather them together, Isa. 11.
I will gather them: and to the Land of Galaad, and Libanus I will bring them,
and there shall not be found place for them. And he shall pass over in the
strayte of the sea, and shall When the faithful are multiplied and confirmed in
religion, their enemies can not hurt them.
the pride of Assure shall be humbled, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart. I
will strengthen them in

CHAP. XI. Jerusalem shall be again most miserably destroyed, 4. the Jewish
nation rejected and dispersed, 12. because Christ was sold by them to the
Gentiles for thirty pence. 16. They will receive Antichrist, who shall be finally
destroyed.
OPEN thy gates Jerusalem is called Libanus, Isa. 10. v. 34. and in other
places, for the great beauty thereof: likewise the temple, and because it was
built of the trees of Libanus, as S. Ierom here, and Ezech. 17. expounds. And
so by this metaphore the destruction of the city and temple by Titus is here
prophesied. The ceders also signify the principal men of the Jews.
o Libanus, and let fire devour thy God the cretor and governor of al men,
calls his general government beauty: because it is most semelie that al be
under his rod. And his peculiar government of the Jews he calls a Cord,
because it is limited to one people.
Beauty, and the other I called c Cord: and I fed the flock. And I cut of
Iere. 15. v. 2.
not feed you: that which dies, let it dye: and that which is cut of, be it
cut of: and let the rest devour every one his neighbors flesh. and I took
my rod that was called beauty, priced at by them. And I took Christ bought
and sold for 30. pence.
the thirty pieces of silver: and I threw them into the house of our Lord to
the statuarie. And Mat. 2^.
I The Jews are rejected:
cut of my second rod, that was called Cord, that I might dissolve the
brotherhood between Judah and Israel. And our vnap^ instruments.
vessels of a foolish pastor. Because lo Antichrist a destroyer,
I will raise up a pastor in the land, shall be destroyed.
the sword upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be dried with
withering, and his right eye waxing dark shall be obscured.

CHAP. XII. The Jews persecuting Christ and his Church, shall be sore
afflicted. 6. The Church still prospering: 11. the incredulous shall be condemned.
THE burden of the word of our Lord upon When the Church of Christ began in
Jerusalem, proceeding to al Jury, and Samaria, and to other nations, the other
Jews most earnestly persecuted Christians. Act. 4. 5. etc.
Israel. Says Judah besieged Jerusalem when Jews remaining in Iudaisme
persecuted other Jews believing in Christ, for then brother delivered brother
to death, the father the son etc. Mat. 10. v 21.
Judah shall be in the siege against Jerusalem. And it shall be: In that seek to
destroy al Nations, that come against Jerusalem. And Joan. 19. v. 3.
him with lamentation as it were upon an only begotten, and they shall sorrow
upon him, as the manner is to be sorrowful in the death of the first begotten. In
that day shall be great lamentation A town nere to Iezrahel in the country of
Mageddon, where Iosas was slain. 2. Baral. 35. and great lamentation was
made for him, which was a figure of the miserable calamity of the obstinate
in the day of judgment, S. Iero^.
Adadremmon 2. Par. 35.
in the filde of Mageddon. And the land shall lament: families

CHAP. XIII. In the Church of Christ al idolatry shall be abolished. 6. In his
passion his Apostles shall be dispersed, and they and others shall be proved by
tribulations.
IN In the time of the new testament Christ is made an open fountain of grace
by his Incarnation. Ioa. 4. v. 13. S. Greg h^. 20. in Ezec and li. 6. epist.
186.
that day shall be a fountain lying open to the house Ezec. 3^.
be in that day, says the Lord of hosts: I will destroy the names of idols our
of the earth, and they shall be remembered no more: and the false prophets, and
the unclean spirit I will take away out of the earth. And it shall be when any
man shall prophecy False doctrine as idolatry and heresy, are punishable by
death in the law of Christ.
shall not live: because thou have spoken a lie in the name of our Lord. And
his father, and his mother his parents shall strike him, when he shall prophecy.
And it shall By svvord is understood al sorts of persecution that fell upon our
Savior.
Sword be thou raised up upon my pastor, and upon the Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
pastor, and the sheep shall be dispersed: and I The Apostles flei^g God
recalled them, and streingthned them with fortitude.
will turn my hand to the little ones. And there shall be in all the earth,
Neither Jews nor Gentiles, remaining in their proper professions can be
saved, but Christian Catholics living justly, which are Gods proper people
distinct from the rest by his grace.
the third part shall be left in it. And I will bring the third

CHAP. XIIII. Jerusalem shall be destroyed, many Jews slain, the rest made
captives: 3. Christ's Church shall flourish, 8. especially in the Gentiles. 12.
Persecuters shall be finally punished: 20. and the godly proceed in grace.
BEHOLD the days of our Lord shall come, and thy spoils In the army of the
Romans were souldiars of many nations at the last destruction of Jerusalem.
will gather E^^. 14.
And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of olives, Amos. chapter 1.
makes also mention of this earthquake, and Josephus li. 9. c. 11 Antiq. though
it be not in the books of the Kings nor Paralipomenon.
of the earthquake in the days of Ozias king of Judah: and Amos. ^. v. 1.
our Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with him. And Christian doctrine
of the Catholic Church universal in all
living waters shall issue forth out places and
the East sea, and half of them to the last sea: in all times.
summer and in winter shall they be. And our the gate of Benjamin even to the
place of the former gate, and even to the gate of the corners: and from the
tower of Hananeel even to the kings presses. And they shall dwell in it, and
there It partly appeared already (as. S. Ierom notes) in the persecuting
Emperors, and since in other examples, but specially these calamities vvil fall
upon the wicked nere the day of Judgment. as Luc. 21 v. 26.
the flesh shall pine away of every one standing upon his feet, and his eyes
shall wear away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their
mouth. In that day there shall be a great tumult of In the mean time such as
before persecuted the Church shall be converted, and with great devotion vvil
celebrate the festiuities, and exercise religious rites to Gods honor: and
shall merit great rewards.
that shall be left of al Nations, that came against Jerusalem, shall go up from
year to year, to adore the King, the Lord of hosts, and to celebrate the
festiuitie of tabernacles. And it And the obstinate incredulous shall remain
barren without grace, and void of eternal glory.
that shall not ascend of the families of the land to Jerusalem, to adore the
King, the Lord of hosts, there shall be no shower upon them. Yea and if the
family of Egypt

THE PROPHECY OF MALACHIE.
MALACHIE (whom S. Ierom, and some others think to be Esdras) In ca. 2. v. 7.
and ^. 3. v. 7.
Much is contained in this brief Prophecy.
prophesied last of the twelve, after that the Temple was reedified. He
reprehendeth both Priests, and people, for that they did not offer their
sacrifices with sincerity; foresheweth the reiection of the Jews, and calling
of the Gentiles by Christ. Before whose first coming shall be one Precursor: and
an other before his last coming to judge.

CHAP. I. God showed his especial love toward the Jews, in that he choice
their progenitor Jacob, rather then Esau. 7. Priests are reprehended, for not
offering the best things in sacrifice. 10. The old sacrifices shall be
rejected, and new far more excellent shall be offered in all nations.
THE burden of the word of our Lord to Israel in Gods peculiar love was first
showed to the Israelits in preferri^g their progenitor Jacob and them his issue
before Esau and his of spring, though in them there was no difference at al,
the one neither deserving more, nor less then the other, but of his mere
mercy electing the one and justly rejecting the other. vvherof see the Annot.
Romans 9.
Was not Esau brother to Jacob, says our Lord, and I loved Jacob, but hated
Esau? and I laid his mountains Romans 9. v. 1^.
into a wilderness, and his inheritance unto the dragons of the desert. But if
Idumea shall say: We are destroyed, but returning Again lastly the same special
undeserved love was shevved* in that the Idumeans subdued by the Chaldees
remained in captivity, but the Israelites were now reduced into their
country.
for ever. And your eyes shall Those that offer ba^^ and contemptible things to
God show that they esteem little of God* and so by their ^ct despise and
contemn him. d If you dare not offer your worse things to your temporal
prince, how dare you offer them to God?
You offer upon mine altar polluted d to thy prince if it shall please him, or
if he will receive thy face, says the Lord of hosts. And now beseech ye the face
of God, that he may have Psalm. 11^*
among the Gentiles, and " in every place there is sacrificing, and there is
offered to my name a clean oblation: because my name is great among the
Gentiles, says the Lord of hosts. And Lo of labor, and you puffed at it,
says the Lord of hosts, and you brought in Two defectes were in their
sacrifices: they offered that which they got by robbery, or extorsion:
of robberies and not the best, but worse part thereof.
the lame and the sick, and brought in a gift: Why, shall I receive it of your
hand, says our Lord? Cursed is the deceitful, that has in his flock a male,

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. I.
10. I have no vvil in you.] Many Prophets (as we have often noted) did
foreshevv the reiection of the Jews, and vocation of the Gentiles: but none
Reiection of the Jews and vocation of the Gentiles.
more plainly then this here; by whom God expressly says* I have no vvil in
you: and I vvil not receive gift of your hand. The reason is also explicated in
this chapter, because God most peculiarly loving them, they were still
vngratful, and disspised him, committing sins upon sins And therefore in
their place, he would bring in the Gentiles: and that not any one, or fevv
nations, but al from the rising of the sun, to the going down thereof, should
sovvner or later come into his Church.

11. In every place there is sacrificing.] God not only changed, and
multiplied Al old sacrifices abolished, and the sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood prophesied.
his people, but also changed, and bettered his Sacrifice. For in place of
sacrificing cattle, birds, and other weak and poor creatures, which were
not able Gal. 4* v. 9.
to purge sins, and were also polluted oftentimes by the sins of them that
offered the same, God here promises a most effectual, pure, and excellent
daily Sacrifice, to continue perpetually in all places of his Church, that can
not be polluted. Which accordingly our Blessed Redemer and Savior instituted,
of his own body and blood, in the forms of bread and wine. As al ancient
Fathers prove, by this place amongst others. So S. Justinius Martyr teaches, in
dialogo cum Triphone. S Cyprian. li. 4. ^ 18. aduersus Iudaeos: S. Damascen. li
4. Proved by the fathers.
c. 14 de ^ide Orthodoxa. S. Ierom, S. Theodoret, and S. Cyril in their
commentaries upon this place. S. Augustine li 18 c. 35. de ciuit. S. Chrysostom
in Ps. 95. and Orat. 2. contra Iudaeos* shevving plainly, and urging the
Jews, and al oppugners of And reasons deduced from the scriptures.
this Catholic belief and doctrine, that this prophecy is no otherwise
fulfilled, but in the daily Sacrifice of the Church. For that here is
prophesied an other Sacrifice, distinct and different from the Jews
sacrifices: neither were sacrifices offered in all the world* neither could be
ordinarily offered out of Jerusalem. But of this most sacred Mystery, and
particularly that it is here prophesied, Deuteronomy. 16.
here is so much published by ancient and late vvriters, that more needs not
to be here added.

CHAP. II. Priests are further reprehended because they discharged not well
their great office. 10. Both they and others offended in marying strangers. 14.
They ought to love, and not lightly dismiss their wives.
AND now to you this commandment Priests coveting and scraping riches do
greatly dishonor God: diminish the estimation of holy Sacraments and other
rites, as though they were ^em ^^ral to be ^ought and sold for money, and so do
scandalize the weak
o ye priests. If Leui. 2^. Deuteronomy. 28.
you will not hear* and if you will not set it upon the heart, to give glory to
my name, says the Lord of hosts: I Such are happy if God by suffering them to
be spoiled, recall them to repentance. For otherwise they will be deprived of
eternal revvard as being paid their wages already in this world. These our
Savior calls. Hyrelinges, not true pastors. Ioa. 10.
will send upon you poverty, and will curse your blessings, and I will curse
them: because you have not set it upon the heart. Behold I will The proper office
of priests besides the administration of Sacraments is also to teach the people
true doctrine:
the lips of the as being the Angel, that is to say, the messenger, from God.
the angel of the Lord of hosts. But Which holy functions priests not
performing are made contemptible in this world and miserable in eternal
torments. Ip. ^ud. v. 11.
For which cause I also have made you Mat. 2^. v. 9. Ephesians. 4. v. 5.
one father of us al? has not one God created us? why then does every one of
us despise his brother, violating the covenant of our fathers? Judah has
transgressed, and abomination Amos 5. v. 22.
destroy the man, that has done this, the master, and the scholar out of the
tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offers gift to the Lord of hosts. And this
again have you done, you covered Ephesians. 4. v. 39.
made our Lord to labor: and you said: Wherein have we made him to labou^? In
that you say: Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of our Lord, and
such please him: or certes where is the God of judgment?

CHAP. III. A precurser shall come before Christ. 3. The Priesthood, and
Sacrifice of the new law are pure, 5. God who sees al sinners will punish them:
10. but if they amend, they shall receive Gods benefits. 13. Not evil men, but
the good please God.
BEHOLD I send S. John Baptist is called an Angel, or messenger because he was
to be sent with special commission from ^od: and for his purity in Angelical
life.
mine Angel, and he shall prepare the Mat. 11. v. 20. Mar. 1. Luc. 1. and 7.
Psalm. 131. v. 17.
way before my face. And S. John was first onceiued likewise first b^rne* and
he first prea^hed, and shortly after him our Savior came.
forthwith shall come to his temple the Dominatour, whom you seek, and Christ
is the Angel of the testament, because he made the Pact of peace between God
and man.
the Angel of the testament, whom you desire. Behold he comes, says the Lord
of hosts: and who shall be able to think the day of his In the mean time God
threatens to punish al even secret sins:
I will come to you known ^o him though not to other vvitnesses.
will be a swift witness to sorcerers, and aduouterers, and to the perjured, and
them that calumniate the hyre of the hired man, the widows, and pupils, and
oppress the stranger, nor have feared me, says the Lord of hosts. For I the
Lord, and I am not changed: and ye sons of Jacob Zach. 1. v. 3.
them. Return to me, and I will return to you, says the Lord of hosts. And
you have said: Wherein shall we return? Shall Paying of tithes is most strictly
commanded.
all the tithe into the barn: and let there be words have been forcible upon
me, says the Lord. And you Job. (...) v. 14. Isa. 5^* v. ^.
said: What have we spoken against thee? You have said: Sin of murmuring
against God, is great blasphe mie and not to lerable: For when they were
punished by famine, for defrauding the Levites of tithes, they blasphemously
imputed it to God: as though he had not such care of his own people, as he had
of other nations, which had abundance of temporal goods.
He is vain that serves God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
precepts, and that we have walked sorrowful before the Lord of host? Therefore
now we call the arrogant blessed,

CHAP. IIII. In the terrible day of judgment, the wicked shall be condemned,
and the just eternally rewarded. 5. Before which time Elias shall return, and
convert the Jews to Christ.
FOR behold In the day of judgment it shall plainly appear, what difference
is between the just and the wicked.
the day shall come kindled as a furnace: and Zach. 3. v 8. and 6. v. 11. Luc.
1. v. 78.
which shall not leave them root, and spring. And there shall Exo. 20. D^ut 4.
5. and 6. Mat 11, and 17. v 11.
says the Lord of hosts. Remember ye the law of Moses The Septuagint for
explication add Thesbites. And S. Ierom. in 17. Mat teaches that Elias shall
in deed come and restore al things
Elias the prophet, Christ's first coming was in all mekenes not in terror, but
his coming to judge will be dreadful. And therefore the prophet here means not
S. John Baptist, but that Elias himself shall come before the great and dreadful
day of our Lord.
dreadful. And he shall convert the heart of the fathers to the children and
utter destruction^
anathema.

The end of the Prophetical Books.
THE BOOKS OF MACHABEES PERTEYNING TO THE HISTORICAL PART OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
The argument of the books of Machabees, with other prooemial Annotations.
BEFORE we declare the contents, the reader perhaps will require to Prooemial
questions touching these books.
know, why they are called the Books of MACHABEES: how many they be; who writ
them; in what language; and especially whether al, or any, or which of them
are Canonical Scripture? For satisfaction of al which demandes, distinguishing
between certain and uncertain, we shall briefly show that which seems more
probable in the doubtful points; and the assured certainty of that which is
decided by the Catholic Church of Christ. They are called Machabees of Judas
Machabeus. Judas had this surname for his streingth and val^^e.
Concerning therefore the name and inscription. S. Ierom, very probably
supposes that these Books have their title of Judas MACHABEVS; the narration
of whose heroical virtues, and noble Act^s occupies the greatest part of this
whole history. And this surname Machabeus signifying valient of streingth (or
by an usual hebrew contraction, Mobi, more explicated, Milchamach Coach bihuda,
that is, Force of battle, or Streingth in Judah) was given him by his father
Mathathias, when before his death disposing of his sons and exhorting them,
he said to them al: You my sons take corege, and do manfully in the law,
because in it you shall be li. 1. c. 2. v. 64, 65, and 66.
glorious. And behold Simon your brother I know that he is a man of counsel:
hear ye him always, and he shall be father to you. Next headdeth: And Judas
Machabeus, valient of streingth from his youth, let him be to you the prince of
warfayre, and he shall manage the battle of the people. And from him this name
was also ascribed Others also called Machabees.
to his brethren, and to all the rest that joined with them either in the holy
wars, or otherwise showed their valor, professing Gods law in spiritual
combat even to death. As Nicetas writes in Orat. 22. S. Greg. Nazian. li. 2.
c. 6. and 7.
Whereupon old Eleazarus and the seven young brethren, with their mother are
also called Machabees.

There be in all, four books called Machabees. The first S. Ierom There be
four books.
found in Hebrew, the second in Greek, as he testifies Epist. 106. The third
is also extant in Greek, and Latin in Biblijs Complutensibus. The fourth
Written by uncertain auctors. The two last are not Canonical.
seems to be that which is mentioned in the end of the first book. And either
v. 24.
the same, or an other under that title, is also extant in Greek, as testifies
Sixtus Senensis, li. 1. Bibliothecae. Who writ them is more uncertain: but
most probable every one had a diverse auctor. Neither are the two last approved
for Canonical by any authentical authority.

It rests therefore to speak of the two first, which the Jews and
Protestants Jews and Protestants deny also these two first. Their arguments.
deny, because they are not in the Hebrew Canon. The Protestants further
alleging that they are not in the former Canon of the Church, before S. Ieroms
time. Moreover obiecting certain places of these books, which they say, are
contrary to sound doctrine, and to the truth of other authentical histories;
or contradictorie in themselves. None of which things can proceed from the
Holy Ghost, the principal auctor of al Divine Scriptures. Al which textes we
shall more conveniently explicate, according to their true sense, in li. 1. c.
1. v. 1. 7. 11. and 57. chapter 4. v. 52. chapter 6. v. 16. chapter 8. v. 16. li. 2. chapter 1.
v. 19. chapter 2. v. 25. chapter 12. v. 43. chapter 14 v. 41. chapter 15. v. 39. Eusebius. li. 3.
c. 25. hist. S. Ierom de viru illustrib.
their proper places. As for the exception, that these books are not in the
Canon of Answers.
the Jews, it is answered already (Praef. Tobiae.) that the Canon of the
Christian Catholic Church is of sovereign authority, though the Jews Canon
have them not. Finally whereas these books were not canonized in the former
General Councels, it suffices that they are since declared to be Canonical,
and Divine Scripture, as some other parts have likewise been, which English
Protestants do not deny. As the Epistle of S. James, the second of S. Peter,
the second and third of S. John, and S. Iudes epistle: of al which Eusebius,
and S. Ierom testify, that some learned Fathers doubled sometimes, whether they
were Apostolical or no. But afterward the same, with these two books of
Machabees, and others were expressly declared to be Divine Scripture, by the
third Council of Carthage, can. 47. By the Council of seventy Approved by
Councels.
Bishops under Gelasius, though by the name of one book, as also Esdras and
Nehemias as but one book. Last by the Councels of Florence, and Trent.

If any further require the judgment of more ancient Fathers, diverse do And
by Ancient* Fathers.
allege these books as Divine Scriptures. S. Dyonise, c. 2. celest. Hierar.
S. Clemens Alexan. li. 1. Stromat. S. Cyprian li. 1. Epist. ep. 3. ad
Cornelium. li. 4. ep. 1. and de exhort. ad Martyrium. c. 11. Isidorus li. 16.
c. 1. Etym. S. Gregory Nazianzen has a whole Oration of the seven Machabees
Martyrs, and their mother. S. Ambrose li. 1. c. 41. Offic. But to omite others,
albeit S. Ierom urged not these books against the Jews, yet he much esteemed
them, as appears in his commentaries upon Daniel. c. 1. 11. and 12. S.
Augustine most clerly avouches li. 2. c. 8. de doct. christ. and li. 18. c. 36.
de ciuit. that notwithstanding the Jews deny these books, the Church holds
them Canonical. And whereas one Gaudentius an heretic alleged for defense of
his haeresie the example of Razias, who slew him self. 2. Mac. 14. S. Augustine
denies not the authority of the book, but discusseth the fact, and
admonishes that it is not unprofitably received by the Church; si sobrie
legatur, vel audiatur: if it be read, or heard soberly. Which was a necessary
admonition to those Donatistes: who not understanding the holy Scriptures,
depraved them (as S. Peter speaks of like heretics, ^p. 2. c. 3.) to their
own perdition.

Now touching the contents, a great part of the same history, which is The
same contents of both the books.
written in the former book, is repeted in the second, with such variety of
some things added, some omitted, as in the books of Kings and Paralipomenon:
and as the Gospel is written by the four Evangelists. Joining therefore these
Four principal parts.
two books together, the Concordance thereof conteyneth four principal parts.
The Preface; the History: an Appendix, and the Conclusion. But the three
former parts are very extraordinarily disposed. For the The occasion of so
extraordinary disposition.
writer of the second book (who doubtless was a distinct person from him that
writ the former) first of al added an Appendix to the history (written
before) making mention of two Epistles, and reciting the sum of one of them,
in the first chapter and part of the second, as though he meant to have writ
no more of the same matter. But then, as it may seem upon new resolution,
intending to abridge the historical books of Jason, makes a preface to ^^. 2.
c. 2. v. 24.
his work, in the rest of that second chapter. And so prosecuteth his purpose:
and finally makes a brief conclusion in the three last verses of the same
second book. The main history conteyneth two special parts. The The
history conteyneth two parts.
first shows the state of Gods peculiar people, the Jewish nation, from the
beginning of the Grecian Monarchy, parted after the death of Alexander amongst
his folowers: of which some did exceedingly persecute the Jews, by diverse both
subtle and cruel means, to the ruin of many, and even to death and martyrdom
of some most constant obseruers of Gods Laws, and true Religion, til the
wars of the Machabees, in the first chapter of the first book, and in the 3.
4 5 6. and 7. chapters of the second book. In the other fiftene chapters of
the former book, and other eight of the second, are described the battles,
victories, and triumphs of the valient Machabees. Of which holy wars
Mathathias was the beginner and first captain: Judas the second: the third
Ionathas: and Simon the fourth: after whose death his son John Hyrcanus
succeeded Duke and Hieghpriest.

But because these books are intermixed the one with the other, wh^soeuer An
order how to read these books.
please to read them in order of the history, may follow the direction of the
Alphabet letters, set in the inner margen, beginning with A. at the twentieth
verse of the second chapter of the second book, to the end of the same
chapter. Thence proceed as the sign of a star directs to the next letter
B. which is at the beginning of the first book, the first chapter first verse.
And so in the rest. And when the capital letters are ended, the smaller will
direct you.

THE FIRST BOOK OF MACABEES.
CHAP. I. King Alexander conquering many countries, erecteth a new Monarchy.
6. who dying, his chief folowers succeed in several kingdoms of the same Read
first the preface. li. 2. chapter 2. v. 20.
Monarchy. 11. King Antiochus approves that a profane schole be setup in
Jerusalem, 17. subdueth Egypt; 21. inuadeth Judea; enters by force into
Jerusalem; spoyleth the temple, 25. and kills many. 30. Two years after
sends an other spoyler; who killing many, robs and burns lerusalem: The
first part of the history. The persecution of the Church by Antiochus.
35. fortisieth the tower of David; 38. prophaneth al holy things: 4^.
commands al to commit idolatry; 47. and to forsake the rites of Gods law,
52. upon pain of death. 57. He sets up an abominable idol in the Temple,
60. persecuteth, and murdereth those that conform not themselves to these
innouations.
AND it came to pass, after that Alexander Philips B
son the Macedonian, that Other kings reigned before Alexander in Greece but
he was the first that reigned in that great Monarchy erected by himself.
first reigned in Greece, being gone out of the land of Cethim, stroke Darius
king of the Persians and the Medes: he made many battles, and obtained the
munition By delivering his ring to Perdicca, he gave him authority to
distribute his kingdoms. I^s^nu^ li. 12. ^ ^urtius. li. 10.
divided his kingdom to them, when he yet lived. li. 2. c. 3. v. 1.
. And there came forth of them a sinful root Antiochus Epiphanes, Noble in
re^owme.
Illustre, D
the son of king Antiochus, that had been at Rome an hostage: and he reigned
in This Antiochus begane his reign in the year 137. from Seleuchus the first
king of Syria after Alexander. otherwise this was the 156 year of the Grecian
Monarchy, Eusebius in chroni^o.
the hundredth and seven and thirteth year of the kingdom of the Greeks. In
those days li. 2. c. 4. v. 7.


And the kingdom was prepared in the sight of Antiochus, and F
he begane to reign in the land of Egypt, Being established in the kingdom of
Syria, he coueted also the kingdom of Egypt.
that he might reign over two kingdoms. And he entered into Egypt with great
li. 2. c. 4. v. 21.


And Antiochus turned, after he struck Egypt in the H
hundredth and three and fourtith year: and he went up to Israel, and went up
to Jerusalem with a great multitude. Josephus. li. 12. c. 6. vvriteth that
Antiochus first killed such as would have hindered his entrance into Jerusalem
and afterward those that opened the gates unto him, but would have hindered
him from spoiling the temple.
the sanctification with pride, and took a prince of tributes into the cities
of Judah, and This was Apollonius, as appears li. 2. c. 5. v. 2^.
he came to Jerusalem with a great multitude. And he spoke unto them The tower
of Sion fortified and kept.
the city of David with a great wall, by a garrison of Macedonians.
sinful nation, wicked It sufficed not this cruel tyrant to spoil Gods people
of their goods, and many of their lives, but he also perverted many in
religion: because his master the devil seeks to destroy men's souls.
wrote to al his kingdom, of God. And whosoever had not done acording to the
word Daniels prophecy. chapter 9. was here in part fulfilled, as in a figure, and
our Savior confirms it. ^la^. 24 of Antichrist setting up abomination of
desolation in the holy place.
built the abominable idol of desolation upon the altar of God, and through out
all the cities of Judah round about they builded altars: and before the gates of
houses, li. 2. c. 5. v. 11.
.

CHAP. II. Mathathias with his five sons, lamenteth the calamities of the
people, 8. and profanation of holy things, 15. resists the kings wicked
decrees, 23. kills an idolater, and the kings commissioner, so flies into
the mountains with others. 31. Many are slain not resisting in battle on the
sabbath days. 40. Upon further consideration the rest defend themselves in the
sabbath; 45. kill their enemies, and destroy idolatry. 49. Mathathias dying
exhorts his sons to be zealous in the law: 65. appoynting Simon their
counseler, and Judas their captain.
IN those days arose Mathathias the son of John, the The 2. part. The wars
of the Machabees, begune by this Mathathias, and prosecuted by his sons,
especially by Judas as in the seven chapters following and more largely in the
second book from 8. chapter to the end of the last.
K
son of Simeon, priest of the sons of Ioarib from Jerusalem, and he sat in
the mountain of Modin: and he had:: This small help of great importance, is
that aid where of Daniel prophesied chapter 11. v ^4.
free, is made a servant. And lo our holies, and out beauty, will we
sacrifice, transgressing the commandments of our law, to go an other way. And
as he ceased to speak these Mathathias not of private spirit, but being
general captain of the people, did this justice according to the law, where
it is commanded to kill the auctors of false pretended religion. Deuteronomy. 13. S.
Cyprian. Exhort, ad Martyrium. c. 5. S. Beruar. Epist. 158. ad Innocent.
according to the judgment of the law, and flying upon him he slew him upon
the altar: yea and the man, whom king Number. 25.
And Mathathias cried out with a loud voice in the city, These are commended
by S. Ambrose li. 1. Offic. c. 40. and other fathers, dying in the simplicity
of doves, though they had not the prudence of serpents, which others observing
are more commended, especially in respect of the whole Church so dangerously
impugned, which God in deed will ever defend, and conserve from utter ruin: Yet
he uses also ordinary means, by lawful vvarres and the like.
Let us dye al in our simplicity: and that day, saying: Every man whosoever
shall come unto us in battle on the day of the Sabbaths, let us fight against
him: and we will not al dye, as our brethren died in secret places. Then was
there gathered to them the synagoge of Assideans otherwise called Esseni not
hypoch^y^ically as the Pharisees, nor erroniously as the Sadduces, but sincerely
professed a peculiar holy rule of life. Josephus li. 2, c. ^2. de bello
Iudaico.
the Asside Genesis 22.
not in tentation found faithful, and it was reputed to him unto justice?
Joseph in the time of his distress kept the commandment, Genesis 41. Number. 25.
and he was made lord of Egypt. Phinees our Iosue. 1. Number. 14. 2. Reg 2.
word, was made the duke in Israel. Caleb whiles he testifies 4. Reg 2. Dan.
3. Dan. 6.
zeleth the zele of the law, was received into heaven. Ananias In all affairs
order is of singural importance that every office be designed to ^^^^est
persons. As here Mathathias appointed Simon the chief for determining matters
in counsel, and Judas the first for execution, and that the rest should obey
these two, and each of these the other in his office.
And behold Simon your brother, I know that he is a man of counsel: hear ye
him always, and he shall be a father to you. And

CHAP. III. Judas Machabeus punishes the wicked: 10. kills Apollonius in
battle. 13. Seron braggeth, but is also overthrown. 25. Antiochus furiously
incensed, 29. gathers money in Persis, 32. leaving Lysias viceroy; 38. who
sending a great army against the Israelites, 42. Judas and his brethren
commending the cause to God, by prayer and penance, 54. resolve to fight
against their enemies.
AND Judas, that was called Machabeus his son He did not arrogate to himself
to be chief, but being designed by his father, was so accepted by his
brethren, and the good people joined with them in defense of the law of God.
arose:: Judas had four battles, and victories, against four general
captains sent by king Antiochus Epiphanes. The first against this Apollonius.
of Judah, and destroyed the impious out of them, and turned away wrath from
Israel. And he was renowned even to the li. 2. c. 8. v. 1.
And Apollonius gathered together the Gentiles, and from M
Samaria a power much and great, to make battle against Israel. And Judas
understood it, and wentforth to meet them, and the sword of Apollonius Judas
took away, and he fought with it al his days. And The second against Seron.
Seron captain of the army The natural frailty of man fears to encounter
with a strong enemy, but true confidence in Gods help, which is ever assured
in a good cause, gives corege and gets the victory.
there is no difference in the sight of the God of heaven to deliver in many,
and in few. Because not in Not only the Jews resisted Antiochus innouations
in religion, but also diverse other nations revolted and rebelled because he
commanded al ^o leave their for merrites and gods, and to accept of his
gods only. chapter 1. v. 43.
the dissension, and:: the plague, that he had made in the land, to take away
the ordinances, that were from the first days: and he feared lest he should
not have as mind, and purposed to go into Persis, and to take the tributes of
the regions, and to gather together much silver. And he:: persecuting all that
did not thereto conform themselves.
and Jerusalem: and that he should send an army to them, Praying fasting and
other works of penance are the best armor in holy vvarres for religion.
pray and desire mercy and miserations. And Jerusalem was not inhabited, away
from Jacob, and there failed their pipe, and harp. And Public place of
prayer was, first in Silo. Iosue. 18. after in Maspha. 1. Reg. 7. lastly in
Jerusalem.
before. And they fasted that day, and clothed themselves with a penta
contarchos.
and decurions. And he said to them, that built houses, Deu. 20.
the law. And they removed the camp, and pitched at the This most godly
resolution encoreged themselves, and procured Gods merciful protection.
as it shall be the will in heaven, so be it

CHAP. IIII. Gorgias with six thousand souldiars well appointed, intending
sudenly to destroy the Israelites army of three thousand not well armed, 8. is
defeated; half of his men slain, the rest running away. 16. Judas staying his
men from spoiling, til the enemies were out of sight, then they take rich
prays; and render thanks to God. 28. The next year, Lysias with three score
thousand foot, and six thousand horsemen inuading Jury, Judas with ten
thousand (making his prayer to God) kills five thousand: 35. the rest flying,
Lysias gathers more souldiars. 36. Judas with his brethren, and others
cleanse the temple, and renew holy things. 55. Offer Sacrifice, 58. and
institute a feast of the dedication of a new Altar.
AND The third battle made by Judas was against this Gorgias an other captain
of Antiochus Epiphanes.
Gorgias took five thousand Vigilancie in rulers and pastors preserves from
all the devils stratagems.
heard, and arose, he Confidence in God procures his assistance.
Fear not the multitude of them, and of their assault be not afraid. Remember
in what sort our fathers were to battle. And they did al flee into the plain
of the aliens: Psa. 106.
God toward heaven, because he is good, because his mercy is for ever. And
great salvation was made in Israel in that day. li. 2. c. 8. v. 8.
O
And the year following The fourth great battle of Judas was against Lysias
sent by Antiochus into Jury.
Lysias gathered of chosen men 1. Reg. 17. 1. Reg. 14.
assault of the mighty by the hand of thy servant David, and did deliver the
camp of the aliens into the hand of Ionathas Saul's son, and of his esquyer.
shut up this army in the As it was the first and chief intention of Judas to
defend religion and holy things so having expugned their enemies, his chief
care is to purge the temple, and to restore al holy rites of Gods true service.
let us go up now to cleanse the holy places, and to renew them. And all the
army assembled together, the holy places. And he chose priests without
spotte, having Altars, temples, and statues of false gods made of stone, and
set up in the temple. chapter 1. v. 50. were now destroyed.
the stones of contamination into an unclean place. And he considered of the
altar of holocausts, The temple was purged two years and some thing more
after the profanation which was in the year 145. chapter 1. v. 57.
the hundredth and eight and fourtith year: and Our Savior observed this feast
being instituted long after the Law of Moses. Joan. 10. v. 226*
they made the dedication of the altar eight days, and Joan. 10.
they offered holocausts with joy, and sacrifice of salvation, and of praise.
And they adorned the face of the temple with towers, lest sometime the Gentiles
should come, and conculcate it as they did before. And he placed an army
there, to keep li. 2. ^. 10. v. ^*


CHAP. V. Judas and his brethren expugne their bordering enemies, 9. deliver
them that were distressed. 17. Simon prospers in Galeley, 24. Judas in
Galaad, 45. takes Ephron, and al return safe into Jerusalem. 55. Josephus and
Azarias attempting ambiciously without order to fight against their enemies,
are defeated. 63. And Judas has more victories.
AND it came to pass, as In this chapter is mention of ten battles in which
Judas or his brethren Ionathas and Simon were victors.
the Gentiles round about heard Q
that the altar was builded up, and the sanctuary as before, they were
exceeding angry: and they thought to take away The first against the Idumeans
in A^rabathane.
the children of Esau in Idumea, and them that were in Acrabathane: because
they besette the Israelites round about, and he stroke them with a great
plague. And he remembered the The second against the Beanites.
of Bean, which were to the people a snare and a scandal, lying in wait for
them in the way. And utterly destroyed.
anathematized them, and burnt their towers with fire, with all that were in
them. and he passed to the children The third against the Ammonites.
of Ammon, villages.
daughters, and returned The fourth against the Galadites.
in Galaad, gathered their coats rent reporting according to these words:
saying The fifth against the Galileans of the Gentiles.
Galilee: and I, and my brother Ionathas will go into the country of Galaad.
And he left Joseph the son of zachary, and the cry of the battle ascended
to heaven as a trumpet, and a great cry out of the city: and he said to his
host: Fight ye The sixth against the Carnaimites.
the city itself, and the temple he burnt with fire, with all things that were
therein: and Carnaim was subdewed, and could not stand against the face of
Judas. And Judas The seventh against the Ephronites.
Ephron, and this they that were in the city, shut in themselves, and stopped
the gates with stones: and Judas sent to them in peaceable words, saying: Let
us pass through your land, and go into Number. 20.
pass. And they would not open unto them And Judas commanded A good and pious
captain cherishes and comfort the vveake souldiars::: and en^oreged ^l to
show their so^titude.
exhorted the people throughout all the way, til they came into the land of
Judah: and they went up into mount Sion with joy, and Men that pre^ume of their
own strength without commission from lawful auctotitie, have not Gods
assistance, and so faylein their attemptes, as not called of God amongst those
men, by whom salvation is made in Israel. v. 62.
Joseph the son The eight against the Idumeans, in Chebron.
Esau in the land, that is toward the South, and they stroke Chebron, and her
daughters: and the walls thereof and the towers he burnt with fire round about.
And he removed the camp to go into the land of the aliens, and he walked
through The ninth against the Samaritanes.
Samaria. In that day fell The tenth against the Philistimes in Azotus.
to Azotus into the land of the aliens, and he threw down their altars, and
the sculptils of their gods he burnt with fire: and he took the spoils of
the cities, and returned into the land of Judah.

CHAP. VI. Antiochus repulsed from Elimais, 5. and hearing of the overthrow of
his army in lurie, falls vehemently sick: 11. and acknowleging his
calamities to have happened, for he has done against the Jews, dies. 17. His
young son Antiochus Eupator succedeth. 18. Judas besieges the Macedonians
fortress. 21. Relapsed Jews solicit the king, 28. and he comes with a
terrible huge army. 32. Judas therefore leaving the siege meets the enemy.
43. Eleazar going under an elephant kills him and so himself is also slain.
47. The king takes Bethsura by composition. 51. and bends his forces against
Jerusalem. 55. By Lysias advice the king makes peace with the Jews; 62. but
breaking his oath destroys the wall of Sion; 63. and returning recouereth
Antioch from Philippe.
AND king Antiochus walked through the higher countries, The full history of
Antiochus Epiphanes his death is written in this chapter to the 16. v. and in all the 9. of the second book.
Babylonia.:: Finally he returned into the country of Babylon::: but before he
arrived there he heard the bad news of his army in Jury, and fell into
intolerable and desperate diseases, v. 8. and li. 2. chapter 9. v 5.
And there came one that told him in Persis, that the camps down upon his
bed, and fell into sickness for sorrow, because it was not chanced to him as he
thought. And he was there All this was but seaned repentance li. ^ chapter 9. v 13.
now I remember the evils, Antiochus begane to persecute the Jews in the
year. 143. ch 1. v. 21. and dying this year, 149 it appears that his
persecution dured about six years, or some what more agreeable to the answer
of the Angel. Dan. 8. v. 14. that it should endure. 2300. days, which make
six years, and almost four months. within which time Judas by his valor
obtained and purged the holy places, in the year 148. chapter 6. v 52 some
months before Antiochus death.
an hundredth forty nine. li. 2. c. 9. v. 1.


S
Antiochus his son to reign, whom he brought up a young man: and he called
his name Eupator. li. 2. c. 10. v. 10.


And they that were in the castle, had enclosed Israel round V
about the holy places: and they sought them evils always, and the
strengthening of the Gentiles, And Judas thought to win them. And the king was
angry, as he heard these Blood of the grup ( wine Deuteronomy ^2. v 14.) a^^ juice
of mulberies do incite elephantes to fight. A^ some kind of blood or smell
thereof does incire hounds to hunt. Vallesius c. 82 sacrae Philosophia.
the blood of the grape, and of the mulberie, to provoke them to the battle.
And they divided king was on it: and he gave himself to deliver his people, S
Ambiose li. 1 c. 40 Offic. highly commends the fortitude of this souldiat
putting himself in so present danger of death fighting for religion.
he went under the feet of the elephant, and king entered mount Sion, and saw
the munition of the place: and he brake quickly the oath which he swear, and
commanded to destroy the wall round about. And he departed in have, li. 2. c.
13. v. 1.


CHAP. VII. Demetrius commands to kill Antiochus and Lysias being eaptiues. 5.
Alcimus and other wicked Jews solicit the king, 8. and he sends a great
army into Jury: appoints Bacchides general, and Alcimus highpriest. 10. Who
falsely pretending peace, Judas does not credit them, but the Assidians are
deceived: 16. and many are slain. 23. Judas resisting, the persecuters
depart. 26. Whereupon Nicanor is sent with an other army, fights, and loses
many men; 33. parts in great rage, 39. assaulteth Bethoron, 42. is slain;
and his army flying is al destroyed. 48. They celebrate that day with joy, and
have peace for a while.
IN the year an hundredth fifty first went forth Demetrius X
the son This Scleucus was brother to Antiochus Epiphanes: and so Antiochus
Eupator was Demetrius his consin german.
of Seleucus from the city of Rome, and he ascended with few men into a city
by the sea side, and reigned there. And it came to pass, as he entered into
the house Alcimus was now in place of the highpriest, as Menelaus had been
before him, set up by Antiochus: and therefore is righ^ly here said: he would
have been the chief priest, but in deed was not. For the true highpriesthood
was amongst the Machabees
would be made the priest. And This usurper with his accomplices devised false
accusations against Judas, and the rest to incense the king against them. And
by great gifts gained the kings favor. li. 2 c. 14. v. 4.
they accused the people to the they saw that they came with a great army. And
there assembled Among the Scribes the Assideans were first consulted being as
learned as the Pharisees, or any other, and in deed more sincere, as we noted,
chapter 2. v. 42.
first, the Assideans And so Alcimus deceiving them in a matter of fact,
tovvitte, that himself meant truly (as he did not) cruelly murdered thre^ score
of them.
they said: A man that is a priest of the seed of Psalm. 78.
saints, and the blood of them they have shed round about Jerusalem, and there
was none to bury them. And there li. 2. c. 14. v. 1.
And the king sent This Nicanor was the most terrible enemy against Judas,
but was at last slain by him. v. 43. and li. 2. c. 15. v. 28.
Nicanor, one of his nobler princes: that Z
practiced emnities against Israel: and he commanded him to destroy the people.
And Nicanor came into Jerusalem with come with guile: and he was sore afraid of
him, and would not see his face any more. And Nicanor knew that his counsel li.
2 c. 14. v. 12.
And This was the last conflict between Judas and Nicanor written more largely
in the last chapter of the second book.
Nicanor went out from Jerusalem, and moved the 4. Reg. 19.
angel came forth, and stroke of them an hundred eighty five thousand: so
destroy this army in our sight to day, and let And the people rejoiced
excedingly, and they spent that day VVhiles Judas disposed things perteyning
to religion, and the commonwealth: Demetrius prepared for wars chapter 9. v. 3.
a few days. li. 2. c. 15. v. 1.


CHAP. VIII. Judas knowing the Romans to be a most renowned nation, reciting
their worthy acts, 17. sends Embassaders to enter league with them: 21.
Whereto they a greing confirm a perpetual amity with mutual conditions.
AND Judas heard of Of the renow med acts of the Romans, other
Historiographers have also written largely: especially Liuius, Diodorus,
Justinius Florus Varre Plutarchus, and many others.
the name of the Romans, that d
they are mighty of power, and agree unto al things that are requested of
them: and whosoever have come unto them, they have made amity with them, and
that they are mighty of power. And they heard of their battles, and goodly
What places these were losephus expresses. li. 12. c. 17.
the Polybius li. 5. vvriteth that Antiochus had 102. elephants in his war
against Prolemeus, and therefore it is not to be merueled that he had 120.
against the Romans.
an hundred and twenty elephants, and horsemen, and chariottes an army
exceeding great was discomfited by them: and that they took him and brought
under their power. But with their friends, and Though Rome was then governed
by two consuls. Yet one only ruled every day in their course, not both in one
day, for so says Liuius ( li. 2 hist.) it should have been more terror of two
rulers, then before it had been of one king.
to one man every year to rule over al their land, and al they obey one, and
there is no envy, nor emulation amongst them. And Judas chose Eupolemus will
add to these, or take away any thing, they shall do it at their pleasure: and
whatsoever they shall add, or take away, shall be ratified. Yea and concerning
the evils, that Demetrius

CHAP. IX. Bacchides and Alcimus returning into Jury make great slaughter. 5.
More then two parts of Judas small troop flying away, he with eight hundred,
sets upon the enemy, 14. overthrows the strongest part of their army:
16. but an other part coming at his back, with great slaughter on both parties,
Judas is slain: 19. and most honorably buried. 23. Much evil increases in
Israel. 28. Ionathas is made captain general. 36. The children of Iambrie kill
his brother, which he reuengeth. 43. Being environed by Bacchides chaceth him
away to his fensed places, killing many. 54. Alcimus beginning to deface the
temple, is stricken with a palsy, and dies miserably. 57. So they have peace
two years. 58. Bacchides coming with a new army: 62. Ionathas and Simon
retire into Bethbessen. 65. there defend themselves, and annoy the enemy. 69.
who blaming his counselors, makes peace, and departs.
IN This happened about a year after the death of Nicanor. chapter 7. v. 50, li.
2, c. 15, 38.
the mean time as Demetrius heard that Nicanor was Strongest men are not free
from first motions of perturbation, but reflecting upon their own infirmity,
and considing in Gods providence, take corege in a good cause, being assured
either of temporal victory, or of eternal glory As now it happened to this
most glorious Champion. v. 18.
his heart was broken: because he had not time to gathr them together, and he
was discoureged. And he said to them that were remaining: fight against them.
And they diswaded him, saying: We are The mighty may fall in the sight of men,
but Judas his fortitude proved and confirmed by former heroical acts, with
prosperous success, was now perfectly consummate by this most glorious end.
S. Ambr. li. 1. c. 4^* Offer.
How is the mighty fallen, that saved the

And it came to pass: Where there is no governor the people shall fall. Pro.
11. v. 14.
after the death of Judas, there came Ionathas the third general captain of
the Macha, bees was also high priest after the death of Judas. Though Alcimus
by the kings favor unjustly usurped the office, (chapter 7. v. 9.) vvhiles Judas
yet lived, and until this time. v 54.
Ionathas: Since thy brother Judas died, there is not a man like unto They also
killed him. v. 38. 42.
took John, and al things that he had, and went away having them. After these
words, it was told Ionathas, and Simon his To revenge or punish faults in due
measure, and other right circumstances is a special virtue, moderating man's
defense of his person, honor, or right without cruelty, or remisnes: and so
the children sometimes are temporally punished, for their parents finnes, and
the community for their leaders, either for their consent before the fact or
after; or to prevent that they do not the like. S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 108.
took revenge of the blood of their brother: 2. Par. 20. v. 3.
And battle was joined. And Ionathas stretched forth his hand to strike
Bacchides, and he turned aside from him backwards. And Ionathas lept aside, and
they that were with Ionathas and his men svvame not to the other side, but to
an other place on the same side: for otherwise the armies had been parted by
the river: and so there had been no conflict that time.
over Jordan to them: and Josephus li. 12. c. 17. confesses that Judas was
highpriest, but erreth in saying he succeeded after Alcimus: neither considering
that Alcimus was not in deed high priest, but an usurper: nor that he lived
after Judas: who was slain a year before this time v. 3 and 18. VVherby,
and by many other such errors, we see that Josephus is rather to be corrected
by this book then to disalovv this book because it differs from Josephus,
or other like auctors.
the year an in their tabernacles, and he began to slay, and to grow in
forces. But Simon and they that were with him, went out of the Evil counsel
how soever it happens to them that follow it, is ever hurtful to them that
give it.
he slew many of them: but himself thought with the rest to depart into their
country. And Ionathas understood it, and he sent unto him

CHAP. X. Demetrius invaded by Alexander, 3. seeks help of Ionathas: 15. but
he joins with Alexander, a surer friend: 22. though Demetrius solicit him
again, offering rewards, with remission of tributes, 31. and great
priuilegies, 46. Al which he suspecting to be feaned, persisteth with
Alexander: 48. who in battle kills Demetrius: 52. espouseth the kings
daughter of Egypt: 59. calls Ionathas to the marriage: 62. and honoreth him
as a king. 67. Demetrius (the son) coming into Syria, sends Apollonius
against Ionathas: 70. provoke him, 74. and is overthrown (79.
notwithstanding his ambushment of a thousand horsemen) 83. Ionathas burns
Asotus, with their idol Dagon. 86. so returns by Ascalon to Jerusalem with
great glory.
AND in the year an hundredth threescore came up Alexander He falsely auovvched
that he was the son of Antiochus Epiphanes. for he was in deed of very mean
birth. Justinius, li. 35.
the son of Antiochus, that was surnamed Noble: and he took Ptolemais, and
they received him, and he reigned there. And Demetrius the king heard it, and
he we have done against him, and against his brother, and against his nation.
And he gave him authority to gather an army, It was not in the kings power
to make Ionatha^ high priest but he being so before, the ^ing from this time
did so account him*
we make thee this day high amity, and have not joined to our enemies, This
king Demetrius to get his desired purpose, sticked not to write a plainelye,
for he had heard that the Jews had refused him and made league with his
enemy Alexander v, 22, 23.
we have heard of it, and are glad. And now persevere still to keep fidelity
toward And beside these five thousand sicles of silver, which they
Notwithstanding the great offers of evil disposed men, Ionathas and al prudent
men considering their former wicked deeds do not give credit to glorious
words.
they believed them not, nor received chapter 7. v. 11.
them: because they remembered the great mischife, that he had done in Israel,
and had afflicted them excedingly. And their This Ptolomeus Philometor decided
a controversy that the Jews had the true temple in Jerusalem, and that the
Samaritanes temple in Garizim was schismatical: which he judged because
albeit both pleaded antiquity, yet only the Jews proved by continual
succession of high priests from Aaron, and showed that the other departed from
them, first in the time of Jeroboam, and afterward, built that temple in
Garizim, when some were returned from captivity: vvherof Josephus vvriteth.
li. 13. c. 6. Antiquit. Our Savior also judged that the cause of the Jews
was better, Joan. 4. v. 22.
Ptolomee king should come to meet him. And he went with glory to When
caluminators see that the innocent is justified and honored, they fail in
their heart to proceed against him.
saw his glory that was published, and him covered with purple, they al fled:
and the king magnified him, and and a great army. And he went to Azotus as
making Ionathas set his army in that manner as on every side his men stood in
front ready to resist the force of the enemy coming toward them, al their
backs so turned within their own squadron, that the enemy could no way
enter without present resistance: and so those of the embushment could only
cast darts, but could not break the array of Ionathas camp, not make any
entrance with out their own present death.
the people stood, as Ionathas

CHAP. XI. Ptolomeus king of Egypt deceiptfully coming into Syria, 8.
surpriseth certain cities, and taking his daughter from Alexander gives her
to Demetrius. 15. Alexander flying away, 17. is treacherously slain. 18.
Ptolomeus dies the third day, and Demetrius reigns. 20. Ionathas besieges
the fortress which resisted him in Jerusalem. 24. obtayneth of Demetrius
remission of tributes, and other priuilegies. 38 Demetrius dismissing his
army, the souldiars conspire with Tryphon against him. 43. Ionathas aydeth him
with three thousand men, who kill an hundred thousand mutiners. 53. Demetrius
breaking league with Ionathas, is overthrown by Tryphon. 57, Young Antiochus
renews league with Ionathas: and he (65. as likewise his brother Simon)
prospers: 67. in great danger prays and prevails.
AND the king of Egypt gathered an army, By this hyperbolical description
(very frequent in holy scripture) is signified that Ptolomeus army was
exceeding great, yea greater then can be easily conceived, and therefore is
described by excessive terms.
as the sand Jury, to win the castle in Jerusalem: and they made engines
against it. And certain When pastors endeavor to extirpate si^ne out of the
minds of the people, those that hate godliness, suggest to temporal princes
that* such spiritual preaching is dangerous to their state.
that hated their own nation But zealous men cease not from so necessary a
work, because Gods word is not ^yed* 2. Tim. 2.
he bade And wise kings vvil most esteem of such men, knovving that their
fidelity toward God, is an assurance that they vvil also be faithful to
princes.
the king did to him, as they had done to him which The king had before
adjoined principal places to Judea which were called ^opa^chi^ that is places
of principality, or principal governments: now he granted also immunities to
them as to al Judea and Samaria.
toparchies, and Samaria, and the confines thereof: and he promised him three
hundred talents. And the king consented: and he was quiet in his sight, and
nothing resisted him, he dismissed al his army, every man to his place,
except the foreign army, which he brought from the isles of the Gentiles: and all the bands of his fathers were enemies to him. And there was Three thousand
faithful enco^^^^ing with an hundred and twenty thousand infidels, killed of
them in one day an hundred thousand.
three thousand after these things Tryphon returned, and with him Antiochus
the young boy, who reigned, and put the crown upon him. And there gathered unto
him all the bands, which Demetrius As to wear purple, and to bare a crown so
to drink in gold cups and to wear a gold cheyne, was proper to kings,
and to whom they gave license.
to drink in gold, and to be in purple, and to have a cheyne of gold: And he
appointed Simon his It is an ancient ceremony in all uations, often mentioned
in these books, to confirm peace by giving each other the right hand.
to take the Only two captains remained and with them some souldiars (as
Josephus vvriteth, about 50) for it is not to be thought that Ionathas would
have returned to battle. v 72. being but three men in all to begin a new
assault.
none was left of them, but Mathathias the son of Absalom, and Judas the
son of Calphi, chief captain of the chivalry of the host. And Ionathas
rent and they fought. And they of his part that fled; saw, and returned

CHAP. XII. Ionathas confirms league with the Romans, and Spartiates, by
letters: 19. with mention of letters received before, 24. By diligent guard he
defends the country from the enemies invasions, putting them to flight. 31.
subdueth the Arabians, and returns by Damascus. (33. Simon prospering in
other places.) fortifieth Jerusalem, 39. Finally is deceived by Tryphon. 48.
and al his men are slain.
AND Ionathas saw that the time helped him, he chose Sparta the chief city of
Lacedemonia called also Lacedemon, and Theramne.
the Spartiats, and to other places Spartians otherwise called Lacedaemonians
(by Josephus and other vvriters) descended from Abraham, v. 21. and were in
great league with the Jews.
their brethren greeting. Long ago were epistles sent to Onias us. We
therefore would not be trublesome to you, nor to the The Spartianes had written
this epistle before Onias vvritte to the^, though it be here placed after.
the rescript of the epistles, which he had sent to Onias: ARIVS the king of
the Spartians to Onias the grand priest There remained with the Spartiates old
writes of genealogies, as Josephus supposes. li. 12. c. 5. and li. 13. c. 9.
in scripture of the Spartians, and the called together the ancients of the
people, and he consulted with them to build fortresses in Jury, and to build
the walls Morally in Tryphon is noted the practice of the devil: who
intending to overthrow a king or a kingdom first seeks to deceive the
pastores, and to destroy them: especially by error or other sin. For (as S.
Gregory teaches. ho. 38.) if the pastors life be corrupted, his doctrine vvil
be contemned.
Tryphon had purposed to reign over Asia, and to take the crown and to extend
his hand against Antiochus the king: fearing lest perhaps Ionathas would not
permit him, but and Israel mourned with great mourning. And all the heathen

CHAP. XIII. Simon exhorts the people to defend themselves, and religion: 7.
is made general captain. 14. Tryphon demands an bundred talents of silver,
and hostages for Ionathas. 17. which are sent (to satisfy the people) Tryphon
receives the rarsom, 23. kills Ionathas, and his sons. 25 Simon erecteth a
memory to his parents and brethren. 31. Tryphon murthereth his young king.
33. Simon fortifieth the country, obteyneth peace, and liberties of Demetrius:
42. subdueth the city Gaza, and the rebellious castle within Jerusalem.
Simon the fourth general captain of the Machabees, and highpriest excelled
his brethren in vvisdome, by the restimonie of his father. c. 2. v 65.
Simon heard that Tryphon gathered a very great army, to come into the land of
Judah, and to destroy it.

Seeing that the people was in dread, and in fear, he went up He undertook by all his endeavor to defend and deliver his nation from danger, and to restore
their former liberty.
avenge therefore would join battle with him, he sent legates to him, saying:
Simon being wise choice the less evil, and less danger. For if he had not
sent that was demanded it was very like and almost cettaine, that Ionathas
should be slain, and it would have been imputed to Simon, that he had not
taken just care of his brothers life, vvherby the people would have been
alienated from him, and perhaps have revolted from him, and also from religion.
S. Tho. in hunc locum.
nevertheless he commanded the silver, and the children to be given: lest he
should get great emnitie with the people of Israel, saying: Because he sent not
the silver, and

And Simon This was not vain glory, but true glory to keep memory of so
great virtue: thereby to stur up others to imitation. He that loves honor
(says S. Augustine. li. cont. Secundin. c. 17.) imitateth God. But humble
souls desire houour in God, proud men vvil be honored more then God. or
without God. O how many Epitaphes are of wicked men, nothing else but
perpetual monuments of their ambition, vanity, injustice, crucltie, and other
vices! but those that are of true virtues are to Gods more honor: the auctor
of al virtues.
built over the sepulcher of his father and of done by spoil. And Demetrius
the king according to these a precious chain.
the bahem, which you By how much more, that mercy is admixed with justice,
so that justice be not destroyed, and that religion be advanced, the better it
pleases God, and edifieth the well disposed.
yet he cast them out of the city, and cleansed the houses, wherein there had
been idols, and then he entered into it with hymes blessing our Lord: and al
filthiness harpes, and cymbals, and nables, and hymns, and canticles, because
the great enemy was destroyed out of Israel. And he ordained This John
Hyreanus defended the country against inuaders, chapter 16.
John his son, that he was a

CHAP. XIIII. Demetrius inuading Media is taken captive: 4. and Jury is in
peace. 14. Simon cherishes the godly, and punishes the wicked: 16. receives
freindlie letters from the Romans, and Spartiates: 20. vvherof the copy is
recited: 24. sends a legate to Rome with a present. 25. And is established
highpriest, and governor by public consent.
IN THE year an hundredth seventy two, king Demetrius Simon had now governed
the people two years beginning with great difficulties, but hence forth
enjoyed peace til Antiochus Sedetes brake the league, and invaded Jury. chapter
15. v. 27. and 39.
all the land He reduced many Jews from captivity.
captivity, and had the dominion discomfited in those days. And he confirmed
all the humble Sparta being the chief city of Lacedemonia, had many cities
subject and depending as upon their Metropolitan.
the cities of the Spartians to Simon the grand priest, and to the ancients,
and the priests, and the rest of the people of the Jews their brethren,
greeting. The legates, that were When peace was estabished in all Jury, and
friendship confirmed with the Romans, and Lacedaemonians, the whole nation
of the Jews in gratitude toward Simon, who only now remained of
Mathathias sons, confirmed him in the office of highpriest perpetually or for
ever, v. 41 that is, during his life. and to his progeny, v. 49*
What thanks giving shall we render to Simon, and his children? For he has
restored his brethren, and has expugned law might stand: and with great
glory have they glorified their nation. And Ionathas gathered together his
nation, and was The hieghpriesthood continevved in this family of the
Machabees until Herod took it from them selling it for money, and then shortly
came Christ the faith full Prophet.
for ever, til there rise the faithful prophet: and country without him: and
to be clothed with purple, and to wear a cheyne of gold. But he that shall do
beside these

CHAP. XV. Antiochus by his letters grants great priuilegies to simon: 10.
pursues Thryphon, and inuironeth him. 15. The Romans commend the Jews to
other nations. 25. Antiochus refusing aid sent by Simon, breaks league, 30.
and exacteth certain cities, and tribute. 37. Tryphon escapes, and other of
the kings forces invade and spoil lurie.
AND king Antiochus This Antiochus Sedetes son of Demetrius Soter, was
brother to Demetrius the second, who was now captive in Per ^^a. chapter 14. v. 3.
the son of Demetrius sent epistles seventy four went forth Antiochus into
the land of his fathers, and all the hosts assembled unto him, so that there
were few left with Tryphon. And Antiochus the king pursewed This legate was
sent almost two years before to Rome. chapter 14. v. 24. and now brought letters
not only to the Jews but also to sundry kings and peoples in their behalf.
Numenius came, the castle, that is in Jerusalem, cities of my kingdom: their
Simon subdued these two towns because they anoyed the Jews: but because
they otherwise perteyned not to Jury he paid for them an hundred talentes.
they made a great plague among the people, and in our country: for these:: we
give an hundred talents. And Athenobius answered him not a word. But with anger
returning to the king, he reported By the river of Cedron (over which David
passed. 2. Reg ^^ v. 23. and our Savior. Ioa. 18.) a city was now built, or
rather repared being decayed before.
Cedron, and to fortify the gates of the city, and to conquer the people. But
the king pursewed Tryphon. And Cendebaeus came to Iamnia, and began to provoke

CHAP. XVI. Simon sends two of his sons to fight against Cendebaeus, 8.
whom they overthrow. 11. Ptolemee Simons son in law, inuiting him to a feast
treacherously kills him, and his sons Judas and Mathathias: 19. sends
also men to kill John, but he being warned of the treason, kills them: 23. and
succeeds to his father in the government.
AND After Simons death, his eldest son John surnamed Hyrcanus succeeded him
in government spiritual and temporal v. 24.
John went up from Gazara, and told Simon his He beginning to govern in the
year 170. chapter 13. v. 41. 42. had difficulties the first and last years, in
the rest they had peace. To be inebriated signifies no more but to be
rep^enished with drink competently, or abundantly, without excess. As Psalm.
64. v. 10 the earth inebriated, and v. 11. rivers inebriated. That is,
abundantly replenished without excess S. August. q. 144. in Genesis
the year an hundredth seventy seven, the eleventh month: this is the month
Sabath. And the son of Abobus received entered into the feast, and slew him,
and his two sons, and certain of his servants. And he did great deceit in
Israel, and Out of the book here mentioned some think the fourth book of
Machabees was translated. See Six^us Se^en. li. 1. Biblioth. page ^^.
the book of the days of his priesthood, from the time that he was made
prince of the priests after his father. li. 2. ^. ^. v. ^.


THE SECOND BOOK OF MACHABEES.

CHAP. 1. The Jews in Jerusalem write to the Jews in Egypt, 7. signifying
that they had wri^te before of many afflictions past: 9. and now write again,
rendering thanks to God for their delivery from Antiochus: 18. exhorting
their brethren to keep the feast of Scenopegia: rec^^ing the miracle of water
returning into fire: 24. when Nehemias prayed: 33. and that This Appendix
concerning two epistles of the Jews was added to the history, of the first
book by him that vvritte this second.
the king built a temple in memory thereof.
TO THE brethren, the Jews that are through e
out Egypt, the brethren, the Jews that are in Jerusalem, and that are in
the country of Jury, send health, and good peace. God do good to unto you al
an heart to worship him, and to do his will with a great heart, and a willing
mind. Open he your heart As they had written before in their afflictions, so
now they exhort their brethren to be thankful to God, and amongst other
means to show their gratful mind by celebrating the feast of dedication of
the new altar.
we Jews wrote unto you in the tribulation, and violence, that came upon us in
these years, since Jason revolted li 2. ^. 4. v. 7.
from the holy land, and from the kingdom. They burnt It seems that either
this Judas was the first son of John Hyr^amus (otherwise called
Aristobolus) or rather Judas Essenus of whom, chapter 2. v. 14. and of whom
Josephus vvriteth* li. 13. ^. 19.
Judas, to Aristobolus the master of Ptolomee the king, who is of the stock
of the anointed priests, and to those Jews, that are in Egypt health, and
welfare. Being delivered by God out of Chaldea being nere to Persis, is
sometimes comprehended under the same name so Mamertinus, in Panager^ca ad
Iulia* recites Tigris and Euphrates amongst the rivers of Persi. and S.
Chrysostom. ho. 6. in Math. says the Jews were delivered from captivity of
Per^^s, meaning Babylon.
into Persis, the priests that then were the worshippers of God, taking the
fire from the altar, hid it secretly in a valley where there was a pit deep,
and dry, and therein they saved it, so that the place was unknown to al men,
But when many years had passed, and i^ In this fire were four miracles.
First it was not changed into air but into water. v. 20.
thic^ke water. And he bad them draw, and bring unto him* Secondly this water
being cast on the hosts of sacrifice was kindled as fire. v. 22.
was kindled a great fire, so that al merueiled. And all the priests made
prayer, whiles the Thirdly, it burned also being cast upon stones. v. 32.
was Fourth, it was extinguished by the light that came from the altar. v. 32.
by light also, that shined from the altar, it was consumed. And as the thing
was made manifest, it was Nephthar, signifies delivery, which is the effect
of purification, for the temple and other holy things being purified, were
delivered from profane use.
Nephthar, which is interpreted purification. But it is called with many Nephi.

CHAP. II. Holy fire, and the book of the law were conserved by Jeremy the
prophet, in the transmigration into Babylon. 4. Likewise the Tabernacle of
Moses the Arc, and Altar of incense in a secret place. 8. As Moses had
dedicated the Tabernacle, and Solomon the Temple: 14. so Judas Machabeus
^lensing the Temple, and making a new Altar, instituted a feast of the
Dedication thereof. 20. The Preface of the Auctor abridging the history of the
Machabees written by Jason in five books.
AND it is found in the descriptions of Jeremy the prophet, S. Ambrose, li 3.
c. 14. Offic. vvriteth at large of this miracle.
the fire, as it was signified, and as he commanded them that were carried away
in transmigration. And he Epis. Iere. Baruc. 6.
would not remove the law from their heart And it was in Neither the tabernacle
nor the arc were carried away by Nabuchodonosor, but were preserved by some
means: and most like (besides the authority of this scripture) by Jeremy the
propher, who had spocial favor of the Babylonians, when Jerusalem was
taken. Iere. 39. v. 11.
the tabernacle, and the arc should follow in company with him, til he came
forth into the mount in which Moses ascended, and saw the inheritance of God.
And Jeremy coming thither found a place of a cave: and he Ex^. 40. 3. R^g. 8.
as it was also mad^manifest to Moses, and as when Solomon prayed that the
place might be sanctified to the great God, he did manifest these things. For
he handled wisdom magnifically: ^euit. 9. 7. 24.
And Moses said: Because that which was for sin, was not eaten, it was
consumed. In like manner Solomon also things were put in the descriptions, and
commentaries of Nehemias: and after what sort he making a library gathered
together books of the prophets, and of David, and the epistles of the kings;
and concerning the donaries. And in This seems to be the same Judas Essenus
who with others vvritte this epistle, chapter ^. v. 10.
Judas also such things as were fallen away by the war that happened to us,
gathered them al together, and they are with us. If therefore you desire these
things, li. 2. c. 15. v. 38.


After the auctor had written this Appendix to the former book, he resolved
also to add an abridgement of the whole history, whereunto he makes this
Preface, signifying the matter vvherof he vvil write v. 20. in what manner. v.
24. and why, v 25. auouching his diligence. v. 26. with brevity. v. 29.
Concerning Judas Machabeus, and his brethren, and of A
the purification of the great temple, and of the dedication of the altar, Yea
and of the battles that perteyne to Antiochus God assisting the vvti^ers of
divine histories, does not alvvayes deliver them from labor in seeking to
know the same of sueh as knew particular things. So S Luke vvritte the
Gospel, having diligently attained to al things Luc. 1. v. 3.
the difficulty to them, that will attempt the narrations of histories, because
of the multitude of matters: we have been exact declaration.
verity our selves according to the form that is given, studying to be
brief. For as the builder of a new house must have care li. 1. c. 1. v. 1.


CHAP. III. When Jerusalem was in peace, and good order, by the care of Onias
high priest, and king Seleucus favored pious works, 4. Simon a wicked The
first part The persecution of the Church by Antiochus.
churchwarden, betrayeth the treasure of the Sanctuary: 7. VVher upon
Heliodorus sent by the king, and after courteous intertainment, declaring that
he must carry all the money to the king, is resisted by Onias with others,
devoutly commending the cause to God. 23. He nevertheless attempting the
sacrilege, is terrified by a vision, sore beaten, and in desperate misery, 31.
by Onias sacrifice and prayers, is restored to health: 35 and returning home
confesses the power of God.
THEREFORE when the holy Three things make a commonwealth to be in good state.
city was inhabited in C
Good agreement of principal men amongst themselves, and with the commonaltie.
. al peace, Exact observation of good laws:
. the laws also as yet were very well kept, because of Onias And eminent virtue
of the supreme governor with exercise of piety and hate of sins.
the high priest his piety, and mind that hated evils, it came to pass that
kings also themselves, and princes Appollonius had made relation to the king,
concerning the:: Other three things do truble the state: Obstinacy in
offenders, not content to be corrected. 2 Inueterate malice seking revenge
against just Superiors. 3. and avarice of princes, to rob the holy or common
treasure.
money that he was told of he calling for Heliodorus, who was over his
affairs, sent him with commission to transport the foresaid money. And
forthwith Heliodorus began to take These virgins remained in places nere to the
temple, brought up in exercises of piety, fasting and praying, til they were
despoused. 1. Reg. 2. v. 22. S. Amb. li. 1. de virgin. S. Greg. Nissen: Orat.
de Christ Natiuit. S. Damas. li. 4. c. 13.
that were shut up, came forth to Onias, and some to the walls, but some
looked through the windows: and al stretching forth was miserable. And these
certes inuocated almighty God, 4. Reg. 2. v. 11. A fiery chariotte and fiery
horses carried Elias from Elizeus. 4. Reg. 6. v. 17. And the mountain appeared
full of horses, and of fiery chariots round about Elizeus, no less strange then
this vision. See S. Ambrose li. 2. c 29. offic. discoursing upon this history.
there appeared to them a certain horse having great God, which he had seen
before his own eyes. And

CHAP. IIII. Onias defamed and molested by Simon, repayreth to the king to
procure peace. 7. Seleucus dying, and Antiochus reigning, lason by promising
money to the king, gets the office of highpriest from his brother Onias: 10.
and peruerteth religion: 12. sets up a wicked school, whereby many are
corrupted: 8. sends money for sacrifice to be offered to Hercules, which is
employed in making gallees. 21. Antiochus is received with great pomp into
Jerusalem. 23. Menelaus by promise of more money gets the high priesthood
from Jason. 29. He also is deposed, and his brother Lisimachus put in the
place. 32. Andronicus traitorously murdereth Onias. 36. and for the same is
slain by the kings commandment: 39. and Lysimachus by the people. 43. Menelaus
justly accused escapes by bribing, and the innocent are slain.
BVR Simon the foresaid betrayer of the money, and of It is the common
practice of al traitors to calumniate and defame good gouerners. And the best
remedy a against such seducers is by authority of Superior power, not by the
people, who are commonly more prone to favor faction then justice.
spoke il of Onias, as though he had stirred up Heliodorus to these things,
and had been the mouer of the evils: and the prouider for the city, and
defender of his nation, li. 1. c. 1. v. 11.
But after Seleucus departure out of life, when Antiochus E
Jason the brother of Onias ambiciously sought the highpricsthood: going to the
king, promising him three hundred Where true Religion is abolished, most men
neglect al show of religion, and rather apply themselves to vanities, or woise
sins.
the temple being contemned, and the sacrifices neglected, they hastened to be
pertakers of the gamme of wrestling, and of the unjust maintenance thereof, and
in the exercise of the coyte. And setting naught by the honors of their
fathers, li. 1. c. 1. v. 17.


And Apollonius the son of Mnestheus being sent into G
Egypt because of the nobles of Ptolomee Philometor the king, This king falsely
pretended to restore his kinsman (his sisters, son) to the kingdom being
deprived by his younger brother ( Liuius li. 44) but the true cause of his
sending Apolonius into Egypt, was to subdue that kingdom to himself. 1. Match.
1. v. 17.
when Antiochus understood that himself was made an alien from the affairs of
the kingdom, providing for his own commodities, departing thence he came to
Ioppe, and from thence to Jerusalem. And being magnifically received Menelaus
brother of Simon (v. 23) of the tribe of Benjamin ( chapter 3. v. 4.) was not by
the law capable of the priesthood, which only perteined to the progeny of
Aaron of the tribe of Leui So in this trublesome time the right succession of
high priests was intermitted, and restored in Mathathias. li. 1. c. 2.
Menelaus obtained the princedom: murder of so great a man. But when the king
was returned True and solid virtue moved the common people to compassion, the
King himself to tears, the Tyrians to honor the bodies of the innocent with
costly burial. v. 49.
the Greeks: complaining of the unjust murder of Onias. Antiochus therefore
was sorry in his mind

CHAP. V. Visions of armies fighting in the air appear in Jerusalem forty
days. 5. Jason with a thousand men surpriseth the city, kills, many
citizens, but is expulsed and dies myserably. 11. Antiochus persecuteth the
Jews, 15. spoyleth the temple, and prophaneth holy things. 27. Judas with
others flee into the desert.
AT the same time Antiochus prepared a second journey Strange things above the
ordinary course of nature do ever signify Gods wrath, for men's
transgression, and are admonitions to turn from sin, with speed that we
may escape the heavy hand of Gods justice. So the Emperor Charles the Great
interpreted the apparition of a great Comete as witnesses. Fasciculus
temporum.
for kindred sake to have refuge there: but he:: Lacedaemonians otherwise
called Spartians, descended from the stock of Abraham li. 1. c. 12. v. 2.
that cast away many unburied, himself both unlamented, and unburied is cast
forth, neither enjoying foreign buryal, nor partaker of the sepulcher of his
fathers li. 1. c. 1. v. 21.


These things therefore being done, the king suspected that I
out of Egypt with a furious mind, he took the city by arms. And he bad the
souldiars kill, and not spare them that came in chapter 3. v. 23. 27.
chanced them to have been wrapped in many sins, as Heliodorus, who was sent
of Seleucus the king to spoil the treasury, this man also immediately as he
came had been scourged, and repelled verily from his boldness. But Al rites of
religion with temples and other holy things are ordained to the Service of
God, and for men's spiritual good and therefore when men cease to serve God, as
holy things are destroyed, or taken away.
not the nation for the city with armed men he slew a very great multitude.
But Judas Machabeus, who was Judas was the tenth lawful highpriest from the
Monarchy of the Grecians.
the tenth, was retired into

CHAP. VI. The law of God is abolished, the temple profaned, and named of
Jupiter Olympius. 7. The feast of Bacchus is kept. 10. women with their
circumcised children are slain. 11. others for celebrating the sabbath (12. an
admonition to the reader) 18. old Eleazarus constantly observing the law
suffers glorious death.
BUT not long after the king sent a certain ancient man of Antioch, that
should compel the Jews to remove them selves from the laws of their fathers
and of God: to contaminate Sanaballat in the time of Alexander the great
procured a temple to be built in Garizim like to that in Jerusalem. An other
was built in Egypt by Ananias in in the time of Ptolomee Philometor both
schismatical. Josephus. l. 11. c. S. and li. 13. c. 6.
Garizim, according as they were that inhabited the place, of Jupiter
Hospitalis. And the invasion of the euiles was sore and grieucus to al: for the
Besides former great masaker. c 5. four most notorious martyrdomes are here
related.
they should kill. A man then might see the misery. For Women with their
circumcised children.
. two they were discovered to Philip, were burnt with fire, because they feared
for religion and observance, to help themselves with their hand. Other people
for keeping the sabbath.


But I beseech them that shall read this book, A necessaire admonition to the
weak in time of persecucion.
that they

Therefore Eleazarus nintie years old cruelly slain.
Eleazarus one He was excellently learned in holy Scriptures and in all divine
and humane knowledge.
of the chief of the Scribes, a To feyne or make outvvard show of consent to
false religion, is never lavvful.
might feyne to have eaten, as the king had commanded, of the flesh of the
sacrifice: that by this fact he might be In the old restament none could enter
into heaven, but the most just went to Limbus when they died.
be sent unto hell. For it is not Old age (says S. Ambrose. li. 2. c. 10. de
Jacob patri.) ought to be the haven, not the shipvvrake of thy former life.
age to feyne: that many young men thinking, that Eleazarus of four score
year and ten is passed to the life of Aliens: they also through my
dissimulation, and although at this present time I be delivered from the
punishments of men, yet neither alive nor dead shall I escape the hand of the
Almighty. Wherefore in departing manfully out of

CHAP. VII. The noble Martyrdom of seven refusing to eat swines flesh: and
boldly admonishing king Antiochus of his damnable state. 41. Lastly the mother
(having encoreged her sons) likewise dies gloriously.
AND it came to pass, The fourth Martyrdom was of seven brethren and their
mother. ^ Whosoever please to read more of these glorious Martyrs, may sec
the large discourses of Flanius Josephus in his book de Machabeis, And of
sundry ancient Fathers: S. Cyprian. li: 4. Epist. ep. 6. S. Chrysostom,
homilia de natiuitate septem Machabaeorum. S. Ambrose li. 1. Offic. c. 40. etc
li. 11. de Jacob. c. 9. S. Augustine, de origin animae. Tract, 8. in Epist 1.
Joan, and Ser. 110. de diuersis. S. Prosper: li de praedict. par 2. c. 40. S.
Prudentius. hymno de Romano Martyr. S. Leo. Ser de Not septem fratrum. Machab.
S. Gaudentius. Brixanus Tractatu de Machabeis. S. Ephrem. Ser. de morte. S.
Victorinus Aser. Carmine de septem Machabeis.
that seven brethren together with Lord God will behold the truth, and will take
pleasure in us, as Moses declared in the profession of the Canticle: And in
his Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43.
servants he will take pleasure. That first therefore being dead

but do not think that thou shall escape unpunished, for joining a man's heart
to a woman's cogitation, she said to A promise is properly of a good thing, and
binds the promiser to do that which is in deed good. In so much that
whosoever promises, svveareth, or vovveth to do evil, is bond not to do it.
And to do it, is a distinct sin besides the former.
she promised that she would counsel her son.

Therefore bending toward him, In that this godly woman deceived the tyrant,
she did well, lavvfully using aequiuoeation.
mocking the cruel tyrant,

For my brethren having now sustained short pain, are judgment of God shall
receive just punishment for thy pride. And I as also my brethren do yield my
life and my body for li. 1. c. 2. v. 1.


CHAP. VIII. Judas Machabeus with six thousand men, commending their cause to
God, The second part of the history. The vvarres of the Machab^e^ begune by
Mathathias. li 1. c. 2 and prosecuted by Judas
6. prospers in battle. 8. Philippe soliciting for more help, Nicanor and
Gorgias are sent with twenty thousand men against Judas. 12. whose men
beginning to fear, and some flying he encoregeth the rest, 19. reciting many
examples of Gods assistance: 22. disposes his army, and pr^uayleth. 30.
killing many of Timothees and Bacchide^ men. 34. The principal hardly escaping
by flight, acknowledge that God protecteth the jews.
BUT Judas Machabeus and they that were with him, went I.
in secretly into the towns: and calling together their kinsemen and taking
unto them those that continewed in Iudaisme, they brought out to them six
thousand men. And In all good attemptes devout prayer is the first preparation.
And no where more necessary then in battle. As well for good success
(supposing always a good cause) as also that every one pray for his own
soul, that it be in state of grace.
they inuocated our Lord, that he would have respect unto his people that was
trodden of al, and would have mercy on the temple, that was cotaminated of the
impious: he would li. 1. c. 3. v. 10.


But This Philip a Phrygian was left in Jerusalem by Antiochus to afflict the
Jews, chapter 5. v. 22.
Philip seeing the man to come forward by little and little, N
and that things for the more part succeeded with him prosperously, wrote to
Ptolomee the governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, to give aid to the kings
affairs. And he with A just and religious cause is the very best help, that
can be in vvarres.
for the testament that was with their fathers, and for the invocation of his
holy and magnifical name upon them. But Machabeus calling together seven
thousand, that were 4 Reg. 19.
score five thousand perished. And of the battle, that they:: Of this battle
with the calatians there is no other mention in holy scripture but it seems
to be that, vvherin they assisted Antiochus the first called Soter, when he
repelled the Galatians inuading Asia: vvherof Appianus vvriteth in bellis
Syriacis. And Josephus testifies. l. 12, c 3. that Antiochus Magnus (son of
Soter) much favored the Jews, for their explottes done in his fathers days.
had against the Galatians in Babylonia, how al they, when it came to the
point, the Macedonians their fellows staggering, being only six thousand slew
an hundred twenty thousand, by reason of the aid given them from heaven, and
for these things obtained very many benefits. With these words great
infelicitie by the destruction of his army. And he that li. 1. c. 4. v. 28.


CHAP. IX. Antiochus repulsed from Persepolis, 3. and hearing that his army is
overthrown in lurie: 9. worms issuing from his body, intolerably stinking:
11. acknowlegeth his wicked deserts: 14. promises amendment, 18. writes to
the Jews, praying them to obey him, and his son, 28. and dies miserably.
AT that time Antiochus returned out of Persis dishonourably. R
For he had entered into the city which is called A chief city of Persis,
called Elymais. li. 1. c. 6. v. 1.
Persipolis, and he attempted to spoil the temple, and to oppress the city:
but the multitude running together to arms, they were put to flight: and so it
chanced that Antiochus after his flight returned with dishonor. And when he
was come man, worms crawled abundantly, and his live flesh fell of for pains,
with his smell also and stink the army was anoyed. And he that a little before
thought to touch the stars of Antiochus was in deed really and seriously
grieved, and truly acknowledged that his affliction was for his sins, li. 1.
c. 6. v. 11. but he was not truly penitent for the offense committed against
God and his neighbor but only for his own calamity and misery: and
therefore could not obreyne mercy to remission of his sins, nor release of
the punishment. So also the damned in hell, know and confess that they are
punished for their sins, but have not true repentance, for their offense
against God.
of whom he was not to obtain mercy. And the city to the which he came in
have to have wait for times, and expect the event, I have appointed my son
Antiochus king, whom, I having recourse oftentimes to the higher kingdoms did
commend to many of you: and I have written to him that which is set down here
beneath. I pray Of this tyrant S. Cyprian gives this censure: li. de exhort.
Martyrij King Antiochus an inueterate enemy to all the good, Nay, in Antiochus
Antichrist is expressed.
the murderer, and blasphemer being very li. 1. c. 6. v. 17.


CHAP. X. Judas Machabeus cleanses the temple, and institueth the feast of
dedication. 10. Young Antiochus Eupator reigning Ptolomeus of disgust kills
himself with poison. 14. Judas resists great forces of Gorgias, takes
certain holdnes from the Idumeans, punishes traitors, and kills many
enemies. 24. In his battle against Timothee is miraculously assisted from
heaven: 37. and finally kills him.
BUT Machabeus, and they that were with him, our Lord P
protecting them, This recovering and clensing of the temple was after the
fourth battle of Judas, which was against Lysias one of Antiochus chief
captains, as appears. li. ^. c. 4 and so was before the death of Antiochus,
written here. chapter 9.
recovered the temple and the city again: but the altars, which the aliens
had set up through the streets, li. 1. c. 4. v. 5.
men. And what day the temple had been polluted of the him, that gave success
to cleanse his place. And they decreed li. 1. c. 5. v. 1.
But now of Eupator the son of Antiochus the impious, T
evils that were done in the wars. For he having taken It is never an act of
fortitude but of extreme pusillanimity when one in temporal misery kills
himself to be rid thereof. But is a most heroical act to dye willingly for
Gods glory.
made an end of his life with poison. But Against this Gorgias Judas had a
victory before in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes. li. 1. c. 4.
Gorgias being captain of Timothee the second captain general of Antiochus
with Bacchides was once before overthrown. li. 1. c 8. v. 30.
Timothee, who an army of foren multitude, and gathering horsemen of Asia,
came as to take Jury by arms. But Machabeus and they that Josephus Gorion.
li. 3. c. 13. says these twenty zealous young men were of the Assidians, who
professed a certain religious form of life: of whom mention is made before.
li. 1. chapter 2 v 42. etc. 7. v. 13.
twenty

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. X.
Protestants confess that Judas instituted this feast.
8. They decreed.] Beza in his Annotations ( in Joan. 10. v. 22.) set forth in
English in the year. 1603. confesses that the feast which our Savior
observed, was instituted by Judas Machabius, and his brethren, after the
restoring of Gods true religion by easting out Antiochus his garrison It is
also clear that this feast was It is distinct from other feasts.
in vvinter, ibidem, agreeable to the text, in the month of Casleu, which is
November, v. 5.
vvheras the feast of tabernacles was in September, before vvinter; and the
feast of restoration of the temple after the captivity of Babylon, was in
Adar (1. Esd. 6.) which is February, between which time and mids of March,
was not competent space for those things which Christ did after this feast,
before his Passion. And therefore it is very strange that Beza, or other
Protestants vvil deny these books to be Canonical: which have so excellent
a testimony by the Evangelist of our Saviors own fact.

CHAP. XI. Lysias supposing with his army of fourscore thousand footmen, and
a great band of horsemen to subdue Jerusalem: 6. Judas with his few praying
God, and going to fight, an Angel, in form of an horsemen, goes before them:
10. so they setting upon the enemies kill many, and the rest flee. 13. Lysias
perceiving Gods power, offers to procure peace. 22. Whereto the king, agrees,
writting to him, 27. and to the Jews. 34. The Romans also write to the Jews.
BUT a little after This Lysias also bad been vanquished before, li. 1. c. 4. v.
28.
Lysias the kings procuratour, and cousin, Knovving that the Patriarchs
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, likewise Moses Iosue and many others were singularly
assisted by Angels, these Machabees in their good cause prayed for Angelical
help, and had it: but jointly with their own endeavor, although some times
God gives such victories without cooperation of men. Exo. 14. 4. Reg. 19.
that he would send a good Angel to the saving of Israel. And Machabeus him
self first having an helper from heaven, and our Lord having pity upon them.
And like lions running violently upon the enemies, Lysias was in deed the
kings consin. v. ^5 but he calls him brother for honor sake.
his brother, health. Our father

KING Antiochus to the senate of the Jews, and to the rest of the Jews
health. If you fare well, you are so as we

CHAP. XII. VVhiles the Jews have peace with the king, others still persecute
them. 5. which Judas reuengeth. 13. and in Casp^n makes great slaughter, and
reposeth in Chara^a. 19. Ten thousand of Timothees men are slain. 20. whom
Judas pursuing kills many in Carnion: 34. takes him, but releaseth him
again: 27. the like in Ephron. 32. Some Jews are slain in battle against
Gorgias. 38. Judas and his men are purified, and gathering the dead bodies,
find that some had taken unlawful spoils. 42. For whose souls he prays,
and causes sacrifice to be offered.
THESE covenants being made, Lysias went foreward to An other Timothee was
slain. chapter 10. v 37.
Timothy and Also an other Apollonius was slain before. li. 1. c. 3. v. 11.
Appollonius the prepared, with their wives and children, as though no secret
emnities were between them. Therefore according to the common A furlong is
about the eight part of a mile, so this fire was seen thirty miles of others
count a furlong to conteyne a thousand foot, the fifth part of a mile so it
was seen 48. miles distant.
two hundred forty furlongs of. When they Iosue. 6.
the walls. And the city being taken by the will of our Tubianci, or Tubieni,
signify religiously good, it is pro babble that these were the Assideans. li
1. c. 2. v. 42. c: 7. v. 13.
Tubianeians: and in those places they took not Timothee, they came to
Jerusalem the solemn day of the weeks approaching. And after Pentecost they
went against Judas had the victory twice before against this Gorgias. li 1. c.
4. v. 1. li. 2. c. 10. v. 14.
Gorgias the It was commanded. Deuteronomy. 7. v* 25. not to covet nor take aniething
perteyning to idols, but to destroy al* See this sin punished. Iosue. 7. 1.
Reg. 15. etc.
of the donaryes of the idols, that were in Iamnia, from which the law
forbids the Jews: therefore it was made plain to al, that for that cause
they were slain. Al therefore blessed Unless it had been the doctrine and
practice of the Church to pray for the dead, Judas could never have thought of
any such matter.
making a gathering, he sent twelve thousand It is only profitable for those
that dye penitent.
with godliness, had very good grace laid up for them. " It is therefore:: a
holy, and healthful cogitation to li. 1. c. 6. v. 18.


ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XII.
This text is clear for praying for the dead.
46* It is a holy and healthful cogitation to pray for the dead.] The
Catholic belief, doctrine, and practice of praying for the dead, is so
evidently confirmed by this place, that our adversaries have no better shift to
avoid the same, then by denying these books to be Canonical Scripture. Which
being authentically in the argument. pa. 890.
proved, it may here suffice to add that albeit the Greek text (as in other
Likewise the Greek.
innumerable places) differs from the Latin, yet it is no less clear for
this doctrine. Which in English is thus: v 45. Regarding (or considering) that
grace is laid up for them that sleep (or dye) in piety: tovvitte in true
faith and repentance; in the next verse (46.) infers thus: Whereupon he
(Judas Machabeus*) S. Augustine. ep. 61. ad Dulcit. l. 1. c. 23. de morib, li.
de cura pro mort. c. 1. and Enchir. c. 110.
made reconciliation (or expiation) for the dead, that they might be delivered
(or loosed) from their sin, that is, from punishment for sin.

Omitting therefore multitude of other proofs, we vvil here only cite two
great Doctors, who with others teach that the denial of this particular point
of Denial of this doctrine is heresy.
religion is a condemned heresy. S. Augustine li. de Haeresib. haer. 53. notes
this for a special heresy, saying: Aerians are named of one Aerius, who being
a priest, and taking it grievously that he could not be ordained a Bishop,
falling into the heresy of the Arrians, added some proper doctrines of his
own, saying: that we ought not to pray, nor offer sacrifice for the dead.
Likewise S. Bernard, Ser. 66 in Cantica: in plain terms says they are
heretics, which believe not that there is purgatory fire after death, but
that the soul departing from the body, goes forthwith either to rest or to
damnation. Let them then (says he) ask of him who said: There is some sin
that shall not be forgeuen, neither in this world, nor in the future: why he
said this, if there remain no remission, and purgation of Mat. 12.
sin in the future world? He therefore advises al to bevvare of such
seducers, saying: See the detracters, see the dogs. They deride us, because
we baptize infantes: for that we pray for the dead.

It is also most vvorthie of consideration, that Judas Machabeus, (who did
Judas was high priest when he caused prayers and sacrifice to be offered for
the dead. It was the general practice of ^he Church. And is yet observed by the
Jews.
this charitable act for his souldiars slain in the holy vvarres) was the
High priest, or chief Bishop of the Church at that time, and defender of true
faith and Religion. Finally we may also observe that he did not any new
thing, but practiced the usual custom of the whole Church. For so it
appears by their set form of Office for the dead, called HASCHABAH, that
is, Rest, or prayer for rest, in their book MAHZOR, translated and set forth
by Bishop Genebrard, in the year of our Lord. 1569. Where are these express
supplications. Requiescat anima ipsius in cubili suo: iaceat in pace: dormiat
in pace. His (or her) soul rest in his bed: lie, and sleep in peace. Again,
Ye Angels of peace come forth to mete him* etc. And that the Jews this day
use to pray for the dead, is a clear thing, and confessed by Protestants,
namely Munsterus, and Fagius in their Annotations upon the 14. of Deuteronomy. and M.
Whitaker, in his first book against F. Dureus* fol* 81.

CHAP. XIII. Menelaus a fugitive Jew is put to death. 9. Antiochus with his
great army is defeated twice, with loss of many men. 23. Philippe rebelling,
peace is renewed. 24. And Judas is made Lord of Ptolemais.
IN the year an hundred forty nine Judas understood, W
that Antiochus Eupator came with a multitude against Jury, and with him
Lysias the procuratour, and chief over In the first book, ch* 6 v. 30* the
number of this army differs from the number here recorded, the cause is for
that sometimes those only are counted which were permanent, sometimes others
are also counted which came uncertainly. The like difficulties of differences
occur often in the books of kings and Paralipomenon.
an hundred ten thousand, and of horsemen five thousand, and elephants
twenty two, chariots with hooks three hundred. And Menelaus The vvatch word
this night was: The victory of God.
the victory of God, with most valient young men piked out, by night setting
upon the kings court, in the camp he slew four thousand men, and the greatest
of the elephants, with them that had been placed thereupon, and he filled the
And this was done when the day appeared, the protection li. 1. c. 7. v. 1.


CHAP. XIIII. Demetrius having taken certain holds from Antiochus, 3. Alcimus
lately deposed from the office of high priest, 6. accuses good men of
disloyalty, 11. others also incense Demetrius. 12. Whereupon Nicanor being sent
into Jury, makes Alcimus again highpriest: 18. has peace with Judas,
conuersing with him most familiarly. 26. But by Alcimus suggestion, seeks to
deliver him into the king ^andes: 30. otherwise threatens to profane the
temple. 34. The priests pray God to protect them. 37. Razias being accused,
and pursued, 41. in extreme distress kills himself with marvelous corege of
spirit.
BUT after the space of three years Judas understood, and Y
they that were with him, that Demetrius the son of Seleucus with a strong
multitude, and with ships was come up by the port of Tripolis to commodious
places, and held the Alcimus was of Aarons stock. li. 1. c 7. v. 14. but for
this apostasy here mentioned was incapable of high priesthood, and so
Matthathias was ordained being of the same progeny and most sincere in
religion.
Alcimus that had been highpriest, but voluntarily was contaminated in the time
of the confusion, considering that there was saftie for him by no means, nor
access to the altar, came to king Demetrius in the year an hundred fifty,
offering a golden bough.
Talloes, which seemed to be of the temple. And that same day in deed he held
his peace. But having gotten a commodious This description of the Assideans
made by their malicious enemy in calumnious and odious terms, shows well
their singular zele, and sincerity in promoting Gods service* And so their
adversaries malignant accusations more against them then al others, is a plain
testimony of their more rate and more singular virtues.
Assidians, of whom li. 1. ^. 7. v. 26.
Who forthwith sent Nicanor, chief over the elephants a
take Judas himself: but them that were with him, he should disperse, and make
Alcimus the high priest of the greatest temple. Then the nations, which had
fled from Judas out of Jury, Apostates and politikes make their gain by
spoiling the faithful.
esteming the miseries, and calamities of the Jews the prosperities of their
own affairs. The Jews therefore having heard of Nicanors when there was long
consultation of these things, and the captain himself had moved it to the
multitude, there was one sentence of them al to accord unto amity. Therefore
they Nicanor a right worldly politic, a figure of Pilate and of such
temporizing Judges, counselors, and courtiers, as lack zele in religion.
because he could not resist the king, he observed They knevv not precisely
where Judas was, neither would they search for him to deliver him to the
persecutor.
saying Bacchus called also Liber, and by many other names, feaned by infidels
to be auctor and god of wine. And therefore drunkards dedicate feasts and
temples to him.
Liber pater. And when he had said these things, he departed. But the priests
stretching forth their hands unto heaven, inuocated him that was always the
defender of their nation, saying thus: Thou o Lord of al, which lackest
nothing, would S. Augustine epist 61. ad Dul^itium and l. 2. c. 23. ad epist.
2. Gaud* discussing th^^ fact; says the helie scripture dot^ tell it, not
praise it. As to be admired not to be imitated, and that either it was not
well done by him, or at least is not convenient in this time of grace.
he struck himself with a sword: choosing li. 1. c. 7. v. 39.


CHAP. XV. Nicanor intending to assault Judas on the sabbath day, 5.
blasphemeth most proudly. 7. Judas with all confidence in God encorregeth his
men. 11. confirming them with the relation of a vision in sleep. 21. So he with
fervent prayer, the enemy trusting his own streingth, joins battle. 27. and
kills thirty five thousand, and Nicanor amongst the rest. whose head, and
hand cut of with the shoulder are hanged up in Jerusalem: 33. his tongue given
to the birds, and a festiual day observed. 38. And herewith the Auctor (of
this second book) concludes the whole history.
BUT Nichanor as he understood that Judas was in the c
places of Samaria, he purposed with all violence to join batel P^ophane men
make their advantage of religious men's good conscience, but Judas rightly
instructed in this case defended his just cause also in the sabbath. li. 1. c.
3. v. 40.
the day of the Sabbath. But the Jews that of necessity O Luciferian
blasphemy*
I am potent upon the This dream was from God as the effect shevved. And Judas
knevv also that it so was by internal inspiration, as Joseph. Mat. 1. v 20.
was assured of his dreams.
declaring a dream worthy to be credited, whereby he rejoiced them al. And the
vision Jeremy ( chapter 38. v. 17.) persuaded the king of Judah to yield himself
with the city and people to the Chaldees, and not to resist. But now he
delivers a svvord to Judas, exhorting him to fight: according to Gods vvil in
diverse cases, and times, for there is a time of vvare, and a time of peace.
Eccle 3. v 8.
gave unto Judas a sword of gold, saying: Take the holy sword a gift from God,
wherewith thou shall exhorted therefore with the words of Judas exceeding good,
by which the coreges might be stured up, and the hearts of the young men
streingthned, they resolved to fight, and to encounter manfully: that manhood
might decide the matter, because the holy city, and the temple were in
danger. Gods honor, and holy things are first and principally to be
respected, before vvordlie freindes, though they also must be regarded in due
order and place.
For 4. Reg. 19.
this manner: Thou Lord which did send thine Angel in the time of Ezechias
king of Judah, and did kill an hundred eighty five thousand of the camp of
Sennacharib: and now o Dominatour holy house of almighty God, had mightily
bragged. The li. ^. c 8. v. 1. etc.
Adar, which is called in the Syrian language, the day before Mardocheus day. *
f


These things therefore being done concerning Nicanor, More being written in
the first book, this auctor makes one conclusion of al, because other
persecuters being also overcome the land was again caulme after storms.
from that time the city being possessed of the Hebrews, I also in these will
make an end of speaking. And if well, and

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XV.
12. Onias prayed for all the people. And. v. 14. Jeremy prays for the
people.] Prayer of Saints is evidently proved by this place.
As against prayer of the faithful for the dead: Ch 12. so against prayer of
Saints for the militant Church. Protestants have no better evasion, when they
are pressed with these examples, then by denying the authority of the Books.
For seeing the Prophet Jeremy, and the Highpriest Onias, being in Limbo patrum
(no holy souls ascending into heaven before Christ) did pray for the whole
people of the Jews, it is also certain that they, and other Saints in
glory, do of their excellent charity pray for those that are in this
mortallife. Yet neither do we Catholics urge this place, as though we had
no other to allege, for we show the same doctrine, by other holy
Scriptures, It is also proved by many other holy Scriptures.
Genesis 48. Exo 32. Iere. 15. Luc. 16. 2 Petri 1. Apoc. 5. 6 8. and others:
neither must we omite these books, because our adversaries deny them, seeing
the learned Doctores, and holy Fathers confirm the same doctrine by those
Scriptures. Among others ancient Origin. tomo 18 in Joan. says, it appears
that Saints departed from this life have care of the people, as it is written
(says he) in the Neither is this place to be omitted.
Acts of the Machabees, many years after the death of Jeremy: this is
Jeremy the prophet of God, vvo prays much for the people. Likervvise S.
Bernard. Ser. 3. vigil. Natiuit. Domini. and Ser. 11. again Ser. 76. in
Cantica, admonishes that a good religious man is like to this Onias: who
prays to God for all the people.

39. If not se vvorthely.] He demands not pardon, as though he suspected The
auctor of this book asks pardon for his style, not for the doctrine nor
history. But the auctors of these Annotations crane pardon for all defectes.
any error in his doctrine or in the history, but of his unpolished style in
writing. As S Paul says that himself was rude in speech, yet not in knowledge
2. Cor. 11. v. 6.

But we, who by Gods great goodness have passed now to the end of this English
old Testament justly fearing, that we have not worthily discharged so great a
work: and in no wise presuming that we have avoided al errors, as well of
doctrine as history: much more we acknowledge that our style is rude and
unpolished. And therefore we necessarily, and with al humility crave pardon of
God, and al his glorious Saints. Likewise of the Chruch militant, and
particularly of you right well-beloved English readers; to whom as at the
beginning we directed and dedicated these our endeuoures: so to you we offer
the rest of our labors, even to the end of our lives: in our B. Savior JESUS
Christ, to whom be al praise and glory.

Amen.
THE CONTINVANCE OF THE CHVRCH, AND RELIGION IN THE SIXTH AGE: from the
captivity in Babylon to the coming of our Savior, nere the space of 640.
years.
SVCH is the providence of Almighty God, that not obscurely, or at Gods true
Service has alvvayes continued in the visible Church.
sometimes only, but manifestly, and without intermission his Divine Majesty
is acknowleged, his name glorified, his Religion professed, and his precepts
observed by a visible known Church, from the beginning of the world to the end
thereof, as we have already showed in the other five ages; and shall no less
clerly declare the same in this sixth. For albeit the peculiar people of God
were for their sins carried forth of their country, and held captives in
Babylon seventy years, and after their reduction were subject to strangers
ruling over them, and sometimes extremely afflicted with persecution, yet they
still perseuered in the same faith and religion, had succession of Priests, and
of one Highpriest, with conservation also of the royal line of David, even to
Christ our eternal King and Priest.

First therefore concerning Articles of faith and religion, the belief in Faith
in one God is the ground of al religion.
one God was so generally confessed by the whole Jewish nation, that their
Priests and Prophets did use it for a principle, in confirmation of other
points, as well doctrinal as moral. So Malachie teaching that our neighbor is
to be beloved, God to be served, and his laws to be kept: Is there not one
Father of us al (says he. chapter 2. v. 10.) Has not one God created us? Why then
does every one of us despise his brother, violating the covenant of our
fathers? More expressly Jeremy in his Epistle (Baruc. 6.) shows the vanity
and absurdity of many gods: exhorting the people to serve the one
omnipotent God, saying to him sincerely in their bartes; (v. 5.) Thou ought
to be adored o Lord. Likewise, when the Magicians of Chaldea ascribed the
knowledge of dreams to false gods, Daniel with the other three children (chapter
2. v. 18) prayed the God of heaven: and the mystetie was reveled to Daniel. and
he declared and expounded the kings dream. Who thereupon confessed to Daniel
(v. 47.) In very deed your God is the God of gods, and Lord of kings. The
same three children (Daniel. 3.) were cast into the burning furnace, and Daniel
into the lions den (chapter 6. and 14.) ready to dye for their faith in one God.
For this faith also Mardocheus, as is written in the book of Esther, was
persecuted, and he with all the people were in extreme danger. And the auctor of
the book of wisdom teaches that one God is known by consideration of his
creatures: Al men are vain (says he. chapter 13. v. 1.) that by things seen,
understand not him that is: neither attending to the works agnise who was the
workman. So the auctor of Ecclesiasticus chapter 1. v. 8. professes: There is one
most high Creator omnipotent, and mighty king, and to be feared excedingly,
sitting upon the throne, the God of Dominion.

As for the high Mystery of three Divine Persons in one God not so The B.
Trinity reveled to some and uttered obscurely in the old testament.
commonly reveled in the old testament, yet was it known and in some sort
uttered: As Aggeus 2. v. 5. and 6. I am with you, faith the Lord of hosts, the
word that I did covenant with you: when you came out of the land of Egypt: and
my Spirit shall be in the mids of yoa. Where, by the Lord of hosts, u
commonly understood God the Father; by his spirit, God the Holy Ghost, and
the word may signify God the Son: of whose Incarnation the Prophet plainly
speaks in the next verses. For in this consists the covenant between God and
his people, that they should keep his word of precepts and commandments
expressed in the law: and he would send them the word, his only Son the
Second Divine Person to redeem mankind. Again the same three Persons seem to
Distinction of Persons in one God.
be distinguished in diverse places, God the Father is described according to
man's small capacity, Daniel. 7. v. 9. thus: Thrones were set, and THE ANCIENT
OF DAYS sat: his vesture white as snow, The Father.
and the hears of his head as clean wool, his throne flames of fire, his
wheels fire kindled. He is called Ancient of days, not only because he is
eternal, for so are the other two Divine Persons, but this term is attributed
to the Father, because in order he is the beginning, from whom the other two
Persons proceed [The Son by generation, the Holy Ghost from the Father and
the Son by procession.] To God the son the same Prophet The Son.
Daniel prays: chapter 9. v. 17. saying: Now therefore hear o our God, the
petition of thy servant, and his prayers: and show thy face upon thy Sanctuary
which is desert, for thine own sake: that is, for thine own merits: which
can only be understood of that Divine Person, which is incarnate. Zachary, 12.
v. 10. God speaking by the prophet says: I will power out upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of
prayers, which may easily be understood to be the promise of the B. Trinity:
but that which immediately follows: and they shall look toward me, whom they
pierced, can only be spoken by the Second Divine Person, who only is incarnate,
and was pierced in his Passion. In the book of wisdom is much written of
wisdom increated, a term appropriated to God the Son. especially chapter 2. 7.
8. 9. and 10. The like in Ecclesiasticus, chapter 1. 4. 24. And chapter 51. v. 14. is
distinct mention of the Father and the Son, I have inuocated (says the
auctor, or any faithful soul) our Lord, the Father of my Lord. There is
likewise particular mention of the Holy Ghost in some places. As The Holy
Ghost.
2. Esd. 9. v. 20. Thou gave them the good Spirit, which should teach them.
for the office of internal teaching is appropriated to the Holy Ghost. Joan.
14. v. 17. and 16. v. 13. The Spirit of truth, and he shall teach you al truth.
Ezec. 36. v. 27. I will put my Spirit in the mids of you, and will make that
you walk in my precepts. Zach. 7. v. 12. The words which the Lord sent in HIS
SPIRIT, by the hand of the former Prophets. Sapient. 1. v. 5. The Holy Ghost
of discipline will fly from him that feaneth. Ecclesiasticus 1. v. 9. He
created her in the Holy Ghost. 24. v. 29. They that eat ME, shall yet hunger,
and they that drink ME, shall yet thirst. Where God calls the Holy Ghost
(which is received by grace) himselsef. Because al three Other places prove
plurality of Persons in God.
Divine Persons are one God. And that there be many Dinine Persons in God, who
is one in substance, is sufficiently signified by all those holy Scriptures,
where God is called by the name Elohim, in the plural number; especially seeing
this name has also the singular number, Eloha. As Job. 12. v. 4. and 36. v. 2.
Daniel. 2. v. 28. Habacuc. 1. v. 11. and 3. v. 3. which last place seems most
painly to speak of the Son of God, ELOHA MITHEMAN IAVO. God will come from
Theman, or from the South. And therefore where this word Elohim is used in the
plural number (as in most places it is) it signifies plurality of Persons in
God.

Christ's Incarnation is more clerly foreshewed by Prophets, who above The
mystery of Christ's Incarnation is more frequent and more plain in the holy
Scriptures especially in the Prophets. Jeremy.
other consolations, most especially comforted the people by their prophecies
of Christ our Savior. Jeremy 23. v. 5. I will raise up to David a just branch,
and he shall reign a king, and shall be wise, and he shall do judgment and
justice in the earth. Chapter 31. v. 23. A woman shall compass a man. Christ though
in body a little infant, yet in power and wisdom was most perfect of al men,
even when he was in his mothers womb. Chapter 33. v. 14. Behold the days will
come, says our Lord, and I will raise up the good word. v. 15. I will make the
spring of justice to bud forth unto David, and he shall do judgment and justice
in the earth. Ieremies Lamentations are in greatest part of Christ and his
Church. And some part can hardly be applied to any other. chapter 3. v. 30. He
shall give the cheke to him that strikes him, he shall be filled with reproaches,
chapter 4. v. 20. Christ our Lord is taken in our sins. Baruch. 2. v. 35. God
promising Baruch.
to reduce the people from Babylon, adds: And I will establish unto them an
other testament everlasting (by Christ, whose kingdom is for ever) that I be
their God, and they shall be my people. Chapter 3. v. 36. This is our God, and there
shall none other be esteemed against him. v. 38. After these things he was seen
upon the earth, and was conue^sant Ezechiel.
with men. Ezechiel peculiarly called by an Angel the son of man, was therein
a special figure of our Savior, who so calls him self. And the same prophet
has in plain terms foreshewed the office of Christ, the true Pastor of al
pastors. eh. 34. v. 25. I will (says God by this prophet) raise up over them
one Pastor, who shall feed them, my servant David. that is, Christ prefigured
by David. His admirable visions in the three first chapters, and nine last
perteyne properly and principally to the new Testament of Christ, and his
Church, showing the abundance of grace and glory given by him to the elect.
Daniel. 7. v. 13. With the clouds of Daniel.
heaven there came in as it were the Son of man, and he came even to the
ancient of days, and in his sight they offered him. He came even to the
ancient of days, because in his Divinity he is equal to the Father: and in
his humanity he is offered to God in Sacrifice. v. 14 His power is eternal:
and his kingdom shall not be corrupted. chapter 9. v. 24. Seventy wekes (of years)
are abridged, that sins may be forgeuen, grace be infused, prophecies be
fulfilled, and the Holy one of holies be anointed. Al which belong only to
Christ. v. 26. After sixty two wekes Christ shall be slain. Aggeus 2. v. 8.
The desired of al nations Aggeus.
shall come. Zach. 3. v. 8. I will bring my servant the Orient. chapter Zacharias.
13. v. 7. Strike the Pastor, and the sheep shall be dispersed, fulfilled in
Christ's Passion Mat. 26. v. 21. Mala^h. 3. v. 2. Forthwith shall come to
Malachias.
his temple the Dominator, whom you seek, and the Angel of the testament, Also
the books of wisdom.
whom ye desire. The book of wisdom. chapter 2. v. 12. describes the malice of
the wicked against Christ. Let us (say they) circumuent the just, because he is
unprofitable to us: and he is contrary to our works, and reprochfully
obiecteth to us the sins of the law. v. 13. He boasts that he has the
knowledge of God, and names him self the Son of God. Ecclesiasticus 24. v.
34. God appointed to Ecclesiasticus.
David his servant, to raise up a king of him, most strong and sitting in the
throne of honor for ever. Which eternal king proceeding from David can be none
but Christ our Savior. And all the praises of Pa^riarches, and Prophets (in
the last eight chapters) consist in their faith, and expectation of Christ.
Likewise the Priests and people. 1. Match. 14. v. 28. 35. and Machabees.
and 49. showed their faith of Christ to come, when they established Simon, and
his progeny in the government and highpriesthood, for ever til there rise the
faithful Prophet, to wit the Prophet of whom all the prophets did speak
(Luc. 24 v. 27.)

Amongst the rest Jeremy, chapter 31. v. 23. and Ezechiel chapter 44. v. 2. make
Prophecies and figures of the B virgin mother of God.
also especial mention of some singular privileges of the most excellent virgin
Mother of God. Of whom also Judith, and Esther were apparent figures, who
received special graces for the benefit of their nation, and so did this
singular Virgin receive of God most eminent gifts, above al other mere
creatures, for the benefit of the whole Church.

Of Angels the celestial spirits, is frequent mention in the holy Scriptures
Angeles excel corporal creatures in multitude.
of this age. Their multitude is innumerable, and therefore are insinuated to
men by general terms. Daniel. 7. v. 10. Thousands of thousands ministered to
him, and ten thousand hundred thousands assisted him. And their power is
most great, and to men most profitable. An Angel And in power.
defended the three children in the furnace, walking with them in the fire.
Daniel. 3. v. 49 95. Another defended Daniel from the lions. chapter 6. v. 22. The
same or an other carried Habacuc from Jury into Babylon. Dan. 14. v. They help
men and are lavvfully inuocated by men.
35. and restored him in his place again. v. 38. The Archangel Gabriel
instructed Daniel, chapter 8. v. 16. 17. chapter 9. v. 21. And chapter 10. v. 13. and 20.
Other Angels the Patrones or Guardians of the Persians and Grecians, prayed for
those countries; and S. Michael, v. 21. for the Jews. An Angle spoke in
Zachary, chapter 1. v. 9. An other Angel went to mete him. chapter 2. v. 3. And in
respect of Angelical offices, both S. John Baptist, and our Savior himself are
figuratively called Angeles. Malach. 3. v. 1 No meruel therefore that Judas
Machabeus and his army, 2. Machab. 11. v 6. prayed for the assistance of a
good Angel, which was granted them. v. 8. And so they went promptly, having an
helper from heaven. v. 10. Their like prayer had the same effect in an other
battle. 2. Machab. 15 v. 27.

Contrary to these glorious Angeles are other spirits, at first created in
Devils hating God, and al mankind never cease to tempt men to sin.
grace, which falling into pride, and most obstinate malice are perpetual
enemies to God their Creator, and to al mankind, continually calumniating the
works of God, and of al his servants, whereof they are called Devils, or
calumniators. They never cease tempting al they can to evil, so to bring men to
eternal death: For by the envy of the devil (Sap. 2. v. 7.) death (both of
soul and body) came into this world. The just stipend of sin. Al sins
offend God and please the devils. But more particularly they desire to be
honored as God with Sacrifice. Which therefore they require to themselves They
seek to be honored with sacrifice.
and their idols. And for this sin of Idolatry, above al others, God is most
provoked to wrath: and for the same most especially punished his people: as the
Prophet Baruch (chap. 4. v. 6.) signifies to the people, saying: You are sold
to the Gentiles. etc. You are delivered to their adversaries: and giving the
reason why, he adds: v. 7. For you have exasperated him that made you, the
eternal God immolating to devils. And not to God.

The same all the Prophets teach, and withal that Sacrifice is the sovereign
Sacrifice is the proper service of God.
service due to God only, and not to any creature, how excellent soever. But of
Sacrifice there is so much written, that it were over long and nedeles to
recite the places. It imports more to observe the predictions of the most
excellent, and perfect Sacrifice of the new Testament Malachie. 1. Sacrifice of
the new testament, in all places.
v. 11. From the rising of the sun (says God by this Prophet) even to the
going down, there is sacrificing, and there is offered in my name a clean
oblation. In the old testament they offered cattle, and birds, by pouring out
their blood about the altar, and drawing forth their bowels. For purging and
clensing whereof there was much washing and labor: but now in the Church of
Christ, is the clean Sacrifice of our Lords body More pure and excellent then
the old*
and blood, in forms of bread and wine. It is also in itself so pure, that it
can not be polluted (as the old sacricrifices were, v. 12.) by unworthy
Priests, but is always auaylable to some or other, ex opere operato.
According to that the same Prophet testifies, chapter 3. v. 4. The Sacrifice of
Judah and Jerusalem shall please our Lord. which is necessarily understood of the
Christian, sacrifice: for else this place were contrary to that which God said
to the Jewish priests, chapter 1. v. 10. I have no will in you, and I will not
receive gift at your hand. Daniel also prophecieth, chapter 9^ v. 27. that in the
half of the weke the host and the sacrifice shall fail. Chapter 12. v. 11. The old
ceased and the new succeeded.
The continual sacrifice shall be taken away, thereby signifying that not only
after the figure, the Sacrifice prefigured should succeed (for else there should
be no daily Sacrifice at al in the new Testament, which Malachie s^yth plainly
there shall be, not in one, or in few places, but from the rising of the sun,
even to the going down, etc.) but also that both the old and new sacrifices
should be taken away in their several times. For so which shad also be
abandoned by Antichrist.
our Savior (Mat. 24. v. 15.) applies the next words of this prophecy, and
abomination of desolation shall be set up, not only as a sign before the
destruction of Jerusalem, but also of the end of the world. Verified in part as
in the figure, when the temple was destroyed, and diverse prophanations made in
the same place: but more especially shall be fulfilled by Antichrist, abolishing
the holy Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, so much as he shall be suffered:
as S. Hyppolitus writes, lib. de Antichristo. and in oratione de consummatione
mundi. Agreeable to S. Ireneus. li. 4. c. 32. and li. 5. in ^ine S. Ierom. in
Dan. 12. Theodoretus in eund^m locum, and S. Chrisostom in opere imperfecto.
Yea some Hebrew Rabbis acknowledge Transsubstantion, Transsubstantiation
confessed by Rabbis.
in the Eucharist. as R. David Kimhi witnesses upon these words of Osee. 1^.
v. 8. They shall live with wheat, and shall spring as a vine: Many of our
Doctores (says he) expound this, that there shall be mutation of nature in
wheat, in the times of our Redemer Christ.

This Rabbi David also, and the Chaldee Paraphrasis expound Ezechiels
prophecy, chapter 36. v. 25. I will power out upon you clean water, of the
remission of sin, though they signify not by what particular means. Which
Baptism.
Christian Doctors undoubtedly explicate of the Sacrament of Baptism. And like
wise his other prophecy, chapter 47. v. 1. waters issued forth under the threshold
of the house toward the East, can not be understood of any other waters then
of Baptism.

The purifications, oblations, and other works of penance practiced by the
people, after their return from captivity, written. 2. Esd. 9. 10. 13. Penane.
testify their observation of the law in this point, by which the Sacrament of
penance in the new testament was prefigured.

In like sort the continuance of Priesthood, and priestlie functions Holy
orders.
is manifest in the books of Esdras, and of other Prophets, which prefigured
the Sacrament of holy Orders, in the Church of Christ.

In these times also the feasts instituted by the law, were observed with
Feasts.
more or less solemnity, as time, place, and other opportunities served. As
Esdras testifies. li. 1. c. 3. v. 2. Iosue (the highpriest) and Zorobabel (the
duke) after their return from captivity, built an altar (notwithstanding the
threats of infidels) and offered upon it holocaust to our Lord morning and
evening. And they made the solemnity of tabernacles, and other feasts, as well
in the Calendes, as in all the solemnities of our Lord, though the temple was
not yet built again (v. 6.) And afterward upon new occasion, Judas Machabeus,
1. Match. 4. and 2. Match. 10. instituted a new feast, which our savior
observed. Joan. 10. v. 12.

The like observation was kept of fastes. For amongst the feasts which Fastes
ordinary.
were al duly performed (1. Esd. 3. v. 5.) one was of Expiation which consisted
in fasting from even to even. Leuit. 23. Number. 29. And besides And
extraordinary.
the ordinary, Esdras appointed a peculiar fast for special purposes, 1. Esd
8. v. 21. And I proclaimed (says he) a fast, beside the river Ahaua, that we
might be afflicted before the Lord our God: and might desire of him a right way
for us, and our children. And (v. 23.) we fasted and besought our God hereby:
and it fell our prosperously unto us. Again, 2. Esd. 9. v. 1. The children of
Israel came together in fasting, and sackclothes, and earth upon them. see more
of fasting Judith. 4. and 9. Esther 5. and 14. Zachar. 8. And of abstinence
from certain Abstinence.
meats according to the la^, Daniel ^. and 9. Judith. 10. and 12.2. Match. 6.
and 7.

More generally the whole form of good life is excellently prescribed Form of
good life prescribed in the sapiential books.
in the books of wisdom and Ecclesiasticus. Where under the general virtues of
wisdom and Justice, al are admonished to seek diligently to know God, and to
serve him. As much as to say, to have faith and good works: the two feet, and
legs, on which the godly walk unto life everlasting. Let one short
sentence here serve for example (wishing al men to read more in the books
themselves) Sap. 6. v. 18. 19. and 20. is this gradation. The beginning of
wisdom is the true desire of discipline; the care of The ascending by steps
(...) from earth to heaven.
discipline is love; and love is the keeping of her laws: and the keeping of
the laws is the consummation of incorruption: and incorruption makes to be
next to God. These are the steps from earth to heaven, from this vale of
miseries to eternal happiness. first A true and sincere desire of discipline, or
of Gods true service: 2. This desire or care of discipline bredeth love of God:
3. love is the keeping of laws, the commandments of God: for he that says he
^oueth God, and keeps not his commandments ^. Joan. 2.
is a liar: 4. keeping the laws is the consummation of incorruption: making the
soul perfect in virtues, and free from corruption of sins: 5. and this
incorruption makes to be next to God, joining man with God, which is the
perfect beatitude of eternal life. And so he concludes, v. 22. Therefore (from
first to last by degrees) desire of wisdom leads to the everlasting kingdom.
Yet must we understand that neither Without Gods grace preventing, no man can
think or do any thing meritorious.
the first step of good desire, nor any of the rest is in a man's own power
as of himself, so much as to think a good thought, but Gods grace preuenteth
2. Cor. 3.
sturreth men up, and continually assisteth, in all good beginninges progress,
and perseverance, as the same divine auctor teaches a little before, v. 14.
wisdom preuenteth them that couete her, that she first may show herself unto
them. Then to admit, or refuse is in their power, that have good motions. And
therefore sin is rightly imputed, and damnation justly inflicted upon the
wicked, because as Nehemias (2. Esd. 9. v. 17.) testifies of the vngratful
people, they would not hear. And they hardened their necks, and gave the head
to return to their servitude, as it were by contention, or striving against
God, through their own free will; which appears here to remain in sinners.
On the other side the same Confidence of good works done in grace.
Nehemias in confidence of reward for good works, and of his voluntary
cooperating with Gods grace, feared not to pray (2. Esd. 5. v. 19) in these
words: Remember me my God to good, according to al things which I have done
to this people.

Some men moreover besides the commandments of the law, voluntarily Voluntary
vows like to Euangelical connsels.
professed a peculiar state of holy life, a plain figure, or rather an
example of Euangelical counsels. As in the former ages the Nazerites, whose
rule is prescribed Numeri 6. practiced by Sampson (Iudic. 13.) and Samuel (1.
Reg. 1.) and the Rechabites (Iere. 35.) so in this last age next before Christ
the Assideans, or Esseni. 1. Match. 2. v. 42. of whom Judas Machabeus in his
time was head or captain. 2. Match. 14. v. 6. Jeremy the prophet (chapter 16. v.
2.) by Gods ordinance lived single unmarried all the time of the captivity.
Perpetual virginity.
Thou shall not take a wife, and thou shall not have sons and daughters in
this place: to wit, in Jerusalem. Neither did he marie when he was
afterward in Egypt. But of his own accord remained a virgin al his life, as
S. Ierom writes, li 1. aduers. Iouinianum.

Prayers of Saints after they are departed from this world is wanifestly
Prayers of Saints.
deduced of the sacred text, lere. 15. v. 1. of Moses and Samuel, not to be
heard if they should pray for the people, whom God had decreed to punish, were
consequently to be heard in some other case. And more expressly. 2. Match. 15. v.
12. and 14. is recorded that Onias, and Jeremy did pray for all the people, and
for all the holy city. Reverent estimation of Relics, Relics.
and other holy things is manifest by the fact of the same Prophet Jeremy,
who by Gods ordinance (2. Match. 2. v. 1. and 5.) hid the holy fire, and the
Tabernacle, and the Arc, and the Altar of incense in a cave. that they should
not be profaned by infidels ransaking Jerusalem, and the Holy vesseles.
temple: Other holy ornaments also, and vesseles were restored by the
favorable king Cyrus, 1. Esd. 1. v. 7. and chapter 8. v. 30. In figure also of the
holy Sign of the Cross.
Cross on which Christ was to redeem mankind, those that mourned for the
abominations in Jerusalem (Ezec. 9.) were signed in their foreheades with the
letter Thau, or. T. and so were saved from the common slaughter of the vnsigned.

Prayer and Sacrifice for the dead is likewise clear, 2. Match. 12. v. 43.
Prayer for the dead.
etc. if either the text may be admitted for Canonical, saying (v. 46.) It is a
holy and healthful cogitation to pray for the dead; or for good testimony of
Judas fact; being Highpriest, and doing that which the whole Church practiced,
and which the Jews yet observe to this day.

Of the General Resurrection, is good testimnie in the same place v.
Resurrection.
43. and 44. as the ground of Judas his piety towardos the dead, well and
religiously thincking of the Resurrection. For unless he hoped that they which
were slain should rise again, it should seem superfluous, and vain to pray
for the dead. But seeing he did believe the Resurrection, he did right well and
piously. And seeing the belief of resurrection is true, it follows, as this
auctor infers, that it is a holy thing to pray for the dead.

Malachie the last of the Prophets, in the last chapter foresheweth, and
Judgment.
describes the General judgment, in the end of this world: wherein the wicked*
hal be condemned, and the just eternally rewarded. Which day shall come (says
he) kindled as a surnace. All that do impiety (dying in Everlasting punishment.
and eternal reward.
that state) shall be stubble, and that day shall in flame them. And there shall
rise to you that fear my name, the Sun of justice, and health in his wings,
or glorious beams, healing and curing al body lie infirmities, The coming of
Elias, and conversion of the Jews.
and defectes. Before which day he foretells of two signs, v. 5. The coming
of Elias the Prophet. and. v. 6. and the conversion of the Jews to Christ. And
thus much may here suffice, for particular points of religion in this age.

It rests to view the state and government of the Church in this time. The
state of the Church in the times of heathen Monarchies, in general.
Which may be considered according to the four Monarchies of heathen nations:
the Chaldees, the Medes and Persians; the Grecians; and the Romans: Under the
Chaldees, whose Emperial city was Babylon, they were in captivity seventy
years. By the Medes and Persians (for that Monarchy consisted of those two
nations) they were released from captivity with many favors, yet sometimes
afflicted. Under the Monarchy of the Grecians, they were partly in extreme
persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, and of other Grecian kings and princes,
partly in wars for defense of Gods laws. Before and after which persecution
and wars, as well under the Grecians, as the Romans til Christ's Passion the
Church was for most part in peace, yet some times afflicted. But omitting many
intricate diffi^uliies about the times and reigns of sundry heathen kings,
it will suffice our purpose to show the general state of the Jewish nation, with
their own particular gouerners spiritual and temporal, with more or less
favor of foreign Princes.

First therefore concerning their estate in their captivity in Babylon, we may
Their state in the captivity.
here observe Gods providence, in that before the city and temple of Jerusalem
were destroyed, and the whole nation made captive, Ioachin (otherwise called
Iechonias) the son of Ioachaz (who was also called Iechonias) king King
Iechonias ^n^ ^* sede^h Highpriest were in Babylon before the whole nation
was captive.
of Judah was transported into Babylon, and his mother, and many other
principal persons. 4. Reg. 24. v. 15. Likewise Iosedech son of Saraias
highpriest (1. Paral. 6. v. 15.) was carried into Babylon. And in the mean time
Sedecias (uncle to Ioachin) reigned in Judah, who in the eleventh year, was
taken and carried captive into Babylon, and there died, Ioachin yet living in
prison. And Saraias the Highpriest with others, was slain in Rebla, when
Jerusalem was destroyed. 4. Reg. 25. v. 18. and 21. To whom Iosedech succeeded
in the highpriesthood. So that both the issue of David, in the right line of
our Saviors genealogy, and the Highpriest of Aarons stock, were in Babylon
before the whole body of the nation was brought thither. This Iechonias (or
Ioachin) remained in prison, til the death of Nabuchodonosor, the space of
thirty seven years, and was then delivered by Euilmerodach, and by him
entertained courteously as a prince, 4. Reg. Iechonias intertayned in
captivity as a prince.
25. v. 27. He married there and had issue Salathiel; and Salathiel h^d
Zorobabel. Who together with Iosue son of Iosedech highpriest, and Esdras,
Nehemias, and others recited 1. Esd. 2. conducted the children of Israel from
Babylon into their country. There were also in a former transmigration Daniel
with other three children were carried before ^ni^ of the kings into Baoylon.
Daniel, and the other three children Ananias, Misael, and Azarias, (of the
royal or principal blood) in the third year of Ioakim (otherwise called
Eliacim son of Josias. 4. Reg. 23. v. 34) king of Judah. Dan. 1. v. 1. 6.
These with others were carried ^s hostages into Babylon, and brought up more
liberally. Where serving God sincerely, abstayning from unlawful meats, were
protected by God, much also esteemed and promoted in that place. For Daniel
about the age of twelve years, convinced the two wicked Judges, They were
singularly esteemed.
and delivered Susanna from their cruel hands. Dan. 13. And afterward for
declaring and interpreting the kings dream (Dan. 2.) and excellent wisdom, and
gift of prophecy was admired by all, advanced by the king: but maligned by
certain envious sorcerers, and great men. Whereby he was sometimes Sometimes in
danger. But preserved by God.
in great danger, but still delivered by Gods power protecting him. Dan. 6. and
14. The other three children were likewise advanced. Dan. 2. v. 49. and
therefore by diverse envied, and for refusing to adore an idol set up by
Nabuchodonosor were cast into a hot burning furnace, and there preserved. Dan.
3.

Jeremy, who before this time begane to prophecy whiles he was a child,
Jeremy prophesied in Jerusalem and in Egypt.
(Iere. 1.) continued in the time of captivity, in Jerusalem and Jury, with
much affliction, and still prophesying finally dyed in Egypt. Baruch his
scribe, and also a Prophet, went sometimes into Babylon, and returned into
Jury (Baruch. 1.) instructing and exhorting the people.

Ezechiel was carried with king Iechonias, and Iosedech into Babylon, and
Ezechiel and Daniel in Babylon.
there prophesied (chapter 1. v. 2.) part of the same time with Daniel, in great
part the same things with Jeremy. And during the captivity, king Iechonias,
Iosedech the highpriest, Jeremy, Baruch, Ezechiel prophets, and innumerable
others (some Martyrs, and many Confessors) parted from this world. But Daniel
yet lived. And in place of Iosedech Highpriest Iosue succeeded, and the progeny
of king Iechonias continuing in Salathiel, and Zorobabel, the nation ^ad them
and other eminent men, with temporal dependence upon foreign princes in the
next Monarchy of the Medes and Persians.

For when Darius king of Medes had slain Ba^^azar king of the Chaldees, The
Monarchy of Medes and Persians.
and so possessed Babylon, with the whole country he brought the Monarchy to
the Medes and Persians. Dan. 5. v. 31. and within the space of one year he
dyed; and Cyrus succeding granted leave to all the Jews to Cyruslicensed the
Jews to return and build up their temple. Prophecy of Christ: after
seventy weeks.
return into Jury; and there to build up their temple, and city of
Jerusalem, which Nabuchodonosor had destroyed. At which time Daniel had his
vision, that Christ our Savior should come into the world, within seventy
weeks (of seven years to the weke, that is, in four hundred ninety years)
after the perfect finishing of the temple* and city. Dan. 9. v. 24. and 25.
But when they were so built again, that the wekes began to be counted, is
very obscure: as it was the will of God, that the prophecy, being certain in
itself, should not be over clear to every man's understanding, but as likewise
many other prophecies, shut and sealed. Dan. 12. v. 6. 9. 13.

In this time of the Medes and Persians Monarchy, Mardocheus remaining in
Chaldea, after the relaxation had that vision in a dream, Mardocheus.
Esther. 11. after which followed the history of him, and Queen Esther, and
Esther.
wicked Aman; with the danger and delivery of all the Jews in those parts.
Aman.
Some think it likewise probable, that the history of Judith happened after
the captivity; though others suppose that it was in the time of Manasses king
Judith.
of Judah. which not being our purpose to discuss and decide, we will pass to
things more certain.

The prophets Aggeus and Zachatias nere twenty years after the relaxation,
Aggeus and Zachatias.
earnestly exhorted the princes and people to build up the temple which had
been begun, and now was neglected upon vain fear, thincking, the time was
not yet come of building the house of our Lord. Aggeus. 1. v. 2. Whereupon the
prophet reproves them, expostulating thus: Why, is it time for you to dwell in
embowed houses, and this house (of our Lord) desert? And assures them. v. 10.
that their ground should remain barren, and chapter 2. v. 15. their sacrifices
vngratful, til they should build the temple: promising moreover that this new
temple should be more glorious by Christ's personal presence therein, then the
former temple built by Solomon. But especially the Church of Christ presigured
by the temple, The (...) more glorious in the new testament.
should far excel the Synagoge of the old testament. chapter 2. v. 10. Great shall
be the glory of this last house more then of the first. Which Zachary
confirms inuiting the Gentiles to come, and the Jews to return into Christ's
Church: chapter 2. v. 6. O flee out of the land of the North, says our Lord,
because into the four winds of heaven, have I dispersed you. v. 7. O Sion
flee thou that dwell with the daughter of Babylon. And by diverse other
visions and prophecies they forshew the conversion of the Gentiles, and
reiection of the Jews for their obduration, but in the end they also shall be
converted.

Malachie prophesied after the finishing of the temple, exhorting al to offer
Malachie.
their sacrifices with purity of heart, reprehending both priests and people
for not so doing. chapter 1. He also foresheweth the reiection of the Jews, and
calling of the Gentiles, with the change of the old sacrifices, and institution
of a new far more excellent, and more effectual, to be offered every where
(v. 10. and 11.) He concludes his prophecy chapter 4. foretelling the terrible
day of Judgment, and life or death everlasting.

These later prophets yet living, as Josephus, Eusehius, Theodoretus and The
Grecian Monarchy.
others testify in their histories, the Grecians obtained so great a Monarchy
by king Alexander the Great of Macedo, that being parted after his death
amongst many, yet al were great kingdoms, some longer some shorter time. King
Alexander honored Iaddus the Highpriest.
In the beginning whereof when king Alexander came to Jerusalem, as Josephus
writes. li. 11. c. 8. Antiquit. Iaddus the highpriest going forth in his
pontifical attire to mete him, the same king straightwayes fell down at his
feet with all reverence. And being demanded by his freindes, the princes of his
army, why he so much honored the highpriest, he answered, that he honored no^
the man for himself, but for his office, and God in him, who had appeared to
him in sleep in that very habit, and ornaments, when he in Macedonia
discoursed in his mind of making battle against the Persians, promising him
assured victory. Shortly after this it happened, that Manasses an The
schismatical temple in ^atizim.
Apostata highpriest, by intercession of Sanaballar, whose daughter he had
unlawfully married, obtained license to build a temple in Garizim, which the
Samaritanes afterward pretended to be more ancient then the temple of
Jerusalem, against which our Savior gave sentence. loan. 4. v. 22. It was also
decided by king Ptolomeus in Alexandria (as Josephus witnesses. li. 13 c. 6.)
by way of arbitrament, finding that the temple of Jerusalem, and the
Highpriestes thereof had a perpetual succession from Salomons time, and that
their pretense of Jacobs adoring in Garizim was not to the purpose, seeing there
was no succession, that temple being lately built. Nevertheless the same
Ptolomeus to gratify Onias an other Apostata, son of good Onias Highpriest
An other schismatical temple in Egypt.
and Martyr* (2. Macab. 4. v. 34.) gave leave to build an other temple in
Egypt, which stood likewise in schism against the true temple of Jerusalem,
wresting to their purpose the prophecy of Isaie. chapter 19. v. 19. In that day
there shall be an altar of our Lord in the mids of Egypt. Which The Seventy
two Interpreters.
S. Ierom shows to be understood of the Church of Christ. Before this last
schismatical temple, and after the former were the Seventy two Interpreters,
or Translators of the Hebrew Bible into Greek. of whom S. Ierom and al ancient
Fathers speak much, and esteem of very great and Canonical authority.

In the time of the Grecians Monarchy, profane lerning flourished more
Profane lerning flourished amongst the Crecians, but they erred excedingly in
matters of Religion.
then before, and Philosophers abunded. but differed excedingly amongst
themselves, and al erred in the principles both of Natural and Moral knowledge.
For whereas in deed God omnipotent was the only maker of the whole world, and al
things therein, al these Philosophers supposed and taught, that some material
thing was coeternal with God: and so they put the same thing to have been the
beginning of al other things. Which some say was the water, some the Air,
some the Earth, some the Fire, some al these four Elements, Primum principium.
some the Atomos, or indivisible small bodies, some one thing some an other.
Whereof S. Epiphanius writes in compendio contra h^reses. And the like absurd
conceiptes they had of the chief Good, or Summum bonum. Which Sammum ^o^um.
Pithagorians.
the Pithagorians thought to be nothing else but a certain immortality of the
soul, and so, as it may still be in a body. And therefore seeing both men and
beasts do dye, they held opinion, that when a soul parts out of one body,
it goes into an other. Yea and makes transmigration from one species or kind
to an other. As from a man's body into the body of a horse, or an ox; and
contrariwise from a brute beast into a man again, and from one beast into an
other. The Stoikes put the chief good in Stoikes.
virtues, but could reach no further then to a certain contentment of joy in
their mind, not knowing the reward of virtues to consist in seeing God.
Achademikes.
Platonikes, or Achademikes conceived more of God, and pure spirits, but
thought both corporal and spiritual creatures were coeternal with God.
Peripatetikes
The Peripatetikes placed the chief good* or felicity in the aggregation of
best spiritual, corporal, and worldly things together. The Epicures.
Epicures esteemed carnal and bodily pleasures above al. And al these and
their folowers judged so diversely of the right true felicity, contradicting
and The assured faith of the Church, the city of God.
condemning each others opinions, that they were multiplied into innumerable
Sects. As S. Augustine declares out of Marcus Varro: and opposes against them
al, the one assured faith and judgment of Gods Church, in his 19. book de
ciuit. Dei. c. 4. And concludes with the Royal Prophet, and S. Psalm. 93 1.
Cor. 3.
Paul, that their cogitations are vain, which will have happiness to be in any
other thing but in seeing God; or to be obtained by any other means, without
Gods grace And not only before and since, but also in the same times the
auctors of The Books of wisdom and Ecclesiasticus taught right doctrine
against those erroneous Philosophers.

For profession also of true faith and religion the Machabees both suffered,
The Machabees professed the same. Antiochus his Edict.
and labored most notably, When king Antiochus Epiphanes (1. Match. 1. v. 43.)
wrote to al his kingdom, that all the people should be one, and every one
should leave his own law. And whosoever should not do according to the word
of Antiochus they should dye. Against which most wicked decree, and cruel
execution thereof, Gods grace so abunded that (v. 65.) many of the people of
Israel, determined with themselves, that they would not eat the unclean
things: and they chose rather to dye, then to be defiled with unclean meats:
and that they would not break the holy law of God, and so were murdered: As
is more particularly recorded, 2. Match. 5. v. 14. Martyrs for this faith.
how there were in the space of three days fourscore thousand slain, forty
thousand in prisoned, and no less sold. After this with more pretense of
justice, but with more malice, endeavoring to terrify others, and to draw them
to yield, or make show of conformity to wicked laws, chapter 6. v. 10. Two women
were accused to have circumcised their sons, For circumcision.
whom when they had led about through the city, with the infants hanging at
their breasts, they threw down headlong by the walls. And v. 11. other
people were burnt with fire, for secretly For keeping the Sabbath
keeping the day of the Sabbath. Thirdly. v. 18. Eleazarus being urged to eat
swines flesh, and entreated by his familiar freindes, to make show of
conformity, would neither eat, nor feyne to ^a^e it, but dyed most
constantly, For abstayning from svvines flessh.
leaving an example of virtue and fortitude. Fourthly seven brethren and their
mother (2 Match. 7.) yielded also their lives in most glorious Martyrdom, because
they would not yield conformity to wicked laws.

After which heroical constancy in suffering, it was also Gods providence,
Holy vvarres for the Church and religion.
that others should show their fortitude, in delivering his Church from these
calamities and dangers. For Matthathias of the tribe of Leui, and stock of
Aaron Priest, and (after the apostasy of Jason. li. 2. c. 4. v. 10.)
Highpriest, Matthathias.
lamenting the pitiful state of Gods people, with resolute mind, and inuinoible
corege resisting wicked Antiochus (1. Match. 2.) of just zele with his own
hands slew one, who for fear of death was ready to offer sacrifice to idols,
and withal killed the kings commissioner, who came to compel men to commit
idolatry: and then gathered troops to defend so hohie a cause. Against whom
the enemies fighting on the sabbath days killed many, which of scruple would
not resist. But upon further consideration, the rest resolved to defend
themselves also on the sabbath day, if they were assaulted.

Next to him succeeded his son Judas Machabeus in both the offices of Judas
Machabeus.
Highpriest and General captain: who (as good order required (first pursued
the wicked (towitte amongst his own subjects) inquiring them out, and such as
trubled his people, them he burned with fire. 1. Match. 3. v. 5. and his enemies
were repelled for fear of him: all the workers of iniquity were trubled: and
salvation was directed in his hand. For he and his folowers 2. Match. 8. v. 2.
inuocated our Lord, A religious prayer.
that he would have respect to his own people; the temple; the city; hear
the voice of blood crying unto him, remember the most unjust deaths of
innocents, and the blasphemies done to his name. So he with a few (having made
this preparation by prayer) overthrew the armies of Antiochus, with their four
principal captains Apollonius (1. Match. 3. v. 11.) and (v. 23.) Seron, (chapter
4.) Gorgias, and Lysias. Then clensing the temple (v. 36. and li. 2. chapter 10.)
renewed The temple cleansed.
the holy vessels, which were destroyed by Antiochus, and dedicated a new
altar. v. 47. and 56.

And whiles Judas with his brethren delivered the people from al bordering
Antiochus dyed miserably.
enemies. 1. Match. 5. and li. 2. chapter 10. and 11. Antiochus Epiphanes li. 1. c.
6. and li. 2. chapter 9. dyed most miserably. And his young son Antiochus Eupator
reigned. Against whose captains Judas had still more victories. li. 2. chapter 12.
and 13. Then followed the last battle of Nicanor sent Ni^^or ^laine.
by king Demetrius, where he was slain by Judas forces, in the mids of his
army. li. 1. chapter 7. and li. 2. chapter 15. whereof Demetrius hearing sent new
forces with Bacchides and Alcimus, and more then two parts of Judas small camp
fleying away, he with only eight hundred. li. 1. chapter 9. setting upon the
enemies defeated the strongest part of their army: but an other part coming at
his back, great slaughter was made on both sides, and Judas after many
heroical acts was now slain in battle, dying with most renowned glory. v.
18. Judas dyed gloriously.
al good men lamenting his death.

After him Ionathas his brother succeeded Highpriest, and general Ionathas.
captain, chapter 9. v. 28. who managing the common affairs with great wisdom,
piety, and coreg^, the wicked usurper Alcimus, who not long before swearing
that he would not hurt the Assideans, presently killed threescore of Altimus
dyed miserably.
them in one day. li. 1. chapter 7. v. 15. and beginning to deface the temple, was
suddenly strooken with a palsy, and dyed miserably, li. 1. chapter 9. v. 54.
Ionathas prospering against the enemies confirmed league with the Romans and
Lacedaemonians, chapter 12. At last was deceived, and both he and his sons were
trecherously slain by Tryphon, chapter 13. So Simon his brother was made Simon.
Highpriest, and captain general by public consent. chapter 14 who after many
noble acts, chapter 15. was also vilanously slain with two of his sons, by his
son in law Ptolomee. And his other son Ioannes Hyrcanus Ioannes Hyrcanus.
succeeded, chapter 16. In his days the Jews in Jerusalem writ to their
brethren in Egypt, exhorting them not to frequent the schismatical temple in
Egypt, but to keep the feasts which were instituted in Jerusalem. Thus much
of the trublesome state of the Church, reduced to peace by the Machabees.

Shortly after which time, the Roman kingdom having been often increased The
Roman Monarchic.
in the space of nere seven hundred years from the building of Rome, was by
Pompeius the great, subduing the East countries, extended so far, that as
Pliny writes. li. 7. c. 26. Asia Minor was now as it were the middle part,
which before was the uttermost borders of their dominions. And the same
Pompeius, amongst the rest, taking Jerusalem, brought the Jews under the
Roman Empire, nere fourscore years before Christ. under whom they enjoyed
some liberties, til Herod Ascalonita a stranger borne (his Hered the first
strange king of the Jews.
father an Idumean, his mother an Arabique) was first made governor of
Galelee, then Tetrach of Judea, and afterward king thereof* who being advanced
by the Romans to royal dignity, endeavoring by sundry benefits to get the
peoples favor, amongst other things enlarged and adorned their He enlarged
the temple. But sold the office of Highpriest.
Temple, making it as it were a new edifice, in comparison of that which was
built after the captivity: yea more excellent as some think, then that which
Solomon built. But this new king made sail of spiritual offices. Namely he
sold the office of the Highpriest for money, and that from year to year, or
for short and limited time. In him was fulfilled the prophecy of the
Patriarch Jacob, Gen 49. giving it for a sign that Christ our Redemer should
presently This king was a sign of Christ's coming.
come into this world, saying: The scepter shall not be taken away from Judas,
and a duke out of his thigh, til he do come that is to be sent, and the same
shall be the expectation of the Gentiles. And therefore Herod hearing by the
Sages, that the true king of Jews was borne, in extreme fury murdered the
innocent Infantes. Mat. ^. And so both Jews and Gentiles were admonished that
the Messiah was borne of the se^de, and right line of King David. Whose
Genealogy before the captivity we noted in the fifth age of the world to
Ioachaz son of Josias. Now therefore to prosecute The genealogy of Christ
from the captivity.
page 939*
the same, we must observe, that whereas S. Matthew says: Josias begat
Iechonias, by this Iechonias he means Ioachaz, otherwise called Iechonias; or
else he ascribes the nephew to the grandfather as his son. For Josias was
slain at least eleven years before Iechonias the father of Salathiel was
borne. And this later Iechonias was also called Ioachin, the first of the third
Tessaradechad, so the second Salathiel. the 3. Zorobabel: 4. Abiud, 5.
Eliachim, 6. Azor. 7. Sadoc. 8. Achim, 9. Eliud, 10. Eleazar, 11. Mathan, 12.
Jacob, 13. Joseph. the husband of Marie, of whom was borne the fouretenth,
JESUS CHRIST. And this known by tradition, not written before S. Matthewes
Gospel.

The succession also of the Highpriestes, declared in our former
Recapitulations Succession of Highpriestes.
page 713. 939.
of the fourth and fifth ages, from Aaron to Iosedech, who was Highpriest in
the captivity, after that his father Saraias was slain, 4. Reg. 25. v. 18.
continued, as partly by holy scriptures, the rest by other auctors appears
in this order: After the same Iosedech, his son Iosue, then Ioachim,
Eliachim, Eliasib, Ioiada, Jonathan, Iaddus, in the time of king Alexander:
Onias the first, Simon Priscus, Eleazarus, by whom the Seventy two
Interpreters were sent to king Prolomeus Philodelphus. Manasses, who became an
Apostata, Onias the second, Simon the second, of whom is worthy mention,
Eccli. 50. Onias the third, whose brother Jason obtained the office of the king
by symonie, and became an Apostata, so was never lawful, neither those th^^^f
lowed him. Menelaus of the tribe of Benjamin. Lisimachus his brother, and
vicar. Alcimus though of Aarons stock, yet for his Apostasy unlawful. Al
which time the true Highpriestes were of the Machabees, Matthathias and his
sons Judas, Ionathas, and Simon, his son Ioannes Hyrcanus. Then
Aristobulus, Alexander, an other Hyrcanus, in whose time Pompeius The true
suecession continued also in the times of usurpers.
took Jerusalem, Antigonus, after whom Herod put Anaelus in the office for
money. And so the rest or most of them that followed were symoniacal.
Aristobulus, Iosue, Simon, Mathias, Josephus, Iozarus, Eleazarus, Iosue, Anna,
Ismael, Eleazarus, Simon, and Caiphas. who in council (Joan. 11. v 49.) gave
sentence (which himself understood not) that it was expedient, that one man
dye for the people, and the whole nation perish not. which the holy
Evangelist ascribes to his office, being highpriest of that year, he
prophesied that JESUS should dye for the nation: and not only for the nation,
but togather into one the children of God, that were dispersed.

JESUS REDEMER, correct in us our errors, gather the dispersed, conserve them
that are and shall be gathered, make al one flock in one fould A petition to
JESUS CHRIST.
under one Pastor, thy self JESUS CHRIST. To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost be al thanks, praise, honor, and glory, now and for ever and
ever.

AMEN.
The prayer of Manasses, with the second and third Books of Esdras, extant in
most Latin and vulgar Bibles, are here placed after all the Canonical books,
of the old Testament: because they are not received into the Canon of Divine
Scriptures by the Catholic Church.

THE PRAYER OF MANASSES KING OF IVDA, WHEN HE WAS HELD CAPTIVE IN BABYLON.
LORD omnipotent God of our fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, 2. Paral. 33. v. 12.
and Jacob, and of their just sede, which did make heaven and earth: with all
the ornaments of them, which have bound the sea with the word of thy precept,
which have shut up the depth, and sealed it with thy terrible and laudable
name: whom al things dread, and tremble at the countinance of thy power,
because the magnificence of thy glory is importable, and the wrath of thy
threatening upon sinners is intolerable: but the mercy of thy promise is
infinite and unsearchable: because thou art our Lord, most high, benign, long
suffering, and very merciful, and penitent upon the wickedness of men. Thou Lord
according to the multitude of thy goodness have promised penance, and remission
to them that have sinned to thee, and by the multitude of thy mercies thou have
decreed penance to sinners, unto salvation. Thou therefore Lord God of the just,
have not appointed penance to the just, Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, them that
have not sinned to thee, but have appointed penance for me a sinner: because I
have sinned above the number of the sand of the sea. Mine iniquities Lord be
multiplied, mine iniquities be multiplied, and I am not worthy to behold, and
look upon the height of heaven, for the multitude of mine iniquities. I am
made crooked with many a band of iron, that I can not lift up my head, and I
have not respiration: because I have stirred up thy wrath, and have done evil
before thee: I have not done thy will, and thy commandmentes I have not kept: I
have set up abominations, and multiplied offenses. And now I bow the knee of
my heart, beseeching goodness of thee. I have sinned Lord, I have sinned, and I
acknowledge mine iniquities. Wherefore I beseech disiring thee, forgive me Lord,
forgive me: and destroy me not together with mine iniquities, neither reserve
thou for ever, being angry, evils for me, neither damme me into the lowest
places of the earth: because thou art God, God, I say, of the penitent: in me
thou shall show al thy goodness, because thou shall save me unworthy according
to thy great mercy, and I will praise thee always all the days of my life:
because all the power of the heavens prayseth thee, and to thee is glory for
ever and ever.

Amen.
THE THIRD BOOK OF ESDRAS.
For help of the readers, especially such as have not leisure to read al, we
have gathered the contents of the chapters; but made no Annotations: because
the text it self is but as a Commentary to the Canonical books; and therefore
we have only added the concordance of other Scriptures in the margin.

CHAP. I. Josias king of Judah makes a great Pasch, 7. giving many hosts to
such as wanted for sacrifice: 14. the Priests and Levites performing their
functions therein: 22. in the eightenth year of his reign. 25. He is slain in
battle by the king of Egypt, 32. and much lamented by the Jews. 34. His son
Ieconias succedeth. 37. After him Ioacim, 40. who is deposed by the king of
Babylon. 43. Ioachin reigns three months, and is carried into Babylon. 46.
Sedecias reigns eleven years wickedly. 52. and he with his people is carried
captive into Babylon, the city and temple are destroyed. 57. so remained til
the Monarchy of the Persians.
AND Josias made a Pasch in Jerusalem to our Lord 4. Reg. 23. v. 21. 2. Paral.
35. v. 1.
and immolated the Phase the fourtenth moon of the month: appointing the
Priests by courses of tribes, according to the writing of David king of
Israel, and Exo. 12. Leuit. 23. Number. 28.
which was given to Moses. And Josias gave unto the people and the things
concerning him are written in the ancient times, 4. Reg. 23. v. 29. 2. Paral.
35. v. 20.
upon Israel. And after all this fact of Josias, came up Pharao 4. Reg. 23. v.
30. 2. Par. 36. v. 1.
taking Iechonias the son of Josias, made him king for Josias his father,
when he was three and twenty years old. And he of the kings. And Ioachin his
son reigned for him. And 4. Reg. 24. v. 1. v. 17.
sending, transported him into Babylon together with the sacred vessels of our
Lord. And he made Sedecias king of Judah and Iere. 37. v. 2.
the prophet from the mouth of our Lord: and being sworn Iere. 25. v. 12. and
29. v. 10. Dan. 9. v. 2.
Babylon. And they were his servants until the Persians reigned

CHAP. II. Cyrus king of Persia permits the Jews to return into their
country: 10. and delivers to them the holy vessels, which Nabuchodonosor
had taken from the temple. 16. Certain adversaries writing to king Artaxerxes,
hinder those that would repair the ruins of Jerusalem.
CYRUS king of the Persians reigning for the accomplishment 2. Paral. 36. v.
22. 2. Esd. 1. v. 1. and 6. v. 3. Iere. 26. v. 12. and 29. v. 10. Dan. 9. v. 2.
of the word of our Lord by the mouth of Jeremy, our Lord raised up the spirit
of Cyrus king of the Persians, 1. Esd. 4. v. 7.
times of Artaxerxes king of the Persians, there wrote to him of them that
dwelt in Jury and Jerusalem, Balsamus, and Mithridatus, and Sabellius, and
Rathimus, Balthemus, Sabellius scribe, and the rest dweling in Samaria, and
other places the epistle following to king Artaxerxes. SIR, thy servants
Rathimus over this city, and the walls shall be finished, they will not only
not abide to pay tributes, but also will resist the kings. And because

CHAP. III. After a solemn supper made to all the court, and chief princes,
king Darius sleeping: 4. three esquires of the body keeping watch, proposed
the question: 10. Whether wine, or a King, or women, or the truth does excel?
17. The first prayseth wine.
KING Darius made a great supper to al his domestical servants, under him from
India unto Aethiopia, an hundred twenty seven provinces. And when they had
eaten and drunken,

CHAP. IIII. The second prayseth the excellency of a king: 13. The third
(which is Zorobabel) commends women: 33. but prefers truth above al 41.
which is so approved, and he is rewarded. 42. The king moreover at his request
restores the holy vessels of the temple, and grants means to build the
city of Jerusalem, and the temple.
AND the next began to speak, he that spoke of the strength himself to a
woman. And with a woman he refreshes his soul: more, then the things that are
written, and I will give it thee, according as thou art found wiser then thy
neighbors, and thou shall sit next to me, and shall be called my cousin. Then
said he have given me wisdom, and I will confess to thee Lord God of our
fathers. And he took the letters, and went into Babylon.

CHAP. V. Those that returned from captivity of Babylon into Jerusalem, and
Jury, are recited. 47. They restore Gods service: 66. but are hindered from
building.
AFTER these things there were chosen, to go up the 1. Esd. 2. v. 1.
princes of towns by their houses, and tribes, and their wives, and their
sons and daughters, and their men servants and women servants, and their
cattle. And Darius the king 1. Esd. 2. v. 2. 2. Esd. 7. v. 6.
of the transmigration, whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon transported
into Babylon, and returned into Jerusalem. And every one sought a part of
Jury according to his Archad, four hundred twenty seven: the children of
Cham, the children of An, the children of Radin, the children of Desanon,
according to their power: and to be given into the temple to 1. Esd. 3. v. 1.
of Israel were every man in his own affairs, they came together with one
mind into the court, that was before the east gate. And Jesus the son of
Iosedec, and his brethren the together praising our Lord, and blessing him
according to David king of Israel. And they song a song to our Lord, because
his 1. Esd. 4. v. 2.
you: For we have in like manner heard your Lord, and we walk

CHAP. VI. The Jews by assistance of king Darius build up the Temple in
Jerusalem.
AND in the second year of the reign of Darius prophesied 1. Esd. 5. v. 1.
Aggeus, and Zacharias the son of Addo the prophet to Jury and Jerusalem in
the name of God of Israel upon them. Then Zorobabel the son of Salathiel
standing up, and Jesus commandment, build ye this house, and this roof, and
perfect al other things? And who are the workmen that build these things? And
the ancientes of the Jews, which were left of Babylon: and if it shall be
found, that the building of the house 1. Esd. 6. v. 1.
search to be made in the libraries: and there was found in Ecbatana a town
that is in the country of Media, one place wherein were written these words: IN
THE FIRST YEAR of the

CHAP. VII. The house of God is finished, 7. and dedicated, 10. the feast of
Pasch is also celebrated seven days with Azimes.
THEN Sisennes the deputy of Coelesyria, and Phaenice, and 1. Esd. 6. v. 13.
Satrabuzames, and their fellows, obeying those things which were decreed of
Darius the king, applied the sacred

CHAP. VIII. Esdras going from Babylon to Jerusalem, 9. carries king Artaxerxes
favorable letters. 14. not. license to tak^ gold, silver, and al things
necessary at their pleasure. 31. The chief m^n that go with him are recited.
51. He voweth a fast praying for good success in their journey. 56. weighs
the gold and silver, which he delivers to the Priests, and Levites. 69. And
severely admonishes the people to repentance, for their marriages made with
infideles.
AND after him when Artaxerxes king of the Persians reigned, 1. Esd. 7. v. 1.
came Esdras the son of Azarias, the son of Helcias the son of Salome,
the son of Sadoc, the son of Achitob, And al things whatsoever thou with
thy brethren wilt do 1. Esd. 8. v. 1.
are the princes according to their kindredes, and several principalities of
them that came up from Babylon the kingdom of Artaxerxes. Of the children of
Phares, Gersomus: and of the and with him two hundred fifty men: of the
children of Sala, of their brethren ten men. And I weyed to them the gold and
1. Esd. 9. v. 1.
rulers came to me, saying: The stock of Israel, and the princes, and the
Priests, and the Levites, and the strange people, and tearing the hears of my
head, and my beard, I sat sorrowful and heavy. And there assembled to me
mourning upon this iniquity, adoration confessed weeping, lying flat on the
ground before the 1. Esd. 10. v. 1.
temple, there were gathered before him out of Jerusalem a very great
multitude, men and women, and young men and youg women. For there was great
weeping in the multitude it self. And

CHAP. IX. Esdras fasting for the sins of the people, commands that they
separate al strange women from them. 18. The Priests and Levites, which had
offended herein, are recited. 38. He reads the law before the people: 48.
certain do expound to the multitudes in several places. 52. And so they are
dismissed with joy.
AND Esdras rising up from before the court of the temple, 1. Esd. 10. v. 6.
went into the chamber of Ionathas the son of Nasabi. And lodging there he
tasted no bread, nor drank water for loud voice: As thou have said, we will
do. But because the and Manasses, and Semei. And of the sons of Banni:
Ieremias, the Levites denounced openly to al, saying: This day is holy, be not
sad. And they went al to eat, and drink, and make merry,

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF ESDRAS.
CHAP. I. Esdras is sent to expostulate with the vngratful Jews for neglecting
Gods many great benefits.
THE second book of Esdras the prophet, the son 1. Esd. 7. v. 1.
the son of Sadanias, the son of Sadoch, the son of Achitob, the son of
Achias, the son Exodus 14.
servants, and al his host. Al nations did I destroy before their and Sidon,
and I slew al their adversaries. But speak thou to Exo. 13.
gave you light by the pillar of fire, and did many marvelous things among
you: but you have forgotten me, says our Lord. Thus Exo. 16.
you a camp for defense, and there you murmured: And you Nem. 14.
were hungry in the desert, saying: Why have thou brought us Exodus 16. Number. 20.
Sap. 16. v. 20.* Isa. 9. v. 4.
and gave you manna to eat. You did eat bread of Angels* When you thirsted
did not I cleave the rock, and waters flowed Exo. 15. v. 25.
Amorrheites, and blaspheming my name, I gave you not fire Exo. 32.
obey o Judah. I will transfer my self to other nations, and will give them my
name, that they may keep my ordinances. Because Isa. 1. v. 15.
you have forsaken me, I also forsake you: when you ask mercy of me, I will
not have mercy. When you shall invoke Mat. 23. v. 37. Isa. 66. v. 5.
When you shall bring me oblation, I will turn away my face blood I will require,
says our Lord. Thus says our Lord omnipotent, Malach. 3. v. 1.
who also is called the Angel of our Lord.

CHAP. II. The Synagogue expostulateth with her children for their ingratitude;
10. showing that they shall be forsaken, and the gentiles called.
THVS says our Lord: I brought this people out of bondage, Genesis 19. v. 2.
Gomorrha: whose land lies in cloddes of pitch, and heaps of to Israel. And I
will take to me the glory of them, and will give Exodus 15. v. 27.
having the rose and the lilie, in the which I will fill thy children with joy.
Justify thou the widow, judge for the pupil, give Tobie. 1. v. 12.
seat in my resurrection. Pause and rest my people, because commandment of
our Lord. And therefore, I say unto you Apol 7. v 9.
praise our Lord with songs. And in the mids of them was

CHAP. III. The works of God are wonderful from the beginning, 7. and men
vngratful 13. In Abraham God chose to himself a peculiar people: who
nevertheless were froward, and obstinate. 23. He also chose David, but still the
people were sinful: 28. the Babylonians also, by whom they are afflicted, are
no less but rather greater sinners.
IN the thirteth year of the ruin of the city I was in Babylon, Genesis 1.
from the beginning, when thou did plant the earth, and that alone, and did
rule over the people, and gave Adam a dead Genesis 2. v. 7.
body: but that also was the work of thy hands, and did breath into him
the spirit of life, and he was made to live before thee: and thou broughst him
into paradise, which thy right hand had Genesis 7.
inhabitants of the world, and did destroy them. And there Genesis 12.
him and to him on lie thou did show thy will. And thou did Exo. 19.
thou did bring forth his sede out of Egypt, thou broughst it upon mount
Sinai. And thou did bow the heavens, and forth fruit in them. For Adam the
first bearing a vi^ious Iere. 12.
she rule over Sion? It came to pass when I was come hither,

CHAP. IIII. Man's wit and reason is not able to understand the counsel and
judgment of God, 22. why his people are afflicted by wicked nations, 33. nor
of times, and things to come.
AND the Angel answered me, that was sent to me, whose thee three similitudes.
Of the which if thou shall declare to me Iud. 9. 2. Par. 25.
forward to a wood of trees in the filde, and they devised a devise, and said:
Come and let us go, and make watre against the sea, of the heavens. And I
answered, and said: I beseech thee Lord, months, her womb can yet hold the
infant within it? And I

CHAP. V. Diverse signs of things to come are showed to Esdras by an Angel:
16. for the comforth of the people in captivity.
BUT concerning signs: behold the days shall come, wherein Math. 24.
which thy self see, and above that which thou have heard in time past. And
they shall put their foot into the country which now fowls shall make their
flight away. and the sea of Sodom shall cast thee one people: and a law approved
of al thou have given to this people, whom thou did desire. And now Lord, why
quicken the creature created by thee at once, and the creature sustained it: it
may now also bear them present at once. And he

CHAP. VI. God knowing al things before they were made, created them 54. for
man: and considers the ends of al.
AND he said to me: In the beginning of the earthly world, Prouer. 8.
congregation of the winds did blow, and before the voices and not by any
other: and the end by me, and not by any other. And I answered, and said: What
separation of times shall there be turned into an other sense. For evil shall be
put out, and deceit should be made. And in the fifth day: thou saydst to the
seventh

CHAP. VII. Without tribulations no man can attain immortal life: 17. which
the just shall inherit: and the wicked shall perish. 28. Christ will come, and
dye for mankind. 36. Prayers of the just shall profit til the end of this word,
but not after the general judgment. 48. Al sinned in Adam. 52. and have added
more sins, 57. but it is in man's power, 62. by Gods grace, to live eternally.
AND it came to pass when I had ended to speak these that it might be deep
and wide: but the entrance to it shall be Deuteronomy. 8.
and said: Lord dominatour: behold thou have disposed by thy law that the just
shall inherit these things, and the impious shall perish. But the just shall
suffer the streites, hoping for the time shall come, and it shall be when the
signs shall come, which I have fore told thee, and the bride shall appear, and
appearing she shall be showed that now is hid with the earth: and every Genesis
18. Exodus 32.
prayed for the Sodomites, and Moses for the fathers 2. Reg 24. v. 1^. 2.
P^r^i. 6. v. 1^. 3. Reg. 17. and 18. 4. Reg. 19. v. 15.
the destruction, and Solomon for them that came unto the sanctification. And
Elias for them that received rain, and for the O what have thou done Adam? For
if thou did sin, it was not Romans 5. v. 2.
made thy fall only, but ours also which came of thee. For what Deuteronomy. 30. v. 19.
he lived, to the people, saying: Choose unto thee life, that thou may live.
But they believed him not, no nor the Prophets

CHAP. VIII. God is merciful in this world, yet few are saved. 6. Gods works,
and disposition of his creatures are marvelous. 15 Esdras prays for the
people of Israel: 37. and salvation is promised to the just, and punishment
threatened to the wicked.
AND he answered me, and said* This world the Highest made Mat. 20. v. 16.
are created, but few shall be saved. And I answered, and said: Therefore will I
begin to pray before thee for me, and for them: 2. Reg. 8. v. 46. 2. Paral 6.
v. 36.
has not done impiously, and of them that confess, which have not sinned. For
in this shall thy justice be declared, and thy rejoice upon the creature of the
just, and I will remember their pilgrimage also, and salvation, and receiving of
reward. Therefore Mat 13. and 20.
as I have spoken, so also it is. For as the husbandman Psalm. 13. and 52.
that there is no God: and that, knowing that they dye. For as to him that
prepared life. Wherefore my judgment now approaches.

CHAP. IX. Certain signs shall go before the day of judgment. 14. More shall
perish then be saved. 25. Prayer with other good works, are means to
salvation.
AND he answered me, and said; Measuring measure thou (...). 10.
that shall be saved: as a flood is multiplied above, more then the workman,
such also the work: and such as the husbandman, such is the husbandry:
because it was the time of the world. And now when I was preparing for them,
for these Exodus 19. and 24. Deuteronomy. 4.
and unfruitful, when they came out of Egypt: and saying thou saydst: Thou
Israel hear me, and sede of Jacob attend to Exodus 32.
not keeping that which had been sown in them. And it: For the law has not
perished, but has remained Esai. 48.
in his labor. And when I spoke these things in my heart, I looked

CHAP. X. The state of Jerusalem is prefigured by a woman mourning, 25. and
afterward reioy^ing.
AND it came to pass, when my son was entered into his of so many things
that spring upon it. And of her were al And Behold, suddenly she put forth a
great sound of a to thee, that my son coming into the bryde chamber dyed,
and that a fall chanced unto him, this was the ruin of Jerusalem that is made.
And behold, thou have seen the similitude of

CHAP. XI. An eagle appears to Esdras coming forth of the sea, with three
heads, and twelve wings: sometimes one reigning in the world, sometimes an
other, but every one vanishes away. 36. A lion also appears coming forth of
the woe(...) suppress the eagle.
AND I saw a dream, and behold an eagle came up out of the creature that is
upon the earth. And I saw, and behold the eagle with much labor, and he that
held the dominion of the whole world above all the wings that were. And I saw
after these

CHAP. XII. The eagle vanishes away, 5. Esdras prays, 10. and the former
visions are declared to him.
AND it came to pass, whiles the lion spoke these words to in that, that thou
searchest the ways of the Highest. Behold ^^^* 7. v. 7.
it was not interpreted to him, therefore I do now interpret it to thee. Behold
the days come, and there shall rise a kingdom his bed, and yet with torments.
For the two that shall remain, you in tentation. For I have not forsaken you,
neither did I

CHAP. XIII. A vision of a wind (as it first seemed, but) in deed, v. 3. of a
man: 5. strong against the enemies: 21. with the interpretation.
AND it came to pass after seven days, and I dreamed a and there came to him
the countenance of many men some Mat. 24. Luc. 21.
an other: one city an other city, one place an other place, and nation
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. And it other: and an innumerable
multitude shall be gathered in one, 4. Reg. 17.
whom Salmanasar the King of the Assyrians led captive: and he transported them
beyond the river, and they were transported into an other land. But they gave
themselves this counsel, to Exodus ^4. Iosue. 3.
stayed the veins of the river til they passed. For by that country thou have
called mother: and for this I have showed thee riches

CHAP. XIIII. God appears in a bush, 6. revealing some things to be
published, and some things to be hid. 10. As the world waxes old, al things
become worse. 27. The people of Israel are vngratful. 32. Al shall be judged in
the Resurrection according to their deeds.
AND it came to pass the third day, and I sat under an oak. Exodus 3.
reveled upon the bush, and spoke to Moses, when the people served in Egypt,
and I sent him, and brought my people out Man 24. 1. Joan. 2.
now, worse then these will they do again: for look how self farther of, and
lying has approached, for now the vision which thou saw, hasteneth to come.
And I answered, and Genesis 47. D^pt. 4. (...).
were delivered from thence. And they received the law of life, (...) ^.
And I opened my mouth, and behold a full cup was brought

CHAP. XV. Esdras is bid to denounce, that assuredly many euiles will come to
the world. 9. God will protect his people, the wicked shall be punished, and
lament their final miseries, God revenging for the good.
BEHOLD speak into the ears of my people the words of Apo^ 6 v. 10. and 19.
v. 2.
our Lord, and I will take al innocent blood out of them unto me. Behold my
people is led to staughter as a flock, I will no more shall mourn, and the
fundations thereof beaten with plague, and with the chastisement which God will
bring upon it. The Mat. 24. Luc. 21.
nation to fight, and sword in their hands. For there shall be instabilitie And
from the territory of the Assirians the besiegers shall beseige Apoc. 18.
They shall come together against her, and shall compass her, not receive thee.
Will I be zealous against thee says our Lord,

CHAP. XVI. Al are admonished, that extreme calamities shall fall upon this
world, 36. the penitent returning to justice shall escape, 55. and as al things
were made by Gods omnipotent power at his will, so al things shall serve to the
reward of the blessed, and punishment of the wicked.
VVOE to thee Babylon and Asia, woe to thee Egypt, and before his face? The
earth has trembled, and the fundations because no man shall pass by it.
Virgins shall mourn having Eccli. 23. Luc* 16. Genesis 1.
and their cogitations, and their hearts. For he said: Let was made. And by his
word the stars were made, and he knows Psalm. 146. v. 4. Job. 38.
the number of the stars. Who searches the depth and the

FINIS.
A table of the Epistles, taken forth of the old Testament, upon certain
festiual days. The other feasts, and all the sundays have their Epistles in
the new Testament. As is there noted.
In the feast of our Blessed Ladies Conception. Prou.8. v.22. to the v.36. S.
John Evangelist. Eccli. 15. v. 1. to v. 7. The Epiphanie. Isaioe, 60. v. 1. to
v. 7. Candlemasse day, Malach 3. v. 1. to v. 5. S. Thomas Aquinas. Sap. 7. v.
7. to. v. 15. The Annunciation of our B. Lady, Isaioe. 7. v. 11. to v. 16. S.
Mark. Ezechiel. 1. v. 5. to v. 14. S. Philippe and S. James. Sap. 5. v. 1. to.
v. 6. S John ante portam Latinam, the same. The Nativity of S. John Baptist.
Isa. 49. v. 1. to. v. 6. and v. 23. Visitation of our B. Lady. Cant. 2. v. 8.
to v. 15. The octaue of S. Peter and S. Paul. Eccli. 44. v. 10. to. v. 16. S.
Marie Magdalen. Cant. 3. v. 2. to. 6. and ca. 8. v. 6. to. 8. S. Anne, Proverb.
31. v. 10. to the end of the chap. The Assumption of our B. Lady. Eccli. 24.
v. 11. to. 21. Decollation of S. John Baptist. Iere. 1. v. 17. to the end. The
Nativity of our B. Lady. Proverb. 8. v. 22. to. 36. S. Matthew. Ezech. 1. v.
10. to. 15. S. Martin. Eccli. 44. v. 25. and ca. 45. v. 1. to. v. 9. S.
Cecilie. Eccli. 51. v. 13. to. 18. S. Catherin. Eccli. 51. v. 1. to. 13. In the
Anniuersarie of the dead. 2. Match. 12. v. 42. to the end of the chapter.
Deo Gratias.
AN HISTORICAL TABLE OF THE TIMES, SPECIAL PERSONS, MOST NOT ABLE THINGS, AND
CANONICAL BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
Anni mundi. Pattiarches. Especial points of the sacred history of Gods
Church ever visible. Schisms and infidelity. Canonical Scriptures. a The
first year and first week. Adam the first man, of whom al mankind is
propagated. a Creation of heaven and earth, and al things therein, in six
days. Genesis 1. Man last created was made lord of al corporal creatures of this
lower world, and placed in paradise. Genesis 2. For transgressing Gods commandment
Adam and Eve were cast out of paradise. But by Gods grace repenting had promise
of a Redemer. Genesis 3. Genesis conteyneth the history of the visible Church,
from the beginning of the world to the death of Joseph in the year of the
world. 2340. b 130. Seth borne. Cain the first borne became a husbandman, Abel
next borne, a shepherd. Genesis 4. God respecting Abels sacrifice, and not Cains,
Cain killed Abel. Genesis 4. c. 235. Enos borne. Seths children and other faithful
were called the sons of God to distinguish the true Church from the wicked
city begune by Cain. Genesis 6. Cain wentforth from the face of our Lord; begane
a new city opposite to the City of God. d. 325. Cainan In the days of Enos
begane public prayers of many assembling together (besides Sacrifice, which
was before) Genesis 4. v. 26. Genesis 4. v. 16. His generations in the right line to
Lamech, who slew him, are these, without notice of time when they were borne or
dyed: Enoch, Irad, Mauiael, Mathusael, Lamech. Genesis 4. v. 17. e 395. Malaleel f
460. Iared, g 622. Enoch, Mathusala. Lamech. Enoch a Prophet pleased God in all
his ways. None borne in the earth like to Enoch. Eccli. 49. v. 16. Some
declining from God, and marchi^g in marriage with Cains race begat those
monstrous men huge of stature, most wicked and cruel called giantes. h 687.
Noe bor. k Adam dyed at the age of 930. years. Genesis 5. v. 5. To whom Seth
succeeded chief Patriarch. And so in the rest. Genesis 6. v. 4. i 874. Sem bor. And
the next two years Cham, and Iaphet. l Enoch in the year of his age 365. was
seen no more: because God took him. Genesis 5. v. 24. Enoch was translated that
he should not see death. Heb. 11. v. 5. k 930. m Seth dyed in the year of his
age. 912. l 987. o Enos dyed anno aetatis; 905. m 1042. p Cainan dyed, an. aet.
980. n 1056. q Malaleel dyed, an. aet. 895. o 1140. r Iared dyed, an. aet. 962.
p 1265. s Noe the preacher of justice, forewarned al men that except they
repented, God would destroy them with a flood. And by Gods commandment built
an Arc (or ship) wherein himself, and his family, with other living
creatures, were preserved from drowning. q 1290. v Lamech dyed (before his
father) in the year of his age. 777. r 1422. w Mathusala dyed, an. aet 969.
immediately before the flood, as seems most probable. s 1536. t 1556. v 1651. w
1656 x 1656. x The same year of the world, 1656. the 17. day of the second
month Noe with his three sons his wife, and their wives, in all eight
persons, and seven payres of every kind of clean living creatures, and two
payres of unclean entered into the Arc. And presently it rayned forty days
and nights together. Whereby al living creatures on the earth out of the arc
were drowned. Genesis 7. Al Cains race, with other wicked infideles were utterly
destroyed, by the flould. Genesis 7.

THE END OF THE FIRST AGE, AND BEGINNING OF THE SECOND.
y 1658. Arphaxad borne the son of Sem. The whole earth being covered with
water, Noe with his family, and other living creatures remained in the arc
twelve months and ten days ( a just year of the sun) then coming forth
built an altar and offered sacrifice. Which God accepting blessed them for new
increase. Genesis 8. and 9. z 1693. Cainan. * c Heber consented not to the
building of Babel. And therefore his family kept still their former language,
which thenceforth for distinction sake, was called the Hebrew tongue. He lived
to see Abraham's father. And Noe, Sem, Arphaxad, Phaleg, and other most godly
men lived some part of Abraham's time, who was never corrupted in faith, nor
religion. a 1723. Sale, * Not affirming but supposing that Cainan was the son
of Arphaxad, we place him here: and Sale 30. years after. b 1753. Heber, c
1787. Phaleg. Nemrod the son of Chus, and nephew to Cham, about three score
years after the flood, by force and sutteltie drawing many folowers, begane a
new sect of infidels. And afterward was the principal auctor of building the
tower of Babel. Where the tongues of the builders were confounded, and so they
were separated into many nations, about 130. years after the flood. Genesis 10.
v. 25. After Nemrod his son Belus reigned in Babylon, about the year of the
world. 1871. which was 215. years after the flood. d 1817. Reu. e 1850. Sarug.
f 1879. Nachor, g 1908. Their, h 1979. Abraham borne. i By Gods commandment,
Abraham at the age 75. years having been much persecuted for religion, went
forth of his country Chaldea. Whereupon his father Their went as far as
Haran, in the confines of Mesopotamia. And Lot went further with him into
Chanaan. Which country God then promised to give him* and to multiply his
seed, and therein to bless al nations. Genesis 11. v. 31. and 12. v. 1. and 7.
And after him his son Ninus beginning to reign about the year 1936. set up
idolatry, causing his father to be honored as the great God, called Belus
Iuppiter: and his grandfather Nemrod, otherwise called Saturnus, or Sator
deorum, the father of gods. i 2054.

THE END OF THE SECOND AGE, AND BEGINNING OF THE THIRD.
k 2055. k By occasion of famine in Chanaan, Abraham went into Egypt with his
wife, and Lot. Genesis 12. v. 10. l 2056. l They returned into Chanaan, became
very rich: and God renewed his great promises to Abraham. Genesis 13. m Lot
[amongst others] being taken captive, Abraham with three hundred and eightene
men rescued them al. Whereupon Melchisedech offered sacrifice in bread and wine:
blessed Abraham, and received tithes of him. Genesis 14. n 2064. n Sara long
barren persuaded Abraham to take her handmaid Agar to wife. o Agar conceived
and brought forth a son, who was named Ismael. Genesis 16. o 2065. p
Circumcision was instituted, that Abraham, and his sons, and all the men of
his family might be distinguished from others. Genesis 17. Sodom and Gomortha
with other cities were burnt with brimstone. From whence Lot was delivered by
Angeles. Genesis 19. Ismael attempting to corrupt Isaac in manners (which S. Paul
calls persecution. Gal. 4.) was cast out of Abraha^s house together with his
mother. Gen, 21. v. 29. And nevertheless had twelve sons, al dukes before
Isaac had any issue, Which S. Paul notes. 1. Cor. 15. v. 46, First that is
natural, afterward that which is spiritual. p 2078. q Sara conceived and bare a
son called Isaac, Genesis 21. q 2079. Isaac, borne. r Abraham by Gods
commandment was ready to offer Isaac in sacrifice, but was stayed by an
Angel. And former promises were renewed. Genesis 22. r 2104. s After the death of
Sara, Abraham married Cetura, by whom he had six sons. Genesis 25. s 2116. t
Isaac married Rebecca the daughter of Bathuel, son of Nachor Abraham's brother.
Genesis 24. t 2119. Jacob and Esau. borne. w Abraham dyed at the age of 175.
years. Genesis 25. v 2139. w 2154. x 2216. x Isaac blessed Jacob thincking him to
be Esau. Gen 27. Esau also had much issue, and prospered in the world. But his
progeny, as also Ismaels, and al Abraham's of spring by his last wife Cetura
were excluded from the promised enheritance, and other blessings. Genesis 25. v.
5. and 6. and chapter 28. v. 4. and 14. y 2217. y Jacob going into Mesopotamia to
fly the danger of his brothers threats, saw in sleep a ladder reaching from
the earth to heaven. Ge. 28. And being there he served his uncle Laban seven
years for his younger daughter Rachael, received Lia the elder; and served
other seven for Rachael. And six more for certain fruict of the flocks. Genesis
29. and 30. Apis king of Argiues, of ^up piters race, going into Egypt, taught
the people to plant vines, and make wine, to plow with oxen, and to sow and
reapecorne, was made their king and after his death honored in the form of an
ox, for their great god. S. Aug. li. 18. c. 5. de ciuit. z 2224. Ruben.
Simeon. Leui Judas. Dan. [li. Nephtha Gad. Aser. Issachar. Zabulon. Joseph: b.
e Jacob returning from Mesopotamia wrestled with an Angel, and was called
Israel. Genesis 32. and 35. v. 10. a 2225. Benjamin. bor. f Rachael dyed, and was
buried in Bethleem. Genesis 35. v. 18. and 19. b 2226. g Joseph was sold, and
carried into Egypt; and shortly after cast into prison, where he interpreted
the dreams of two Eunuchs. Genesis 37. 39. and 40. c 2227. h Isaac dyed, at the
age of 180. years. d 2230. i Joseph interpreting king Pharao his dreams, and
giving wise counsel to provide for the scarsitie to come, was made ruler of
Egypt. He then married, and had two sons Manasses, and Ephraim in the seven
years of plenty. Genesis 41. k Jacob sent his ten sons into Egypt to bye
corn. Where they were threatened as suspected spies, and one was kept in
prison, til they should bring their brother Benjamin. Genesis 42. e 2236. f 2246.
g 2247. h 2259. i 2260. Caath. Phares. l They returning into Egypt with
Benjamin in their company, Joseph first terrified them, afterward manifested
himself unto them. And sending for his father and whole kindred, they al went
into Egypt. Genesis 43. 44. 45. and 46. As people increased, so idolatry was
multiplied, and innumerable gods feaned and served with supersticious rites
in all heathen nations. Amongst which first the Assirians, and at last the
Romans held the principality, others in respect of them were of less power,
or of shorter time, and as it were dependentes of them: as S. Augustine
observes. li. 18. c. 2. de ^^uit. l 2269. m Jacob blessed and adopted the two
sons of Joseph, preferring Ephraim the younger before Manasses. Genesis 48.
prophesied of al his twelve sons; and in Judas of Christ. Genesis 49. v. 10. And
then dyed. Job either of the progeny of Nachor, or as seems more probable of
Esau, lived the same time; in which the children of Israel were pressed with
servitude in Egypt. Himself writ the history of his affliction in the
Arabian tongue which Moses translated into Hebrew. m 2286. Amra^. Esron. n
Joseph buried his father in Chanaan, and nourished his brethren with their
families, as their patron and superior. Genesis 50. v. 18. o 2340. o He dyed at
the age of 110. years. Genesis 50. After his death the Superiority of the
children of Israel descended not to his sons, but to his brethren and rested
in Leui the third brother living longest of all the twelve, to the age of 137.
years. Exodi. 6. v. 16. whose genealogy is there declared to show the descent
of Aaron and Moses. About this time was Atlas the great Astronomer brother of
Prometheus, grandfather to Mercurius the elder, whose nephew Mercurius,
otherwise called Tris megistus, the master of moral philosophy must needs be a
good while after Moses. S. Aug. li. 18. c. 39. de ciuit. Also Cecrops the
first king and builder of Athens, was in Moses time, after him Cadmus built
Thebes, and the first that brought letters into Greece, more ancient then many
Pammes gods S. Aug. li. 18. c. 8. etc. The book of Exodus conteyneth the
affliction and delivery of the children of Israel, and precepts of Gods law. p
2401. Aaron. borne. Aram. r Moses an infant of three months was put in a
basket on the water, and taken thence by Pharaos daughter, nurced by his own
mother, and brought up in Pharaos court. Exodus 2. q 2404. Moses borne. s At
the age of forty years he went to his brethren to comfort them. Where
killing an Egyptian that oppressed an Israelite, he was forced to flee into
Madian Exodus 2. s 2244. t After other forty years God appeared to Moses in
a bush burning and not wasting. Sent him into Egypt with power to work
miracles, and to bring the children of Israel out of that bondage. t 2484.
Aminadab. v Pharao and the Egyptians resisting were plaged with ten sundry
afflictions. At last the Israelites were delivered, and Pharao with all his
army drowned. Exo. 3. to. 15.

THE END OF THE THIRD AGE.

THE BEGINNING OF THE FOVRTH AGE.
Anni. mu^di. Highpriests. The line of Judas. The sacred history. Schisms and
infidelity. Scriptures. w The law was given in Mount Sina the fifteth day
after their going out of Egypt. Exodus 19. 20. In the absence of Moses the
people forcing Aaron to consent, made and adored a golden calfe for God. Exodus
32. x 2485. x The tabernacle, with all things perteyning thereto, was prepared
in the first year, and erected the first day of the second year of their
abode in the desert. Exodus 40. Aaron. y In the same second year Aaron was
consecrated Highpriest, and his sons Priests, for an ordinary succession:
Moses remaining Superior extraordinary during his life. Leuit. 8. Nadab and
Abiu offered strange fire in sacrifice and were burnt to death. Leuit. 10.
Leuiticus conteyneth the Rites of Sacrifices, Priests, Feasts, Fastes, and
Vows. Numeri, so called because in it are numbered the men of twelve tribes
able to bear arms, also the Levites deputed to Gods service about the
tabernacle, and the mansions of the people in the desert with other things
happening in the 40. years of their abode there z Balaam a sorcerer hired by
Balac king of Moab to curse the Israelites, was forced by Gods power to
prophecy good things of them. Number. 22. 23. 24. Chore, Dathan, and Abiron with
many others murmuring and rebelli^g against Moses and Aaron were partly
swalowed alive into the earth others burnt with fire from heaven. Number. 16. a
Moses and Aaron doubting that God would not give water out of a rock to the
murmuring people, were foretold that they should dye in the desert, and not
enter into the promised land. Number. 20. b 2523. Eleazar b Aaron dyed in the
mount Hor, and his son Eleazar was made Highpriest. Number. 20. c 2524. c Moses
repeted the law, commending it earnestly to the people. Then dyed, and was
secretly buried by Angels in the valley of Moab. Deuteronomy. 34. To whom Iosue
succeeded in temporal government his spiritual remaining in the Highpriest Nu.
27. v 20. d All the children of Israel that came forth of Egypt above the age
of twenty years dyed in the desert except two, Iosue and Caleb. Number. 26. v.
64. 65. Al nations generally besides the Jews, serving many false gods,
those thought themselves most religious that were most supersticious, and
studious of art Magike, Nigromancy and the like. And every country yea almost
every town and village had their peculiar imagined gods, as S. Athanasius
discourses, Orat. contra idola. Deuteronomie is an abridgement and repetition
of the law, contained more largely in the former books. e Presently after
Moses death Iosue brought the people over Jordan into Chanaan Iosue. ^. And in
the space of seven years conquered the land. Iosue. 6. etc. f 2531, f And
divided the same amongst the tribes. Iosue. 13. g 2533. g The tribes of Ruben
Gad and half Manasses having received enheritance on the other side of Jordan,
Number. 32. v. 33. and now returning thither made an altar by the river side,
which the other tribes suspecting to be for sacrifice, and so to make a
schism, prepared to fight against them: but they answering that it was only
for a monument; al were satisfied, Iosue 22. The book of Iosue, is the first
of those which are properly called Historical, declaring how the Israelits
conquered and possessed the land of Chanaan, it conteyneth the history of 32.
years. Naasson. The Romans otherwise most prudent accounted al inuenters of
arts, conqueroures of countries, and al archiuers of great explores at least
after their deaths to be gods. And not only men, but also many other
things were held for gods. h 2556. h Iosue at the age of 110. years dyed.
Iosue. 24. v. 29. and had no proper successor. i 2556. i Eleazarus the
Highpriest dyed the same year, Iosue. 24. v. 33. And his son Phinees
succeeded. Phinees. k After the death of Iosue the people were afflicted by
foreign nations, God so permitting for their sins, but repenting he raised
up certain captains, who were called Judges, of diverse tribes without
ordinary succession, to deliver and defend the country from invasions. These
were in all fourtenne in the space of nere 300. years. l 2564. l Othoniel the
first Judge, of the tribe of Judah, delivered the Israelites from molestation of
the king of Syria. He governed (comprehending also the intermission) forty
years, Iudic. 3. v. 11. Neither did it suffice their phancies to commend
themselves and their goods to the protection of few gods but diverse things:
yea and the same things according to diverse state to diverse gods, and
goddesses. As S. Augustine notes. li. 4. c. 8. de ciuit. that they thought it
not sufficient to commend their lands and possessions to one god, or goddess,
but the fields to one, mountains to an other, little hills to an other,
valleys, or meadows to an other. Likewise their corn not al to one, but the
sede newly sown to one, beginning to brewerd to an other, when it rises and
begins to have knottes to an other, when it bladeth to an other, when the
ear springs to an other, when it is ripe ready to be reaped to an other.
And so without end more and more vain gods were imagined by the devils
suggestion, The book of Judges shows the state of the people of God the
space of nere three hundred years after the death of Iosue, when they had
sometimes temporal gouerners of diverse tribes, some times none. m 2588. m Aod
of the tribe of Benjamin the second Judge, killed Eglon king of Moab, and so
delivered Israel, and slew ten thousand Moabites. Iud. 3. v. 20. 29. n Samgar
a husbandman the third Judge, killing six hundred Philisthimes with the culter
of a plough defended Israel. Iudic. 3. v. 31. He with Aod, and the times,
wanting judges, governed seventy five years. o 2663. o Barach by direction of
Debora a prophetess, fighting against Sisara, chief captain, of Iabin king
of Asor, Iahil a stout woman slew the same captain, striking a nail in his
head, Iud. 4. They governed 38. years. Abisue. Salmon. p Gedeon confirmed by
miracles that he was sent of God ouertherw the Madianites, and delivered
Israel, governing forty years. Iudic. 6. 7. 8. p 2701. q Abimelech the base
son of Gedeon unjustly usurping authority, killed his seventy brethren one
only escaping, but within three years was hated of his folowers, and slain by
a woman. Iud 9. q 2741. r Thola defended the country from invasion of enemies
three years. Iud. 10. r 2744. s Iair a potent noble man defended the people
twenty two years. Iud. 10. v. 3. s 2767. Bocci. t Iepte first rejected but
afterward entreated by the ancientes of the people, fought for them and
overthrew the enemies. And upon an indiscreet vow offered his daughter in
sacrifice. Iud. 11. t 2789. Booz. who so deluding men brought them to eternal
ruin. v He killed in civil war forty two thousand Ephraimites, and
governed six years. Iud. 12. w 2795. w Abesan a fortunate good man ruled in
peace seven years. Iudic. 12. v. 9. About this time Booz of the tribe of Judah
married Ruth a Moabite: by whom the right line of Judas descended by Phares to
David. Ruth. 4. v. 18. etc. The people in this time of peace fell again to
idolatry. For which God suffered the Philistimes to afflict them. Iud. 13. The
tribe of Dan, set up idolatry, Iud. 18. x 2802. x Ahialon governed likewise in
peace ten years. Iud. 12. v. 11. A heinous crime being committed in the
tribe of Benjamin and not punished, the other Israelites made battle against
them and being themselves also great sinners lost many men in two conflictes,
but in the third the tribe of Benjamin was almost destroyed. Iud. 19. v. 20.
The book of Ruth amongst other mysteries shows the genealogy of David, of
whose sede Christ was borne. y 2812. Obed. y Abdon an other nobleman governed
eight years Iud. 12. v. 13. z 2820. Ozi. z Samson from his birth a Nazareite
of admirable streingth did many heroical acts, killed many Philistimes in
his life, and more by his own death. He governed twenty years. Iud. 13. v.
5. etc. chapter 16. v. 31. a 2840. Hei, otherwise Zaraias. a Heli of the stock of
Aaron by the line of Ithamar was High priest and governed Israel forty
years. 1. Reg. 4. v. 18. Isai, or Iesse. b Samuel (whose mother being long
barren had presented him an infant in the temple, according to her vow) was a
Nazareire and a prophet from a child. 1. The four books of kings show the
state of the Church from the b 2880. first kings of Gods people to their
captivity. And the two books of Paralipomenon do repete briefly some things
written before, partly add things omitted in other books Maraioth. David b.
Reg. 1. and 3. And after the death of Heli, governed the people of Israel
before Saul twenty years. And with him twenty years more. About the year
of the world. 2830. Troy was taken and destroyed by the Grecians. In which
battle were Agamemnon, Ulysses, Achilles, Nestor, and many others not in deed
so renowned for any virtues or factes of their own, as Homer, Horace, Vi^gil,
Onid, and others by poetical liberty and flattery set them forth. But most
folly appears in that the city of Rome was afterward commended to those
gods, which were taken in Troy, not able to defend them selves from invasion
and spoil. S. Aug. li. 1. c. 3. ciuit. The psalms written by David, a
summarie of al holy Scriptures. c 2900. Achimelech or Amarias. David king. c
By the importunity of the people to have a king, God appointed Samuel to
anoint Saul. 1. Reg. 10. who at first governed well, but afterward declining
from God was deposed, and David anointed by the same prophet Samuel. 1. Reg.
16. Yet Saul was not actually deprived of the scepter so long as he lived. 1.
Reg. 31. d 2920. Abiathar, or Achitob. Solomon. d David king and prophet^^. led
his kingdom as a right parterne of al good kings: made the book of Psalms
full of al divine knowledge, prepared means for building the temple, ordained
diverse sorts of musicians, and reigned forty years. 2. Reg. totus. 2. Par.
23 etc. e 2960. Sadoc. e Solomon excelling in wisdom, prospered in this world.
3. Reg. 3. etc. f 2964. f He built the temple and adorned the same with all
excellent furniture requisite for Gods service: disposing al in order, as David
had ordained.

THE END OF THE FOVRTH AGE.

THE BEGINNING OF THE FIFTH AGE.
Annimu^di. Highpriests. kings of luda. The sacred History. Schisms and
infidelity. Scriptures. g 2972. g The temple being finished in seven years,
was the^ dedicated most solemnly, with exceeding devotion of the king, and all the people with abundance of sacrifices And afterward the same king Solomon
writ three sapiential books. The Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and the Ca^^icle of
Canticles. But in his old age fell from God, and it is uncertain whether he
dyed penitent or no. He reigned forty years. 3. Reg. 11. Jeroboam the first
king of the ten tribes made a wicked schism, setting up two golden calves in
Beth^l and Dan: which most of the people served as their gods. h 3000.
Achimaas. Roboam. h King Roboam leaving the advice of ancientes and following
young counselers, ^ffended the people: and ^s servant Jeroboam was made king of
ten tribes: only Judah and Ben^amin remaining to him. He reigned seuentene
years. 3. Reg. 14. v. 21. He re^^ned 22. years. 3. Reg. 12 After him were
these kings of diverse families of the same ten tribes. The Proverbs.
Ecclesi^st s. Canticle of Canticles. i 3017. Abias. i His son Abias reigned
wickedly three years. 3. Reg. 15. v. 2. Nadab son of Jeroboam reigned two
years 3. Reg. 14. Basa of the tribe of Issachar reigned 24 years. 3. Reg. 15.
Ela two years. 3. Reg. 16. k 3020. Azarias Asa. k Asa a good king destroyed
idolatry, and reigned 41. years. 3. Reg. 15. v. 10. Zambri but seven days.
3. Reg. 16. v. 15. Amri* 12. years whereof The bni reigned in civil war
against him three years. v. 22. Achab married Iezabel a Sidonian, and served
Baal, reigning 21. years. 3. Reg. 10. etc. l 3061. Iosaphat. l Iosaphat
governed the kingdom well 25. years, 3. Reg. 22. v. 42. and 43. saving that he
joined affinity with Achab king of Israel, and with Iezabel. 2. Paral. 18. v.
1. Iohanam. m 3086. Ioram. m Ioram reigned wickedly eight years. 4. Reg. 8. v.
17. and 18. 2. Paral. 21. v. 5. and 6. The three next are omitted by S. Matthew.
Ochozias reigned two years. 3. Reg. 22. v 52. Elias Elizeus and diverse other
Prophets preached, and did many miracles in the kingodm of Judah and Israel,
not writing any particular books. n 3094. Ioiada. * Ochozias. n By the evil
counsel of his mother Athalia, Ochozias governed wickedly one year, and was
slain by Iehu together with Ioram king of Israel. 4. Reg. 8. v. 27. and chapter 9.
v. 27. 2. Paral. 22. v 3. and 9. Ioram twelve years. 4. Reg. 3. Iehu killed
Ioram and Iezabel, destroying the whole house of Achab reigned 8. years. 4.
Reg. 9. and 10. o 3095. o Queen Athalia murdering the children of her own
son the late king, usurped the kingdom six years. 4. Reg. 11. v. 1. Ioachaz
reigned. 17. years. 4. Reg. 13. p 3101. * Ioas. p The youngest son of
Ochozias called Ioas being saved from the slaughter, was made king by means of
Ioiada Highpriest, and Athalia slain 4. Reg. 11. v. 4. Ioas reigned sixtene
years. 4. Reg. 13. v. 10. Jeroboam 41. years. 4. Reg. 14. v. 23. Zacharias.
He governed well during the life of Ioiada. But afterward fell to idolatry, and
caused Zacharias the Highpriest and son of Ioiada to be slain. 2. Paral. 24.
v. Zacharias reigned but six months. 4. Reg. 15. v. 8. Sadoc. or Ioathan. 22.
And shortly after the sameking was trecherously slain when he had reigned 41.
years. 4. Reg. 12. v. 20. and 2. Paral. 24. v. 25. Sellum but one month. 4.
Reg. 15. v. 15. q 3142. Sellum * Amasias. q Amasias beginning well did some good
things, 4. Manahem reigned 10. years. 4. Reg. 15. v. 17. Phaceia two years.
4. Reg. 15. v. 23. Helcias Reg. 14. v. 3. But after the spoil of the Idumeans
he worshipped their idols. 2. Paral. 25. v. 14. And reigned 29. years. ibidem.
Phacee reigned 20. years. 4. Reg. 15. v. 27. r 3171. Ozias, or Asarias. r
Ozias sometime reigned well, 4. Reg. 15. v. 3. but afterward presuming to offer
incense on the altar was repelled by the Highpriest, and presently strooken
with leprosy, and cast out of the temple and city. He lived after that he was
king. 52. years. 2. Par. 26. v. 16. Osee reigned nine years. 4. Reg. 17.
Azarias s Ioathan a godly king governed a great part of his fathers time, and
after his death sixtene years. 4. Reg. 15. 2. Par. 27. The kingdom of Israel
having stood above two hundred and fifetie years was subdued by the Assitians
and much people carried captive into Assyria. 4. Reg. 17. v. 6. In the days of
king Ozias was Isaias the Prophet. Likewise Osee: Joel: Amos: Abdias: and
Jonas. s 3223. Ioathan. t Achaz a wicked king, after many benefits received
from God, fell to idolatry, reigning sixtene years, destroyed holy things,
shut up the temple, and perverted many of the people, 4. Reg. 16. 2. Paral.
28. The Grecians every fourth year set forth enter Iudes in honor of
Iuppiter Olimpius, whereof begane the count of Olimpias, about the year of the
world 3247. Micheas prophesied in the reign of Ioathan: the former prophets
yet living. Vrias. v Ezechias a most godly king advanced true religion, which
was much decayed. He recovered health being mortally sick, which was confirmed
by miracle in the sun returning back: and made a Canticle of praise with
thanks to God, and reigned 29. years. 4. Reg. 18. 2. Paral. 29. 30. 31. 32.
And after six Olimpiades, that is, 24. years. Rome was built. t 3239. Achaz.
New inhabitants being sent from Assiria into Jury, mixed their paganism with
the Israelites religion, made many wicked, and detestable Sects. 4. Reg. 17.
v. 29. Nahum and Habacuc prophesied after the captivity of the ten tribes. v
3255. Ezechias. w 3284. Manasses w Manasses for his great sins was carried
captive into Babylon, where he repented and was restored to his kingdom: he
reigned and lived in captiuirie 55. years. 4. Reg. 21. ^. Par. 33. About this
time happened the history of To bie, who lived in all 102. years. Tob. 14. v.
2. x 3339. Amon. x Amon reigned evil two years. 4. Reg. 21. 2. Par. ^3.
Sophonias prophesied in the reign of Josias king of Judah. y 3341. Josias. y
Josias a very good king purged the Church of idolatry, repaired the temple,
celebrated a most solemn Pasch, was slain in battle by the king of Egypt,
(which all the people much lamented, especially Jeremy the prophet) when he had
reigned 31. years. 4. Reg. 22. 23. 2. Par. 34 35. In the time of Numa the
second king of the Romans, Pithagoras taught transmigratio^ of souls from one
body to an other. Jeremy also begane to prophecy being a child in the days
of Josias, and continued in the captivity of the two tribes. Baruch was his
Scribe and also a Prophet. z ^372. Ioachaz, or Iechonias. z Ioachaz otherwise
called Iechonias, reigning but three months was carried into Egypt (where
afterward he dyed 4. Reg. 23. v. 34.) and Eliakim, otherwise called Ioakim,
his brother was made king: Who in the third year of his reign was carried into
Babylon. 4. Reg. 23. v. 34. 2. Par. 36. v. 4. 5. and with him Daniel, and the
other three children. Dan. 1. Daniel begane to prophecy also very young in
Babylon, and continued after Zaraias Shortly after which time happened the
history of Susanna. Dan. 13. the relaxation from captivity. And the same
Ioakim after his reign of three years, lived other eight years in
captivity. 4. Reg. 24. v. 1. 2. Par. 36. v. 4. and 5. A certain captain
picking a quarrel apprehended Jeremy and by consent of principal men, cast him
into a dungeon the king not knowing thereof. 4. Reg. 25. Iere. 37. 38. Ezechiel
prophesied also in the captivity, in the country nere to Babylon. a 3383.
Ioachin, otherwise Iechonias. a Ioachin called also Iechonias, son of the
former Iechonias, or Ioachaz, reigned but three months and was carried into
Babylon and with him Ezechiel the Prophet and others. And his uncle Matthanias,
otherwise named Sedecias was made king who reigned eleven years. 4. Reg. 24.
2. Paral. 36. Ismael killed Godolias the governor, and others. 4. Reg. 25.
Iere. 41. b 3394. Iosedech. b In the eleventh year of Sedecias when king
Iechonias the younger was prisoner in Babylon, Jerusalem was taken, the Temple
destroyed, and the people carried captive into Babylon* 4 Reg. 25. 2. Paral. 36.
In the mean time Daniel was in singular great estimation both with the
faithful people, and Paganes, and was advanced to authority as also by his
means the other children, for which they were envied and persecuted but were
miraculously protected. Dan. 1. ad 7. and 13. 14. Many Jews fled into Egypt
and fell to idolatry, resisting and contemning Ieremies admonitions to the
contrary. Iere. 42. 43. 44.

THE END OF THE FIFTH AGE.

THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTH AGE.
Anni mu^di. Highpriests. The line of David. The sacred history. Schisms and
infidelity. Scriptures. c 3418. Jesus son of Iosedech. From the captivity,
the Jews had no kings: but the line of David continued in these persons from
Iechonias to Christ. c In the captivity by diligence of the prophets, many
Jews had great zele in true religion. And about the 24. year of the
captivity Assuerus otherwise called Astiages, made Esther Queen, and wicked
Aman seeking to destroy all the Jews in those parts, was himself hanged on the
gallows which he had prepared for Mardocheus. Esther. 7. etc. When the
Monarchy came to the Chaldees by the power of Nabuchodo nosor king of Babylon,
there was greatest confusion of many gods, and of al kinds of idolatry.
The history of Esther Mardocheus and Aman written in the book of Esther in
the captivity. d3420. Salathiel. d Euilmerodach delivered Iechonias (or
Ioachin) from prison, and enterteyned him as a prince. 4. Reg. 25. v. 27.
e3464. e Baltazar being slain, Darius king of Medes and Persians possessed
Babylon: and Cyrus succeding Darius, released the Jews from captivity, and
gave license to Zorobabel, and Jesus to reduce the people into Jury.
Zorobabel. 2. Paral. 36. v. 22. 1. Esd. 1. And great dissension among the more
learned Grecians. For the Pithagorians put their chief happiness, or Summum
bonum, in the immortality of the soul. The Stoiks in moral virtues. The
Achademikes conceived much of pure spirits, as Angels, but could affirm
nothing. The Peripatetikes placed the consummation of al, in the aggregation of
spiritual, corporal, and worldly prosperity. f3465. f The Jews being
returned into Jerusalem set up an altar and offered sacrifice. 1. Esd. 3. v.
2. Esdras write the relaxation of the Jews from captivity. And Nehemias the
reparation of Jerusalem. g3466. g The next year they begane to build the
temple. 1. Esd. 3. v. 8. h3469. Ioachin. h Attaxerxes (otherwise called
Cambyses, also Assuerus) forbade to perfect the temple. And Jesus the
Highpriest returned into Babylon. 1. Esd. 4. v. 7. Abiud. i3470. i Daniel
understood by vision that Christ should come within seventy wekes which make
490. years from the perfecting of the temple, and the walls of Jerusalem.
Dan. 9. v. 25. The schismatical Samaritanes opposed against the building of the
temple. 1. Esd. 4. k3490. Eliasib. k Aggeus and Zacharias the prophets exhorted
to build the temple. 1. Esd. 5. The Saduces acknowleging only the five books
of Moses rejected al other Scriptures, and denied the resurrection. Aggeus.
Zacharias. l3500. l Judith killed Holofernes, either about this time, or in the
days of Manasses before the captivity. Praefat. Judith. The Scribes expounded
holy Scriptures sophistically. Judith, either here, or before the captivity.
m3502. Eliacim. m The temple being perfected Malachias ( who is supposed to be
Esdras) exhorted to offer sacrifice with sincerity. Mal. 1. and 2. The
Pharisees were precise in the letter corrupting the sense, making large hemmes
of their garments, often washing themselves, and the like. Malachias. n3508. n
And Nehemias brought the kings Edict for the reparation of Jerusalem. 2. Esd.
2. o3509. o Esdras, Nehemlas and others labored in repayring Jerusalem, but
were often interrupted. 2. Esd. 3. p3530. Azor. p About this time the city was
well repaired with three walls. 2. Esd. 3. and 7. And so by the judgment of
some expositers, the count of seventy wekes begane, according to the prophecy
of Daniel. chapter 9. v. 26. Ioiada. q 3504. Jonathan. q Nehemias returning from
Persia (or Chaldea) into Jury found thick water, for the fire, which Jeremy
had hid in a deep cave. 2. Match. 1. v. 20. and 23. Iaddus. Sadoc. r Alexander
the great honored Iaddus the Highpriest. Joseph. li. 11. c. 8. Antiq. r 3644. s
Onias a most zealous godly Highpriest. 2. Match. 4. was persecuted by Simon a
church warden, slain by Andronicus a courtly minion, v. 34. And after his
death prayed for all the people. chapter 15. v. 12. s 3689. Onias. Achim. t Jesus
the son of Sirach writ the book of Ecclesiasticus in the time of this
Simon Highpriest, as seems chapter 50. v. 24. and 25. Simon. Priscus. v The
seventy two Interpreters being sent by Eleazarus Highpriest to Ptolomeus
Philadelphus king of Egypt translated the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek
Sanaballat a Grecian obtained license for his sonnein law Manasses, the
Apostata highpriest, to build a temple in Garizim. Joseph. li. 11. c. 8. Antiq.
t 3700. w An other Jesus (Nephew of the former) translated Ecclesiasticus into
Greek. Prolog. Eccli: Ananias an other false pretender built an other
schismatical temple in Egypt. Eleazarus. x Philo the elder writ the book of
wisdom in Greek. S. Icrom in pref. In the time of Onias the second, his brother
Jason obtained for money to be highpriest. w 3720. Ecclesiasticus conteyneth
many moral precepts, and is a storehouse of virtues: and holy mysteries.
Manasses an Apostata. Eliud. w 3750. Onias. The book of wisdom is also
replenished with much doctrine of virtue, and of divine mysteries. Simon. x
3810. Onias. Eleazar. y 3825. y Antiochus Epiphanes persecuted the Church most
cruelly, like as Antichrist will do nere the end of the world. 1. Match. 1. v.
11. and 2. Match. 5. 6 7. Antiochus set up the abomination of desolation whereof
Daniel prophesied. chapter 9. Mathathias. z In defense of the Church Mathathias and
his sons with others made wars, killed, and oue^ threw al their enemies,
advanced religion, cleansed the temple, and delivered the people from
persecution. 1. Match. 2. etc. 2. Match. 8. and seq. The books of Machabees
contain the history of the Jews from Alexander the great to the time of
Ioannes Hyrcanus highpriest, above two hundred years. z 3846. Mathan. d After
the wars, the Jews in Jerusalem writ to the Jews in Egypt, exhorting
them to keep the feasts, and other rites, as they were observed in Jury 2.
Match. 1. and 2. After Jason followed more usurpers of the Highpriesthood. a
3847. Judas. Machabeus. e Pompeius the great taking Jerusalem subdued the Jews
to the Romans. He entered into the holy place, called Sancta Sanctorum, there
profaned holy things, carried away Aristobulus (who had been Highpriest)
prisoner, and confirmed Hyrcanus in his place. After whom Cassius also spovled
the temple. S. Aug. li. 18. c. 4^. de civil. Menelaus. b 3853. Ionathas. f S.
John Baptist was borne of Elizabeth, who had been long barren. Lisimachus. c
3869. Simon. Alcimus. d 3878. Ioa^nes. Hyrcanus. Jacob. Aristobulus. e 3847.
Alexander. Joseph the husband of the most B Virgin. Hyrcanus. Marie. f 4000.
JESUS CHRIST. And six months after, Christ our SAVIOVR was borne, of the B.
Virgin Marie, in Bethleem; circumcised, adored by the Sages, and presented in
the Temple. When king Herod reigned in Judea. Herodians held opinion that Herod
was Christ, the Messiah, whom the Jews had long expected. Antigonus g Joseph
fled with the child and his mother into Egypt, and Herod murdered the
innocent infantes. But Christ the Son of God coming into this world cut of al
these, and other old sects. And from time to time cutteth of al haresies, that
rise against his Church. Anaelus. h Returning from Egypt they dwelt in
Nazareth. g4001. Aristobulus. i Christ at the age of twelve years remaining in
Jerusalem unknown to his parents was found the third day in the temple
amongst the Doctors. h4006. Iosue. Simon. Mathias k S. John Baptist preached
and baptized in Jordan. Of whom Christ amongst others, was baptized, and fasted
in the desert forty days. i 4012. Josephus. Iozarus. Eleazar Iosue. l Christ
crucified, redeemed mankind; arose from death; ascended to heaven; and sending
the Holy Ghost planted his perpetual visible Church. k 4030. Annas Ismael.
Eleazar Simon. l 4034. Caiphas. The first holy Scripture of the new Testament
was S. Mathewes Gospel written about the year of Christ 41. And the last was
S. John's Gospel the year 99.

The end of the sixth age, and of the old Testament.
A PARTICVLAR TABLE OF THE MOST PRINCIPAL THINGS Contained as well in the holy
text, as in the Annotations of both the Tomes of the old Testament. In which,
the letter A. directs to the former volume; B. to the latter; and the numbers
to the pages.
AARON of the tribe of Leui designed to assist his brother Moses a 163. called
the prophet of Moses a 169. He yielded to make an idol a 243. was consecrated
Highpriest a 275. In him and his seed the Priesthood of the written law was
established. a 206. 275. 278. b. 438. 610. He once murmured against Moses a
348. He and Moses offended in doubting of Gods will a 365. b. 196. He died in
mount Hor a 366. And is particularly praised b 438. Abel offered sacrifice
sincerely, a 13. 15. 31. and was slain by his brother. ibidem. Abdias
prophesied the captivity, and relaxation of the Jews: and the Incarnation of
Christ the Redemer of mankind b 840. Abiathar the Highpriest was deposed a 692.
Abimelech killed his brethren and usurped government a 534. Abram left his
country Chaldea for religion, a 45. 51. a principal Patriarch a 50. He and his
seed were strangers in diverse countries four hundred and thirty years a 60.
187. His name changed to Abraham a. 63. 65. His faith and singular obedience, a
75. His many virtues. a 200. 203. He was never an idolater a 203. 515. He died
at the age of 175. years a 83. His praises b 438. Absalom ambicious and
sedicious a 663. He perished in rebellion a 670. Abstinence a 9. 39. 47. 280.
545. 934. b 613. 772. 994. see Fasting. Accaronites durst not keep the Ark of God, a 582. Accidents remain without subject in the holy Eucharist, a 4.
Achans secret sin punished in the multitude a 481. Achitophel a wicked
counseler a 667. hanged himself a 669. Adam created in grace and knowledge, a,
5. transgressing lost the same a, 10. repented and is saved b 356. Adonai one
of the names of God, is also read in place of Tetragramaton, the name of four
letters which the Jews pronounce not a 168. Adoration civil due to men a 77.
133. 144. 152. 868. adoration religious of holy persons and other things a.
Ssssss 746. 746 763. but divine adoration is only due to God a. 218. 219. see
Idolatry. Egypt was diversely plagued a 170. 177. etcc Affinity spiritual and
carnal in certain degrees hinder marriage a. 298. etc. Agar lawfully married to
Abraham a 62. Aggeus prophesied after the relaxation from captivity, exhorting
to build the temple b. 865. 999. Ahias prophesied the division of Salomons
kingdom a. 731. and afterward the utter ruin of Iero^oams house a. 738.
Alcimus an Apostata deceived the Assidians b 915. did much wickedness, and died
miserably b 922. Alleluia a voice of praise to God a. 1009. b. 191. 217.
Alexander the great brought the monarchy to the Grecians. b. 8^2. 999. He
honored Iaddus the high priest a. 2^8. b. 999. His Empire divided into four
kingdoms b. 793. (...)s deeds a. 429. 969. 100. of^^n commended in the
sapiential books b 288. 296. 297. 300. 302. also 784. Alphabet ^n Hebrewe is
mystical and very hard b. 215. 650. Altares erected for sacrifice a. 47. 51.
94. 101. 227. 685. 720. 947. b. 905. Am^n required divine honor a. 1040. he
favored traitors a. 1053. persecuted the Jews a. 1041. and him self was
hanged a. 1046. Ambition breeds sedition a 663. it deceives and overthrows
a. 670. 1045. Ambition, abundance, and idleness are the cause of much corruption
b. 701. Amos a heardesman prophesied before the captivity of the ten tribes
b. 829. Amram nephew of Leui, and father of Moses and Aaron, lawfully married
his aunt a. 168. 299. 3^8. Angels offer men's prayers to God, a. 214 1006.
resist the devil a. 13. and wicked men a. 369. b. 9^3. especially Antichrist b
802. their ministry in the Church a 47. 161. 242. 249. 545. 546. 935. 1061.
1072. b 781. they protect men and places a. 147. 193 478. 519. 527. 924. 995.
996. 1007. 1029. b. 323. 670 798. 973. 992. they are exceeding many b. 792. 992.
they learn secrets one of an other b. 794. Antichrist probably supposed to
come of the tribe of Dan a. 150. the Jews will receive him b. 801. He is
prefigured a. 534. 538. 1014. b. 794. 801. 895. 970. He shall be strong and
cruel for a short time, b 792. to wit three years and a half b. 803. He
shall then be overthrown b 747. Antiochus his cruel edict b. 894. 1001. his
repentance in sickness was not sincere, not fruictful b. 911 969. He died
miserably. b. 911. 968. 1002. he was a figure of Antichrist b 970. Antiquity a
note of true doctrine b. 331. Aod by especial inspiration killing Eglon is not
to be imitated a. 522. Apostasy from faith first happened in Cain a. 16. after
in Nemrod a. 45. 48. in Jeroboam a 734. and others. Ark of Noah how great, a
25. it was a figure of the Church a 28. Arc of the Testament much reverenced
a. 336. 360. 579. 583. 584. 647. 843. 876. 882 b. 147. 949. 996. It ouerthrewe
Dagon a. 581. Arphaxad king of the Medes vainly boasted a 1012. Ashes a holy
ceremony a 12. 32. 1019. 1023. 1042. 1108. b 533. 559. 795. 844. 902. 904.
Assidians professed a religious rule of life b 898. 915. 972. 977. 982.
Threescore of them martyrs b. 915. Avarice a detestable sin especially in
Clergy men a 576. 585. b 530. 558. 562. Aureola an especial accidental glory
of Martyrs, holy Doctors, and Virgins, b 802.
B
Baal the false god of the Moabites, Madianites, Sidonians, and other nations,
a 370. worshipped some times by Jews was once overthrown by Gedeon, a 528.
again his prophets destroyed by Elias, a 747. Iehu also killed many
worshippers of Baal a 783. and king Ioas destroyed his temple a 906. Babylon
built a 45. was long potent and glorious, but at last destroyed, b 469. 518.
639. 642. etc. 713. 8^3. Balaam the sorcerer, first refused, afterward
attempted to curse Gods people, a 389. His ass spoke a 370. He prophesied true
and good things of Israel a 371. etc. he was slain together with the
Madianites a 386. Baptism prefigured a 4. 32. 199. b. 197. 740. 994. It takes
away al sins a. 193. b. 197. S. John Baptist precursor of Christ b. 887.
Baruchs prophecy is Canonical Scripture b. 661. Beda most modest in expounding
holy Scripture. a 46. Behemoth an elephant, or an other greater beast is
subject to Gods ordinance, a 1106. Belus Iuppiter imagined by idolaters to be
the greatest god a. 42. b. 1076. Beza corrupts the Gospel a 46. says God
created man to fall a 171. b 394. Blessing of creatures operative a. 5. 47.
90. 93. It belongs to the greater to bless the less a. 59. 48^. 524. 721.
Blessing by a set form of words a. 35. Blind leaders excuse not their
folowers a 572. Brazen serpent erected a. 336. was afterward broken in pieces
a. 799. how it healed those that were hurt b 366. Brothers are four manner of
ways, a. 53. 570. Burden of Babylon (and the like) sigsignifieth doleful and
co^minatorie prophecy of ruin b 469 etc. 854.
C
Caath the son of Leui. father of Amram, and grandfather of Aaron and Moses
a 167. Calvin contemns all the fathers, a 59. makes God the auctor of sin
a. 171. carpeth at Moses a 245. charge the book of Wisdom with error. b.
364. Canon of the Church of Christ is an infallible rule declaring which are
divine Scriptures, a 989. and of more authority then the Jews Canon. ibidem.
Canticle of Canticles is a sacred Colloquium, or Interlude b 334. it perteyneth
to three spouses, b. 335. Captivity of the ten tribes in Assyria a. 798.
Captivity of the two tribes in Babylon had three beginninges a. 813. 932. b.
649 Ierem. 52. v. 28. 29. 30. and b. 77^* Dan. 1. and the same captivity was
released by degrees at diverse times. a. 944. etc. 1. Esd. 1. 2. 6. 2. Esd. ^.
Catholic name designeth true Christians, and the true Church. a. 22.
Catholics are spiritual souldiars a. 10^0. Al Catholics participate of the
prayers and other good works of all the just, b 223. Ceremonies in the law of
nature a. 32. 211. observed by Solomon, not expressed in the written law a 877.
Prescribed to Ezechiel to lie on one side a certain time b 685. ceremonial
laws at large from the mids of Exodus, and the greatest part of Leuiticus,
continually used in divine service b 959. ordained for three especial causes a.
264. 283. Children of the Church are the spiritual seed of Abraham a. 53.
Choice to be made of desires, words, and deeds b 425. Christ our Redemer
promised a. 10. 12* 359. 364. 768. 963. b 244. He was prefigured by Abel a. 13.
by Noe a. 28. by Abraham a. 51. by Melchisedech a. 55. and others innumerable,
and forshewed by all the Prophets. 449. His Incarnation and other mysteries
following especially in these places a. 31. 47. 197. 373. 703. 934. b. 16. 16.
45. 113. 158. 202. 203. 313. 325. 462. 463. 464. 494. 495. 506. 536. 542. 601.
603. 609. 667. 702. 790. 841. 850. 860. 871. 872. 874. 941. 990. 991. His
genealogy from Phares ( the son of Judas) to David a 571. from David to the
captivity a. 939. from the captivity to Joseph, and consequently to his B.
mother of the same family b. 1004. Christ being in Egypt, the idols lost
their power b 476. His Passion, and Resurrection more particularly a. 13. 88.
362. 366. 553. 1060. b. 26. 46. 49, at large. 70. 256. 540. 568. 580. 636. 877.
His Resurrection the third. day b. 816. He was sold for thirty pence a. 117.
b. 880. Christ a Priest and a King a. 56. 397. b. 36. 204. He came in humility
b. 511. He will come in Majesty b. 888. Christians called fishes a. 4. and are
of three states a 709. Church of Christ prefigured by the Ark of Noah a. 28. by
the tabernacle a, 259. by the Israelites in the desert a. 465. 467. by the
coming of the Queen of Saba to Solomon a. 718. by Judith, Esther, and many
other persons and things a. 1051: b. 872. It is the proper inheritance* of
Christ b. 16. 166. 281. 870. 873. 882. The Church is perpetual and visible from
the beginning of the world, a. 19. 35. 48. 203. 649. 714. 937. b. 17. 88. 119.
125. 163. 337. 455. 497. 528. 539. 555. 556. 601. 604. 607. 608. 687. 692. 704.
709. 768. 775. 801 839. 868. 884. 997. See the Historical table b. 1073. etc.
The Church of Christ is universal consisting of al nations a 65. 206. 317. 576.
716. 728. b 42. 50. 90. 121. 161. 211. 537. and in many other places of Isai
and other prophets. It is more conspicuous and more glorious, then the Church
of the old testament a 205. 943. b 336. 432. 485. 999. It cannot err a. 74.
434. 715. 803. 943. b. 163. 335. 340. 456. 515. 536. 573. 1001. It is the only
fold of Christ's sheep b. 744. Out of the Church is no salvation. a. 28. b. 536.
698. 882. Circumcision instituted a 65. 198. renewed a. 477. Circumstances do
aggrauate sins b. 717. 815. Clean and unclean a ceremonial distinction
before Moses law a. 26. more distinguished by the law a. 281. 283. etc.
Clergy men must be orderly called to their function a. 274. etc. b. 588. and
for their virtues, b 546. They ought not to serve for temporal reward a 502.
(v. 7.) b 36. 737. 885. They ought above others to have compassion on the poor
b. 8^5. Their office is to water the whole world with true doctrine a. 709.
Commandments of God are possible to be kept a 458. 604. b 15. and in many
Psalms (especially the 118.) and in all the Sapiential books, and Prophets.
See Grace. Communion of Protestants is no Sacrament, neither has any miracle
in it a 210. See Eucharist. Communities and al common wealths require unity,
observation of laws, and eminent virtue of the superiors b 951. Concubines in
the old Testament were lawful wives a 62. 534. 557. 664. Concupiscence without
consent is not sin a 12. Confession of sins a 32. 333. b 400. Confidence in
God most necessary a 106. 605. b 20. 53. and in many Psalms: item. 478. 491.
493. 858. 900. Conscience guilty of wickedness tormenteth the sinner a. 1046.
Consideration directs good works b 319. 420. Constancy in good shall reap
reward b 381. In freindshipe is most necessary b 386. Consuls in Rome governed
by entercours of days b 918. Contempt of admonition aggrauateth sin b 807.
Contrition a part of penance a 32. 722. b 21. 32. 101. 735. 827. Conversation
requires honest, discrete, and profitable speech b 403. Covenant between God
and man a 214. 449. 515. Covenant with men must also be kept b 814. Cross of
Christ prefigured a 47. 145. 146. 195. 211. 279. 364. b 546. 687. 996. Cruelty
not mercy to spare an obstinate or impenitent sinner b 390. Curses for
enormious sins a 450. 452. He that maliciously curses is cursed of God b
345. Custom in sin is hardly cured b 17. 101. 577. 822. 836.
D.
Days dedicated to Gods service a 7. see Fastes and Feasts Damnation after
this life is extreme misery b 349. and remediles. ibid. Daniels whole book is
Canonical b 769, Daniel with other three children of the royal blood of Judah
were carried into Babylon b 772. 997. He discovered the false accusation of
Susa^na at the age of twelve years b 803. And continued to prophecy to his
old age b 806. He was of singular wisdom b 725. He was also most holy b 697.
772. He and the other three were advanced b 776. 998. He was zealous and with all
diserete in Gods service b 789. was defended by an Angel from the lions b 790.
Prophesied of four Monarchies b 791. He was called the Man of desires b 796.
He had the vision of Christ's coming within seventy weeks of years b 796.
Darkness and other priuations are to the beauty and profit of the universal
state of creatures b 780. David the youngest son of Iesse was called from
keeping sheep, and anointed to be king a 604. b 148. By playing on his harp
king saul was refreshed a 604. He killed Goliath a 608. He was singularly
protected by God a 610. 612. b 38. 54. etc. He had amity with Ionathas a 609.
611. 613. He would not drink the water that was procured with danger a 683.
His zele and devotion great a 648. 848. 855. 865. b 55. 115. 441. He danced
before the Arc a 647. He wisely feaned him self to be mad, a 617. b 69. Spared
Saul's life a 621. 627. He was the second time anointed king a 639. the third
time, a 645. He sometimes sinned a 654. 684. 853. Many of his issue slain a
656. His posterity conserved til Christ a 740. 849. 904. b 244. 408. 440. 442.
462. 464. 579. 880. 1004. He was in many respects a figure of Christ a 606.
etc. b 18. 19. 59. He made all the Psalms b 3. 4. 19. 34. Of him is written all the second book of kings, part of the first and third, and from the eleventh
chapter to the end of the first of Paralipomenon. Debora a prophetess and
figure of the Church a 523. Deceit sometimes lawful a 92. 483. Dedication of
things to God a 787. 850. 862. 969. See Altar, Temple etc. Delta the Greek
letter represents the form of the musical instrument called the Psalter b
14. Detraction is as bad in the hearer as speaker b 415. Diueles were created
in grace b 431. They require sacrifice a 371. b 992. They tempt men, even to
the end of this life a 10. b 992. They delude their servants a 554. Doctrine
does fructify in the well disposed a 461. It is bread of the mind b 419.
Dreams of diuets kinds, and often from God a 116. 124 301. 530. 1052. b 422.
773. 985. Drunkenness detestable b 303. dangerous, deceiptful, beastly, hurtful
to others, sensles and vnfatiable b 304.
E
Ecclesiastes signifies eminently The Preacher b 373. Ecclesiasticus
signifies a Preacher. ib. The book of Ecclesiasticus is Canonical Scripture a
989. b 343. 372. 398 It is a storehouse of al virtues b 373. Ecclesiastical
authority a 332. 433. See Supreme head of the Church. Eleazar a valiant
soldier offered himself to present death. b 913. Elias had a distinct habit,
and rule of life a 761. His zele in religion, a 747. 761. His miracles a 939.
He is yet huing a 19. 33. 762. b 444. His letters to king Ioram after his
translation a 903. 935. He shall return and preach before the day of Judgment
b 888. 996. Eliu an arrogant disputer a 1096. preferred his private spirit
above al others, a 1097. perverted the state of the controversy, a 1099. 1100.
1113. Elizeus had the two spirits, of prophecy, and of working miracles, as
Elias had before a 763. His particular miracles a 940. Enchanters are sometimes
suffered to do marvelous things, but not true miracles, nor al they desire a
176. 177. 180. They sometimes confess the power of God. 178. 371. Enoch yet
lives a 19. b 437. Epicures believe not eternal punishment, nor reward b 346.
Equivocation is sometimes lawful a 52. 71. 89. 91. 777. 1026. b 964. Esther
most humble and prudent a 10^7. b 998 a figure of our B. Lady, and of the
Church a 1051. The whole book of Esther is Canonical Scripture a 1035. 1036.
1052. Eucharist a Sacrament and Sacrifice a 190. b 885. Prefigured by blood, a
228. by the loaves of proposition, a 229. by all old sacrifices a 239. 264. 288.
b 609. Christ's real presence in the Eucharist a 150. 188. 210. b 50. 69. 181.
See Paschal lamb, and Manna, Transubstantiation confessed by Hebrew Rabbis b
993. Evangelists signified by four living creatures, and by four wheles, b
676. 690. Eve was not borne, but built of Adams ribbe a 7. She was a figure of
the B. virgin a 11. Example in gouerners is of great importance, b 387. 848.
Examples ought to move b 628. 818. Excommunication prefigured a 332. Exequies
for the dead a 77. 202. 637. 711. 931. 936. b 978. Ezechias mortally sick
recovered miraculously a 805. b 504. Ezechiel a Priest a Prophet, and a Martyr
b 674. He prophesied in Chaldea, b 998. the beginning and end of his prophecy
is very hard. 674. 711. He is often called the son of man b 677. His last
vision perteyneth in some part to the Jews, but more principally to the Church
of Christ, b 749. 763. It can not be expounded of the Jews, and their Temple,
b 753. 765. 767.
F.
Faith is above reason a 775. without faith none can be saved b 289. 348. Faith
is the ground of al true virtues a 60. b 411. there is no true faith but the
Catholic faith of the whole Church, b 536. Faith alone does not justify, a
61. 900. b. 70. Faith and good works gain heaven, a 393. 410. b 34. 338.
Fastes instituted and observed a 382. 706. 899. 934. 957. 1006. 1029. 1045. b
534. 615. 795. 825. 827. 874. 895. 994 It is an act of religion b 514* great
effects thereof, ibidem. Fathers and the holy Doctors do build, and adorn
the Church b 537. Faults must be reveled or concealed with discretion, b 400.
402. Fear of God is the first degree of wisdom b 269. It is the seed of al
other virtues, and of eternal glory, b 375. Fear of Superiors because they
are Gods ministers is necessary a 594. b 412. Fear not men commanding
contraie to God, b 313. Fear of God with the observation of his commandments
is the sum of al godly doctrine b 333. Feasts instituted and observed, a 7.
225. 307. 380. 430. 707. 934. 1050. 1059. b 153. 947. 972. 994. Fire sent
miraculously a 15. 279. 528. 748. 761. 855. b 948. Fire perpetually kept in the
tabernacle, a 271. 279. Fire shall burn the world immediately before the general
judgment b 97. 545. Four miracles in the fire which Jeremy hid b 948. 949.
Firmament signifies the space from the highest stars to the earth a 1.
Flaterie is full of guile b 401. Fortitude consists more in suffering
patiently, then in repelling forces a 88. Fortitude contemns imagined fear b
301. Fortitude required in Judges b 383. Free consent is required in every
covenant, a 214. and in man's justification b 323. Freewil is in man a 13. 15.
33. 191. 200. 207. 458. 459. 596. 703. 978. b 177. 217. 271. 323. 349. 418.
466. 526. 543. 567. 821. No sin can be committed without consent of freewil.
a 11. 32. Luther abhorred the name of freewil, and Calvin disliked it. a 16.
Freindshipe is a strong band. a 609. b* 405* 426* False freindshipe fails in
adversity a 1046.
G
Guard of the outward senses. a 972. Gedeon was confirmed by miracles a* 528.
encoraged by a dream. a 530. By a stratageme with a few he overthrew many a
531. Genealogies are recited from Adam to Noe. a 18. 818. From Noe to Abraham,
a 44. 50. 819. From Abraham by Isaac, and Jacob, to David, a 821. From David to
Josias, a 823. and to his sons, a 939. Also from his son Iechonias to
Christ b 1004. Genealogies of Leui to Aaron and Moses, a 168. 828. 939. b
1004. Gentiles shall be converted to Christ, a 51. 85. 146. 453. 463. 529. 681.
716. b 16. 119. 425. 484. 498. 521. 543. 544. 558. 636. 702. 743. 812. 813.
839. 872. Giantes before Noes flood* a 22. 1033. 1090. others after the flood a
402. Gloria Patri: etc. added after every Psalm by Eclesiastical tradition b
266. Glory eternal a 35. 712. b 34. 83. 156. 492. God is one in substance a
30. 47. 160. 196. 702. 934. b 41. 182. 362. 988. Known by his works a 162.
178. 464. 1105. b* 435. 436. 508. Only God knows al things a 1103 b 251.
God calls the whole world his Beauty, and his peculiar people his Cord. b
879. He would have al to be saved b 706. 714. 735. 816. 822. 835. 847. His
threats are conditional b 579. 844. He rewards all that keep his law, and
punishes the transgressors a 216. 401. 451. 1101. b 21. 22. 830. 831. Gods
especial protection in distresses. a 804. 924. 1019. 1044. 1051. 1090. 1107. b
27. 30. 37. 51. 56. 57. 61. 67. 255. 262. 487. 512. God figheth for his
servants three ways. a 512. God tempts not to evil a 76. He is never the
cause of sin a 153. 535. 666. 684. 758. 1024. 1061. b 23. 192. 541. 612. 822.
His permission is sometimes called his fact b 653. 654. He made man right a 5.
b 327. 550. He is ielous a 216. 1018. b 726. He speaks by his Priests,
Prophets, and Preachers a 194. b 861. God uses his creatures to supernatural
effects a 163. 764. 998. 1005. And suspendeth their natural operation at his
will. b 781. Gods foreknowlege what will happen, or may happen, does not
prejudice man's freewil b 349. Gog and Magog signify Antichrist, and his
adherentes b 746. Goliath provoking the Israelites, was slain by David a 605.
608. Gospel is kowen by the Church a 989. Grace is necessary, otherwise none
can merit a 245. b 65. 217. 293. 405. 512. 513. 520. 549. 667. 995. It
requires man's cooperation, a 401. 422. 463. 603. 704. 892. b 33. 43. 217. 323.
394. 408. 528. 536. 603. 811. 869. 995. Grace is also necessary to persevere a
422. b 129. 293. 679. Grace sufficient is given to every one, effectual of Gods
especial mercy to some, b 678. Al grace is from the fulness of Christ b 538.
881. It enableth man to keep the commandments a 458. 704. b 584. 742. 865.
Gradual Psalms are prayers and prophecies b 234. Gratitude acknowlegeth
benefits received, b 447.
H
Habacuc prophesied before the captivity of Judah b 857. An other Habacuc being
carried by an Angel from Jury into Babylon, brought meat to Daniel in the
lions den b 809. 858. Happiness in this life consists in fleeing sin, and
serving God b 15. 16. 267. 317. Happiness eternal is in seeing God a 247. b 38.
317. Hardness of heart a 164. 171. 201. Hayle did not extinguish the fire a 180.
b 367. Head of the Church in the Law of nature was by sucession of Patriarchs
a 35. 50. 206. In the written Law by succession of Highpriestes a 277. 327.
713. 939. b 1004. See the historical table. One head is necessary of every
community a 350. b 284. 920. Heaven not open to men before Christ, a 31. 118.
202. 293. 396. 407. 515. 711. Heber consented not to build Babel a 45. Hebrew
was the only tongue of al men before Babel. ibidem. Hebrew Bibles now extant
are not more certain then the Latin: a Prefat. b 260. Hell often signifies the
place of souls called Limbus, not grave, a 118. 130. 131. 1081. 1085. b 37.
39^. 877. Heli was punished for not correcting his sons a 584. Heliodorus a
sacrilegious commissioner was severely beaten by Angels. b 952. 953. Heresy
and idolatry breed many sects a 49. 798. b 202. 421. It is described by the
resemblance of a wicked woman b 410. Heretics and false prophets are known
by going forth from the Church a 18. They are proud, a 45. b 272. 588. They
seek to destroy a 695. b 461. 955. They pervert the truth by wrangling b. 605.
691. 693. 694. 837. They teach many absurdities a 1071. They foolishly compare
their errors with Catholic Religion, a 801. They allure most by temporal and
carnal motives a 374. 386. Heretical service, and sermons not to be heard a
356. 359. See Schism. Herod the first stranger king of the Jews b 1003.
Histories have a mystical sense a 571. 943. 945. 956. 1000. 1002. 1005. The
Holy Ghost was sent the fiftith day after Pasch a 219 b 828. The seven gifts
of the Holy Ghost are most eminent in Christ b 467. Holy things, a 616. 706.
770. 874. See places. Holofernes presuming in strength of his army, a 1019.
was slain by Judith a 1029. Honor is due to Kings, though they be wicked a
1046. Hospitality is meritorious a 69. Hours of the Churches service b 231.
disliked by Heretics, but defended by the Scriptures, and holy Fathers b 232.
Humility most necessary in greatest authority b 419. Hyperbola is a frequent
figure in holy Scriptures a 53. 417. 871. 1069. b 582. 593. 629. 654. 732.
929. Hypochrisie is often joined with cruelty. b. 624.
I
Jacob the Patriarch was a plain sincere man a 84. replenished with many
virtues a 106. He lawfully bought the firstbirthright, a 85. was content with
mean estate a 94. His prophecies and blessings a 149. He was blessed in
Abraham b 438. Idols, and Images at large a 217. 314. 465. Diverse sorts of
idols, b 209. 360. 361. 365. 565. 630. 671. They can not help themselves not
others a 464. b 209. 514. 634. 639. 686. Iechonias king of Judah was preserved
in Babylon a 817. b 586. 997. Iehoua is none of the right names of God a 168.
Iephte sinned in vowing rashly: not in performing his vow. a 542. Jeremy a
Priest, Prophet, Virgin and Martyr. b. 548. 575. prophesied in Jerusalem and
Egypt. b. 998. He hid himself from his persecuters. b. 615. which God
approved. b. 616. He hid holy fire, the Arc, and Altar of incense. b. 949.
Jericho walls fell miraculously a 480. Jeroboam rebelled against Solomon a 731.
He lawfully possessed the kingdom of ten tribes. ibidem But most wickedly
raised schism and idolatry a 734. Jerusalem has four significations. a. 4.
It was first called Iebus a. 497. 503. 557. Afterward Jerusalem. ibid. and was
the chosen City of God. a. 609. 645. 730. etc. b 101. 117. 124. etc. Often
impugned and protected, a. 684. 787. 790. 802. etc. b. 149. 236. 238. 249. At
last destroyed by the Chaldees. a. 815. 933. b. 563. 596. 599* 647. 703. Yet
not all the people destroyed. a. 815. b. 565. 655. Reedified. a. 965. etc. It
was most wicked in the time of Christ. b. 454. Lastly destroyed by the
Romans. b. 489. 545. Jesus the son of Sirach writ the book of
Ecclesiasticus. An other Jesus his nephewe, translated it into Greek b 343.
373. Iethro prefigured the wisdom of Christian Gentiles. a. 213. Jews the
peculiar people of God. a. 43. 161. 194. 462. b. 140. 142. 191. 699. 822. 884.
They murmured ten times more notoriously. b. 148. 607. and very often, b.
833. 888. Their reiection a. 146. 453. 575. b. 69. 119. 455. 489. 527. 543.
544. 560. Made contemptible, b. 544. 627. 740. 836. 873. 880. 885. They
persecuted Christ. b. 346. and his Church b. 880. Their ruin described by a
metaphor of proud women b. 457. They shall be converted in the end of the world.
a. 408. 540. b. 340. 702. 813. 834. 849. 878. 996. Iezabel most wicked, a 754.
perished miserably. a 781. Islands among other nations shall be converted to
Christ. b 483. 508. 537. Images of false gods are Idols. a. 103. 245. 412.
553. 556. 906. b. 195. 364. 776. Image of a dead man honored with divine
honor was the beginning of Idolatry b. 364. Images of Cherubimes a. 229. 254.
711. b. 813. Image, or statua of a man. a. 612. Images of palmetrees, and other
things a. 700. 720. 935. Imprecations are oftentimes zealous and lawful desires
b. 265. or prophecies. b. 127. 823. Incense used amongst especial ceremonies. a
239. 259. 294. 337. b 254. Indulgences a. 1070. Induration of heart a. 170. 171.
etc. 404. 582. Infidelity, or spiritual fornication obscureth the
understanding. b. 814. Ingratitude aggrauateth other sins. b. 819. it was
great in the Jews. b. 851. Injury to be remitted with three conditions. b.
414. Intention excuses some errors. b. 289. Job probably of Esaus progeny a.
114. was a King or an absolute Prince. a. 1059. His book most part in verse.
a. 1060. He was an admirable example of patience, a. 1059. 1062. 1114. His
afflictions increased by degrees. a. 1111. He was a right plain man. a. 1063.
His wife signified carnal cogitations. a. 1064. His freindes erred, a. 1064.
1108. He sinned not in complaining of his afflictions. a. 1065. He prefigured
Christ. a. 1060. 1069. 1094. He had nine conflictes with his adversaries. a.
1066. etc. 1111. He convinced Eliu with silence. a. 1103. In some things he
sinned venially. a. 1106. 1108. and did penance a. 1109. His cause was
justified against his adversaries. ibid. They were pardoned for his sake, and
himself rewarded. a. 1109. Joel prophesied. before the captivity of the ten
Tribes. b. 824. S. John Baptist was foreshewed by Isaie b. 507. by Malachie. b.
887. John Hyrcanus son of Simon was Highpriest after the wars of the
Machabees. b. 946. 1003. 1004. Ioiada Highpriest caused Q. Athalia to be
slain, and Ioas to be crowned King of Judah a 785. Jonas being sent to preach
in Niniue fled from that function. b. 842. in a tempest was cast into the sea,
and swallowed by a whale, ibid. He prayed in the whalles belly, and was cast
safe on the land, b. 843. He preached the destruction of Niniue: the coming of
Christ: and conversion of al Nations. b. 841. He was a figure of Christ's
Resurrection. b. 845. Ionathas Highpriest and general governor. b. 920. 1003.
Ioram slain by Iehu a. 780. Iosaphat the place where probably shall be the
General Judgment b. 828. Joseph endued with many virtues a. 121. suddenly
advanced a. 127. called the Savior of the world a. 128. was a figure of
Christ. a. 151. a Prophet. a. 152. b. 445. He had duble portion. a. 499. 826.
Josias king of Judah destroyed Idolatry: and made a great Pasche a. 810. was
very devout and liberal. a. 812. Iosue governor of Israel a. 468. He
conquered, and divided the land of Chanaan a 473. etc. in all his book. b 440.
He slew one and thirty kings a 493. exhorted, and blessed the people a 509.
Iron did swim upon the water a 773. Irregularities a 304. Isaac borne by
promise a 72. prefigured Christ a 76. He and Jacob were blessed in Abraham b
438. He blessed Jacob in place of Esau a 89. Isaias an Euangelical Prophet b
452. also an Apostolical, announcing Christ, and his Church. b 460. 521. and
seq. In the former part of his prophecy he admonishes and threatens the
people for their sins: in the latter part he comfort them b 452. He went
naked when God so commanded him b 477. He inueigheth against evil Pastors b
530. Israelites chosen not for their merit, but by mere grace a ^61. They
increased exceedingly. a 323. were guided by a cloud, and pillar of fire a 191.
345. Iubiley year a 312. Judgment and Justice what they signify in holy
scripture. b 495. 529. Judgment general. a. 34. 48. 203. 576. 712. 936. 1095.
b 22. 97. 138. 178. 498. 828. 888. 996. Judgment begins at the house of God
(or with the Clergy) b 687. Judges of Israel were figures of Christ a 516.
They were extraordinaryly raised to save the people a 520. They were finally
holiemen a 516. b 440. Judges are called gods a 221. 223. they ought not to be
partial a 437. Iudiths book Canonical Scripture a 989. 1010. 1023. b 999. she
was a figure of the Blessed Virgin, and of the Church a 1032. she led a most
holy life a 1021. 1025. 1033. and a special example of holy widowhood a 1034.
Jurisdiction pertains to the Ordinary Clergy a 433. to Prophets by
extraordinary commission a 692. b 449. Just men always some in the Church a
21. 24. 26. 35. 48. 201. 204. 465. b 453. 682. Justice necessary. a 481. 559.
560. 754. Justice and mercy must be mixed. a 563. b 199. Justice consists in
declining from evil and doing good. b 76. 529. 550. Justice may consist with
venial sins. a 1066. 1079. b 34. 35. Justification by faith and good works.
a 472. b 43.
K
Kings shall be converted to Christ. a 72. b 17. 522. A King desired by the
Jews a 585. was disliked by God. a 586. 594. Kings have privileges above
Dukes. a 533. 587. They are anointed with oil. a 590. 604. 639. 645. 779.
They receive spiritual grace thereby. a 591. Good Kings are called the Kings
of God. a 884. They are bound to destroy Idolatry, and infidelity. a 810. 891.
901. 916. 927. 942 b 17. 344. and to advance Religion a. 918. b 17. Kings
honored with glorious titles for their zele in religion a 475. They receive the
law at the Priests hands a. 433. and direction in principal actions. a 620.
633. Badde Kings. b 17. Kings of Judah had continual succession a 939. Kings
of the ten tribes with their families were destroyed a 937. Kings ought to
use many counselers, not to rely much upon one, a 1054. 1058. Kingdoms are
often changed b 478. 513. Kingdoms of great power hardly agree, b 574.
Knowledge of al things in God takes not away free will a 604. 620. b 349.
Knowledge of the truth in controversies is a privilege of the Highpriest, a 433.
715. Human knowledge is imperfect a 1103. it can not comprehend Gods works b
374. it is a good knowledge to know that we are ignorant b 755. Knowledge of God
includes the keeping of his precepts. b 814.
L
Laban sinned in giving Lia for Rachel to Jacob a 96. also in pursuing and
threatening Jacob a 100. 448. and more grievously in Idolatry, a 103.
Lacedaemonians descended from Abraham b 923. 958. Laiheads hippe of the Church
is rejected by most Heretics, and by all Catholics b 410. Lamentations of
Jeremy are composed in verse, in order of the Hebreu Alphabet, and contain
many Mysteries b 650. Lamentations, a Song, and Woe b. 677. Lamps in the
Tabernacle a 233. in the Temple a 720. Last four things to be remembered b
384. L%%ria is honor due to God only a 219. 411. Law of God is most excellent
wisdom a 406. 463. It makes his people most renowned a 460. b 373. it is
outwardly sharp, but inwardly sweet b 548. Laws positive do bind in
conscience a 8. Good laws are the safety of the commonwealth, wicked laws the
ruin. b 465. Law of like pain a 311. 437. b 790. Law of Moses ceased after
Christ, but the New Law is to the end of the world b 665. Leaven not offered in
Sacrifice a 25. 265. 273. Lending is a work of mercy b 415. Lents fast is in
imitation of Moses, Elias, and Christ a 249. 749. 9%4. Leprosy judged by
Priests a 285. Leui lived longest of al his brethren a 167 b 1080. Leuiathan a
huge fish signifying the devil a 1107. Light an accident made the first day. a
2. Limbus, or Abraham's bosom a 515. 711. See Hell. Loaves of proposition a 229.
310. Lot received Angels in his house a 69. his wife turned into a pillar of
salt a 70. Of him proceeded the two families of Moabites, and Ammonites a 43.
71. Lotte in trial, division, or election, is guided by God a 296. 482. 502.
591. Love, but believe not enemies, b 390.
M
Machabees so called of Judas Machabeus, b 889. and Judas had this title of his
valiant strength b 899. Two books of Machabees Canonical b 890. the auctor
asks pardon for his style, not doubting of the truth, b 987. Both the books
in great part contain the same history, b 891. Seven brothers Machabees
Martyrs, b 962. and their mother b 965. Magistrates, a 213. 346. b 154.
Malachias the Prophet is supposed by some to be Esdras b 883. He prophesied
after the Temple was reedified b 883. 999. Man made to Gods image a 2. 5. 17.
Man in his creation had ten prerogatives, a 5. Manasses King of Judah repented
in captivity, a 807. 926. Manna had twelve miracles. a 209* al which are more
eminent in the B. Sacrament, none at al in the Protestants communion. a 210.
Mansions and travels of the Israelites, signified the travels for eternal life.
a 390. Mardocheus detected traitors. a 1040. b 998. He was in extreme danger, a
1044. but delivered, and advanced. a 1045. 1048. 1051. Marie the most B. virgin
bruseth the serpents head a 12. she was prefigured by Aarons rod. a 359. by
Iael, 524. 526. by Gedeons fleece, a 529. by Judith a 1032. by Esther a 1051.
Of her, many Prophets foretold, b 462. 467. 603. 757. 758. 992. She was free
from al sin a 12. b 331. she was not bound to the law of Purification a 284.
she excelled in all perfection b 336. 338. 342. Marriage not commanded to every
person a 6. Plurality of wives lawful in the Patriarchs, not in Christians. a
62. 63. 84. 97. 433. Marriage was forbid by the law of Moses in certain
degrees of kindred, a 121. 297. 298. 302. 378. 498. Other impediments of
marriage. a 397. Marriage of the brothers wife (deceased without issue) was
lawful in the law of nature, a 121. 299. and was ordained by the law of Moses
a 448. 570. Marriage forbid to be made with Infideles a 78. 248. 730. 958.
981. Yet sometimes dispensed withal in the old Testament a 547. 570. 641. 1039.
1056. Marriage in the new Testament is a Sacrament prefigured in the law of
nature a 32. Married persons have a notable example in Tobias and Sara a 1003.
Martyrs of the Machabes b 893. 956. etc. to 965. and 1001. Matthathias
Highpriest and general captain b 897. 982. 1002. Meditation requires four
preparations, b 430. Melchisedec a King and a Priest, a 55. supposed to be a
distinct person from Sem a 56. He offered sacrifice in bread and wine a 58. and
therein was a figure of Christ a 56. Mercy of God electeth whom he will save,
otherwise al should be damned a 85. b 199. It is nevertheless mixed with justice
b 938. S. Michael Patron of the Church b 798. Michas of the tribe of Ephraim,
made and adored an idol. a 553. Micheas prophesied before the captivity of the
ten tribes b 845. Ministers amongst Heretics are contemptible a 554.
Miracles are testimonies of truth a 164. 175. 360. 376. 748. b 781. 808.
Falseprophetes may do strange things, but not true miracles a 175. 748. b
589. Modesty in familiar conversation prescribed, b 389. Monarchy of the
Assyrians was begun by Ninus a 42. Monarchy of the Chaldees by Nabucodonosor
b 628. 771. Monarchy of the Medes and Persians, was set up by Darius b 788.
988. Monarachie of the Grecians by Alexander b 892. 999. Monarchy of the
Romans by Pompeius b 792. 1003. Moses was protected by Gods special
providence a 157. His killing of the Egyptian was lawful, but not to be
imitated a 159. He was as the God of Pharao a 170. He was a Priest a 275. b
181. Chief governor of the people, both temporal and spiritual. a 164. 206.
275. So long as he held up his hands in prayer, the people prevailed in
battle. a 211. He saw more Mysteries then other Prophets. a 247. b 438. His
face appeared glorious a 249. He was buried by Angels, a 468. His praises, b.
438. Murmuration seuerly punished, a 348. 350. 355. 379. 1020. Music is of
great force a 604. gratful in Divine service a 860. b 10. etc. Mysteries are
spiritual hid things above natural capacity a 91. 141. 196. 320. See Names,
Numbers Scriptures.
N
Naamans example excuses not English Schismatiques a 771. Naboth was unjustly
slain by Iezabels procurement. a 755 Nabuchodonosor vainly purposed to subdue
all the earth a 1012. He confessed no God but himself a 1014. 1018.
Nabuchodonosor was not changed into the substance of a beast, but in shape, b
785 787. It is probable that he is eternally saved, b 785. Nachors progeny,
from whom Israel descended by Rebecca, a 76. 82. ^13. Nadab and Abiu were burnt
to death for offering strange fire a 280. Nahum prophesied the destruction of
Niniue after Jonas b 853. Name of God most proper is, HE WHICH IS. a 162. Names
were given to al corporal creatures by Adam. a 7. Names are sometimes mystical
a 65. 76. 105. 111. 112. 349. 977. Names are sometimes translated according to
their signification a 832. Nations and principal tongues seventy two. a 43.
Nazareites a Religious order a 335. 545. 709. Nehemias writ the book which
is also called the second of Esdras, a 962. His commiseration of his countries
calamities a 963. by his especial industry Jerusalem was reedified 964. etc.
Nemrod an Arch heretic a 42. 45. 48. Afterward called Saturnus, the father
of gods a 49. Nigardnes is injury to many b. 393. Ninevites repenting,
fasted, and were spared from ruin b 844. The greatness of the city. ibid. at
last it was destroyed. b 855. 856. 863. Noe a just man a 21. 24. 26. and
perfect a 24. b 438. a figure of Christ a 40. Noes flood a notorious example of
Gods justice a 28. his sacrifice was very gratful to God a 37. 47. Novelty in
Religion is a mark of Infidelity, and heresy a 429. It pleases carnal men,
a 462. Numbers are sometimes mystical a 141. 267. 320. 327. 328. 1110. b 234.
266. 670. 830.
O
Obedience ought to be prompt, and sometimes blind, ^ 9. 602. b 397. 477. 5^7.
Obstinate sinners do rarely repent in the end b 378. but become desperate b*
488. 533. Occasion of sin must be avoided, a 88. 138. 1095. b 379. 386. 435.
Olimpiades began to be counted about the year of the world. 3247. b. 1089.
Ominous speech a 82* 598. Onias a most godly Highpriest b 951. and Martyr b
956. Oolla and Ooliba the kingdoms of Israel and Judah b 715. Oratories in
private houses a 1023. Origens heresy, that al shall be saved b 188* Original
sin is contracted from Adam* a, 9* 30. b 99. 396. 431. 513. Osee prophesied
of the captivity of both the kingdoms, b 810. Oaths false, or of unlawful
things do not bind. a 269. Oaths by false gods are unlawful, a 421. Oaths
require* truth, justice, and consideration b 406. 554. 556. Oil used in
consecration of Altars, a 59. 101. of Priests a 95. 277. of Kings a 590. 604.
639. 645. Oils were of two sorts a 95. Oz^ was stricken dead for touching the
Arc, a 647.
P
Parables are pithie Allegorical sentences. a 1092. b 268. 281. Paradise is
defended by Angeles, fire, and sword a 13. Paralipomenon signifies a
supplement of things omitted, a 817. Parents must be honored and loved,
first of al neighbors a 216. b 373. Partiality is injustice b 391. Paschal
lamb with the rites and signification a 184. was a figure of Christ's real
presence in the B. Sacrament a 187. Paschal feast a 225. 307. 381. 430. Pasch
made very solemnly by King Josias a 812. 930. Pastors shall always be amongst
the faithful people, b 539. 697. 738. 850. Their office is to feed, and to
rule, b 850. 85^. 886. They must do as they teach, a 970. Otherwise they are
injurious to Gods word, b 394. They must cry and not cease b 533. 539. 678.
734. 845. 871. 935. When they have leisure from preaching, they must employ
their labors in writing, b 428. Patience much commended in the Proverbs, in
many places. It keeps from desperation b 376. and brings content b 849.
Patriarchs in the Law of nature were al Priests, and governed the Church a
212. They continued by perpetual succession to the Law of Moses a 35. 50. 206.
Peace is forbidden with Infideles a 2^6. Peace is a reward of keeping Gods law,
a 315. 856. 1017. b 233. 273. etc. Peace and war, both necessary upon just
occasions* b 321. Peacemakers rewarded b 286. Penalty of original sin
remains in all mankind a 33. Penance necessary a 32. 47. b 619. 826. 994.
with contrition, confession, and satisfaction* a, 32. 685. 934. 977. Penitentes
must have humility, and confidence a 594. 1020. 1042. 1043. People must learn
of their pastors, a 215. Peregrination, or pilgremage to holy places, a 84.
899. Perfection in this life, is to tend to perfection a 63. Persecuters love
treason, not traitors a 548. b 893. Persecuters do pretend false causes
against the innocent b 618* 789. 914. 930. 954. Persecution of four sorts b
170. Persecution must be borne with patience a 74. 155. 156. 158. 750. 964. It
can not hinder the Church b 17. 883. Pharao by abusing Gods benefits hardened
his own heart a 173. 178. 179. 181. 191. 582. Philo a Jew writ the Book of
wisdom before Christ b 343. Phinees killing a malefactor, is not to be
imitated by private men a 374. His zele commended b 196. 439. Piety is
preferred before lerning b 382. Pilgremage. a 84. 899. Places sanctified a 140.
160. 232* 259. 423. 478. 700. 785. 879. 9^5. b 2^3. ^46. 760. Also respected by
painimes b 956. Politic worldlinges persecute innocents against their
conscience b 983. Prayer a 17. 31. 34^. b 715. 965. Set form of prayer and
praises a 880. 921. 935. b 965. 1002. Prayer with fasting and alms a 1006. b
825. Prayer and sacrifice for the dead. 978. 996. It is hitherto observed by
the Jews b 979. Praise of Saints and good men redoundeth to Gods praise b
937. Preaching a necessary office of Pastors b 533. 539. 678. 734. 845. 850.
853. 871. 886. 935. Predestination supposes the means of justification, and
salvation. a 84. 201. Prerogatives of man in his creation. a. 5. Presumption of
proper strength depriueth men of Gods assistance b 909. 995. Pride is the root
of al sins. b 387. Priesthood, a 32. 47. 274. b 994. Priesthood and Law stand
and are changed together a 32. 326. Priests proper office is to offer sacrifice
a 57. 276. 295. Priests consult God for others a 486. They are called gods a
171. High Priest called Prince a 304. and Princes called Priests a 651. 677.
859. Pagan Priests much esteemed in their own nations. a 143. No priest at al
amongst Protestants a ^6. Princes of every family, in the law of nature,
were Priests a 212. Procession made by Priests and people a 479. Prodigality
dissipateth that which the wise gathers b 300. Prodigees are signs of Gods
wrath b 958. Promises of God are conditional a 415. 496. 905. Prophecy is a
principal divine benifite given to few for the good of many b 449. Prophecies
are called visions b 450. and are certain. b 718. 736. Light of Prophecy is
more clear, then the light of faith: b 450. Every Prophet perfectly
understands that he is illuminated b 797. None can prophecy but by Gods
illumination b 510. Prophecy uttered conditionally is true, though the event
follow not b 620. Prophets visions are limited a 789. Al prophets most
principally speak of Christ b 449. many Prophets are hard to be understood.
b 450. 675. 749. 797. 803. 8^3. 844. Why they are obscure, b 451. Many
Prophecies are uttered in factes a 731. b 570. 580. 595. 628. 69^. 815. Four
greater Prophets, and twelve less b 809. Propitiatory of God a 229. 293.
342. Protestants doctrine concerning hardening of heart a 171. Proverbs are
common, brief, pithie sentences b 268. The book of Proverbs perteyneth
particularly to beginners, Ecclesiastes to such as proceed, and the Canticles
to the perfect in piety. b 333. Providence of God in men's actions a 136. 166.
176. b 262. etc. Prudence requisite in all actions. a 137. 1043. b 427. Prudence
in disposing souldiars to fight fortifieth the army. b 928. Prudence chooses
the less danger, or evil in distress. 937. Psalms and Canticles are more
special praises of God b 11. Psalms 150. al made by David. b 3. 4. 19. 174.
176. The whole book called the Psalter b 13. It is a Sum of al other
Scriptures b 5. and the Key of al other Scriptures. b 6. It self has ten
keys, or principal Articles of Divine doctrine. b 7. 8. It is composed in
verse b 9. more ancient then any profane Poetry now extant b 10. It was
written for many causes: especially for Divine service in the old, and new
Testament b 11. 12. 109. Many Psalms perteine to the new Testament b 21.
Seven last Psalms instruct more particularly how to praise God. b 260. Number
of Psalms mystical b 266. Titles of the Psalms were added by Esdras and the
Septuagint. b 19. Bishops are bound to be skilful in David's Psalter. Other
Priests to have competent knowledge therein. b 13. 93. Punishment for sin. a
15. 23. 33. 69. 656. 685. 1088. 1091. b 101. 376. 383. 705. Purgatory. a 33.
711. b 24. 77. 384. See Prayer for the dead. Pu^illanimitie in a superior is
injustice. b 391. In all others a sin, contra^ie to just zele, b 417.
Pythagoras taught transmigration of souls. b 1000.
Q
Quales were sent miraculously amongst the Israelites. a. 207. 347. b 193.
Queen of Saba visited Solomon, and admired his wisdom. a 727.
R
Rachel a figure of the Catholic Church. a 103. She was buried in Bethlehem.
a 111. Her weeping was prophetical. b 603. Rahab delivered two Israelites from
danger. a 472. Rainbow was before Noes flood, but was afterward set for a
sign of Gods mercy. a 38. Razias killing himself is not to be imitated. b
984. Rechabites a religious order b 613. 995. Recidiuation aggrauateth sins.
b 611. Redemption by Christ. a 12. etc. b. 16. etc. See Christ. Relaxation of
the captivity foreshewed. b. 747. performed. b 933. 944. etc. Religious
orders. a 335. 545. b 613. 995. Relics. a 153. 191. 290. b 949. 996.
Remission of sins. a. 294. 577. 926. etc. Remission of injuries with
discretion. a 1048. Repentance necessary. a. 32. 47. 1074. b. 65. 465. See
Penance. Restitution. a 223. 270. Resurrection. a 34. 48. 203. 712. 936. 1083.
b 49. 485. 546. 743. 996. Rewards of good works. a 76. 1102. b 199. 393.
395. 448. 543. 579. Rewards temporal in the old Testament. a 157. 190. 451.
682. Rock of the Church is Christ. who also made S. Peter the rock thereof b.
5. 77. Rod of Aaron brought forth buddes, flowers, and fruict. a 359. Rome
begane to be built about the year of the world. 3. 71. b. 1089. Roman
Monarchy was greater then the former. b 792. 1003. Ruth a Moabite prefigured
the vocation of Gentiles. a 564. She was very commendable for her virtues. a
569. A comfort to the Gentiles in that Christ descended from her. b 473.
S
Sabbath day (that is our saturdaie) instituted. a, 7. 216. 250. 307. 430.
756. b 947. Sackcloth worn for penance, a 774. 802. 977. 1021. 1042. 1080. b
501. 795. 824. 838. Sacraments of Circumcision. a 65. of hosts for sin.
267. of consecrating Priests. 275. of diverse washinges, and purifications. 288.
and many others in the old Law. More in number, less in effect then the
Sacraments of Christ. a 705. Sacraments of the New law for most part were
prefigured in the old Testament. a 199. 32. 705. Sacrament of the Eucharist was
prefigured. a 150. 188. 210. Sacrifice is due to God only, as Lord of al
creatures. a 5. 31. 47. 198. 262. b 424. 842. 993. And to no creature how
excellent soever. a. 15. 219. 528. 705. Sacrifice is the proper office of a
Priest. a 57. Three kinds of Sacrifices. a 262. Sacrifice ordained for three
causes a 264. b 581. Diverse for diverse sins: a. 267. for diverse feasts: a
380. with distinct hosts appointed by the Law. a 425. Sacrifice in beasts,
birds, and other things mystical. a 60. 362. Sacrifice by the Law of Moses
limited to one place. a 423. 510. 707. 873. by dispensation in other place s. a
519. 545. 707. 893. And in the new Testament one online Sacrifice in all places
of the world. b 884. 993. Sacrifices of the old Law to be changed. b 69. 98.
884. 993. Sacrifice of the Eucharist perpetual to the end of the world. b 280.
544. 885. 993. Sacrilege severely punished. b. 953. Sacrilegious murder
revenged. a 908. Saints are to be honored. a 8. 34. 218. 531. 935. b 252.
Are lawfully, and profitably inuocated. a 33^ 245. 710. 1068. 1110. b 503. 541.
575. 697. 778. 987. 996. They may know our thoughts. a 605. 107. b 541. 578.
Salathiel the son of Iechonias, and father of Zorobabel, was borne and died
in the captivity of Babylon. a 824. 947. 951. b 865. Solomon signifies
Pacifier: was also called Ecclesiastes, the Preacher: and Idida beloved: He
writ three books. b 333. 334. He was also called the Gatherer. b 314. and
Lamuel b 315. He prefigured Christ in diverse respects. a 856. b 131. 166.
Solomon deposed Abiather by extraordinary commission a 692. Salomons salvation
is doubtful a 732. 866. b 354. Salt signifies discretion, and was required in
every sacrifice. a 265 361. It makes ground barren. a 537. Salvation
depends upon grace and merits. a 33. b 267. 994. See works meritorious.
Samaria the head city of the ten Tribes. a 737. Samaritanes Schismatiques.
a 734. fell into many sects a 744. 798. 941. Samson a Nazareite, and a figure
of Christ. a 545. 553. He did many strange great things. a 548. etc. He
sinned not in killing himself with the Philistimes. a 553. etc. 941. Samuel of
the tribe of Leui prophesied a child. a 574. He anointed Saul King a 590.
Also David. 604. He appeared after his death a 631. b 441. Sanaballat procured
license for Manasses to build a schismatical temple. b 960. 1000. Sapiential
books teach the way to serve God, b 267. Al five are Canonical Scripture. b
268. Saraias Highpriest slain in Rebla. a 816. b 997. Satisfaction. a 32. 270.
Savior properly pertains to Christ: is also attributed to some men. a 128.
521. Saul the first King of the sraelites began well. a 587. 595. He afterward
offended in disobedience, and presumption. a 596. 602. 837. He was relieved in
spiritual afflition by David's music a 704. Of great envy he hated and
persecuted David. a 610. In distress he consulted a Pithon spirit. a 629. And
in desperate extremity killed himself. a 635. Scandal hurts the weak, not
the perfect. b 233. Schism and heretical conuenticles must be avoided a 355.
358. 510. 511. 756. 771. 887. 896. 949. b 56. 232. 238. 526. 696. 710. 777.
862. 894. 896. Schismatical Temples in Garizim, and in Egypt b 800. 960. 1000.
School of paganism was set us in Jerusalem by Jason an Apostata. b. 955.
Scriptures are of most eminent authority. a 3. They have four senses. a 4.
Yea many literal senses. b 19. 188. Mystical sense is sometimes as certain as
the literal. b 8^1. They are hard to be understood a 3. 16. 22. 46. 115. 435.
b. 214. 216. 485. 490. 674. 680. 758. Scriptures seeming contrary, are
reconciled by ten rules a 820. They can not in deed be contrary one place to
an other. ibid. b 293. They are best expounded by the holy Fathers a. 251. b
14. Secrecy justly enjoined, or promised binds in conscience. b 434. Sects
of Panimes* Barbarism, Scythisme, and Grecisme a. 48. Many Sects also of the
Schismatical Samaritanes. a 798. 941. Innumerable amongst the Grecians b 1000.
Sepulchers, a 33. 151. 515. Christ's sepulcher glorious. b. 468. 527. Serpents
most crafty. a. 9. Serpent of brass erected for curing infirmity. a 336. b
366. Afterward broken in pieces. a 799. Service of false gods does not
appease them. a 915. Seven times signify seven years. b. 783. Seventy two
Interpreters of the Hebrew Bible into Greek b 1000 Shamfastnes is sometimes
good, sometimes vicious. b 379. Simon High priest and general captain b 936.
1003. Simonie committed by Giezi a 770. Sin entered by envy of the Devil. a
11. Sins before the flood were great in four respects. a 23. Sins of
commission and omission. a 272. b* 820. Sins less and greater, or venial and
mortal. a 401. 407. b 399. Sins of al sorts must be punished a 9. 33. 40.
351. 685. 512. 894. b 65. 95. 188. 345. 413. 459. 535. 557. 569. 576. 591. 631.
719. 817. 888. Sinners for punishment are suffered sometimes to fall into other
sins. a 455. 463. 492. 577. 910. b 389. 572. 679* 697. 808. 833. Al sins
are remissible during this life, a 577. 798. 1031. b 65. 188. 328 552. 579.
666. 706. Some sinners are of the Elect, and shall be called, and justified. b.
8^1. Sinful people are often unconstant. b. 627. Sloth breeds contempt in
this life, and damnation in the next. b. 404. Sodom and Gomorrha were
destroyed with brimstone. a 70. Sons of God are the faithful godly people. a
20. Sophonias prophesied the captivity of the two tribes. b 861. Souls of men
are daily created. a 6. b 3^8. Souls departed, may be relieved by Sacrifice
and prayers a 33. 202. 637. 711. 995. b 24. 284. 979. 996. Souls sometimes
appear, assuming bodies* after death. a 632. Spartians otherwise called
Lacedaemonians descended from Abraham. b 933. 934. Succession a special proof
of true doctrine. b 926. 934. Succession of spiritual Governors proves their
authority. a 35. 50. 115. 206. 317. 713. 828. 8^0. 939. 984. b 926. Succession
of Patriarchs, and of Highpriestes. See Supreme head of the Church, and the
Historical table. Succession conserved in the Machabees, after the apostacy of
Manasses, Alcimus. etc. b 956. 1004. Sun a very excellent* creature, but not
so excellent as man. b 398. Sun stood the space of a day. a 488. Returned
back* ten degrees. a 805. b 505. Supreme head of the Church. a 35. 50. 171.
327. 433. 475. 846. 657. 899. 905. 912. 960. b 1004. Sure^^eshipe is dangerous.
b 276. Susanna was delivered from false sentence, by Daniel conuincing the
wicked Judges. b 805. Suspension from Priestlie function* a 811. Sustenance is
the proper hyre of spiritual woorkmen. a 55. Swearing by creatures. a 131. See
Oaths. Sweet answer appeaseth anger a. 532. b 289. 381.
T
Tabernacle described, a 230. etc. finished and erected. a* 259. It signified
the Church of Christ. ibid. Temperance in feasting. a 134. 1037. Temple
intended by David. a 648. 848. was built by Solomon. a 699. 871* It was
destroyed by the Chaldees. a 815. 933. b 648. 658. and reedified after the
relaxation from captivity. a 945. etc. But the former was more excellent. a
948. b 868. The second was profaned, and much impared by Antiochus Epiphanes.
b 893. 959. but recovered and cleansed by Judas Machabeus. b* 905. 970. 1002. It
was enlarged and adorned by Herod* b 1003. and finally destroyed by the Romans
b 545. Temples schismatical were built in Garizim: and in Egypt. b 960. 1000.
Temporal pain remains due after sin is remitted. a 33. Ten Tribes in
great part fell into schism and Idolatry, a 734. but not al a 744. 750. 941.
992. 1010. Many of them returned from captivity. a 982. b 600. 602. 743. Two
tribes, and ten tribes are called by sundry names, b 810. Tentations happen
to the strongest, but hurt them not. b 919. Teraphim signify images, as well
lawful as unlawful. a 103. 612. b 813. Thau the Hebrw letter had the form of a
Cross. b 688. Time is short in comparison of eternity. a 1077. 1084. Time or
season is to be considered and observed. b 320. Tithes paid in the law of
nature, and of Moses. a 59. 319. 418. 986. b 887. Tobias his book is
Canonical a 989. 990. He never yielded to schism, nor idolatry a 941. 991. He
prophesied. a 1008. Tongues divided in Babel. a 43. Traditions were long before
Scriptures. a 3. They are necessary and certain. a 397. 409. Traitors do
commonly calumniate good governors, b 954. Translations do not fully express
the sense of the original tongue. b 374. Transubstantiation confessed by
Rabbines. b 993. Treasure of satisfactorie works in the Church. a 1069.
Tribulations are profitable to men. a 115. 1067. b 64. 133. 170. 218. 273. 322.
339. 347. 531. 551. 711. Trinity of Divine Persons in God. a 30. 47. 67. 196.
702. 934. b 86. 93. 792. 989. Truth must be avouched. b. 380.
V
Vanity described by Solomon. b 317. etc. Venial sins. a 157. b. 34. 305.
Verse more pleasant to the mind, and more easy to be remembered. a 460. b 11.
Virtues described and commended in all the five Sapiential books. b 267. etc.
more particularly. b 282. to the page. 313. Virtue afflicted moves to
compassion. b 957. Vestments of Bishops, and Priests, a 234. signify virtues
requisite in Clergy men* a 236. Vinetree signifies the Church b 698.
Virginity. a 542. It is a great blessing, and meritorious state in the Church
of Christ. b 530. preferred above Marriage. b 531. 995. Vision of God is perfect
felicity, a 247. b 38. Visions of the Prophets are often obscure, b 675. 749.
871. Union domestical, and civil is necessary, before peace can be made with
strangers. b 743. Vocation to spiritual functions is necessary. a 234. 251.
323. 326. 346. 792. b 588. Vows. a 95. 319. 335. 384. 385. 444. 709. 824. b
140. 323. 6. 3. 843. Unlawful vows do not bind. a 542. Yet Iepthe is otherwise
probably excused in sacrificing his daughter a 543. Usury is forbid. a 224.
313. 443. b 34. 105. 310. 705. 714.
W
Wars often made by Gods servants. a 55. 211. 366. 385. 403. 414 440. and
Seq. In the books of Iosue, Judges, Kings, and Paralipomenon. Also b 896.
986. Small numbers overcame greater. b 931. etc. In wars a just cause is the
best armor. b 966. Water made sweet by Moses throwing in a piece of wood. a
195. By Elizeus casting in salt. a 763. Water drawn out of rocks. a 211. 365.
417. 978. b 144. 193. 207. Water procured by Elizeus, a 765. Waters of the red sea stood like to walls. a 193. Likewise of Jordan. a 474. b 207. Water
of lustration holy, ^ 340. Women being virtuous and prudent, are preferred
before riches, beauty. etc. b 315. Some most excellent both in the old, and
new Testament. b ^16. Women in extreme hunger did eat their own children. a
774. b 655. 658. Likewise men sometimes did the same. b 663. 681. Widohood is a
holy state of life. a 1035. The Book of Wisdom is Canonical Scripture. a
989. b 343. 349. Wisdom taken three ways: Increated, which is God himself;
Spiritual wisdom; and Humane wisdom. b 270. 353. 355. Wisdom spiritual
comprehends al virtues, and divine gifts, and compriseth all the means
whereby God is served, b 267. consists in keeping the law of God. b 582.
Wisdom (and thereby eternalglorie) is attained by gradation from virtue to
virtue. b 352. 995. Wisdom considers things past, present, and to come. a
463. especially it considers the Creator, ad supernatural virtues. a 1091.
Wisemen are most humble. b 313. Worldly wise are not to be consulted in
spiritual things. b 385. Worldly men think the Church may be destroyed by
persecution. a 165. Works necessary to salvation. a 33. b 267. 994. Al works
are not sinful. a 23. Works without true faith, or grace may merit temporal
reward, but not eternal. a, 784. b 34. 728. 764. Works done in grace are
meritorious a. 61. 200. 347. 352 442. 539. 567. 704. 895. 936. 970. 988. 995. b
76. 227. 395. 764. 85. 995. Works of mortification. a 272. 593. 1021. b 126.
331. 395. 901. Works of supererogation. a 920. 936. b 530. 613. 952. 995. Al
voluntary works shall be rewarded or punished. a 15. 722. 988. b 31. 271. 273.
376. 383. 666. 706.
Y
Years mystical: The seventh year the ground rested, a 312. debtes were
remitted amongst the Jews. a 428. the fiftith year was Iubelie, with
remission of servitude, and testauration of inheritance. a 312. Younger must
regard and esteem the judgment of elders. b 433. Younger brother for mystery
preferred before the elder, as Jacob before Esau. a 85. Ephraim before
Manasses. a 146. Moses before Aaron. a 169. David, and Solomon before their
elder brethren, a 604. 688. Youth is the fittest time to get virtue, and
knowledge. b 332. 448.
Z
Zachatias Highpriest was slain by Ioas King of Judah. a 908. Zacharias the
Prophet exhorted to build the Temple. b 868. Zele is an indignation rising of
love. b 827. Zele is necessary in just religious causes, discretly used. a
982. 986. 993. b 55. 126. 898. Zele of Simeon and Leui was just, but not
discrete, a 109. 149. 1023. Zele of Moses against Idolaters. a 244. of Phinees
against fornicators. a 374. b 196. 439. of David to Gods public service. a,
647. 648. b 55. 115. 126. 256. of Elias against false Prophets. a 747. of
Matthathias against persecuters of the Church. b 896. And of his sons, and
other Machabees in advancing Religion. b 899. etc. Zele of David, Ezechias, and
Josias above other Kings in destroying idolatry. b 445. Zele of certain
Christian kings rewarded with glorious titles. a 475. Zorobabel chief Duke,
and Jesus the Highpriest with others built an Altar, a 947. and the Temple
after the captivity. a 951. b 866. Which was a figure of the Church of Christ.
b, 868.
FINIS.
Censura trium Theologorum Anglorum, extra collegium commorantium.
NOS infrascripti, perlecta hac veteris Testamenti versione, cum Librorum
Argumentis and capitum; cumque Annotationibus, ac Recapitulationibus suis locis
insertis; nihil inuenimus, quod Fidei Catholicae, aut bonis moribus repugnet:
sed econtra reperimus Translationem fidelem; reliqua docta and vtilia. Vtpote
quae exactam temporum seriem; Ecclesiae, Pastorum, Doctrinaeque Catholicae
successionem, ab ipso mundi exordio deducunt; obscuriora sacri textus loca
elucidant; haereses huius temporis argumentis ex ipso eodem textu collectis
conuincunt; Ecclesiae Catholicae dogmata pene omnia confirmant. Ideoque summa
cum legentium vtilitate publcari posse iudicamus; si ordinarijs Librorum
Censoribus hoc ipsum approbare beneplacitum fuerit. 1609.

IOANNES WRIGHTV^, Ecclesiae collegiatae Gloriosiss. Virginis, Cortracensis
Decanus.

MATTHAEVS KELLISONVS, S. Theologiae Doctor ac Professor in Vniuersitate
Remensi.

GVILIELMVS HARISONVS, S. Theologiae Doctor. Omnes aliquando Sacrarum Literarum
in hoc Collegio Professores.

You may please (courteous reader) to amend the more especial errors happened in
this Edition, by reading thus: In the former volume:
Page 20. line 24. read body etc. Page 26. line 7. partitions. Page 51. line
13. that bless thee, Page 57. line 29. SALEM. Page 107. line 1. seeing Esau.
Page 227. line 6. to the twelve Page 305. Add in the margent: much more in the
Church of Christ? Page 727. line ^4. navy, and put out moniment, in the
margent. Page 846. line 39. rejoice, that Page 910. line 40. and 41. Ioas did
take Amasias, etc. Page 1064. line 39. how they escape many miseries, which
are never borne, line 40. birth. Page 1069. line 1. nor I gaynesay.
In the latter volume:
Page 24. after the last line, add: Others think he speaks of that Chusi
(or Chusai) who reported to him the death of Absalom. 2. Reg. 18. v. 31. Page
268. read the four last lines thus: thirtith chapter, either an other Auctor,
or rather the same under an other title, and in prophetical style, utters
like divine sentences; adding in the last chapter, other excellent precepts
received of his mother: whereto he adioyneth the praise of a right wise woman:
prophetically the Catholic Church. Page 721. add in the margent: were
pastors of cattle here mentioned) subdued the Ammonites.



We have also found some other faults of less importance; and fear there be
more. But we trust the reader may easily correct them, as they occur.


