AN ELEGY Upon the most deplorable death of Prince Henry Eldest son to the
King of Bohemia: Who upon the 9th of January last passing to Harlem, most
unfortunately perished.
Eternal Tears, Griefs, that shall never end,
With murmures uttered in lamenting verse;
Sad accents, and such lines that forth may send
Sounds, such as Widows houle about the hearse
Of their dead Husbands; words whose force may bend
Relentlesse hearts, and flinty bowels pearce:
Come to my plaints, bring Characters of woe,
That endless grief, unvalued loss may show.
Me thinks my hand as with a Fever shakes,
Which when I to the trembling leaf apply,
More ghastly white then erst, for grief it quakes,
And seems with us to have a Sympathy:
But willingly this mournful dye it takes
Badge of our passions, sorrows liverie,
Which as it drops from my unstedfast pen,
Seems to lament the general loss of men,
In this young Prince most likely to revive
The glorious Triumphs of his an^^strie;
This flower of youth, in whom did Nature strive
With Education for the victory:
Each seeming Conqueresse, so they both did thrive,
And grew so soon to such an excellency,
Whom angry Fortune scarcely taught to fear,
Nor hopes vain breath aloft could ever bear.
Drench't in the Sea, lest the enamourd Earth
Love-burnt might chance to prove Trinacrias loss,
And from her burning Entrals send a breath
Like that which comes from Aetnas sulph'ry fosse;
Or lest a flower should from his Vrne have birth
That might have power, the power of Fate to cross:
And like the immortal Nectar of the sky,
Enfranchize men to immortality.
Batavia, rather should thy shores down fall,
And the fierce waves their ancient Lordship fill;
Rather should time back summon and recall
The bloody Actors in thy former ill:
Rather in former seats should Fate install
Proud Austria, D'Alva, Parma, Longeville
In this revenge back to reduce a flood,
And make where once was Sea, a Sea of blood.
What profits it though Nereus did resign
Some of his Kingdom to the Continent,
When he his general forces did combine,
And froth-immantled all in rage he went
Against that straight which Albion did confine,
Which with his boystrous fury down he rent;
And broke that Isthmus that did join before
Our chalkie cliffes unto the Belgicke shore?
If like a cruel Lord he does demand
Such chief, such duties for the unnatural soil;
And does exact a due for barren sand
Of greater worth then was the richest spoil
His waves could ever gain, or the bright strand
Of the fair East, sought with so dangerous toil,
Did ever vie against the Sun, or gold
Pactolus streams, or Tagus sands enfold.
Rather should braved Iberia keep the Ore
Brought from the ransackt Indias wealthy ground;
Better our joys were disanull'd before
Report did ever such a prize resound,
Rather should Holland back again restore
The riches in that conquered fleet she found,
Then that it more should hurt when it was gained,
Then had it in our enemies hand remained.
Thus by our gain we lost, our joy's our woe,
So the angry heavens our hopes still countermand,
Our Conquest proves our fatal overthrow;
The Nerves of war bring weakness to our Land,
Thus while we most do rise, most down we go,
Ever residing on the tottering sand
Of expectation, which each blast does cross,
And every gale can turn to greater loss.
High Providence, could humane wit but sound
The deep abyssus of thy mysteries:
How soon should we on Heaven our Comfort ground
Not on conjectures, possibilities,
Which then most vain, when trusted most are found
But broken reeds are all our policies.
The Heauen's will have our hearts, and take away
Those things the soonst that cause them most to stray.
Thus both our Henry's soon away did go,
Shown to the earth, not suffered to remain,
Now in the Heaven, more bright then ere did show
Proud Cyllarus riders over the liquid plain
Of the vast Oceans Empire, Fa^es bestow
On them by turns to shine upon the maine,
Ours both together glister, jointly live
To Heaven and Earth their light at once they give.
Did Silver footed Thetis cause thee dye,
In thee the Pelian stem to contemplate,
Or Pallas weary of Virginity,
To Enjoy thy love compact with envious Fate,
To bring thee up above the golden sky:
She worth thy love, thou worthy such a mate,
And lead thee up, since all the world denide
A match for her like thee, thee such a bride!
Or did those Heroes that in Paradise
Enjoy those sweets th'inamel'd plains do yield;
Or masking in their Robes of greatest prize,
In gentle ranks pass over the flowery field:
Where every Vale, each mount, each fall, each rise,
With thousand kinds of rarities is filled:
Where noiselesse floods do branch the youthful mead,
Birds sweetly dumb aeternall silence lead;
As hence secure of Fate they cast their eyes
(Their eyes all seeing, passing all they see)
In this sweet Prince they view those qualities
That brought their souls to such felicity,
When envying us, they with the Fates devise
To bring him, (worthy of their company)
Which as they found him, took him straight away:
Their strong desires admitting no delay.
Arion, thou had power to charm with string
A fish to bear thee safe unto the shore:
Could not thy plaints (sweet Prince) have power to bring
Something amidst the waves to pass thee over
Whose voice was better Music? Did what bore
So sweet a burden fear abandoning,
And with the traytrous winds and air agree
To keep thee still, to deal so cruelly.
Enjoy sweet Spirit thine aeternall rest,
Our loss, not thine, is cause of this our woe;
Above the golden spheres live ever blessed,
Possess the Crown the Heavens on thee bestow,
In stead of earthly diadem; possessed
By glorious Saints, so may thou ever show
Thy light, not set a fained Star in sky,
But placed a Saint in greater dignity.
This most hopeful young Prince passing with his Father, and some few
Attendants to Harlem to view the Plate-fleete lately surprised by the
Hollander, being in a small Passageboat, was ouer-set with a ship of greater
burden from Amsterdam. His Father, with two or three Followers were saved by
entering ropes cast out of the greater ship, which takt instantly about for
their relief. The Prince himself laboring to save his life, attained some
height upon the mast of the small vessel that was sunk, where calling for
succor, and none coming to his aid, he was for some space heard crying: from
which part of the ship the next morning they took him starued and frozen to
death, whose corpse his Father brought to the Court the day following, being
for the circumstance of his death, as well as for his hopeful parts infinitely
lamented.

FINIS.
R. ABBEY.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Roystore. 1629.


