decorative border

A CATALOGVE OF THE KINGS OF SCOTLAND. Together with their several Arms,
Wives, and Jssue.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON. M.DC.X.

royal blazon and crown of King Malcolm III of Scotland
MAlcolme, sur-named Canmor, that is, Great-Head, the third of that name, King
of Scots, was the eighty and sixth King after Fergusius, that governed the
kingdom of Scotland. This Malcolme was the son of Duncan, the son of
Crinanus Prince of Cumberland, begotten upon the Kinswoman of Siward Earl of
Northumberland. Unto this Malcolme, Edward the Confessor King of England, gave
the kingdom of Scotland, to be held of the Crown of England, during the
reign of which Malcolme, King Edward dyed.

Edgar Aetheling, or Adeling (unto whom in equiry the kingdom of his deceased
Kinsman king Edward the Confessor appertained) at that time remaining in
Hungary, with his Mother, his Sister, and a great family, putting forth to
sea, with intent to return into his Native Country, being tossed with
contrary winds, at last landed upon the coast of Scotland: where, being
courteously entertained by this Malcolme, after much conference, and courteous
offices (for at that time Malcolme spoke the English tongue as his own, which
in those seasons was seldom used among the Scottish Nation, by reason that he
had lived a banished man, fourteen years of his youth in England) Margaret,
Edgars sister, for the excellent beauty and Noble carriage of her self in the
Court of Scotland, so much pleased the fancy of Malcolme, that he desired her
for his wife, and married her. By whom he had six sons, and two daughters.
William the Conqueror, in the sixth year of his reign, overthrew this Malcolme
in battle, and of him as of his Leige-man, exacted the Oath of fealty and
homage, which homage was performed (as says Roger Houedon) at Abernethy in
Scotland. The like did William Rufus by the said Malcolme and his two sons,
successively reigning Kings, one after another, as it appears by the
Chronicles of Florentius a Monk of Worcester, William of Malmesbury, Roger
Houedon, Henry of Huntington, and others. This Malcolme after he had reigned
37. years, and eight months, was slain, with Edward his eldest son, at the
siedge of Almeric or Anwik a Castle in Northumberland, Anno. Dom, 1093. and
lies buried at Tinemouth, having before builded the Churches of Durham in
England, and Dunfermeline in Scotland.

He bore for his Arms, Or, a Lion rampant Gules only, without any Tressure at
all: for whereas it has bin generally received, that the Tressure has been
used in the Arms of Scotland from the time of Achaius King of Scots, who first
made league with the French, which gives some color to the matter, being
garnished with Flour-de-luces. Yet I make a question, who can prove any Arms,
either with us here in England, or in Scotland, of that antiquity? Surely none,
until of long time after, and much about the time of this Malcolme, if any at
al then were. But out of all doubt, whenever they first began to bear Arms,
they bore the Lion, only without any tract or tressure, as is abouesaid, which
I find continued in that order, until the time of Alexander the second King of
Scotland, as apeareth by his Seal, who in his shield bore this Lion rampant
simply, without any addition. And his son Alexander the third, was the first
that I find, to use the tressure floury, and that but a single one neither, as
you may see it cut in stone at Westminster, in the time of the said Alexanders
reign: which Tressure, K. Edward the first used also but single, in the seals
which he made for the matters concerning his kingdom of Scotland. And I make no
doubt, but that whenever this tressure was first assumed, it did imply, and
was a token of certain and sure league made with the French, which afterward
daily grew stronger and stronger, and to the intent that they would show how
willing they were to keep it, of their single Tressure, they made a double one.

royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King Malcolm III of Scotland
MArgaret, the daughter of Edward the Outlaw (son of Edmund Ironside, King of
England) and sister to Edgar Etheling, by whose death issulesse, she was heir
of the Saxon Kings and Monarchs: and Queen of Scotland, by marriage of Malcolme
the third, king of that Realm. She dyed in the Castle of Edenborough, in the
year 1093. upon report of her husbands death, four days after his decease.
For her sanctity of life, she was after her death, Cannonized a Saint, and
remains registered in the Kallender of Saints. She was no less innobled by
her mother Agatha, the daughter of Henry the fourth Emperor, Grandchild unto
Lewis, and lineall descendant of Charles the great, then by her Father Edward,
being the issue of so many holy and glorious Princes.

Their Issue.
Edward, who was slain with his Father at Alnwick, by the most valiant knight
Morell, the 17. of the Calends of September, in the 37. year of the reign of
his Father. Edmund, who dyed a Child. Ethelred, dyed young also Edgar, who slew
his Uncle Donevald, reigned in his stead, and held Cumberland by the gift of
william Rufus. Alexander, who after the decease of his Brother, entered upon
the kingdom, and also held Cumberland by the grant of Henry the first. David,
who reigned after the death of his Brother Alexander. Matild, or Mauld
(sur-named Bona) upon whose Virtues, was made this memorable Epigram, who was
Queen of England, and wife to k. Henry the first. Prospera non laetam fecere
nec aspera tristem, Prospera terror ei aspera risus erant:
Non decor effecit fragilem, non Sceptra Superbam, Sola potens humilis, Sola
pudica decens.
Mary, who was Countess of Bullogne, married unto Eustace, Earl of Bullogn,
unto whom she bare one daughter, Mauld, heir of the County of Bullogn, and
married unto Stephen, King of England, unto whom she bare Eustace, who dyed
before his Father. She dyed* 1115. the 27. of December.
royal blazon and crown of Kings Duncan II to Alexander I of Scotland
An. Dom. 1096.
DVncan, the base son of Malcolme, and after him, Edgar and Alexander, the
lawful children of Malcolme, successively reigned over the Scots. This Duncan,
forced Donevald, Brother unto King Malcolme to fly his Country, and by the
grant and gift of william Rufus, King of England, reigned in his stead, after
he had performed his Oath of homage and fealty, made to the said king william
Rufus. And after the said Duncan had reigned one year and an half, he was
slain by Makpender, the Thane, and Earl of Mornes. An. Dom. 1007.
Whereupon, the same King william Rufus sent Clito Edgar with an Army into
Scotland, therein to seat his Brother in Law Edgar, the son of King
Malcolme, after the expulsion of his Uncle Donevald, who usurped upon the
kingdom: and he gave unto the said Edgar the Kingdom, and received the
accustomed homage and fealty. The said Edgar deceased the sixth of January,
1107. and unto him succeeded Alexander his Brother, by the consent of King
Henry the first, Anno. Dom. 1107. unto whom he also gave the like Oath of
homage and fealty. Seventeen years reigned Alexander: but because both
himself, as also his Brethren dyed issulesse, David the youngest son of King
Malcolme, succeeded in the Kingdom, Anno. 1124. who being more worthy then
both his Brethren reigned prosperously, 29. years, and two months.

royal blazon and crown of King David I of Scotland
An. Dom. 1124
David, commonly called Saint David, the youngest son of King Malcolme the
third, Edgar and Alexander his Brethren, being dead without issue, succeeded
in the kingdom of Scotland, in the year of our Lord, 1124. Of proud persons,
he (a valiant Prince) was the tamer and confounder; toward his good
subjects, he was mild and merciful; a Prince, Religious and zealous. He
maruailously reformed the Scottish Nation, whose manners were very rude, and
also greedy of blood, out of their savage barbarousnes so accustomed to
bloodshed, neither regarding Age, nor Sex. He waged war, and fought two
mighty battles with Stephen, King of England, assisting the just quarrel of
his Niece the late Empress. For unto Mauld the Empress, the Daughter and
heir of King Henry the first, and his Sisters eldest Daughter, he had made his
homage and fealty. For when King Stephen had sent to demand homage of the said
King David, for the Realm of Scotland, as for all other the Lands and
Seigniories which he held of him within England: King David made answer, that
both Stephen, he himself, with all the Nobility of England, were all severally
bound by Oath, to the obedience of the Empress his Niece, as the only lineal
and lawful heir to king Henry the first, her Father, whereof he for his part
made that conscience, as that during her life, he would never acknowledge any
other true inheritor to the Crown of England. Afterward notwithstanding, he
gave his son Henry, as hostage to k. Stephen, who in his Fathers behalf did
likewise swear homage unto the said K. Stephen. The Northern Provinces of
England (viz.) Northumberland and Cumberland, he claimed in the name of Mauld
the Empress, which being gotten, he long retained them as in his proper
right, till King Henry, the son of the said Mauld the Empress, disgesting with
impatience, to be defrauded of so Noble a portion of his inheritance, regained
the foresaid Frontiers from King Malcolme, the Grandchild of David, by his
son Henry. And thus after many troubles, King David sl^pt with his Fathers,
in the year of our Lord, 1153. in the eighteenth year of King Stephen, the
24. day of May; declaring his Grandchild, the eldest son of his Son Earl
Henry, as yet within age, his successor in the kingdom. He lies buried at
Dumfermeling. A Prince he was, of great Virtue and Honor, who after his
honorable marriage, and his undefiled bed, having one only son borne unto him,
he ever after remained a widdower. He builded many Monasteries; namely,
Halyrude-house, Kelso, Iedburgh, Dundranan, Cambuskeneth, Kinlosse, Metrosse,
New-bottell, Dunfermelin, Holme in Cumberland, and two Religious places at
New Castle in Northumberland. He erected four Byshopprickes, (viz.) Rosse,
Brechin, Dumblane, and Dunkeld.

royal blazon and crown of Matild, wife of King David I of Scotland
MAtild, or Mauld, one of the daughters and heirs of VValtheof, earl of
Northumberland and Huntington, and of Judith his wife, the daughter of Lambert
Earl of Lens, Niece of william the Conqueror, was Wife to King David, and
Widow of Simon Saint-Liz, Earl of Nort^umberland and Huntington.

Their Issue.
Henry Earl of huntington, the only son of King David, married Adama, the
Daughter of william the second Earl of warren and Surrey, Sister by the
Mothers side, to william the younger Earl of warren and Surrey, to Robert
Earl of Leicester, and walram Earl of Mellent in Normandy, and Worcester in
England. Of whom, he got three sons, and as many daughters. He dyed at
Calcone, in the year of grace, 1151. his father being yet alive, and was there
buried. His Lady Adama, founded a Monastery of Nuns at Hadington, and died in
the year of our Lord, 1178. Claricia, eldest daughter of King David. Hodierna,
another daughter of King David.
The Children of Henry.
Malcolme, King of Scots, the fourth of that name, eldest Son of Earl Henry.
William, King of Scots, ^ather of Alexander the second. David, his third
son, Earl of huntington, that married Mauld, Sister of Ranulph earl of
Chester, by whom he had diverse children. Margaret, married to Conan, Earl of
Britain, Anno. 1161. the seventh of Henry the second; after whose death, she
was again married to Lord Bohun, earl of Hereford. Ada, married to Florence,
earl of Holland. Mauld, who dyed in tender years unmarried.
royal blazon and crown of King Malcolm IV of Scotland
An. Dom. 1153.
MAlcolme, the fourth of that name (surnamed the Maiden, because he would never
marry, as hereafter is showed) the Grandchild of King David, being thirteen
years of age, succeeded in the kingdom of Scotland, in the year of Grace,
1153. Henry King of England, son to the Empress, invested this Malcolme with
the Order of Knighthood, and caused him to render unto him the Countries of
Northumberland and Cumberland, and in lieu thereof, restored him again to the
earldome of Huntington, of ancient right appertaining unto him; having first,
performed his Oath of homage and fealty for the kingdom of Scotland, at
Chester, in the year of grace, 1160. The Country of Galloway in rebelling
against him, he visited in person with a mighty Army, and subdued it. After he
came unto man's estate, the grave Counselors of his kingdom persuaded him to
take a Wife; but he ever refused to hearken thereunto, constantly affirming,
that he had vowed chastity, which he observed all the days of his life. He
died at Iedworth, after he had reigned twelve years, and six months. But his
body was buried at Dumfermling, a place lying almost in the midst of the
kingdom, where for the most part the kings of Scotland have been accustomed
to have bin buried, even to these our days. After him, succeeded his Brother
william, a man more fit for wordly affairs then his Brother, but for the Noble
government of the kingdom, he could not be more happy then his Brother.

royal blazon and crown of King William I of Scotland Arma paterna^



An. Dom. 1165.
WIlliam, Earl of Huntington in England, Brother unto Malcolme the fourth,
succeeded in the kingdom of Scotland, and was crowned in the year of Grace,
1165. This William, as also David his Brother, with all the residue of the
Earls and Barons of the Kingdom of Scotland, became the Leidge-men of King
Henry the younger, the son of King Henry the second, the day after his
Coronation, and swear unto him fealty against all men, reserving their
allegiances due unto Henry the Father (as yet living.) Howbeit, the same
William having forgotten his duty, in hostile manner invaded the Country of
Northumberland, with a puissant Army, in the twentieth year of Henry the
second, and used exceeding cruelty against the Inhabitants. Against whom,
certain Lords of Yorkshire, making out (viz.) Ranulph de Glanvill, Robert de
Stuteuill, Bernard de Balliol, William de Vesey, and others, they took him
prisoner at Alnwick or Anwick, and surrendered him unto the foresaid Henry.

In the year following, the fifteenth day before the Calends of May, he was
permitted to depart freely. And afterward, the said William, by the consent
of the Prelates, the Earls, Barons, and Nobles, and all others the chief
persons of Scotland, coming unto York, in the foresaid year, the
seventeenth day before the Calends of September, he did acknowledge by his
Letters Patents, unto his Lord Henry, King of England, the son of Maud the
Empress, that he, his heirs and successors, should for ever be subject unto
the Kings of England, as unto their Leige-Lordes. After the decease of King
Henry, this william came again to Canterbury, and did his homage unto Richard
the first, the son and heir of the said Henry. And after his death also,
the said William did his homage, and swore his allegiance to John, King of
England, Brother and heir unto the foresaid Richard, on a heigh hill without
the City of Lincoln, in the sight of all the people, upon the cross of
Hubert Arch-Byshop of Canterbury. At last, falling grievously sick, he
departed this life at Striueling, the day before the Nones of December, in the
year of Christ, 1214. in the seauenty and two year of his age, and the 49. of
his reign: or as others say, in the 52. and lies buried at Abirbrothoke, a
Monastery which he himself had founded.

royal blazon and crown of Ada, first wife of King William I of Scotland
The first wife.
ADa, the daughter of Robert de Auenell, (says Scot. Chronicon. was the first
wife of king william, whose name and progeny to other Chroniclers are not very
well known; perhaps, for that he married her, as yet being but a private person,
and are therefore silenced or omitted of Historiographers. But his daughter
Adama, begotten upon her, he married unto Patric of Dunbar, Earl of March.

royal blazon and crown of Ermengardis, second wife of King William I of
Scotland
The second wife.
ERmengardis, the daughter of Richard Viscount Beaumont, the son of Rosalin,
Viscount Beaumont, and of Constance, the base daughter of Henry the first and
Kinswoman to Henry the second, was the second wife of King William. She was
married unto him at Woodstocke, in the Nones of September, in the year of our
Lord, 1186. by Baldwin, Arch-Byshop of Canterbury, in the 33. year of the
reign of King Henry the second. She founded the Monastery of Bulmurinagh, and
died the 3. Ides of Febr. 1233. in the 47. year after her espousals, and lies
buried in Bulmurinagh being of her own foundation, as aforesaid.

Children by his second wife.
Alexander, King of Scots, borne upon the feast day of Saint Bartholomew at
Hadington, 1198. Henry, slain by his Uncle Malcolme. He was Father unto
Patric Galightly, one of the twelve Competitors for the Kingdom of Scotland.
Isabel, married to Roger Bigot Ea. of Norffolke, and Earl Marshall of England:
and afterward to Robert Lord Roos, de Hamelak: from whom, descended William
Lord Roos, another Competitor of the kingdom of Scotland. Margaret, married
to Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, 1221. who dyed without issue by her.
Mariorie, perhaps base, married to Lord Eustace of Vesey, unto whom she brought
the Barony of Sprouston for her Dowry. Aufric, married to William of Say in
Ireland: from whom descended Roger de Amundeuile or Mundeuile, a Competitor
also of the said kingdom.
royal blazon and crown of King Alexander II of Scotland
An. Dom. 1214.
ALexander the second, after the decease of William his Father, was crowned
King of Scotland, at Scone, on the feast day of S. Nicholas, with great honor,
being but sixeteene years old and an half, when he began to reign. A
Prince, surely worthy of government, and a man who toward the poor was
bountiful, cherrished the good, abhorred the evil, and accustomed to do
right unto all men with Justice and equity. He observed the peace most
faithful, with King John, and Henry his son: unto the which John, and
afterward to his son Henry, he did his homage for the kingdom of Scotland.
And pacifying the rebellious Islanders, he departed the way of all flesh, at
Kerueray, in the west Isles, in the year of our Lord, 1249. the second day of
June, after almost thirty and five years of his happy and fortunate reign,
and lies buried in the Monastery of Melros, in the 51. year of his age, and
the 35. of his reign.

royal blazon and crown of Joane, first wife of King Alexander II of Scotland
The first wife.
IOane, the Daughter of John King of England, and sister to King Henry the
third, was Queen of Scotland, and the first wife of King Alexander, being
espoused unto him, in the year of Christ, 1221. at York, who coming out of
Scotland desired to visit Canterbury, and in her return toward London, died,
the fourth of the Nones of March, leaving behind her no issue, Anno. 1238. She
lies buried between the Arms of Henry, K. of Engand Richard Earl of
Cornwall, her Brethren, in the Church of Tharent.

royal blazon and crown of Mary, second wife of King Alexander II of Scotland
The second wife.
MAry, the Daughter of Ingelram of Guines, L. of Coucy in France, was second
wife to K. Aexander. She was married to him at Roxburg in Scot. in the year
1239. on Whitsonday. She died, 1282. beyond the seas.

His Issue by the second wife.
Alexander the third, King of Scotland, borne at Roxburg, the one and thirty
day of August, 1240. Margaret a Daughter, married to one Alan le Husee, unto
who^ she brought forth Ermengard a Daughter also, married to one whose sur-name
was de Seules. From whom Nicholas de Seules, one of the Competitors for the
kingdom of Scotland descended.
royal blazon and crown of King Alexander III of Scotland
An. Dom. 1249.
ALexander the third, the son of Alexander the second, after his decease, was
crowned King of Scotland. And because this Alexander at the death of his father
was but nine year old, a great fear possessed the Governors of the child,
least upon contempt of his Nonage, usurpations on every hand should be
enforced upon the Kingdom. Whereupon, in all have, Messengers in the Kings
name were dispatched unto Henry the third, King of England, both to continue
the ancient league and amity, as also to request his daughter for their King in
marriage, whereunto, K. Henry granted in all points, and so Alexander took
Margaret, the Daughter of the said King Henry, for his wife, and afterward did
his homage to the said Henry Father in in Law, and to his son Edward, for
the kingdom of Scotland. At last, in the year of our Lord, 1285. The 19. day
of March, the said Alexander falling from his horse, upon the sands on the
North side of Kyngorne, and breaking his neck, dyed, in the 37. year of his
reign, and lies buried at Dunfermeling, having formerly builded the cross
Church of Peibles. After whose death, the kingdom of Scotland, for the space
of six years, and nine months, had no Governor, which produced many
lamentable greeuances (as shall heer-after appear.) He left one only daughter
and heir unto the kingdom (named Margaret) and she was married unto Eric,
King of Norway; who bare also another Margaret, (commonly called the Maiden of
Norway, who presently after her Mother, also deceased issuelesse. Whereupon,
Controversy arose, as concerning the succession. For the kingdom lay vacant
by the term of six years, and nine months, as aforesaid, the state being
promiscuously governed by six Vice-royes or Governors. The Governors for the
South Side of Forth, were Robert Arch-Byshop of Glasquo, John Cumin, and John,
great Steward of Scotland: for the North-side of Forth, were appointed Macduff,
Earl of Fife, John Cumin Earl of Buckquhane, and William Frazer Arch-Byshop
of S. Andrews, who being al worn out, at last, by the judgment of Edward the
first King of England, John Balliol took upon him the supreme authority over
that kingdom.

royal blazon and crown of Margaret, first wife of King Alexander III of
Scotland
The first wife.
MArgaret, the daughter of Henry the third, King of England, and Sister unto
Edward the first, was wife unto Alexander the third, King of Scotland. She
was married unto him at York, upon the feast day of the Nativity of our Lo.
1251. and dyed 1274. at Cupsum, the fourth of the calends of March, and lies
buried hard by King David, commonly called Saint David.

royal blazon and crown of Joletta, second wife of King Alexander III of
Scotland
The second wife.
IOletta, Daughter of the Earl of Dreux, in France, second wife unto
Alexander the third, King of Scotts, whom he married, as having good hope to
leave issue by her to succeed him. She was married unto him in the year of
our Lord, 1286. by whom he left no successor.

royal blazon and crown of Margaret, third wife of King Alexander III of
Scotland
The third wife.
MArgaret, the Daughter of Guy de Dampier, Earl of Flanders, was third wife
unto this Alexander the third, by whom she had no issue. She was afterward
again married to the Earl of Guelders.

Children by his first wife.
Alexander, who dyed an untimely death in the life time of his father, was
borne at Iedworth, the 12. calends of January, 1264. David, who also dyed in
the life time of his Father. Margaret, married to Eric of Norway, son of
Magnus, King of Norway. Of whom was borne another Margaret, the only future
heir of the kingdom of Scotland. Who being promised in marriage to Prince
Edward, the son of Edward the first, King of England, coming out of Norway
to be married, in her iourny about the Orchades, being very young, dyed.
Whereupon, great contentions arising, concerning the succession of the
kingdom, Edward the first, King of England, in the 18. year of his reign,
summoned the Scottish Nobility to a Parliament at Norham, there declaring unto
them his right of Sovereignty, Paramount over the kingdom of Scotland. Which
being acknowledged by the said Scottish Nobility, and seisin and possession of
the Land and the Castles of the kingdom, being delivered to him by the
Competitors, he caused diverse Instruments and Duplicats thereof to be sealed by
them, which to most of the chiefest Monasteries of his realm, he sent to be
preserved for posterity. He then received in the claims of the several
Competitors: Of which, the greatest right, and only descent of title, seemed
to be between Robert de Brus, and John de Balioll, both being descended from
David Earl of Anguse and Huntington, Brother to Malcolme and William, and
Uncle to Alexander the last King, to whom he was next heir, and he suruiued
the issue of his Nephew. Robert de Brus, the eldest son of Isabell, the
daughter of the foresaid David, claimed a presedency of right, as being by a
degree nearer in blood then Balioll, to the last King, which was consonant to
the law of Nations, the fittest rule to square out the interest of Kings. But
either wearied as seems with the trouble of Competitor, or willing to show a
rare example of moderation in his election of a private life, he resigned up
his claim and interrest of that kingdom to his son. The Original deed still
remaining with Sir Robert Cotton, the heir of Bernard de Brus, his second
Brother, and is in these words: OMnibus Christi fidelibus hoc praesens scriptu^
visuris vel audituris Robertus de Brus Dominus de valle Anandia salute^ in
domino. Nouerit vniuersitas vestra nos concessisse and omnino remisisse
karissimo filio nostro domino Roberto de Brus Comiti Karrik. and haeredibus
suis, totu^ ius and clamium quod habuimus vel habere potuimus ad petendum
regnum Scotiae, Ita quod nos nihil Iuris aut clamij ad praedictum regnum,
nomine nostro petendum de caetero vendicare aut exigere possumus damus insuper
and spontanea voluntate concedimus praedicto filio nostro and heredibus suis
plenam and liberam potestatem dictum regnum petendi, and ius quod sibi competit
in hac part nomine suo prosequends prove voluntate sui melius nouerit
conuenire and omnia faciendi que per nos ante tenorem confectionis praesentium
poterunt expediri. In cuius rei testimonium praesenti scripto sigillum nostrum
apposuimus et in Maius testimonium sigillum Nobilis viri Domini Gilberti de
Clare Comitis glouerniae and Hertford presentibus apponi procurauimus. Datum
apud Berwic, die veneris in Crastino sancti, Leonardi, Anno. gratiae, 1292. But
in conclusion, Edward the first finding Balliol an easier instrument, apter to
lean to his desire either of reducing that kingdom to his immediate obedience,
or at least for retaining it within the reach of his sovereignty, preferred him
for King, being the son of Deruergilla, the Daughter of Margaret, the first
begotten daughter of David, Earl of Huntington, great Uncle unto this
Alexander the third.


royal blazon and crown of King John of Scotland
He was crowned the last day of November, at Scone, upon Saint Stephens day
following.
John Balliol, the son of John Balliol, and of Deruerguld his wife, the
Daughter of Margaret, the eldest Daughter of David Earl of Huntington, great
Uncle unto Alexander the third (who dyed without issue) by the suffrage of
Edward the first, King of England, was advanced unto the Royal Throne of the
kingdom of Scotland, and did the accustomed homage, and swore allegiance unto
the said King Edward, at the Town of New Castle upon Tine, in the year of
our redemption, 1292. M. se^ and ter C. sed ab illis octo c^herce, Hoc anno
Domini tradidit d^ma Iohanni.
For three years, and somewhat above, this Balliol governed the state of
Scotland: But, for that he proved slothful and negligent, the Scots deposed
him, as an unprofitable member, in the year of our Lord, 1292. S^ Chron. lib.
1^ Cap. ^6.
From whence, he fled into France, and there dyed. Whereupon, Edward King of
England, for ten years space, miserably afflicted the Scottish Nation, and by
force entered the kingdom as far as the River Forna, where is the passage to
Ros. Here by the way it is to be noted, Some say it was this man's father.
that this John Balliol founded that College in Oxford, 1263. which to this
day bears his own name there: whose Grand father (by the Father side)
Alexander Balliol, in like manner (as others his predecessors) were owners of
Bernard Castle in the Byshoppricke of Durham: which said Castle it is
reported, that one Bernard Balliol, presently after the Conquest of England by
the Normans, erected, and named it after his own name. Between the reign of
this John, and Robert Brus, William Walleys, with some others, opposed
themselves against Edward, k of England. The which Walleys being afterward
taken. Edw. the 1. did hang at London, and caused his quarters to be fixed upon
poles in many places in Scotland. Anno. 1305.


royal blazon and crown of Isabell, wife of King John of Scotland
ISabell, the Daughter of John, Earl Warren and Surrey, was wife unto this
John Balliol, King of Scotland.

Their Issue.
Edward de Balliol, who after the death of Robert Brus, entered his fathers
inheritance, and took upon him the supreme authority of the kingdom of
Scotland.
royal blazon and crown of King Robert I of Scotland
An. Dom. 1306.
RObert le Brus, Earl of Carict, (the son of Robert Earl of Carict, great
Nephew of Isabell, the second Daughter of David Earl of Huntington, great
Uncle unto Alexander the third) having now put Balliol to flight, assumed the
kingdom of Scotland, from which he held himself so long unjustly debarred.
And so upon the feast day of the Annunciation of our blessed Lady, he was
crowned King in the Monastery of Scone, in the year of Grace, 1306. But Edward
the first, king of England, desirous to repress his actions, for his own
advantage, levied a puissant army against him, under the direction and
Lieutenancy of Aumary de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, at that time Deputy and
governor of the kingdom of Scotland; who at Methwen encou^tred the said K.
Robert: wherein the said Robert was overthrown and put to flight, the 19. of
June, 1306. But reinforcing his strength, he oftentimes renewed the war with
Edward the first, second, and third, Kings of England, and was the mirror of
Chiualry in those days. This valiant King after he had reigned 24. years,
being stricken with a Leprosy, dyed at Cardros, 1328. the 7. of June, the 2. of
Edward the third, and lies buried in the Monastery at Dunfermeling. King
Robert being dead, Thomas Ranulph Earl of Murrey, was made Governor of the
kingdom; but he was poisoned at Musselburg, the 13. of August, 1332. It is
reported, that Robert upon his deathbed, willed three things in his Testament.
First, that the Kings of Scotland should never alienate the Scottish Islands
nor bestow them on great personages. Secondly, that the Scotts should never
give a long nor determinate day unto the English to fight on. Thirdly, he
willed his heart to be delivered unto some worthy knight, that had vowed
himself to the wars in the Holy Land, to carry it into the field with him,
whenever he should fight against the Infidels: which accordingly he bequeathed
unto that Noblema^, James Douglas, for that he had heertofore made a Vow, that
in proper person he would undertake to fight against the Infidels aforesaid.

royal blazon and crown of Isabell, first wife of King Robert I of Scotland
The first wife.
ISabell, the daughter of Doneuald, Earl of Mar, the sister of Warthe^, Earl
of Mar, was wife of Robert Earl of Carict, who dyed before he had fully gotten
the kingdom. Robert her husband being the second time overthrown at Dalry.
And as she fled into Ros, was taken, and brought into England, unto King
Edward the first, and in England remained until the battle of Bannock,
commonly called the battle of Bannocks B^rne, fought in the time of King
Edward the 2.

royal blazon and crown of Elizabeth, second wife of King Robert II of Scotland
The second wife.
ELizabeth, the daughter of Hanmer de Burgo, Earl of Vlster in Ireland, was the
second wife of Robert Brus, King of Scotland, who dyed the 26. of October, Anno
Dom. 1327.

His Issue by his first wife.
Marioria, married to that Nobleman Walter Steward, the son of James
Steward, who dyed the seventeenth of the Calends of August, 1309. great
Seneschall of Scotland, unto whom she brought forth Robert Steward, who
succeeded David le Brus, in the Kingdom of Scotland. It was couenanted at
Air, 1315. by the Nobles of the kingdom, that if King Robert deceased without
heir male, that then his Brother Edward Brus, should be King. And if the said
Edward also dyed without male, that then, this Marioria, and so others of the
kings Daughters, should succeed, in case they married to the good liking of
the King and the Realm.
His Issue by the second wife.
David, who succeeded his Father in the kingdom. Margaret, married to the
Earl of Sutherland, who dyed in bringing forth, of John her son. Which John,
dyed a pledge in England for his father David. And according to the intaile,
had succeeded, as descended from the eldest son, if he had lived. Maud,
married to Thomas Isaac, by whom he had two daughters, Ioane and Katherine,
that dyed at Striueling, by whom he had this Maud, it appears not.
royal blazon and crown of King Edward of Scotland
EDward Balliol, the only son of John Balliol, King of Scotland, came into
Scotland after the decease of Robert Brus; affirming, that the kingdom
appertained unto him. And at Duplin obtaining a great victory against the
Guardians of David Brus, and of the kingdom of Scotland, by the assistance of
Edward the third, King of England, by the sword he made good way to his
foresaid claim to the kingdom of Scotland, and accordingly took upon him the
regal Dignity, in the Monastery of Scone, the four and twentieth day of
September, Anno. Dom. 1332. With whom took part, David Earl of Atholl, Henry
de Beaumont, Earl of Bucquhane, Gilbert de Vmfrauille, Earl of Angus, Raph
Baron of Stafford, Richard Talbot, and many others the Nobles of England, who
had Title unto Lands in the same kingdom, in right of their wives. The second
year after, this Edward, King of Scots, did his homage unto Edward the third,
at New Castle upon Tyne, for the whole kingdom of Scotland, and the adjacent
Isles, upon the Feast day of Saint Geruais and Prothasius, the fourteenth
Calends of July, in the year of grace, 1333. Upon occasion of which homage,
the Commons of Scotland rose against both the kings in diverse parts of the
kingdom. Whereupon, Balliol was enforced for a time to make his abode in
England. In the Interim whereof, David the son of Robert Brus, as yet a Child,
and in the custody of Thomas Randolph, Earl of Murrey Protector, is crowned
King: who afterward growing unto man's estate, proved a Prince of no less
spirit then his Father, but not so fortunate. For Edward Balliol ( David as yet
being young, and Thomas Randolph deceased) invaded the kingdom, and put David
to flight; who together with his Wife, (the Sister of Edward the third) was
enforced to fly into France, where he lay obscurely, eight years and more.
But at last, David preparing for his return, he was received with the
general applause of the people, and Balliol rejected, necessity enforcing him
to fly into England, unto King Edward. Where weighing with himself his
manifold eiections; at last, freely released unto Edward the third, King of
England, his entire right unto the kingdom of Scotland, for the sum of 2000.
pound years for his maintenance, as appears by good record, Breuia directa
Baronibus, 38. Edward, 3. in Scaccario.
(viz.) Termino Michaelis, An. 38. Ed. 3. Rex concessit Edwardo de Baliolo
nuper Regi Scotiae ex custuma portuu^ Kingeston and Sancti Botolphi, 2000. li.
singulis Annuis ad sustentatione^ secundu^ conuencionem factu^ inter dictum
Eduardum Regem Angliae, and praedictum Edwardum de Baliole de concessione
corone and iuris regni sui Scotiae.

royal blazon and crown of King David II of Scotland
An. Dom. 1329.
David Brus, the son of Robert Brus, after the eiection of Balliol, in the
year of our Lord 1329. was called out of France (wherein he had now lived to
man's estate,) to take on him the government and rule of the Realm of Scotland,
as King thereof, and upon the 24. day of November, in the year of Christ
1331. in the eight year of his age, and the third of his reign, in the
Parliament at Scone, he received the order of Kinght-hood at the hands of that
Noble-gentlema^, Tho. Randolph Earl of Murry. The day following he was
Crowned, and anointed with great honor (before whom, never was there any King
of Scotland Crowned or anointed.) Upon the sameday, was also crowned and
anointed Johan his Q. Against this David, Edward Balioll waging war, besiedged
Barwicke, to whose aid also came that victorious Prince, King Edward the
third. In the year of our Lord 1333. the 19. of July, in the battle at
Halidon-Hill, where were slain 7. Earls, of Barons and Knights 900. Esquires
400. and 3000. common Soldiers, and Barwick was taken by the said King Edward
the third the day after, being the 20. of July. In this David's time also Edward
the 3. besiedged Calis, which was then in the possession of Phillip of Valois
the French King. Whereupnn this Phillip sent his ambassadors into Scotland unto
King David, that according to their league he should enter England, so to
divert his enemy Edward, from the said siedge of Calis. Who condiscending unto
the French King, adventured to invade England, with a right puissant army of
Scotsh-men, presuming, that Edward had left behind him none but churchmen, and
husbandmen; and that the flower of the soldierie of England, had been over sea
with the King their Soueraign. Whereupon, he Marched as far as Durham, where he
was fought withal, and overthrown by the inhabitants of Yorkshire, and some
few others: He himself, with william Douglas, and many others of the Nobles
taken prisoners, by John Coupland an Esquier of the North and committed to safe
custody, upon the vigil of Saint Luke the Evangelist, in the year of Grace
1346. Those that fought the said victorious battle, were william Le-Zouch
Arch-Byshop of York with the Clergy of his Dioces, Gilbert de Vmfrauill Earl
of Anegos, Henry Percy, Ralph Neuill, william D'eyncourt, and Henry Le-Scrope,
with a very small Army of Englishmen, such as they could assemble in such a
penurious season. The tenth year after, being ransomed, he showed himself a
very modest Prince to the end of his life, which was at Edenburg in the 47.
year of his age, and the 39. of his reign; in the year of our Lord 1370.
leaving no issue behind him to succeed him. He lies buried in the Monastery of
Saint Cross, before the great Alter there.

royal blazon and crown of Johan, first wife of King David II of Scotland
The first wife.
Johan (surnamed of the Tower) the daughter of king Edward the second, King of
England, and Sister unto King Edward the third, was the first wife of David
King of Scots. who iornying into England to see her Brother, there dyed without
issue; and lies buried at London, in the Church of the Friars Minorits. He
Married her at Barwicke the 17. of July 1238.

royal blazon and crown of Margaret, second wife of King David II of Scotland
The second wife.
MArgaret Logi, the Daughter of John Logi Knight, a Virgin excelling all other
of that time for beauty, was the second Wife of King David, whom (as he
himself boasted) he married rather for her form, then in desire of issue.
Notwithstanding, when he perceived that she had accomplished the age of four
and twenty years, and grew hopeles of Issue, he forsook her. Whereupon, she
appealed unto the court of Rome, and after the expense of much Treasure, (to no
purpose,) she dyed.

royal blazon and crown of King Robert II of Scotland
An. Dom. 1371.
RObert Stewart, sur-named the Hunter, the Nephewe of David Brus, by his
Sister, he was son of walter Stewart, begotten upon the body of Margery, the
sister of King David, by the general agreement of the whole Scottish Nation,
is nominated king in stead of his deceased uncle, upon the feast day of the
Anunciation of our blessed Lady, in the year of our Lord, 1371. Against whom,
in the very beginning, william Douglas opposed himself, affirming, that the
right of that kingdom accrued unto him by the aliance with the Balliols and
Comyns. But perceiving that George of Dunbarre, Earl of March, and his Brother
the Earl of Murrey, and the Lord Erskine, (who had three of the strongest
fortresses of the kingdom in their custodies, (viz:) the Castle of Maidens,
Striueling, and Dunbreton) did strongly oppose against him, whereupon he
renounced his pretension. And at last, the daughter of King Robert, borne in
lawful wedlock, was given in marriage to James, son and heir of the said
william Douglas. This Robert amongst the Scots, was the second King of that
name, and the first of the Stewarts: under which Sur-name, and under nine Kings
of the name, for the space of two hundred years and more, even unto this day,
have the Scotts bin happily governed, and the famous Jsle of Great Britain
in our days, into one Government united, by our dread Sovereign Lord King
James, that now is. Unto any of whom, this Robert was nothing inferior in
happiness, as the man, whom during the whole time of his reign, never felt
the affliction of any adverse fortune. He dyed with age, and not with
sickness, the 13. of the Calends of May, in the year of our Lord, 1390. and
in the 19. year of his reign, in his Castle of Deidon, being full of days,
(viz.) in the 74. year of his age, and lies buried in the Monastery of Scone.

royal blazon and crown of Eufemia, first wife of King Robert II of Scotland
The first wife.
EVfemia, the daughter of Hugh Earl of Ros, was the first lawful wife of this
Robert King of Scotland. who not long after her husband Robert, was crowned in
solemn manner, 1372. She died in the third year of his reign, and in the year
of our Lord, 1387.

royal blazon and crown of Elizabeth, second wife of King Robert II of Scotland
The second wife.
ELizabeth, the Daughter of Adam Moore, knight, was the second wife unto this
King ROBERT, By whom, he had three Sons.

His Issue by his first wife.
Walter Stewart, Earl of Atholl, beheaded for plotting Treason against James
the first. David Stewart, Earl of Stratherne. Eufemia, married unto James, the
son of william Douglas.
His Issue by the second wife.
John, afterward named Robert, and succeeded his Father in the kingdom. Robert
Stewart, Duke of Albany, Governor of Scotland, and Earl of Fife in right of
his wife, and was Father of Mordac, Duke of Albany, and Governor of Scotland.
Alexander Stewart, Earl of Bucquhane, father of Duncan
A daughter, married to John of Dunbarre, the Brother of George Earl of March.
A second daughter, married unto John Lion, Lord Glammys, but of what name, or
by what woman these two were, appears not in record.
royal blazon and crown of King Robert III of Scotland
RObert Steward the third of that name, King of Scotts, Earl of Carict, whose
name was first John, succeeded his deceased Parent Robert the second, in the
year of our Lord, 1390. He changed his name, as I conceive, for that he
deemed the name of John, ominous and unfortunate; as first, being hateful in
the Balliols; and secondly, upon animaduersion, that a king of France of that
name was in battle taken prisoner by the English. This third Robert in a
manner, waged continual warfare with England, but always with uncertain and
unfortunate success. Who after he had reigned sixteen years, and seen David,
one of his Sons made away by the subtilty of Robert Duke of Albany, and Earl
of Fife, his Uncle; and his other Son James in declining, by the Treason of
his said Uncle, to be captiuated by the English, wherein he showed himself a
Prince more virtuous then polliticke: for with the English, his child might
have been in better security then amongst his own people; for money or
marriage might have wrought his deliverance, as the event proved. Their own
Annals record, that this Robert was a good man, but no good King. He dyed at
Bucquhane, the fourth of the Calends of April, upon Palme-sunday, in the year
of our Lord, 1406. and lies buried at Paslet. From this time, for the term
of thirteen years, was the kingdom governed by Lieutenants (viz.) Robert, and
after him, by Mordac the son of Robert; which time being almost expired, James
the Son of this Robert, being freely delivered out of England, returned, and
took upon him the Royal Dignity.

royal blazon and crown of Anabel, wife of King Robert III of Scotland
ANabel, the Daughter of John Drummond de Stubhall, Knight, was wife unto this
Robert the third. A Lady for her admirable beauty, deerly beloved of her
husband. She died at Scone, 1401. and lies buried at Dunfermeling.

Their Issue
David, their first borne Duke of Rothsay, who dyed of hunger. James, who
succeeded his father in the kingdom, and was the first of that name.
Egidia, married to Earl Douglas, who had issue, one only daughter, married
to Henry Sinclare, earl of the Orchades, from whom is descended William Earl
of the Orchades. A Daughter married unto the Earl of Angus. A Daughter married
unto the Earl of Dalketh. By what woman these th^ee da^ghters were, is not
man^fest by warrant of any of our records.
royal blazon and crown of King James I of Scotland
James Stewart, the first of that name amongst the Scots, the son of Robert the
third, after his long and tedious abode in England, upon certain conditions and
covenants was freely delivered, and returning into Scotland, was re-aduanced to
the regal throne in the year of grace, 1422. and in the next year following,
he made his homage for the kingdom of Scotland, at windsor, unto Henry the
sixth King of England his superior Lord, Anno. Dom. 1423. This James was a
Prince of an excellent wit, very courageous; an excellent Wrastler, swift of
foot, a good Musician, and inferior to no man in eloquence of speech; all
which, he had exquisitely learned in England, during the time of his long
captivity. He was no less commendable for his Poesy in the Scottish tongue,
whose Book and Verses even to this day, amongst the Scots, carry the prize and
best commendation. By the Treachery of his Uncle the Earl of Atholl (who ever
carried an aspiring mind unto the kingdom) he was wounded to death with thirty
deadly stabbes, in the Town of Perth, the 21. of February, in the year of
grace, 1447. and was buried at the Carthusians, in the one and thirtith year of
his reign, and the four and fortith of his age: for whom, he himself had
built an house in the Suburbs of the same Town. The parricides, the Earl of
Atholl, and Robert Graham were punished most cruelly, but most worthily. Graham
was reported to have alleged for his excuse, that because the K. had
proscribed and banished him, that therefore he was not his subject. So
frivolous an excuse had the man of sin, for ever and ever infamous, taken for
his presumptuous offense. Whereupon, the Scots have this Rithmicall Proverb in
their own language amongst them: Robert Gramen, he slew our King,
God give him schamen.


royal blazon and crown of Jone, wife of King James I of Scotland
IOne (the daughter of John Beaufort, Earl of Somerset in England, whom the
said John begot upon the body of Margaret his wife, Duchess of Clarence,
Sister and one of the co-heyres of Edmund Holland, Earl of Kent) was wife unto
this James the first King of Scotland, married unto him at London, in the year
of our Lord, 1423. who after the death of King James, took to her second
husband, James Steward, a young Gentleman, by whom she had three Sons; the
first, called John, was Earl of Atholl; the second, called James, was Earl of
March, and the third son was thought to be Bishop of Murrey. She died the
fourth of the Nones of March. Anno Dom.

Their Issue.
Alexander, who dyed an Jnfant. James, the second king of Scots after his
father. Twins. Marg. eldest daughter married to Lewis the xij. k. of France.
Joan, Duchess of Austria. Elizabeth, Duchess of Britain. All yssuelesse.
This King had three other Daughters, one married to the Earl of Camphire in
Zeland. Another married to the Lord of Dalketh. Annother to the Earl of
Huntley. All dyed yssuelesse. By what Women these three Daughters were, is not
manifest.
royal blazon and crown of King James II of Scotland
James, the second son of James the first, after the death of his father, was
made King of Scotland, in the year of our Lord, 1447. He was called James
with the fiery face, because he had a very red mole on the one side of his
face. This King, when he came to man's estate, grew very strong, and took to
wife, the daughter of the Duke of Gheldres. He arrested the Earl of Douglas,
William and David his Brothers, with Nicholine Hemming, Lord of Comirnald, at
the Tower of Edinburgh, and caused them all to be beheaded upon the Mount
within the said Castle. From this time, after the death of Douglas, he reigned
Royally, and made Laws according to his own will; and afterward being at the
siedge of Roxborough Castle (which the English had long held) where he was
very curious about the framing of warlicke Engines to assault the Castle, was
there slain by a great shot from the Castle, and the Earl of Angus standing
by, was sorely wounded, the third day of August, in the year of our Lord, 1460.
in the 29. year of his age, and the 24. of his reign. He was royally buried
in the Monastery of S. Cross at Edinburgh.

royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King James II of Scotland
MArgaret, Daughter to Arnoldus of Egmont, Duke of Gheldres (was wife unto the
said James the second) descended anciently from the race of the Dukes of
Brunswicke.

Their Issue.
James, the third King of Scots, next following. Alexander Steward, Duke of
Albany. John Steward, Earl of Mar, who dyed yssuelesse. Anna, first married
to Alexander, Lord of Boyd, after to the Lord Hamilton. Margaret, married to
the Lord Creichton.
royal blazon and crown of King James III of Scotland
James the third, being a child of seven years of age, after the death of
James the second his father, was Crowned King of Scots, at Calcon. in the year
of our Lord, 1460. and when he was twenty year old, he took to wife
Margaret, the daughter of the King of Norway, and was married at Edinburgh,
which brought him in dower the pretended right of the Kings of Norway, to the
Orchad Islands, and the rest of the Islands there adjacent. In the beginning of
his reign, he ruled al things in quiet order, but in his latter time, by
adverse fortune, the most part of his Nobility conspired against him. He dyed
at Sterling, in the year of our redemption, 1488. the xi. of June, in the 28.
year of his reign.

royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King James III of Scotland
MArgaret (Daughter of Christian King of Denmark and Norway) was wife to the
said James the third, King of Scots.

Their Issue.
James the fourth King of Scots, after the death of his Father. John Steward,
Earl of Mar, who dyed without issue. Alexander Steward, Bishop of Saint
Andrews, and Duke of Albany, died without issue.
royal blazon and crown of King James IV of Scotland
James the fourth, after the death of his father James the third, got unto
himself great power amongst the Scots, which for some years he very directly
administered Justice by the same, and brought the kingdom unto much quietness
by his good government. Insomuch, that the great thefts, robberies, slaughters,
and such like villainies which had been commonly used in Scotland, (about the
borders especially) were every where almost utterly left off. But Jews the
French King used great and many persuasions unto King James, that he should not
desist in these bloody enterprises, but rather increase the^, and the rather,
thereby to offend Henry King of England, whose Sister the said James had
married, and with whom he had great league. At length through many hard
persuasions and fair promises from the French King, he leuyed a great power,
and at a time unexpected, invaded England, although (presently after it was
known) he was admonished by King Henry, that although he were not ashamed of
his deed, at least he should fear the judgment of Almighty God, who is wont
to be revenged on the perturbers of peace, and the breakers of leagues. For
that war being taken in hand against all faith, and league sworn, had like
event, for by the English they were overthrown, and King James himself was
slain in that battle, and with him, one Arch-Byshop, two Bishops, four
Abbots; Noblemen and Knights 34. besides 8000. common soldiers, and almost all
the rest taken Captives, also all their Ensigns; and 22. great pieces of
Ordinance. This battle was fought at Floddon-Hill, near Branxton, a Town in
Northumberland, the 9. day of September, Anno. Dom. 1513.

royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King James IV of Scotland
MAgaret, the daughter of king Henry the seventh, and Sister to the most Noble
King Henry the eight, was wife unto this K. James the fourth, who after the
death of the said King her husband, was again married to Archibald Douglas,
earl of Angus, having by him a daughter, called Margaret, borne at Hare-bottel
Castle in England, Anno. 1516. who was wife unto Matthew Stewart, Earl of
Lenox, Mother of Henry, which married Mary, Queen of Scotland, and who were
Father and Mother to our most dread Sovereign Lord James, King of Great
Britain, France, and Jreland, defender of the Faith, etc. whom God long
preserve.

Their Issue.
Arthur, first son, dyed the 14. of July, 1510 in the life time of his
Father. James, the fifth King of Scotland. Alexander, born 1514. after his
fathers death, D. of Rothsay.
royal blazon and crown of King James V of Scotland
James the fifth, his Father being slain in England, was k. of Scotland, in the
year of our Lord, 1513. being but a child of a year old, when his father
dyed, and was crowned, Anno Dom. 1515. at Scone, at which place, the Kings of
Scotland have been usually inaugurated. Under this King there was diverse
conflicts, as well by land as by Sea, between both Nations. John Duke of
Albany, Nephew to the deceased King, by the grave Counsel of the Realm, was
sent for home out of France, to protect the young King, and to govern his
land, and when he had assumed the government, presently after, he with the
French, began to make war against the English, and all those great Lords
whom he thought to have forsaken the King in his war, he put to death: for
which cause, much distrusting his own safety, he returned into France, and
King James now coming unto man's estate, he took to wife Magdalen, eldest
daughter to Francis the French king, who lived not above one year with him.
After whose death, he married Mary, daughter to the Duke of Guise; by whom he
left one only daughter living. King James dyed with grief of mind, in the
Castle of Falkeland, the xiiij. of December, Anno. 1542. after whose death,
James Earl of Arran Lord of Hamilton his Kinsman, was constituted Governor to
the young Queen, and also her Tutor.

royal blazon and crown of Magdalen, first wife of King James V of Scotland
The first wife.
MAgdalen, Daughter to Francis K. of France, the first wife to James King of
Scots, who dyed without issue.

royal blazon and crown of Mary, second wife of King James V of Scotland
The second wife.
MAry of Lorayn, daughter to Claudius Duke of Guise, and Sister unto Duke
Francis, and Widdowe of Longuevill, was the second wife to James the fifth,
which Mary died, Anno. 1560.

His Issue by his second wife.
JAMES ARTHVR Both died Infants. Mary, Queen of Scots, borne the seventh day
of December, on the vigil of the Conception of our blessed Lady the Virgin,
Anno. 1542.
royal blazon and crown of Queen Mary I of Scotland
MAry, only daughter of James the fifth, King of Scotland, being an infant at
the time of her Fathers death, was declared heir to the kingdom of Scotland,
Anno. 1542. her Governor in her tender years, was James Earl of Arran, Lord
of Hamilton her Kinsman, who was also her Tutor. He for the said Queen Mary,
waged war with the English, denying to give her in marriage to Edward the sixth,
King of England, notwithstanding it was so agreed upon by the chief Peers of
both kingdoms, which caused the battle at Musselborough field, where the
English were Victors. The Duke of Somerset, Uncle and Protector to the King,
and John Earl of Warwick, after made Duke of Northumberland, being Generals;
at first, the battle grew doubtful on which side it would fall, but at
length it happily fell on the English side, in the month of August, 1547.
Queen Mary now coming to her prime years, was first married to Francis
Dolphin of France, the fourth of December, 1566. after whose death, she was
secondly married to Henry Steward, Lord Darnley, eldest Son to Matthew, Earl
of Lenox, by Margaret Douglas: who begot of the said Mary, a Child of an
excellent wit, and great hope, 1566. and was christened. Elizabeth Queen of
England, of famous memory; Charles, King of France, and Philebert Duke of
Sauoy, being Godfathers and God-mother: and named Charles-Iames, who now by
true right of descent, is Ki. of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. whom. God long preserve.

royal blazon and crown of King James VI of Scotland
JAMES, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
was son of Mary, Queen of Scots, and of Henry Stewart her second husband,
was borne at Edinburgh, in the castle of Maidens, the 19. of June, 1566. first
crowned and anointed King of Scotland, at Sterling, the 29. day of July. Anno.
1567. in the second year of his age: and in the year of our Lord, 1603. he was
most happily crowned and anointed King of England, France, and Ireland.

royal blazon and crown of Anne, wife of King James VI of Scotland
ANna, Daughter to Frederick the second, King of Denmark and Norway, and
Sister of Christiern the fourth now King, was married to King James, the ^0. of
August, after the usual manner of marrying such persons, the Kings themselves
not being there. This marriage was solemnized at Gonemburgh, a City in
Denmark, being there efpoused to George Keith, Earl Marshall, Governor of the
North parts of Scotland, and of Mar, then Ambassador for the said King. This
Queen Anne was borne at Scanderburg, the twelfe day of December, 1574.

Their Issue.
Henry, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Rothsay, and Earl of Chester, was
borne on Tuesday, the 19. of February, 1593. James, dyed young. Charles, Duke
of York and Albany, Earl of Ros, and Lord of Ardmanoch. Lady Elizabeth,
borne the 19. of August, 1596. Margaret, borne the 24. of December, 1598. dyed
in Scotland. Mary. Sophia. Both dyed young, and lies buried at Westminster.

