THE CONFESSION OF FAITH, SVBSCRIVED BY THE KINGIS MAJESTY and his Household:
TOGETHER WITH THE COPY OF THE BAND, maid touching the maintenance of the
true Religion, the Kingis Majesty's person and estate, etc: Severally to be
Subscriued by all Noblemen, Barrons, gentlemen and otheris, according to the
tenor of the act of secret Counsel, and Commissionis therein contained, as
heirafter follows.

IOSHVA. 24. 25. So Joshua made a covenant with the people the same day, and
gave them an ordinance and law in Shechem. 2. KING. 11. 17. And Iehojada made
a covenant between the Lord, and the king and the people, that they should be
the Lords people: likewise between the king and the people. ISAIAH. 44. 5.
One shall say I am the Lords: another shall be called by the name of Iaacob: and
another shall subscriue with his hand unto the Lord, etc. AT EDINBVRGH. Printed
by ROBERT WALDE-GRAVE. Anno Dom. 1590.

THE PRIVILEGE GRANTED to the Printer.
THe Lordis of the Secreit Counsel, grants and geuis license and Privilege be
their presents, to ROBERT VVALDEGRAVE, to Imprent, or cause to be imprentit, the
Confessioun of Faith, togidder with the general Band, maid touching the
maintenance of true Religioun, the Kingis Majesty's persoun and Estate, and
withstanding of al foreign preparations and forcis tending to the troubill
thairof. As also the Act of secreit Counsel, Containing a Commission to
certain Nobill men, Barons and vthers: for serching, seeking, apprehending and
pursuit of Papists, Jesuits, Seminary Priestis and Excommunicate personis:
with the like Commissioun to certain Ministers of Gods word, To receive DE
NOVO, the subscriptions of al Nobill men, Barons, gentlemen and vthers his
highness liegis, of quhatsumeuer degree, to the said general Band. For the
Imprinting of the quhilk Band, act of secret counsel, and confession forsaid,
the said lords decerns and declars, that the said Robert sall not be callit or
accufit, criminalie nor ciuilie, be any manner of way in time cumming. Nor incur
naskaith or danger in his person lands or guds. Bot the samin salbe countit and
estemit good and acceptable service unto his Majesty, tending to the
advancement of Gods glory, and common weal of this Realm. Exonering him be
their presents, of all pain and danger that he may incur their throw for ever.
Discharging be their samin presents, all and sundry Judges and ministers of his
highness lawis, and vthers his Majesty's liegis and subjects qwhatsumever: Of al
calling, accusing, troubling, pursuing, or in any wise proceeding against the
said Robert for the cause foresaid, and of their offices in that part.
Subscriuit be the said Lordis. At Edinburgh the xiij. day of March: The eir of
God, ane thousand five hundred fourscore nine eiris.

ANESCHORT AND GENERAL CONFESSION OF THE TRUE CHRISTIAN FAITH and Religion,
according to Godis word and actis of Parliamentis, Subscriued be the Kingis
Majesty and his household, with sundry vtheris, to the glory of God and good
example of all men. At Edinburgh the 28. day of January: The ere of God. 1580.
And the fouretene ere of his Majesty's reign.
WE all, and every one of us underwritten proteste, that after long and due
examinatioun of our own Consciencis, in matters of true and falls Religion, are
now thoroughly resolved in the truth, by the word and spirit of God. And
therefore we believe with our heartis, confess with our mouths, Subscriue
with our hands, and constantly affirm, before God and the whole world: That
this only, is the true Christian Faith and Religion pleasing God, and bringing
Salvation to man, quhilk is now by the mercy of God revealed to the world, by
the preaching of the blessed Euangell. And received, believed and defended, by
many and sundry notable Kirkis and Realms, but chiefly by the Kirk of
Scotland, the Kings Majesty, and three Estates of this Realm, as Gods eternal
truth, and only ground of our Salvation: as more particularly is expressed in
the Confession of our Faith, stablished, and publictly confirmed by sindrie
Actis of Parliamentis, and now of a lang time has been opinly professed by the
kings Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in burgh and land. To the
quhilk Confession and form of Religion, we willingly agree in our Consciencis
in all pointis, as unto Gods undoubted truth and verity, grounded only upon
his written word. And therefore, we abhor and detest all contrary Religion
and doctrine: But chiefly all kind of Papistrie, in general and particular
headis, even as they are now damned and confuted by the word of God and Kirk
of Scotland: but in special, we detest and refuse the usurped authority, of
that Roman Antichriste upon the Scriptures of God: upon the Kirk, the civil
magistrate and conscience of men. All his tyrannous Laws made upon in
different things, against our Christian liberty. His erroneous doctrine,
against the sufficiency of the written word, the perfection of the Law, the
office of Christ, and his blessed Euangell. His corrupted doctrine concerning
original sin, our natural inabilitie and rebellion to Gods Law. Our
Justification by Faith only. Our imperfect sanctification and obedience to the
Law, the nature, number and use of the holy Sacraments. His five bastard
Sacraments, with all his rytis, ceremoneis, and falls doctrine added to the
ministration of the true Sacraments without the word of God. His cruel
Judgment against Infants departing without the Sacrament, his absolute
necessity of Baptism, his blasphemous opinion of Transubstantiation, or real
presence of Christ's body in the elements, and receiving of the same by the
wicked, or bodies of men. His dispensationis with solemnet oaths, Periuries,
and degrees of marriage forbidden in the word: his cruelty against the
innocent deuorced. His diuillish Mess, his blasphemous Priestheid, his
profane sacrifice for the sins of the dead and the quick. His Canonization
of men, calling upon Angels, or Sanctis departed, worshipping of Imagrie,
Relics, and Crosses, dedicating of Kirkis, Altars, Dayis, Vows to creatures.
His Purgatory, prayers for the dead, praying or speaking in a strange
language, with his Processionis and blasphemous Letanie, and multitude of
Aduocats or Mediatouris. His manifold Ordouris, Auriculare Confession, his
desperate and uncertain repentance, his general and doutsome faith, his
Satisfactionis of men for their sins, his Justification by workis, OPUS
OPERATVM, workis of Supererogation, Meritis, Pardonis, Peregrinationis and
stationis, his holy water, Baptizing of Bellis, Coniuring of spiritis,
Crossing, Saning, Anointing, Coniuring, Hallowing of Godis good creatures,
with the superstitious opinion joined therewith, his VVorldly Monarchy, and
wicked Hierarchy, his three solemned vows, with all his shawelingis of
sundry sorts. His erroneous and bloody decreis maid at Trent, with all the
subscryuers and approouers of that cruel and bloody band, conjured against
the Kirk of God. And finally, we detest al his vain allegories, Rites,
signs, and traditions brought in the Kirk, without, or against the word of
God, and doctrine of this true reformed Kirk. To the quhilk we join our selves
willingly, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion, Discipline, and use of the holy
Sacraments, as lively members of the same, in Christ our head: promising and
swearing, by the Great Name of the Lord our God, that we shall continue in the
obedience of the doctrine and discipline of this Kirk, and shall defend the
same according to our vocation and power, all the days of our lives, under the
pains contained in the law, and danger both of body and soul, in the day of
Gods fearful judgment. And seeing that many are stirred up by Satan, and
that Roman Antichrist, to promise, swear, subscriue, and for a time, use the
holy Sacraments in the Kirk deceitfully, against their own conscience: minding
hereby, First under the external cloak of religion, to corrupt and subvert
secretly, Gods true religion within the Kirk, and afterward, when time may
serve, to become open enemies and persecuters of the same, under vain hope of
the Popes dispensation devised against the word of God, to his greater
confusion, and their double condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus. We
therefore, willing to take away al suspicion of hypocrisy, and of sic double
dealing with God and his Kirk, protest, and call the searcher of all hearts for
witness, that our minds and heartis, do fully agree with this our Confession,
promise, aith, and subscription. So that we are not moved for any worldly
respect, but are persuaded only in our conscience, through the knawledge and
lufe of Gods true religion, prentit in our heartis by the haly spirit, as we
sall answer to him in the day, when the secrets of all hearts sall be
disclosed. And because we perceive, that the quietness and stabilitie of our
religion and Kirk, does depend upon the safety and good behavior of the Kings
Majesty, as upon ane comfortable Instrument of Gods mercy granted to this
Country, for the maintaining of his Kirk, and ministration of justice amongst
us. We protest and promise with our heartis under the same aithe, hand-writ,
and pains, that we sall defend his person and authority, with our geir,
bodies and lives, in the defense of Christ his Euangell, liberty of our
Country, ministration of Justice, and punishment of Iniquity, against all
enemies within this Realm, or with out, as we desire our God to be a strong
and merciful defender to us in the day of our death, and coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and
glory Eternally, Amen.

THE KINGIS MAJESTY'S CHARGE TO ALL COMMISSIONERS AND MInisters within this
Realm.
Seeing, that we and our Household, have subscryued and given this publict
Confession of our Faith, to the good example of our Subjectis. We command and
charge, all Commissioners and Ministers, to crave the same Confession of their
Parochinars, and procead against the refusers, according to our Lawis and order
of the Kirk, delivering their names, and lawful process to the Ministers of
our house, with all have and diligence, under the pain of xl. pound to be
taken from their stipend, that we with the advice of our Counsel, may take
ordour with sic proud contemners of God and our Laws. Subscryued with our
hand. At Halyrudhous, 1580. the 2. day of March, the 14. year of our reign.

THE SVBSCRIBERS UNTO THE CONFESSION OF FAITH.
(...) (...) (...) (...)

THE GENERAL BAND.
We vndersubscriuand, considering the strait link and conjunctioun betuix the
true and christian religion, presently professit within this our realm, and
souerane Lords estate and standing, having both the self same friends and
common enemies, and subject to the like event of standing and decay: and weying
thairwithall, the imminent danger threatened to the said religion, asweill be
foreign preparations for persecution, of that detestable conspiracy against
Christ and his Euangel, callit the halie league; as be outward and inrestine
practizes of the favorers and suppostis thairof amangis ourselffis, quha now
inanimat be the report of foreign powers repairing to this realm, begins mair
planely to utter and profes their lang concelit evil meaning to the truth, and
consequently to the standing of his Majesty our souerane Lord: quhom they
have found and tryit to be ane constant and inflexible professor of the same.
The preservation quhairof being dearer to us, nor quhatsoeuer we have dearest
in this life: and finding in his majesty, a may honorable and christian
resolution, to manifest himself to the world, yt zealous and religious prince,
quhilk he hes hithertils professit, and to employ the means and power that God
has put into his hands, asweill to the withstanding of quhatsoeuer foreine
force sall mean within this Island for alteration of the said religioun, or
endangering of the present staite: as to the repressing of the inward enemies
thairto amangis our selffs, linkit with them in the said antichristian league
and confederacy. Have thairfore in the presence of Almichtie God, and with his
Majesty's authorizing and allowance, faithfully promisit and solempnly sworn,
like as heirby we faithfully and solempnely swear and promise, to take ane
true cafauld and plain part with his Majesty amangis our selffis, for
diuerting of the appeirand danger threatened to the said religioun, and his
Majesty's estate and standing depending thairvpon, be quhatsoeuer foreign or
intestine platts or preparations: And to that effect, faithfully, and that upon
our trueths and honors, binds and oblishis us to vthers: To conuene and
assemble our selffs publictly with our friends, in arms or in quiet manner, at
sick times and places as we salbe requirit be his proclamations, or be writ or
message direct to us from his Majesty, or any having power from him: and being
conuenit and assemblit, To join and concur with the hail forceis of our
friendis and favorers against quhatsoeuer foreine or intestine powers, or
papists and their partakers, salariue or rise within this Ila^d or any part
thairof, red die to defend or pursue, as we salbe authorized and conductit be
his Majesty, or any other, having his power and commission, to join and hald
hand to the execution of quhatsoeuer mean or order salbe thocht meit be his
Majesty and his Counsel, for the suppressing of the papists, promotion of the
true religion, and settling of his highness estate and obedience in all the
cuntries and corners of this realm, to expone and hazard our lives, landis and
gudis, and quhatsoeuer mean God hes lent us, in the defense of the said true
and christian religion, and his Majesty's person and estate, against
quhatsoeuer Iesuitis and Seminary or Mess priests, condamnit enemies to God
and his Majesty, to their utter wrack and exterminion, according to the power
grantit to us be his highness proclamation and Acts of parliament: To try,
search, and seik out all excommunicats, practizers, and other papists
quhatsoeuer, within our bounds and shyres quhair we keip residence, delate
them to his highness and his priuye Counsel, and conform us to sick
directions, as fra time to time we sall receive fra his Majesty and his
Counsel in their behalfs, and specially so many of us as presently ar, or
heirafter salbe appointit commissioners in every shyre, sall follow, pursue
and travel be all means possible, to take and apprehend al sick papistis,
apostatis and excommunicatis, as we sall receive in writ from his Majesty: and
we, the remnant within that shyre, sall concur and assiste with the said
commissioners, with our haill friends and forces to that effect, without
respect of any person quhatsoeuer. And generally to assist in the mean time
and defend every ane of us ane other, in all and quhatsoeuer quarrels, actions,
debaits, mouit, or to be mouit against us or any of us, upon action of the
present band or vthers causes depending thairvpon, and cafauldly join in
defense and pursuit, against quhatsoeuer sall offer or intend any injury or
revenge, against any ane of them for the premises: makand his cause and part
that is pursued, al our partis. Notwithstanding quhatsoeuer priuye grudge or
displeasures standing betwix any of us, quhilk salbe na impediment or hinder
to our said eafaulde joining in the said common cause, bot to lie over and be
misknawne, till they be orderly remouit and taken away be the order
vnderspecifier. To the quhilk time we, for the better furtherance of the said
cause and service, have assurit, and be the tenor heirof, every ane of us
takand the burding on us for our selffes and all that we may let, assures ilke
other to be unhurt, vnharmeit, or in any wise to be invadit be us or any of our
foresaidis, for auld feid or new, vtherwayis nor be the ordinary course of
Law and justice: neither sall we, nor any of our forsaidis, make any
provocation of tumulte, trouble or displeasure to vthers in any sort, as we
sall answer to God, and upon our honors and fidelity to his Majesty. And
for our further and mare heartly union in this service, We are content and
consents, that al and quhatsoeuer our feids and variances fallin, or that may
fall out betwixt us, be within forty dayis after the date heirof, amicably
referrit and submittit to seuin or five indifferent freindis, chosen be his
Majesty of our haill number, and be their moderation and arbitrament componit
and taken away. And finally, that we sall neither directly nor indirectly,
seperat or withdraw us fra the union and fellowship of the remnent, be
quhatsoeuer suggestion or private advise, or be quhatsoeuer incident regard, or
stay sick resolution, as be common deliberation salbe taken in the premises, as
we sall answer to God upon our consciences, and to the world upon our truth
and honors, and under the pain to be esteemit traytouris to God and his
Majesty, and to have lost all honor, credit and estimation in time cumming.
In witness quhairof his Majesty, in token of his approbation, and protection
promissit to us in the premises, and we be his authorizing and allowance
forsaid, have subscriued their presents with our hands.

THE SVBSCRIVERS UNTO THE GENERAL BAND.
(...) (...) (...) (...)

THE ACT OF SECREIT COVNSAILL.
JAMES be the grace of God, King of Scottis:
To our louitts,
Messengers, ourschyriffes in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute greeting. Forasmekle as be act of our parliament, Intitulate, ANENT
THE TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT of the offense of the adversaries of the true
religion presently professit within our realm. It is statute and ordaint, that
quhatsoeuer professed and avowed Jesuits, or Seminary priests, should be found
in any part of our realm, within the space of ane month after the publication
of the said Act, quhilk was duly published upon the 14. day of August, the eir
of God 1587. eirs. Should be taken, apprehended, called, pursued, and incur the
pain of deid, and confiscation of all their mouable guds, and quha ever
wittingly or willingly should receive or supply any of them thairefter, be the
space of three days and three nychts togidder, or severally at three times,
upon certain knawledge, that they are persons of that profession, being
lawfully and orderly convict of the same should incur the tinsall of their
liuerents. And that they, as also the sayers or hearers of the Mess, or
prophaners of the Sacraments, or vthers persons suspecte to have declined fra
the true religion, or refusing to resort to the preaching of Gods word, or
quhatsoeuer person that should be reasoning, or dispersing of buiks and letters,
presume to persuade any of our subjects, to decline fra the profession of the
said true religion: Being called to compeir and answer thereupon, before us and
our privy Counsel, In case the persons so dilated and accused, or any of
them, sulde be found culpable be our priuye Counsel, or any five of them
(our Chanceller and Clarke of Register being two of that number) ather be the
confession of the said persons accused, or be the deposition of diverse famous
witnesses. Or gif the saidis persons being called and adjudged criminally (in
case we, and the Lords of our privy counsel sall so think good) and were
found culpable and guilty of the premises: That they thairthrow, should incur the
pane of tinsell of al their mouable guds, togidder with the liferents of al
their lands and livings quhatsoeuer, to be vptaken and employed to our own
uses, and na ways disponit to the persons that should be convict or fugitive for
the cause foresaid: as the said Act of our Parliament in the self proports.
And because we and our estates, quhilk conuenit at Halirudehous, upon the 27
day of July. The eir of God, 1588. eirs, perceived be good experience, the
inconvenient that followed, throw default of nonputting of the same Act to due
execution, and that thairthrow the saidis Iesuitis, and seminary priests
disdained our said Acts, and continued in seducing and persuading of diverse of
our nobility and vtheris our good subjectis, to decline fra the said true and
christian Religion, and to practice the alteration and trouble of our Estate.
Thairfore be ane other Act and ordinance maid be us, our said nobility,
counsel and estates, quhilk conuenit the said 27. day of July: certain
persons specially expressed thairin were nominate, elected and constitute our
Commissioners, and Iusticeis in that part, within the boundis of our
schirefdoms stewartries, bayliereis, Burrowis and Cities under mentioned: Like
as to them conjunctly and severally, within the bounds specially limited to
tham were given our full power and commission. All and sundry Jesuits, and
Seminary priests: as namely, M. James Gordon, father brother to the Earl of
Huntley, master Edmond Hay, brother to the gudeman of Meginche, M. William
Creichton, M. Alexander Mackquhirry, Gilbert Brown sometime Abbot of New abbay,
M. Mark Ker son to Robert Ker elder, burges of our burgh of Edinburgh, and
certain vthers of that profession, incase they should nocht depart forth of our
realm, and enter thameselfes to the Prouest of our said burgh of Edinburgh,
til have been ludged, quhile occasion seruit to transport them according to
our proclamation published to that effect. And als all and sundry our rebels,
remaining at the Horn, for slaughter, or sick vthers odious crimes, and all
sornars, brigandis and maisterfull vagaboundis. To search, seike, take and
apprehende, and either to bring and present them before our justice and his
deputes in our burgh of Edinburgh, or then our said justices and commissioners
thameselffs, to put the said Jesuits and Seminary Priests, and vtheris above
written, to the knawledge of ane assise for the said wicked and unlawful
practizes and attempts, and contemptuus disobeying and contrauening of our laws
and acts of parliament, and other odious crimes committed be them, and as they
should be fundin culpable or innocent, to minister justice upon them, conform
to the laws and consuetude of our realm, court or courts to this effect to
set, begin, affirm, hald and continue deputis under them, with clerks,
serjands, dempstars and all vthers officers and members of court neidfull: to
make, create, substitute and ordain Assise ane or ma, to that effect, ilke
person under the pain of forty poundis, to summond, warn, cheese, and cause
be sworn, vnlawis, amerchiaments and escheits of the saidis courts: to ask,
lift and raise, and for the same gif neid beis to poind and distrenzie, count,
reckoning and payment to us and our treasurour in our name in our checker to
make: quhairin the necessary expensses to be maid in the execution of our said
commission, is appointed to be defeasit and allowed. And incase the saidis
Iesuitis and Seminary priestis, and vthers above specified, sall happen to
flee to houses and strenthis, To assege and pursue them thairin, raise fire,
and use all force and warlike ingyne for recovery thairof. And gifit sall
happen any of tham, or any assisting and concurring with tham to be hurt,
slain or mutilat, or any wrack, destruction of house or gudes to be done: the
same to be impute for na crime nor offense, to our said Iusticers and
commissioners, or persons assisting them in the execution heirof: nor they nor
nane of them, to be called or accused for the same, criminally nor ciuilie, be
any manner of way in time cumming: Exonering them of all action and crime, that
may be moved and intended against them or any of tham for the same, and
discharging all our judges and ministeris of our lawis of all calling,
outlawing or any wise proceeding against tham thairfore, and of their officers
in that part for ever. Mairouer with power to the said justices and
commisioners, to enquire, quhat feidis or variance standis betwixt any parties
inhabitant within ye shyres and bounds appointed to them, and quha were the
may able and indifferent friends, to be employed for co^poning and away
taking thairof. And to require and command the^ to travel to that effect: And
the persons standing at variance, to submit thamselfs, to ye moderation and
arbitrament of ye said indifferent friends, according to ye effect and meaning
of the general band, subscriued be us and diverse of our estates: or incase of
refuse or delay, to certify the same to us and our counsel with all
convenient diligence, that sick further order mycht be taken their anent, as
apperteinit. And to move certain of the may zealous and worthy persons in
every parochin, to take upon the^ our commission, for execution of our Act of
Parliament maid for punishment of strange and idil beggars, and relief of the
pure and impotent: as also ordainit and commanded our saidis commissioners and
justicers, to proclaim, and cause make wapponshawings of al fensable persons in
the bounds particularly limitat to tham, and to charge them to conuene in
arms at al occasions neidfull, for defense of the cuntrie, and resisting of
all outward and domestic invasion, tending to the danger of the professors of
Gods true religion, or trobling of the common quietness of our realm: And
further to charge and require all our good subjects to concur and assist them
in the execution of the premises, under the panes contened in the acts of our
parliament: And further under the pane to be repute, halden, esteemed and
pursued, as hinderers of our service, airt, and pertakers with the forsaids
rebellious and disobedient persons, in their ungodly and wicked deids, And that
our said commissioners and justicers do their exact diligence for execution of
the premises, as they and every ane of them, will answer to us upon their
obedience, at their uttermost charge and peril. And further under the pane of
ane thousand pounds, to be paid be every ane of them that salbe found remiss
or negligent heirin, as the said act of our secreit counsel, of the date
forsaid, at mair length proports. Quhilk, with the said act of our parliament,
and vthers acts, ordinances and commissions past, and given for executing of
the same acts, against the said Jesuits, Seminary priests and excommunicate
persons: the said Lords of our secreit counsel, in our name, ratifies,
approues and ordaines the same, to be put to further execution in all points,
conform to the tenor thairof, with sick expedition as conveniently may be.
And because there is certain of the Noble men, Barrons and vthers expressed
commissioners, in the said act of our secreit counsel, maid upon the said 27.
day of July fourscore seven eirs, that sen the making thairof, ar departed
this life, vthers diseased in their bodies, and some absent forth of our
realm, and in other partis far distant fra the bounds, within the quhilk
commission was geuin to them, be reason of their residence thairin for the
time, so that at this present, they may not conveniently use and execute our
said commission, with sick expedition as is requisite. Thairfore the said
Lords of our secreit counsel, at the humble and earnest desire of the
general assembly of the Kirk, presently conuenit, hes thought good, concluded
and ordainit, That our said commission and acts forsaid, salbe put in due and
full execution, be the persons respective after following, given in be tham in
roll, within the liberties, schyrifdoms, stewartries and baylieries
particularly vndermentioned: They are to say, the Provests and baylies of every
city and burgh, justicers and commissioners within the self, and liberties of
the same. And for the cuntrie to landwart, Robert earl of Orknay, within the
bounds of our shyrifdome of Orknay, George earl of Caithnes, Coline Mackenzie
of Kintaill, Thomas Fraser of Knokky, Andro Monro of Dowachartie, An gus
Williamso^ Mackintosh in Termet, and John Vrquhart tutor of Cromartie within
the bounds of our shyrifdoms of Innernes and Cromartie. John Campbel of Caddell
our shyriff of Narne. Hucheon Ros of Kilrawak, and John Hay of Lochloy, within
the bounds of our shyrifdom of Narne, James earl of Murray, Patrik Dumbar
shyriff wardatare of Elgin and Fores, Robert Innes of that ilke, John Grant of
Frewchy, James Dumbar of Tarbert, and David Dumbar of Grangehill within the
boundis of our shyrifdoms of Elgin and Fores. William earl of Morton shyrif
wardatare of Bamff Alexander L. Salton, and Walter Ogiluy of Findlatter within
the bounds of our shyrifdome of Bamff. John master of Forbes, William Forbes
of Corsse, Alexander Irwing of Drum, James Creichto^ of Frendraucht Alexander
Seton of Meldrum, John Gordon of Petlurg, William Keith of Ludquharne and
William Turing of Foverne, within the bounds of our shyrifdome of Aberdene.
William earl of Angus, George earl Marshall, Robert L. of Altree, Andro L.
Dingwell, Alexander Straton of Lourensto^, John Strauchauchine of Thornton,
John Wischart of Pettarro, and John Ramsey of Balmane, within the bounds of our
shyrifdome of Kincardin. John L. Hammilton, Thomas master of Glammis, Patrick
master of Graye, David Lindsey of Edzel, James Skrimgeour of Dudop constable
of Dundie, and George Haliburton of Pitcur, within ye bounds of our shyrifdom
of Forfair. John earl of Athoil, Duncane Campbell of Glenurquhart, Thomas
Stewart of Garntully, Alexander Blair of Bathyok, William Mon criff of that
ilke, and Patrick Ogiluy of Inche Martin within the bounds of our shyrifdome of
Perth, Stormonth and Dunkeld. John Murray of Tullibardin, John Stirling of
Keir, and M. John Halden of Glennegeis, within the bounds of our stewartries of
Strath erne, Menteith and Diocie of Dunblane. William earl of Morton, Alexander
commendatar of Culros, William Menteith of Kerss, and Robert Bruce of
Clakmannane, within the boundis of our shyrifdomes of Clakmannane and Kinross.
Andro earl of Rothes our shyrif of Fyffe. James L. Lindsay of the Byres, M.
William Lundy of that ilk, Andro Wood of Largo, and David Carnegy of Culluthy,
within the bounds of our shirifdome of Fyffe. John earl of Mar, William L.
Leuingston, Alexander Forester of Gardin, and John Leuingston ounger of
Donypace, within the bounds of our shyrifdom of Striuiling. Georg Dundas of yt
ilk, Nicol Cornwall of Ballinhard and David Du^das of Preistsinch within the
bounds of our shirifdom of Lynlythqw. Archibald Naper of Marcheinston,
Alexander Fairly of Braid and Patrik Monype^ny of Pilrig, within the bounds of
our shyrifdom of Edinburgh. Willia^erl of Angus, Francis earl Bothuell, William
Lord Hay of ester, Sir John Maitland of Thirlstane knight our Chancelour, and
Alexander Hume of Northberuicke, within the bounds of the constabularie of
Hadington and Dumbar. Sir James Hume of Coldenknows knight, Georg Hume of
Weddirburne, Alexander Hume of Hultonhall, Patrick Hume appeirand of Ayton,
Patrick Cokburne tutor of Langton, James Seton of Tullibody, and M. Thomas
Cranston of Moreisto^, within the bounds of our shyrifdome of Barwicke or Mers.
William Ker of Cesfurde, Walter Scott of Branxholme, George Douglas of
Bonjedburgh, John Crankston of that ilk and Andro Ker of Fadounside, within the
boundis of our shyrifdom of Roxburgh or Teuiotdail. William L. Hay of ester,
John Stewart of Tracquair, William Twedy of Drummeler and Patrick Murray of
Fawlahill, within the boundis of our shyrifdoms of Selkirk and Peblis. John L.
Hammilton, William earl of Angus, James L. Someruile, James Maxwell of
Calderwood, John Stewart of Mynto, and James Hamilton of Liberton, within the
boundis of our shyrifdome of Lanerk or Cliddisdale. Lodovike Duke of Lennox,
James earl of Glencarne, Robert L. Semple, George Buchannane of that ilk, John
Schaw of Grenok, William Edmondston of Duntreith and Humfrey Colhoun of Lus,
within the boundis of the Lennox and our shyrifdom of Renfrew. Robert master
of Eglinton, Thomas L. Boyd, John Blair of that ilke, and Thomas Craufurde of
Iordanhil, within the bounds of our bayliery of Cunningham. Hew Campbel of
Teorinean, John Wallace of Cragy, Andro L. Vchiltree and William Craufurde of
Lochnoreis, within the boundis of our baylierie of Kyle. John Kennedy of
Blairquhan, Thomas Kennedy of Bargany and John Cathcart of Carlton, within the
boundis of our baylierie of Carrict. Alexander Stewarte of Garlers, Vthrid
Makdougall of Garthland and schir Patricke Vaus of Barnbarrouch within the
bounds of our shyrifdom of Wigton, John Gordon of Lochinvar, Thomas Mackclellan
of Bombie, and James Lidderdale of saint Marie I Will within the boundis of our
stewartrie of Kirkcudbright. John L. Hamilton, James Douglas of Torthorald, and
Roger Greirson of Lag, within the bounds of our shyrifdom of Drumfreis. Robert
L. Sanquhar, James Douglas of Drumlangrig, and Roger Kirkpatrick of Closburn,
within the Sanquhar, or over part of Nithisdale. James Iohnso^ of Dunskelly,
Charles Murray of Cokpule and Robert Johnson Lord of Neubie, within our
stewartrie of Annanderdale. Archibald earl of Argile and his curators, within
the bounds of our shyrifdome of Argile. Angus Mackconeil of Dunniveg and
Glennis Lauchlane Makclaine of Dowart, Donald Makconeill Gorme of Slait, and
Donald Mackcloid of Harris, within the boundis of the Ilis. Attoure the saidis
Lordis of our secreit Counsel, heiring sundry bruits and rumors, asweill
offoreine as intestine plattis and preparations, for the trouble of the true
and Christian religion presently professed within our realm, and perrelling of
our estate and standing, depending thairvppon, both having the same self
friends and common enemies, and subject to the like event of standing and
decay: Hes thocht meit for preventing of the danger threatened hereby, asweill
to the ane as to the other. that first of all, the godly and weill affected
persons our good subjects salbe knawne and discernit fra tham that are of a
contrair disposition, and to this effect, the said Lords hes given and
granted, and be their presents gives and grantis full power and commission,
express bidding and charge to the persons underwritten, every ane of them
within the boundis particularly limitat to tham as follows. They are to say,
Thomas Swinton, Henrye Coluile and John Dunnone within the bounds of our
shyrifdom of Ork nay. M. William Paip M. Robert Innes, William Gray ounger,
Mast. John Robertson, M. George Monro, M. Robert Williamso^ and M. Thomas
Howieson, within the boundis of our shyrifdomes of Innernes and Cromarty. M.
Robert Rait within the bounds of our shyrifdome of Narne. M. John Keith
minister at Duffus, M. Alexander Douglas minister at Elgin, and John Forester
minister at Fores, within the bounds of our shyrifdomes of Elgin and Fores. M.
William Strauchauchin, M. James Duff and M. George Nicolson, within the bounds
of our shyrifdome of Bamff. M. Peter Blackburne, John Strauchauchin, James Reid
and Abraham Sibbald within the boundis of our shyrifdome of Aberdeine. M. Andro
Myln, M. William Lisk and M. Alexander Arbuthnet within the bounds of our
shyrifdome of Kincardin. M. James Meluin, M. Paul Frasair, William Christeson,
M. James Nicolson, M. Henry Guthree, M. Henry Duncane, John Foullarton and M.
Thomas Ramsey, within the bounds of our shyrifdome of Forfair. M. William Glass,
M. William Rynd, Alexander oung, M. Archibald Moncreiff and M. William Row
within the bounds of our shyrifdome of Perth, Stormonth and Dunkeld. M. Andro
oung M. William Striuiling and Alexander Fergy within the bounds of our
stewartries of Stratherne, Menteith and diocie of Dunblane. John Dykis, Robert
Rait and M. Alexander Wallace, within the bounds of our shyrifdoms of
Clackmannane and Kinros, M. Thomas Buchannane, M. Andro Moncreiff, M. James
Meluin and M. Adam Mitchell within the bounds of our shyrifdom of Fiff. John
Dunkeson, M. Alexander Leuingston and Andro Forester, within the bounds of our
shyrifdom of Striuiling. Patrick Kenlo quhy, M. James Law, and M Robert
Cornwel, within the bounds of our shirifdom of Lynlithqw. M. Robert Bruce. M.
Patrick Simson and M. Michaell Cranston, within the boundis of our shyrifdome
of Edinburgh. M. Adam Iohnston. John Hereis and James Gibson within Dalkeith.
William Sanderson, M. Cuthbert Boncle, M. Thomas Mackgye and M. James
Carmichaell, within the Constabularie of Hadington and Dumbar. David Hume, John
Clapperton and Robert French, within our shyrifdome of Berwicke or Mers. M.
Andro Clayhillis, M. William Auchmowty, Ceorge Iohnston, William Balfour and M
John Knox, within our shyrifdom of Roxburgh or Teviotdaill. M. Archibald
Douglas minister at Peblis, M John Welshe, minister at Selkirk and William
Sanderson minister at Innerletham, within the bounds of the Forest and
Tweddall. M. John Dauidson, M. Robert Lindsay, and M. Andro Hay, within the
bounds of Cliddisdail or Lanerk. M. Thom. Iak, M. Andro Knox, and M. Patrick
Walkinshaw, within the boundis of the Lennox and our shyrifdome of Renfrew. M.
Alexander Sk imgeour, M. Alexander Wrato^ and M. Robert Wilky, within our
baylierie of Cuningham. John Porterfield, M. John Inglis and M. Peter Primrois,
within our bayliery of Kyle. John Makcorne and William oung within our
baylierie of Carict. M. Ninian Makcle^noquhen and John ong within our shyrifdom
of Wigton. M. James Hamilton and M. David Blyith, within our Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright. M. Hew Foullarton and William Thomeson, within our shyrifdome of
Drumfreis. M. James Bryson and John Foullarton, within the Sanquhar or over
part of Nythisdale. Alexander Gairdner, within Annanderdal. M. Neil Campbell
within our shyrifdome of Argile. All and syndrie Earls, Lords, Barons,
freehalders, gentlemen, inhabitants of our burrowis, and other our lieges
quhatsoeuer, of quhat rank and degree that ever they be of: To call and conuene
before the said Ministers, be their missiue letters or messe^gers, at
quhatsoeuer places and days they shall think expedient, and they require tham
to gif the confession of their faith, together with their subscriptions
theirto, to the general Band maid and subscriued already be us, and certain of
our estaits, touching the maintenance and defense of the said true religion,
our person and estait, and withstanding of al foreign preparations and forces,
te^ding to the trouble thairof. And incase any persons so required disobey,
that the Ministers of Gods word proceed to admonitio^s, and finding tham
obstinate, cause the censures of the Kirk be used against the^ as enemies to
god, us, and to the co^monweal of this their native country. And that the
said Ministers crave the concurrence of the noblemen, Barrons and gentlemen,
within the bounds particularly above written for the better execution of the
premises. OUR WILL IS heirfoir, and we charge ou straightly and That incontinent
their our letters seen ee pass and in our name and authority make publication
heirof, be open proclamation at the market croces of the head burrows of our
realm, and vthers places neidful, quhairthrowe nane pretend ignorance of the
same: As also that ee command and charge the Noble men, Barons Ministers and
vthers foresaids, to accept upon them our commission given to every ane of
them, in manner perticularly above mentioned, and to report their diligence
touching the execution thereof, to the Clerk of our secreit Counsel, betwix
and the twenty day of May nixt to come, under the pain of rebellion and
putting of them to our Horn, with certification to them and they faillie,
they falbe denunceitrebels and put to our Horn: and all their mouable gudes
escheit and inbrocht, to our use, for their contemption. And sicklike that ee
command and charge all and syndrie our liegeis, to readily answer, intend,
obey, concur, fortify and assist our said commissioners in the execution of
the premises, and to do, nor attempt nathing to their hinderance, as they and
ilkane of tham will answer to us upon their obedience and allegiance, and under
all hiest pain, crime and offense, that they may commit and incur against us,
in that behalf, As e will answer to us their upon. The quhilk to do, we commit
to you conjunctly and severally, our full power be their our letters, delivering
them be you duly execute, and indorsate again to the bearer. Given under our
signet, At Edinburgh the saxt of March, and of our reign the xxiij. eir, 1589.

Per Actum secreti consilij. I. ANDRO


