THE BELGICKE PISMIRE: Stinging the slothful SLEEPER, AND Avvaking the
DILIGENT TO FAST, WATCH, PRAY; And WORK OVT THEIR OWN Temporal and Eternal
Salvation WITH Fear and Trembling.

Prove. 30.25. The Pismires are a people not strong, yet prepare they their
meat in Summer.

Printed at London. 1622.

Errata.
Folio 20. line 8. for thee, read her.

Fol. 22. lin. 3. for stigmatickes, stigmaticke.

Fol. 39. lin. 18. for destroyed, decayed.

Fol. 40. lin. 3. for required, requires.

Fol. 85. lin. 2. for have, had.

Fol. 90. lin. 15. for satfaction, satisfaction.

Fol. 90. lin. 27. for offoord, afford.

Fol. 92. lin. 11. for meekings, meetings.

To the true-hearted British Readers.
Dear Christian Countrymen; I send out this Treatise, in this doubtful and
dangerous time, not only to show you the necessary dependancie betwixt our
Kingdom of Great Britain and the united Provinces, but also to comfort and
strengthen you against all fears, that are or may be interjected, by the
subtlety and malice of our Adversaries, or our own misconceite or diffidence.
For I do not find the Enemy more busily practicing to discourage us, and to
raise false fires to affright us, then we our selves (as Melancholy persons
use) apt to misconster all things, and to imagine the worst, upon the sight of
every shadow.

And yet I must confess, that, as there are many of those who labor to effect
a division betwixt us, and to this end, reviue old grudges, and provoke new
quarrels; so the common current seems to run a contrary course to that
which it had wont, (as tides have their ebbes) and the general disposition of
most men is wavering, as persons light of love, who desire to shift their old
approved friends for fresh Suitors, and prefer the change of an adulterous bed
before the married. But I take this to be but a fit or throw of passion, which
will be easily cast off, with more hate and loathing, then it is now hotly
pursued with longing, when some discontents are settled, and men on both sides
are come to themselves again. And for the State it self (I mean that maine
Axeltree vvhereon our Kingdom turns) I do assure my self, it is the same it
was, firmly grounded on former principles extracted from experience on both
sides; and that we only move, whilst it remains constant, though we imagine
otherwise; as simple passengers sailing swiftly by the Continent, suppose the
trees, steeples, towers, and rocks to go backward.

Thus we are distracted and affrighted with our own shadows; ignorance makes
us Infidels: and whilst we see the face, but understand not the intention
and scope of some passages of State, we and our friends wax suspicious of
each other; and that suspicion raises many rumors; and those rumors, though
false, may beget and nourish a true and dangerous hate betwixt us. My own
Countri-men have tongues laxatiue enough, and Strangers are in their words,
as in diverse other things, libertines. That which I write may help to make
both sides more confident of each others love, more retentiue and sparing of
their censures; at least it shall have that effect in me, till I behold the
issue, which I hope will be happy.

The bell is rung out, and I hear the sound and report it gives on both sides.
Upon the States side, men fear the passages and cariages of all things in
England; and for this, are liberal and free in their discourses, making the
fear greater then the cause requires. On the contrary side, they are
doubtful or rather desperate, and therefore prosecute his Majesty with all
kind of calumny. Pictures and Pasquills are day by day there vented thick and
threefold one upon the neck of another, wherein not only the King of Bohemia
and the Prince of Orange, but our King also is basely traduced and abused. This
comforts me, and assures me they persecute none of their own, and therefore
hold his Majesty to be an enemy. Let this assure us, that he is the same we
would have him, howsoever for some respects of State, he seems, (to weak
eyes who behold things aloof off) to be otherwise inclined. But, for my own
part, I comfort my self especially, and desire you would be comforted against
all these suspicions, fears, and jealousies, out of two considerations; the
goodness and mercy of our God, and the wisdom and policy of our King.

First, let us consider we have a good and gracious God watching over us, who
will not suffer his Truth to be extinguished, but as he has hitherto
miraculously preserved it, so still he will continue to do the same.

And though, for our abuse and contempt of the Gospel (together with our
barrenness in good, Psalm. 89.32.33.
our fruitfulness in evil) he visit our transgressions with the rod, yet
will he not utterly take his mercy from us, nor suffer his truth to fail. Let
us then rest in peace; Psalm. 121.4.
for he that keeps us does neither slumber nor sleep. And let the
remembrance of those many former deliverances, which he has wrought for us,
after an extraordinary and miraculous manner, assure us of the like fatherly
care and protection still, if we faint not, 1. Sa. 17.34 35, 36, 37.
but faithfully and constantly depend upon his merciful promise.

Secondly, consider the wisdom of our Prince, which is so renowned, as for
it he is gladly admitted a general Arbitrator in foreign parts to determine
controversies of State. Let this comfort us, and assure us, that God has not
given Him so much light for nothing, much less for evil. Let us think, that
since He was entertained with so much love, and so great signs of joy into
this Kingdom, and has been served since with so much obedience, (far more
then a father could expect from his children) that He will so much seem to
neglect his own honor and safety, or our lives and liberties, as to leave us
in the hands of our enemies, or abase us in the eyes of other Nations, to lead
us, or suffer us to be led into temporal or spiritual captivity. Let us
think also he cannot forget either 88. or the Powder Plot, (though now
perhaps, it be unseasonable to remember them) nor yet the many attempts and
practices against His person, Crown, Dignity, and the Truth he professes:
nor that God will suffer him to sleep securely in the arms of such, as He
knows watch only for opportunity to destroy Him and His. Think also, that
Nature will reviue and work in Him, though it seems to lie in a trance for
the present time: and that He cannot but see, that it is impossible to love the
Root, and hate the Branches; or to love the Fruit and Branches, and hate the
Root. Our love to his Royal Progeny must needs assure our love to Him; and
the hate of others to Them, assure their inward hate against Him. And for such
as persuade otherwise, that our love to the Kings Children, and hate to the
adverse party, proceeds either out of discontent, or a Puritanicall humor in
us leading to disloyalty, Psalm. 7.16.
Let their lies turn upon their own pates; and let evil happen to them that
think evil, and that would poison and pervert all good purposes with practice.

And though the subtle Enemies labor to breed jelousies betwixt Him and His,
knowing it to be for their advantage, and the only way to blemish the Gospel,
and discredit good men, by breeding this suspicion, which may estrange and
alienate the heart of the Prince from his people, and friends from each other;
yet think it cannot sink into his Majesty's breast, that such servants, such
subjects; Professors of the Gospel, should intend the least hurt to him, who is
the Defender of their Faith. It is for Heathens, Turks, Papists, to become
Assassinates, Parricides, and bloody Traitors; and it is for Tyrants amongst
these, to suspect their friends, brethren, and children, and therefore to cut
them off at the motion of their Flatterers, Bashawes, Jesuits, and other tame
trencher-Traytors. Good Princes, who are fathers of the Commonwealth, cannot
do thus, will not do thus; whilst in themselves they see no cause of their
subjects hate; or if they see any, can find a readier way by amendment, to
remove the cause, and prevent the mischief, then by seconding one evil with
another, to endanger the overthrow of all, and to make the disease desperate,
by endeavoring a contrary cure; or the flame rise higher, by casting in fresh
fuel, or quenching it with oil.

Think also it is our Enemies plot, to stir up our heady and hasty humors,
and to cause the Prince to discontent his best and truest subjects; and, if it
were possible, by all means to provoke them to impatience and resistance, that
so themselves might be armed in His colorable defense, and have occasion also
to bring in other borrowed Aid under the same pretense, but with assurance of
His and all our ruins in the issue; as has ever happened to that unfortunate
State where they have become Sticklers. But think his Majesty cannot but see
this as well as we and much better; and therefore be you quiet, that their
intents and projects may be frustrate.

Finally, think now your King is making of his own Monument, vvriting his
own Chronicle; both which are raised and composed by deeds, and not words:
and assure your selves, He that can speak and write so well, will never so
far contradict his own words with repugnant actions, as thereby to race
his Arms, to stain the honor he was borne unto, and which he has made
good and bettered hitherto, by high and holy enterprises of act and admonition
against Rome: but think therefore, that all this time, He is acting his part
in the eye of the whole world; that he is working his Masterpiece in the
public market, and trying his exact skill in King-craft with the greatest
State and Statists in Christendom; that is, with Rome, Spain, Austria,
Italy, Machiauel, and the extracted strength and quintessence of all these, the
Jesuits.

And therefore think, howsoever for the present he carries himself, and
seems to be led by some of that side, yet in the end, the Lion may awake,
break loose and tear his keeper; or else lead, whilst he seems to be led;
and then the world shall see, that neither the opinion of his sincerity in
the Truth, nor of his unmatchable wisdom and policy, were vain mistakings,
but that our harmless David can use honest Hushai to overthrow their crafty
Achitophel.

Then the Church shall triumph and be comforted, the Commonwealth flourish,
His honor shall be eternized; neither shall you repent of your patience, nor I
of my persuasion to this end; wherein I rest, with an assurance of Gods mercy
herein, and that we shall see our desire upon our Enemies.

To the half-hearted English-Spanish Reader:
DEsiring him, if he finds me too tart in his taste against that Nation, and
(as he thinks) too much to neglect their honors in some passages, that he would
consider there are three things moving me to this; any of which when they come
in my way; may force me to strike them with my tongue, since I cannot reach
them with my hand.

2. The first is the Liberty of the Gospel, to whose free passage they are
open and professed enemies, altering Religion for the worst where they conquer,
taking part with the Serpent against the Seed of the woman, and desiring to
be known Catholic persecutors of all true Christians.

2. The second is the Liberty of life, that by the benefit of nature each
Nation has and seeks to preserve under their own rules; which likewise the
Spaniard labors to take from humane society, and to prescribe Laws to all
Christendom. Which ambitious mood has possessed them ever since that Catholic
title was conferred upon them by that Sea, Luke. 4.6.
who next and immediately under Satan, has the disposition of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth at his pleasure.

3. The third is the bloody, inhumane, and unchristian dealing with the Kings
Children, even when they pretend to desire affinity with that House, and that
dallying about restitution of wrongs, tossing the ball from one to another; and
laughing in their sleeves, that their dissimulation has deluded our plain
meaning, and possessed them of so rich a Country, which is a fit road to invade
all Christendom. For now they have a high way, or thorow-fare to convey their
Armies commodiously from Flanders to Austria all the way in their own Command.
But whom have they not thus dealt vvithall for their own advantages, if
former presidents could make men beware of their courses?

I do protest, saving these quarrels, I bear nor spleen nor malice to any
Spaniard living, much less to the Nation, whom (these things excepted) I
honor as befits me: but when any of these considerations come cross my
thoughts, they stir up a salt humor, which falls from my eyes into my ink, and
turns it more black and bitter, and more sharp vvithall then the Gall and
Coperas which gave it the first tincture; and this makes my style harsh, when
I touch upon that string. No other good can cause me to forget these evils, or
persuade me to take those for my friends who are enemies to these, or afford
them good words, who load these with opprobrious scoffs and open injuries.
Injustice in them begets indignation in others, and no man that does evil, can
ever hope to hear well from any but Cowards, or flatrerers.

To the indifferent Dutch Readers.
I Assure them and all the world, these three considerations aforementioned,
work contrary effects in me toward them. I love them first for Religions
sake, they being a hiding place for the pore persecuted members of Christ
hunted out of Bohemia, the Palatinate, and other distressed Countries.
Secondly, being become a Bulwark for the liberty of all Christendom at this
present. Thirdly, being a happy Sanctuary for the Kings Children, when very
few Christian Princes durst profess themselves their friends.

Men may say, their own respects work these effects, and I willingly grant,
that perhaps, they are involved together. And what Nation is there, or what
State; nay, what man, that in all friendship looks not inward and homeward
with one eye? when I think upon these things, I cannot but love them, and
speak well of them; nor can particular injuries (which may be raised from
their and our enemies, intermixed with them, Ios. 23.13.
as pricks in their sides and thorns in their eyes) nor general wrongs in any
other kind though professed and justified, work me so much to hate and
division, (though they may tempt me shrewdly) as these to love and union.

Yet because I praise this Belgicke friend, as I think, worthily in the body
of the book, I must in the Preface admonish him of such faults as I hear or
see, that he may mend them (if there be cause) in the beginning, and so be
truly worthy of those praises I give him, and think he deserves in the course
of this Treatise. He is a fool that cannot see his friends faults as well as
his perfections; and he is a flatterer that (if he sees them) will not be his
friends glass for amendment to dress him to Glory and perfection. Let him
never take me for a friend, that loves not this plainness: if for this he
proves my foe, I have lost nothing, but saved much I might have lost, had I
ventured any thing in so light, weak, and vnbalast a bottom.

1. First therefore they say, Children are not generally there well educated,
having too much liberty allowed them, so that they soon learn to forget that
duty to their Parents, which they were never taught to remember.

2. Secondly, they say, frugality makes men neglect piety, 1. Tim. 6.5.6. Mar.
11.15
and the gain of ungodliness makes merchandise of godliness; so that buyers
and sellers, and spiritual thieves possess the temple; I mean the labor
proper to six days, makes a sacrilegious usurpation and horrible profanation
of that Rest proper to the Seventh; Exodus 20.9.10.
and many for fear of seeming Jews, become Gentiles.

3. Thirdly, they say, the reverend Ministers are respected but not rewarded
according to their labors and merits. The ox is muzled, and in the mean time
the Ass and Mule eat up his provender in prodigality, riot, and every
excess. 1. Cor. 9.9.10.


4. Fourthly, your professed Enemies tax you with unthankfulness, and make this
a just motive to provoke his Majesty to leave you.

They challenge you of ingratitude to his Majesty, to the British Nation, to the
Soldier. I know not whether these be truths or slanders, I tell you what I
hear and read in their writings. If they say true, amend it, if they come
near the truth, Ingratum dixetis, and omnia dixeris. Senec.
avoid so monstrous a shadow as ingratitude: remember how much English blood
has been spilt to save yours; this cannot be recompensed without
extraordinary respects; for Money pays some, Honor others, Love all. Nor is
there a Nation whose love has been, or is more useful to your State, nor
that is more worthy of it then the British. You neither dishonor, disprofit or
weaken your selves by this admittance and conjunction, but should every way
reap advantage by it. Now thus you have heard what others think and say, for
my own opinion, if you think it worth any thing, you may read it in that
which follows.

THE BELGICKE PISMIRE.
PROVE. 6.6. Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, Behold her ways and be wise.


MAn was not created to idleness, nor to any base or vile employment: but
enjoined labor to preserve by industry what God himself had created. Adam
in his integrity should have wrought, but without weariness; as the Angels
now take pleasure in the diligent discharge of their offices. In idleness man
seems to be like Satan; in action like God, his servant, his substitute, his
coadjutor; for it is said, Genesis. 2.15. after the Creation of all things:
Then the Lord took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, that he might
dress it and keep it: God made it, he must dress it and keep it; therefore
he must work. And to this end, that man might not perform actions casually
or by contingency, but legally according to a rule, God has given him both
bodily strength to till the ground, and reason also to do it seasonably. Yea
he has skill to direct the Creatures subjected to his government, in their
voluntary obedience, and to make them serviceable helps, to the speedy
accomplishment of his honest desires. Thus as soon as he saw them, Genesis 2.19,
20.
even at the first sight, by the intellectual faculty, he discerned their
powers and virtues, and to what employment they were apt; and was able to give
them names, properly expressing their natures. But such was the precipitation
of his fall, as thereby he did not only lose his dignity and wisdom, and
equal himself with the beasts his natural subjects, but cast himself under
the basest creatures, as Samson, buried under the ruins of that house, which
his own hands pulled down upon his own head: or rather, as when things are
turned topsie-turvie, the highest becomes lowest; even so here, man the most
excellent creature is cast under all; the higher his standing, the greater his
ruin, the more noble his nature, the more base his declension. All that he can
now do (neither can he do that of himself by nature, but by grace infused)
is by degrees to remove the weight from himself, piece after piece, and from
the back of one creature, to clime up on another, and so to look toward God,
and toward Paradise, from whence he was excluded for sin. Eccl. 40.1.
He is pressed down to the earth and laden with many difficulties, weakened with
many infirmities, and yet has this addition cast upon him as a curse, even now
when he is least able to help himself, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall
eat thy bread. Before thou were to labor, O man, yet then thou did it
willingly without pain, without weariness, with pleasure and delight; the
Earth answered thy expectation, and prevented thy desires with overflowing
fecunditie; Now thou must labor by necessity, by compulsion, in anguish and
sorrow of spirit, in toil and sweat of body; and when all is done, thy hopes
shall be frustrated; the earth (like an evil debtor) will not pay the due use,
but (like a cousening companion) run away with the principal: Nay (like an
ungrateful wretch, like thy self, and worse it cannot be, worse I cannot
say) shall in stead of flowers bring forth weeds; in stead of corn, Cockle; in
stead of Roses to refresh thee, thorns to prick thee, to crown thee with
curses (as thou crownest thy Savior) and in stead of Manna to feed thee, it
shall bring forth thistles to choke thee. If thou labourest not, thou can not
eat, sterue thou must of necessity; and if thou labourest, death comes to
thee that way also; yea oftentimes thou do kill thy self with toyling. And
yet O happy punishment! O mercy in the midst of misery! O blessed curse,
that leads thee the right and only way to happiness! for except thou
labourest here, thou can not live here: and this does teach thee, that
except thou labourest spiritually and workest the works of grace, thou shall
not live eternally the life of glory. In vvorking thou may obtain, but thou
do not yet merit, thy daily bread; thou beggest it, thou have it by gift, by
Gods blessing: And this will teach thee, that if all thy sweat be not able to
purchase a crum of bread, all thy holiness cannot merit Heaven; work yet thou
must, first to show thy penitencie, and how well thou would behave thy
self, if now thou were in possession of Paradise, as thou have been:
secondly, to show thy obedience to that commandment of his which thou have
broken, when it was in thy power to keep it: thirdly, to show thy faith in
the assurance of that promise, which he that made never fayles to perform:
fourthly, to show thy thankfulness to that God, who notwithstanding thy
sin, has not done execution upon thee, but left thee means to live here,
and to assure a better life hereafter, then that which thou have lost. If thou
die not temporally, thou can not live eternally: O therefore happy
transgression, which procurest this blessed curse! O happy sin, that art
incountred with so much grace! O joyful and pleasant misery, that have met
with such abundant and ouerflowing mercy! Consider Paradise was not thine by
nature, but grace at the first; God made thee without, he brought thee thither,
he put thee into possession, upon condition of thy good behavior; thou did
forfeit thy right by ill desert, which at first was given thee freely without
desert; thou can much less lay claim to it now by merit, or hope to get it
again that way, since grace brought thee in at the first, and the same grace
only can and will bring thee in again, if thou will work; for in the sweat of
thy brows thou shall eat both thy temporal and spiritual bread. Now if thou
have forgotten how to work, (O thou great governor of all creatures, thou man,
that were made their schoolmaster to teach them their lessons) do not think
scorn to refresh thy memory by their examples, but now humble thy self to be
taught of them: (as doting fathers of their obedient children) behold, the
holy Ghost sends thee to learn of a most contemptible creature, a worm, a
pismire; Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her ways and be wise; Go,
for thou have a body and legs; Consider, for thou have a soul and reason; Go
and consider, use both, join both in this business, stir up the faculties
of the foul and body, that thou may attain by industry, that which this
silly worm retains by nature, and learn to be wise for thy self; seasonably
wise; wise to sobriety, procuring thy self timely sufficiency, both for this
life and a better.

The words are exhortatorie; wherein we behold, 1. the Admonitor, 2. the
Admonished, 3. the Admonition. 1. The Admonitor is Solomon, 1. a King, 2. a
Preacher, 3. the Preacher, 1. A king, and therefore deserving reverence and
attention, for the dignity of his person: for counsel partakes authority
with the person that gives it, and is respected or slighted accordingly; Eccl.
13.24*
When the rich man speaks (says Siracides) every one holds his tongue, and
look what he says, they praise it unto the clouds: but if a poor man speak,
they say, what fellow is this? Eccl. 9, 16.
and Solomon says: The wisdom of the poor is despised, and his words are not
heard. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis; whether he speak or no, they
will do as he does. And therefore it is enough for such persons, with Gideon
to say, Look on me and do as you see me do. Judge. 7.17.
But besides the dignity and authority annexed to his person, and the force
and sway of his example, he has likewise power to compel and command, and
therefore speaks in the imparatiue mood, Vade, Go to the Pismire, O sluggard;
who dares but go, when Solomon the king commands him? And yet if you had
rather understand this as an advise and counsel, then as a law or command,
(because vvisdome persuades, but lays not violent hands upon man to compel
him to benefit himself against his will) then hear the Preacher persuading,
since you will not hear the King commanding, and go to the Pismire, O
Sluggard, consider her ways and be wise.

2* A Preacher, and therefore deserving reverence and attention, that being a
King he would descend to take pains to instruct his people, by way of
exhortation as a Preacher, Joan. 21.19
was admirable; they should do ill not to hearken and obey such a Pastor. This
is (...), to feed and rule indeed, not as the Pope does, but as Christ did. Art
thou not ashamed (O Antichrist) whilst Solomon painfully and carefully acts the
Princes part, and the Pastors part, ruling and teaching his people aright, that
thou whose profession it is to teach and to preach, do scorn to be Christ's
Vicar as he was a Prophet, and wilt usurp authority to be his Vicar as he was
a king only? Art thou not ashamed to say that Solomon is damned notwithstanding
his diligent discharge of his duty, and thou art saved? nay, have the power of
Salvation in thine own hand, whilst thou neglectest thine? And are ye not
ashamed, O all ye Wolves in sheep clothing, to neglect the flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to become Courtiers, and leave
the care of the Church to others? Pro. 27.23.
whilst you hear Solomon say, Be diligent to know the state of your flocks,
and take heed to the herds: And whilst you see him leave the Court, and apply
himself like a Preacher, to instruct his people in all necessary knowledge?
Eccles. 12.9.10.
The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge, and
caused them to hear, and searched forth and prepared many parables: The
Preacher sought to find out pleasant words, and an upright writing, even the
words of truth. But the less you teach the people, the more wise you think
your selves; and the more you know, the less ye labor to profit other men,
especially the people. You study indeed to find out pleasant words and
parables, as Apothecaries, pick sallads every Spring; These you vent once
every year, out of the hearing of your own Cures; the Court only must partake
your parables, which are far more precious (if rare things be so) then ever
was Salomons. But Solomon here applies his wisdom to country capacities, he
speaks and sings in their key; 1. Reg. 4*34.
therefore he deserves serious attention, and he had it.

3. The Preacher by way of excellency; for so he begins his book called
Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. The words of the Preacher the son of David the
King: and after in the 12 verse, I the Preacher have been king over Israel in
Jerusalem, and I have given my heart to find out wisdom, by all things that
are done under the Sun. As if he should say, I lay by my Prerogative royal,
my scepter, my crown, my sword: I betake me to my book, to my pen, to my
prayers, to fit my self to teach you. I have been king; that office and
dignity I lay off; I am the Preacher; and that I may be a profitable one, I
have given my heart to study and contemplation, to find out wisdom by all
the creatures, to instruct man (the chief commander and king of all creatures)
to make my subjects wise, that every man may be a king to himself. For as the
vegetables are nourished by the Elements, and things inanimate, and the
sensitive, by the things vegetative: so reasonable man does not only receive
corporal nourishment, but spiritual instruction, from the sensible creatures.
And therefore Solomon takes pains in these; so that he spoke three thousand
Proverbs: and his Songs were a thousand and five: 1, King* 4.32, 33, 34.
Sapient. 7.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
And he spoke of trees, from the Cedar tree that is in Libanon, even to the
hyssope that springs out of the wall: he spoke also of beasts, and of
fowls, and of creeping things, and of fishes: And there came of all people to
hear Solomon from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom. So
he had a continual auditorie, and he deserved it; he took pains to speak
pleasantly, but his principal aim was to speak profitably: for he knew, that
which pleases not something, Eccl. 12, 10
profits nothing; and therefore he would not preach extempore, but he sought to
find out pleasant words, and an upright writing, Sapien. 7, 7. Sapie. 8, 21.
even the words of truth: and he found what he sought, whilst he sought it as
he should, from a right person, and in a right manner; from the right person,
he sought it of God; It is no shame for a king to seek there. Sap. 7, 7.
Wherefore I prayed, and understanding was given me; I called, and the spirit
of Wisdom came unto me* In a right manner, by prayer; by prayer on his knees,
to honor God publicly. Kings cannot honor themselves by any means more,
then by honoring God after this manner, by an humble, holy, and reverend
deportment in public worship.

Thus his example teaches us as well as his words; and he is a Preacher, and
the Preacher, the most excellent Preacher, in thus seeking, in thus finding,
and in thus teaching us to seek what we want, that we may find, whilst
we seek as we should, as he did.

The Preacher, and such a one as did not think himself wise enough to govern
the whole world, like a Catholic King, to rule the whole Church like an
Universal Bishop, or to rule his own kingdom, for all his wisdom, without
wise Councelors: but acknowledged himself too weak to govern a kingdom
less then Spain, 1. Reg. 3, 9.
less then Italy; and therefore he says humbly unto God, Give unto thy
servant an understanding heart, to judge this people, that I may discern
between good and badde: for who is able to Judge this mighty people? O
ignorant Solomon, art not thou able? know not thou who is able? I can resolve
thee; St. Peter's Successor cannot only rule that people, but all the people of
the world. And yet he is no Preacher, and yet he sits still in one place, and
yet he labors not to find out pleasant words, and an upright writing, and the
words of truth, as Solomon the Preacher did.

The Preacher, who speaking thus humbly to God, had the honor to hear God
speaking to him, in this gracious manner: Because thou have asked this thing,
1. Reg. 3* 11, 12, 13.
and have not asked for thy self long life, neither have asked riches for thy
self, nor have asked the life of thine enemies, but have asked for thy self
understanding to hear Judgment: Behold, I have done according to thy words;
Lo, I have given thee a wise and understanding heart, so that there has been
none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall arise the like unto thee.
I doubt not, had the Bishop of Rome been licensed to ask, as Solomon was, he
would have desired long life, that his Cardinals might not poison him in hope
to succeed; or riches, that he need not beg Peter Pence through the world; or
the life of his enemies, that he need not send Jesuits to murder them, or
Iudasses to blow them up. Therefore he misseth of what he would wish, and
pretends to have; whilst Solomon had what he desired, and more too; for God
says, I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both riches and
honor, so that among the kings there shall be none like unto thee in all thy
days: None like him for honor and wealth: hear therefore Solomon the king;
none like him in wisdom; hear therefore Solomon the Preacher; for he is best
able to inform you, and comes nearest unto that perfection of wisdom, wherein
Adam was created; he discernes the natures of plants, birds, beasts, and
fishes; he takes pains to extract observations from them for thy instruction;
wrong not thy self therefore so much, as to lose this opportunity of bettering
thy knowledge: hear what he says, obey what he bids, go whether he commands
thee; Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her ways and be wise.

2. The admonished; that is, the Sluggard: he is the person to whom Solomon
says, Go to the Pismire. The Sluggard, what is he? surely he is a longer that
is never satisfied. Pro. 13.4. Pro. 14, 23
The Sluggard lusts, but his soul has naught: He is a prater that never
does any thing. In all labor there is abundance, but the talk of the lips
brings only want: He is alieni avidus, Pro. 21, 25 26.
sui profusus; The Sluggard coueteth evermore greedily, but the righteous
gives and spares not. He is a moouer without proficiencie; As the door
turns upon the hinges, Pro. 26, 14.
so does a slothful man upon his bed. He is a niggardly prodigal; niggardly
of his pains, and prodigal of his time. Pro. 18, 9.
He that is slothful at his work, is even the brother of him that is a great
waster. He is a courageous coward; a coward, for he dares not go out, but
says, Pro. 22.13
a lion is in the way I shall be slain in the street: and yet courageous; for
whilst he will not go out for fear the Lion should eat him, he remains
within, folds up his arms, Eccl. 4, 5.
keeps his knife in the sheath, and eats up his own flesh: He is a wise
fool; wise in his own conceit, a fool in Salomons. Pro. 26, 16.
The Sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a
reason. And therefore there is more hope of a fool then of him. He is a
resolute wauerer, Pro. 13, 4.
a constant changeling: vult and non vult, (says the vulgar.) By this
description of Salomons we see, he is a longing, prating, prodigal, cowardly,
slow, self-conceipted, certain uncertain fool, who sleeps away his time,
and thinks all men are borne to work, that he might play; conceit has damned
up his ears; for he thinks himself wiser then seven men that can render a
reason: and therefore will not hear, or will not believe, or will not obey the
doctrine that is taught; his own opinion is still wisest and truest, his own
way is still best and rightest, he hates to be reformed, and does sooth up
him self in folly, opposing all that can be said, with a silent and
self-wil'd obstinacy and contempt, sleeping out his life in solitary
retirement, and brutish sensuality, as if a Lethargy had seized upon him, and
bound up his cold brain in forgetfulness both of himself and of God also. He
is socors, that is, sine cord; for he has a head and wit enough, but he wants
a heart, affection, courage, constancy to do what he knows. He is Piger,
that is pede aeger: he lackes a foot to convey him to any honest and
honorable undertaking. The Embassage of Sparta was without head or foot;
this man (if he be worthy to be called a man) has neither heart nor foot:
but rockt asleep in desperate security, with a lullabie of peace and safety,
he derides all happy admonition, and shutting his eyes against the knowledge
of danger, he cares not who kills him, so he sees not his death.

O Incredulity, the wit of fools:
The Cowards castle, and the Sluggards cradle!
How easy it is to be an Infidel?
To this man it is that Solomon the Preacher lifts up his voice like a trumpet,
and rowseth him up from that sleeping-stoole of his, with this acclamation, O
Sluggard Go to the Pismire, consider her ways, and be wise.

3. The Admonition: Go to the Pismire, consider her ways and be wise: Here
we find three things advised: 1. An action, Go to the Pismire. 2. A
Consultation; Consider her ways. 3. A Conclusion or profitable extraction from
the consultation; and be wise.

1. In the action, there is terminus a quo employed, and terminus ad quem
expressed: first, go from thy bed, where thou sleep in security; go
from thy selfe-conceited opinion and imagination; go from thy sensual
pleasures, thy bewitching pastims, thy brutish passions, thy beastly
companions; go from thy customarie coldness and stupiditie; go from thy
fearful cowardice and infidelity; go from thy blind and superstitious
folly, wherein thou art misled, brought up, and rockt a sleep, as in a cradle,
supposing there is nothing good, but that which thou know, no house
commodious but thine own, no air to live in, but where thou breathest, no
life like that which thou leadest in darkness and ignorance. O Sluggard, go
from all those thoughts, and go to the Pismire; go in thy body, exercise
that; for surfets are bred for lack of exercise, and thy body so weakened and
made unfit for any employment; Nay, that wherein thou placest thy chief
felicity (which is sleep) would be sweeter to thee, if thou would take
pains to exercise thy self with labor; Eccl. 5, 12.
For the sleep of him that trauelleth is sweet whether he eat little or much;
but the satiety of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. Exercitium dicitur
sanum, eo quod conseruat sanitatem; It is compounded of ex and arceo, because
it drives out all diseases; and an army is termed Exercitus, quod exercitando
fit melior, because it is much bettered by exercise; This the Romans knew well,
and therefore were not only careful to exercise their own persons and the
people at home, but their armies abroad; and to that end, in the time of truce
or cessation of Arms, did ever employ them in making of cawseys, or wales,
or draines, or fortifications, or such like profitable works; knowing well,
that as water corrupts and stinks by standing still, but is preserved by
agitation, so the bodies and minds of men are corrupted by sloth, and enabled
and preserved by action; Go therefore, O Sluggard, go to the Pismire, if it
were for nothing else, but to exercise thy body and preserve it from diseases.

Do thou not see, (if thou have so much heart to look up, or so much wit as
to consider) do thou not see (I say) what we were in England when we used
exercises, especially shooting, running, wrestling, and the like strennous and
manly sportes? how able, how strong, how active, how healthful, how honorably
esteemed of our friends, how terrible to our enemies? And see thou not since
we left those, (I know not upon what peaceable and politic pretenses) how
our bodies are generally weakened; our manners corrupted, our healths impaired,
and our estates wasted in drunkenness, glutionie, lechery and pride? yea, how
are we contemned and slighted, and counted the offscouring of all Nations? O
Sluggard, go therefore to the Pismire, consider her ways, and be wise.

But if thou think it too much toil to go personally to the place to behold
and see the manner of the Pismires working, and the course she takes in
ordering of her affairs (though this would help and advance the business in
hand very much, and make things clearer to thy conception) yet go in thy
conceit, go in thy imagination, go in thy mind; that is, call to remembrance
what thou have seen, and read, and heard of that little creature; compare thy
self and her together, thy wit and hers, thy strength and hers, thy nature
and hers, thy ways and hers; then consider of it advisedly, Judge. 19.30.
and after give sentence, and speak what thou think.

2. The consultation: Consider her ways. Consideration is a serious
examination of any business, with the causes, effects, beginning, continuance,
and issue thereof. It is a reflection of the mind upon it self, from some
worthy object; a rumination of the judgment, pondering, and reuoluing some
matter in hand, until the same be perfectly digested, settled, and disposed by
reason: The lack of this, is that which wholy keeps men in sloth, and so
in all sin and ignorance, whilst they do not consider either the reward of
glory, which they loose by omission of good and virtuous actions, or the
punishment of shame, and eternal pain, which they procure to themselves by
sin and slothfulness. Ier. 12, 17. Desolatione desolata est omnis terra,
quia nullus est qui recogitet cord: so reads the vulgar.
And this is that which the Prophet alleges, as a cause of all misery
happening to the Jews. All the land is fallen into utter desolation, because
no man sets his heart to consider it; Now the Sluggard cannot do this; for
he is Socors, sine cord, that is, as we may interpret it, without
consideration, or defective in that faculty.

Although every man therefore, at the first sight, thinks consideration to be
no great work, but that the weakest may well effect it, yet the wise (who
better consider the matter, and who truly can only consider well) know, that
it is a difficult work, to contract the whole power of the soul to one
narrow point, and to hold it there firm, stable, and unmoved, until from
thence a resolution or certain conclusion be wrought out and effected. This
cannot be done without labor and practice, even when the mind is most able,
and the faculties at best command: But where the mind is unsteady, and the
imagination stirring, or the memory too slack, the judgment cannot
certainly, and to good purpose consider, as it should or would, if these were
obedient. As we see a burning-glasse held firm, contracts and gathers the
united beams of the Sun, and so sets the object on fire: but if either the
glass move, or the object move, it loses the force, at least fayles in the
effect. This likewise we may see most clearly in persons, whose brains (as
they say) are cracked and distracted, how they flicker and flit in their
discourse, as the fantasy shifts and wanders to and fro; so that they can
hardly bring either their words to a perfect period, or drive their purposes
to any determination, because of this defect. They may be witty, cannot be
wise: and never did Age so abound with such brittle spirits as this of ours.

And to this end, I remember a vvitty mad-woman (who found her own disease,
and by long experience took notice of her own imbecility) told a friend of
hers, who demanded, in what part she found the interruptions of her
discourse, since for the present she seemed very sober and composed, as she
had wont to be: O my good friend (quoth she) I am for flashes, but I cannot
Think: that is, she could not ponder, and deliberately consider of this or
that thing, as she had formerly done. We see therefore, the lack of
consideration; I mean, of the power to consider, is an inclination to
madness; and the lack of endeavor, where the power is present, is an
inclination to folly; and the lack of execution and action, where invention
and deliberation have gone before, is not only an inclination, but an absolute
consummation of sloth and cowardice. In which sense Solomon says, O madman,
or O fool, or O Sluggard, or O coward, (choose you which) Go to the Pismire,
consider her ways, and be wise: that is, Cease to be mad, and become sober;
cease to be foolish, and become wise; cease to be a Sluggard, and become
diligent; cease to be fearful, and become courageous and active: which
cannot be, except you consider; that is, invent, consult, execute, accomplish
the works which are proper to your vocation, wisely and courageously.

Consider her ways: 1. First, consider her in nature, Physically: 2. Secondly,
consider her in morality, or the Ethickes: Thirdly, consider her as a Statist,
in the Politickes: She will afford you lessons every way; and you will
think her the more worthy of your pains, the more pains you take in
considering of her vvoorth.

1. Consider her in the Physics: Her structure is admirable, who can anatomize
her? who can distinctly judge of her parts, and describe her members? who can
sufficiently admire the Wisdom of her Maker, whilst he loses himself, and
all the wit he has, in contemplation of so small a creature? As a face, or
other piece drawn in the smallest form, oftentimes commends the Painter
better, then in a fair and large Table: even so in this little creature, the
admirable skill of the Creator is discerned, as well as in Leviathan or
Behemoth, the Whale or Elephant: Eccl. 42, 22
O how delectable are the works of God, (says Siracides) and to be
considered even to the sparks of fire!

The wisest amongst the Grecians or Romans have not thought their time
misspent in the consideration of this little creature; Arist. lib, 9. Hist.
Animal. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 30.
whom they have honored in their Histories with the title of Ciuility; an
attribute which those two imperious Nations would vouchsafe to none but their
own people. Solomon seems to join with these, or rather they with him, Pro.
30, 25.
when he calls them a weak, but a wise people. No creature subjected to man
did ever obtain this title, which is proper to man, but only the Pismire, and
the Be; but these have won it by their virtues, and man is constrained to
acknowledge how much they resemble him, nay, how far they exceed him in these
particulars:

1. First, they are civil and sociable, they cohabite and converse, as the
most civil Nations use. They have a kind of Fair, Market, or meeting place,
where they trade and traffic neighbor with neighbor: so that you may
observe the paths and highways betwixt one nest and another, is track't and
beaten plain with their little feet: yea, treading upon rocks, they have left
the visible prints of their diligent and common commerce behind them, to the
amazement of sluggish beholders.

2. Secondly, their proportionable strength, bettered by industry and
exercise, is seen in the great burdens which they carry; great, if we compare
them with the porters themselves.

3. Thirdly, their providence and wisdom is apparent, in laying in
Summer-store against winter; in losing no time, but taking opportunity of
seasonable weather, and for fear of the woorst, working in Harvest by
Moone-light: In dividing their meat at the mouth of their Cave, if it be too
great to carry in whole: in conditing and preserving their food from growing in
the earth, which man's wisdom cannot do: and to this end bringing it forth
to dry in the Sun or wind, if it has by chance taken wet.

4. Fourthly and lastly, in the solemn and loving burial of their dead; which
no creature but Man and these do carefully and decently perform.

These are the observations of Aristotle and Pliny, neither need any man be
ashamed of such Tutors, such schoole-fellowes.

Do thou therefore desire health, and to shun sickness? Either a fool or a
Physician.
Go then to the Pismire, consider her vvayes and be wise; If thou be not a
fool, she will teach thee to be a Physician to thy self. She will learn
thee both to be stirring betimes, and to be never idle, but ever exercised:
Diluculo surgere saluberimum est. The desire of the slothful (says Solomon)
slays him, Pro. 21, 25.
for his hands refuse to work. Eccl. 4, 5.
and, The fool foldeth up his hands, and eats up his own flesh; that is, he
kills himself with slothfulness, whilst he prouides not against it, and
breeds the scurvie, gowt, stone, and other diseases, for lack of exercise, as
rust eats up the steel which is not used: Eccl. 31, 22.
Therefore follow the counsel of Siracides; My son hear me, and despise me
not, and at the last thou shall find as I have told thee: in all thy works
be quick, so shall there no sickness come unto thee. But if thou vvilt not
be ruled, Eccl. 38, 15
then there is a curse that follows thee; He that sins before his Maker,
let him fall into the hands of the Physician.

Or do thou desire learning and knowledge? Go then also to the Pismire,
consider her ways, and be wise. Aurora Musis amica; whosoever does great
things begins betimes. The first part of the day, the morning, is best for
study; and so is the first part of thy life, thy youth: the impression is then
easily made, and what is then gotten, may easily be retained if good; can
hardly be lost, if evil. Either thou must rise early, or run apace being late
up, if thou intendest to make any proficiencie in the Arts: Believe not me, who
bewail mine own losses in this kind too late, and am driven therefore to
many hard shifts to hide my ignorance from the derision of boys; who am often
forced to travel for that which children know: (and who is he that can go
step by step all day with a child and not be vvearie?) but believe them
which took time at the best advantage, and therefore obtained the excellency
of knowledge: Hear Solomon therefore and his second Siracides; Pro. 17, 16.
Wherefore is there a price in the hands of the fool to get wisdom, and he
has no heart? Get Learning with a great sum of money, for by her ye possess
much gold. Eccl. 51, 18
But how can she be compassed? very easily in youth, very hardly in age.
Wisdom (says Solomon) shines and never fades away, and is easily seen of
them that love her, and found of such as seek her. She preventeth them that
desire her, Sap. 6, 12.
that she may show her self unto them: who so awaketh to her betimes, shall
have no great travel; for he shall find her sitting at her doors; To think
upon her then is perfect understanding, and who so watches for her, shall be
soon without care. But perhaps thou art foolish, and therefore art afraid to
seek, because thou fear thou shall not find: yet be not discouraged, but
therefore seek, because thou art foolish, thou have the more need of her
instruction. And seek diligently; for if thou seek her, she will seek
and find thee; let that encourage thy diligence, thy study; She knows thy
vvayes, and where thou go alone, sadly thinking of her, and seeking to
find thee with the expense of much Oil; she would find thee sooner, but
then thou would judge her scarce worth finding. Sap. 6, 16.
Hear Solomon what he says to this; She goes about seeking such as are meet
for her, and shows herself cheerfully unto them in the ways, and meets
them in every thought: for the most true desire of discipline is her beginning,
and the ear of discipline, is love; and love is the keeping of her laws; and
the keeping of her laws, is the assurance of immortality; and immortality,
makes us near unto God. Hear likewise what Siracides says to this point:
Eccl. 4, 11.
Wisdom exalts her children, and receives them that seek, and will go
before them in the way of righteousness: he that loves her, loves life; and
they that seek life in the morning, shall have joy. First, she will walk with
him by crooked ways, and bring him unto fear, and dread, and torment him with
her discipline, until she have tried his soul, and have proved his
judgment. Then will she return the straight way unto him, and comfort him,
and show him her secrets, and heap upon him the treasures of knowledge, and
understanding, Sap. 1, 4.
and righteousness. But if he go wrong, she will forsake him, and give him
over into the hands of his destruction. Pro. 7, 6.
Thus we see, as the idle youth wandering up and down the street, seeking
satisfaction for his lust, meets the Harlot seeking him as busily; who
imbraceth and kisseth him, and inviteth him with flattering blandishments,
till she draw him to her lure; (as an ox that goes to the slaughter, and as
a fool to the flocks for correction, till a dart strike through his liver,
Pro. 6.17.
as a bird hastes to the snare, not knowing that he is in danger, but thinking
stoine waters to be sweet, and bread eaten in corners to be pleasant, because
both are easily gotten without ordinary labor, whilst the devil is the
broker and the bawd:) So on the contrary part, vvisdome and knowledge goes up
and down the street, seeking to meet with all that seek after her; yea,
she cries and proclaims aloud, that she is ready to instruct all that will
attend and hear her. Nor need we be discouraged because we are simple, for
she is wise; and if we know not where to find her, yet we are assured she
knows where to find us. And observe, that Solomon says, Pro. 8.
She seeks us in the streets, and in every place; that is, a man that will
diligently give himself to observations, and to lay up lessons for his own
instruction and information, may find some remarkable point of wisdom in
every thing he sees: in every act he does, or sees done; whilst the foolish and
idle-braind idiots, who give themselves over to the vain fashions, and
childish or womanish curiosities of the time, do pass by the most serious
passages, with a slight neglect or contempt of their worthiness. Therefore it
is that Solomon says to such, Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her
ways, and be wise. Consider how much wit is contained in that little body,
whose members cannot be distinguished by the most curious, sharp, and
inquisitiue eye. And let this teach thee, that thy reasonable Part is
spiritual, and would be as wise as now it is, though it had as little a body
to inhabit as the Pismires, nay, though it had no body at all. It is not the
strength, the beauty, greatness, or gracefulness of the body, that adds to
the mind. The excellency of the soul is seen in high and virtuous actions,
which oftener proceed from stigmatick^ weak and dry bodies, (who follow their
aims with diligence, and industry) then in the most excellent forms, who
relying and presuming too much on their natural abilities, neglect the means
to better themselves by artificial exercise. Go therefore, O Sluggard, go to
the Pismire, consider her ways, and be wise.

2. Secondly, consider her vvayes morally, (for sloth is a vice, diligence a
virtue) and see what thou can learn from her in these respects, for the
enriching of thy mind, the bettering of thy manners, the honoring of thy
profession. Sloth is a sin; nay, it is the root of all sin, the
mother-sinne. For sin has no existence in nature, but is a privation of
grace, a depravation of action; so that in the alteration and change from right
to vvrong, there must needs be a residence in sloth. Surely had Adam been
diligently employed in his vocation, the entrance and acquaintance of Satan
had not been so easy, and open, as idleness and security made it.

The contrary to this then, is, That Diligence is a virtue, and the very root
of all virtue. We see man was first created to action, and enjoined it; we
see, he had his very being from action; Genesis 1, 26.
where we find consultation about the creation of his body, and the infusion
of a spirit, and this afterward performed by God accordingly. And then
presently after follows his employment, as soon as he had life; yea before
life, God provideth a world of creatures for him to take charge of, and a
garden to dress and keep, that he might want no work, but as soon as he
was made, fall to action, to which he was made, that therein he might
resemble his Maker, and be a living image of his, and no dead Idol; for though
it be true in some sense that Lucan says: -- Quid quaerimus vltra?

Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moueris, etc. yet man is more expressly
the image of God, then any other humane creature, in respect that he is not
only active, but has reason to guide, order, and marshall his actions aright.
Now yet amongst men, the diligent man seems only to be the image of God, the
Sluggard seems in comparison to be but his idol. An idol (says the Apostle)
is nothing in the World, that is, 1. Cor, 4, 8.
a thing either to no purpose, or to evil. So a Sluggard does nothing in the
World, or if he busy himself in any thing, it is in some idle or superfluous
employment, Psalm. 115, 4 5.
or worse, in doing some mischief. An idol has eyes and sees not, ears and
hears not, a mouth and speaks not; feet* and he does not travel; and such a
golden Calfe or silver idol, is a mighty Sluggard, Sap. 13, 15.16.
who uses not those parts of body, mind, and authority that God has given
him to the right end whereunto they were given him, that is, to Gods glory,
his own information, and the good of humane society and community. Thus if
we look into man's first being and creation, or to his progress and course
afterward, we shall see, whilst he willed freely nothing but what was
good, he did diligently whatsoever was good: but so soon as he declined from
action to ease, and begun to give way to a contrary suggestion, he fell first
from diligence into sloth, and from sloth into other actual sins; and from
sin, into death and destruction, the conclusion of all.

Eccl. 42, 22 23, and 43, 10. Psalm. 19, 1, 2 3* 4, 5, 6.
We see all the creatures of God how diligently they discharge those duties,
whereunto they were created: among others, the glorious Sun (who is diligent
in his constant and annual course) will not only teach us by example, to be
like glorious in diligence, but also lend us light, to see the like diligence
in all the creatures of God, even in this little Pismire, which creeping upon
the ground, can hardly be discerned through her smalnesse, without good heed
taken, and great diligence used. Yet since to her Solomon directs us for an
example of diligence, let us learn of her to know, that the Church has a
Summer, when wise men gather instruction, to arm them against persecution,
the Winter of the Church: That likewise every man has his Summer, that is, the
day of peace and prosperity, when it is fit he gather provision for the Winter
of adversity, affliction, temptation, trial: To this end begin to store thy
self betimes; for man can hardly conquer and subdue his passions and
affections, and the filthy inclination of his nature to sin, when custom
has taught them to get head and wax wild: But in youth they are easily
broken, and made tame, otherwise the weaker and older we grow, the stronger
they grow: and great reason for this, because they spring first from weakness,
they increase afterward by reason of our weakness, and they continue and
feed upon our weakness. Needs therefore must we wax weaker and weaker,
whilst they wax stronger and stronger, as the worm in wood, or the Moth in
wool, till they have utterly waste the thing that bred and nourished them.

Thirdly, consider her ways in the Politickes, Eccl. 42.24 Contraria
Contrarijs magis elucescunt. Arist. de Cael. and Mund.
that is, as a good Commonwealths-man; for it seems this is the natural and
proper drift of the place, as the two next verses immediately following do
manifestly declare; wherein the providence of the Pismire is illustrated by
four notes of observation:

1. First, what she does, is freely of herself without coaction, or
instruction, having no guide, governor, nor ruler: how much more then ought
man to do the like, having a Preacher to instruct him, a King to govern him,
and all the creatures to admonish him of his duty?

2. Secondly, knowing the ordinary means to preserve life is food, and that
the ordinary season to lay in this provision, is the time of Summer: She both
forecasts where best to provide herself, and then diligently takes the
opportunity of the time for the best advantage. For she knows, Winter may be
long, hard, sharp, and tedious, and therefore she lays in good store
aforehand, that if she should be besieged by frost and snow, yet she might
feel no scarcity.

3. Thirdly, from hence and other places may be collected this point of
wisdom besides in her, that she does not only and barely know this by a
naked speculation; but considering it aright, she puts it in practice, and
makes use of every occasion, for the full and final accomplishment of her
purposes.

4. Fourthly and lastly, because she is but weak of herself, she unites
herself with others, making her Nest a perfect plat form of a Commonwealth,
as knowing herself by this confederacy, to be safer from foreign invasion,
and that to dwell together in community, as it were in a city, is far more
commodious, then to inhabit a solitary mansion, where there is neither help
in time of necessity, nor comfort in time of doubt, nor society in time of
pleasure. These things she does, I say, of her self, without a Tutor, or a
head and governor, to bind her with others in a strict league of amity; and
herein she becomes a Tutor to man, and makes Reason a Scholar to Sense; laying
the perfect platform of a Commonwealth, Pro. 30.25
which fools admire, cowards and sluggards malign, wise men imitate, no man
exceedes.

And if we look into the Society of man, we shall find, the greatest
felicity to be in such places, and among such people, as are ordered according
to this president; That is, where there is most diligence used, and where
sloth is most carefully avoided: for it stands with reason, that where many
join in an orderly and unanimous consent and combination, the success must
needs be there prosperous and happy: But where as some draw back and stand
still, whilst others draw forward and proceed, they do not only disorder and
distract the diligent, but increase their burden, and make the draught heavier
to such as labor. Thus in Armies, a few Cowards may occasion the loss of all,
and a few valiant persons resolutely knit in one fortune and engagement, may
discomfite a multitude of negligent persons. Sloth is the Nurserie of every
evil in a Commonwealth, scarcity, famine, beggerie, the every, sedition,
disobedience, and finally, the ruin and dissolution of the whole body and
frame of the State arises from thence.

It is written of the Malabars in the East Indies, that their Noblemen called
Nagros, wear long railes on their hands; to show, that they are Gentlemen,
and no workers; for to work they are ashamed; others must work for them, and
they were borne to no end in the world, but to live and eat, and drink, and
waste the good creatures of God, and so to do mischief till they die; wherein
they seem to resemble Swine, who are never either pleasant or profitable, till
they be seen in a dish. We see all the beasts and birds of prey, are not so
sociable or useful to man, as those that labor diligently for their livings
with man. There is more use of the Horse, then of the Lion; of the Ox, then of
the Bear; of the sheep, then of the Wolf; of the innocent Dove, then of the
ravenous Kyte, Buzzard, or Hawke; though many men rather delight to associate
themselves with these then with those, to show the lazy disposition of their
base, barbarous, and tyrannous natures; and how much these incline to the
execrable example of Cain, or the newfound Canibals, the sons of cursed Cham.

I need not travel far for examples in this kind; the Monopolists and
Improuers of our Land, and the irreligious Impropriators, who prey upon Church
and State, are of this Order; yea all our private Wealth swarms with these
Monsters, and their breed is from the lazy scumme of counterfeit Gentilitie,
who bearing those Arms idly, which their diligent Predecessors have
purchased as badges of some honorable atchieuement, do thereby disgrace their
Originals, as if they were privileged to be vicious by the redundancy of their
predecessors virtues. Arist. de Anim. li. 1.
But as it is true that the Philosopher says, Nobile est quod ex bono procedit
genere: so it is a true which he likewise says, Generosum est, quod non a
natura sua (...) degenerauit: these therefore either being base in their
Originals, or degenerating from the nobility and virtue of their Ancestors,
become of Common-wealths-men, common-woes-men, and study to do such acts, and
invent such projects, as may undo the public for their private and inordinate
desires. Yea, the example of these so corrupts the State, and so ouerspreades
the face and body thereof, like a Canker or Tetter-worme, as it has wel-nigh
eaten out the valiant race of the ancient English yeomandrie, which was one of
the chief glories of our Nation, and the principal base and foundation of the
Commonwealth, at least of the strength and liberty thereof. Not that hereby
I intend to disparage the Nobility, (which is supplementum, or complementum,
as the other is firmamentum Reipublicae) but rather to preserve it entire from
mixture and coagulation, and to let all men see that the root of every
commendable vocation is diligence; and to be without a vocation cannot subsist
with true Nobility. For all the honors and privileges of the ancient
Nobility, were granted upon this ground, that they had worthily acted
something for the general benefit of many: yea Principality it self springs
from this low, but fruitful root. So that as Primum ens consideratum in
Metaphysica, Arist. Pol. li. 1. Eccl. 31.9.
est illud quod prius est nobilitate and caritate: Sic in Physica, sic in
Politica, etc. And therefore virtus and malitia determinant nobiles and
ignobiles, servos and liberos: according to that which Siracides says:
Blessed is the rich that is found without blemish, and has not gone after
gold, nor hoped in money and treasures. Who is he? and we will commend him: for
wonderful things has he done amongst his people; Who has been tried hereby
and found perfect? Let him be an example of glory. Who might offend, and has
not offended, or might do evil and has not done it? Therefore shall his
goodness be established, and the Congregation shall proclaim his love and
charity. And after, speaking of Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, the
ancient Worthies, and of their works of wisdom, he says, All these were
honorable men in their generations, and were well reported of in their times*
There are of them that have left a name behind them, so that their praise
shall be spoken of. There are some also which have no memory, and are perished,
as though they had never been and are become as though they had never been
borne, and their children after them.

Thus if we look into Antiquity amongst the Ethnickes, even unto those that
canonized, or rather deified their Princes, we shall find, that when the
desire of dominion began to disturb the whole World, and brake out into open
hostility and invasion, the diligent and industrious persons were forced, for
their own safety, to elect out some of the strongest from the rest, to be
their guard from foreign assaults: And to these they gave both titles and
privileges, to encourage their diligent attention on their offices; yea and
after death did so far celebrate their happy memories, as the Ages following
(ignorant of the true cause) made them gods, and gave them divine honor;
especially the Poets, which were the Chroniclers of those times. Thus it
appears, that Nobility was first from Office, not from nature, among the
Heathen: and for the Jews, Siracides speaks of the Judges who governed the
State, and defended them from foreign tyranny: Let (says he) their bones
flourish out of their place, and their names by succession, remain to them
that are most famous of their children. So not the eldest son, but the most
virtuous and active, is the heir of his fathers honors, though the other be of
his fathers titles and lands.

Thus whether we look on the root or branches, we shall find Nobility
to spring from action, and to die by idleness: so that it is true which the
Philosopher says; Arist. Rhet lib. 1.
Honor est benefacti and operationis signum. Now for any man therefore to
purchase honor without some worthy action foregoing; or for any man to
confer this without merit concurring, is not truly to be Noble, but the
idol^ of Nobility: and such Parchment honor, (as One well calls it) is
nothing but as a license to be idle, or to beg withal, because they put it
to no better use. Hist. of the world lib. 3 fol. 15.3.
Great and worthy actions (as the same Author says) are the right children of
honorable persons, who live not so much in the issue of their bodies, or in
the name and title of their forefathers Nobility, as in the issue of their
minds, their good deeds, and the good name those good deeds have gotten them.
Eccl. 33, 21.
Therefore says Siracides, Let all thy works be excellent, that thine honor
be never stained. The works that Nobility is originally tied unto, are acts
of bounty, justice, charity, piety, loyalty, and prudence; to watch and ward,
and study, and counsel, for the Commonwealth; foreseeing that they do no
injury to it themselves, nor suffer it, through their sloth and negligence,
and cowardice, to receive prejudice from others. For a Noble man therefore to
be a Monopolist, or a racker of Rents, or a corrupt taker of bribes, or a
protector of wicked persons, or to busy or employ himself in private works,
as common persons do, is to deny his own office and calling, honor and
being. For such are the guard, the sentinel, the watch, the perdu for the
Commonwealth; great reason they should therefore stand together, and defend
the State with their goods and bodies, from an invasive war, and not invade
it themselves by force or fraud, as if they were open enemies It is therefore
far unfit for true Nobility to be educated in an idle course of life, and
trained up only to hunt, or hawke, or dance, or drink, or court, or play,
(the ordinary exercises of these degenerate times) when the contrary is
enjoined them; as if it were expressed in their Patents, under the forfeiture
of their honors. So that they ought to study, and take care by all means, to
enable themselves for the general service of the State in public
employments, to which end they were first created men, and after by men like
themselves, adorned with honorable attributes, which are the badges and
attendants of honorable actions.

It is well therefore, where the children of the Nobility are trained up in
counsel and military affairs: where they seek the wars, and places of
action as their proper Academies; and do not think themselves accomplished,
till they are able both to advise, and execute in matters of State. But on the
contrary side, where the Nobility live idly, acquainting themselves with all
effeminate fashions, and mollifying pleasures; where in stead of good books
and examples, (the true mirrors of the mind) they dress themselves in no other
inward habit of virtue, then such as the eye of their Mistresses judges fit:
where no other counsel is called for, but the Page, the Footboy, and the
Coachman: no other action exercised, but Court-warres; no other armor used,
but what the Tailor and Sempster put on; no other enemy seen, but what the
Stage presents; and no other end propounded to honor, then the pursuit of ease
and pleasure: Where the Yeomandry (to be lightened of the heavy burden that
presses them, by exactions and projects) are content to part with their
estates, to purchase themselves those lazy and idle attributes of honor: And
the Merchant, Mechanicke, and Husbandman, cosen each other interchangeably;
and all for their private gain, prey upon the Commonwealth, there must needs
desolation and dissolution follow.

I have seen in Scotland the miserable Cottages of the poor Hindes; and I
wondered a while at the cause, imputing it either to the barrenness of the
soil, or the lazy disposition of the Commons: But when I looked up higher,
and inquired diligently into the true cause; I found the Land fertile, the
poor men painful, but the Lordly owner is in all the fault; who desirous to
live at Court (not for action, but idleness) must raise his Rents to the
extremest rack; yea pull one piece from another with violent torture to this
end. And that he may do this the better, he never lets out Lease but from
year to year; and he that gives most is the next new Farmer for my next new
master. I say for my next new master, because of late the ancient Owner, by
this idle course has learned to outlaw himself of all; so that the diligent
tradesman eats out the lazy Lord: and as the Poet sings of Troy, jam seges
est vbi Troja fuit, so may I say of these, the Tailor has taken measure of
many fair Manors, and survayed them by the Yardwand; making that the
Iacobs-staffe to level the Nobility: who being careful to dress themselves
superfluously brave, care not for their Country, but make that naked and
ragged; and the poor Tenant uncertain to stay longer then his year, is loath
to build a nest for another bird: and so the Land is impouerished, and polled,
and every thing exposed to waste. But this is not all the mischief, for the
poor Tenant undone also by this hard Farm, and outed of all, (having
notvvithstanding his pains and providence, eaten up his horse and cowes, and
whole estate) now falls either to theft or beggerie; in which lazy kind of
life, he soon finds such sweetness, as he wonders not now, that his
Landlord loved his ease so well, since he sees by experience, that proverb to
be true which says; Well fare nothing once in the year; for such as have
nothing are without care or fear, and may sit still when others must look
out. You may as well reclaim him from this course, as you could before his
Landlord from that cursed cruelty and exaction, whereby he first fleade his
Tenant, and after stripped himself, and pulled his own estate (in the just
judgment of God) over his own ears. Now he fills the Commonwealth with
beggars of his own breed (as lowsy persons their next neighbors with vermin)
and meeting with many like himself, bound up together in one fortune and
condition, he becomes with them a dangerous body, fit for any desperate attempt
either of theft, riot, or rebellion; as waters falling from a steep hill raise
a flood in the next valley. And thus whereas they were profitable and diligent
members, the idleness and sloth of other men has made them superfluous
excrements to be cut off or purged out; for fear of farther infection. And
whilst I speak of Scotland, because it is there a general practice, I except
not England, as if this sin were a stranger in any part of Britain: For
though I must confess it is not so universal a custom with us, both in
regard of some long Leases yet vnexpired, and of some good men yet left, who
bear the honorable Characters of their Ancestors, and in regard of the
Yeomandrie (who are not yet wholly extinguished, and who are the only men that
support the liberty of the State, and make it still retain some resemblance of
the ancient countenance) yet it has gotten such footing, that even good men
(thinking they may do with their own what they lift) forget that they are
Gods stewards, to do good with their goods; and that they are trusted with
such an estate, for the benefit of more then themselves, for which they must
give an account: but supposing themselves to live in this world as in a market,
imagine there is nothing else for them to do, Sap. 15.12.
but to buy and sell, and that the only end of their creation and being was to
gather riches, by all means possible.

And look now from the Nobleman, or from the Pope himself, (if we count him
the highest) through every office, trade, or profession, to him that holds the
plough, if this be not the common practice and course of life, as if the very
end of each man's being were to enrich himself by the loss of others, yea by
the loss of all; and the more he does thus, the more wise he is thought to
be, and the more worthy of preferment; and if he does otherwise, he is
esteemed but a simple fellow, unfit for any employment. To instance this in two
or three particular professions at home, look upon the Lawyers, and see who it
is amongst them, that refuses to plead against truth and innocence, for
falsehood and treason, if he may have his Fee? Look upon the Clergy, if there
be not a D. Shaw, ready to justify any action or opinion which should be
borne out with the strength and authority of the time, and to prove it
Canonical and Orthodoxe, for the hope of preferment. Look into the Country,
if the greedy Farmer do not ingrosse three or four several Farms, which had
wont to maintain as many families; whilst, being unable to stock all of
them, or to follow all of them being stockt, he beggars hereby himself, the
poor, his Landlord, and the Commonwealth; And though this be contrary to the
Law of the Land, and to all conscience, yet in hope of private gain he will
do it to the public loss. Look into all Offices either of the Church or
Commonwealth, if this abuse be not general: so that the places which had wont
to maintain, and employ three or four able men, are now ingrost by one that
perhaps understands nothing in them, but must execute by deputy; nay, perhaps
this one ignorant man ingrosseth two or three of these, to the general
detriment and discouragement of all. And whereas heereto-fore able men both in
state and otherwise, where chosen to high and honorable places, who would
neither give bribes to come in, nor need take any being in: Now others are
employed too often, who must bribe to come in, and must needs take bribes to
recover their expenses, and to maintain their estates, being once come in.
Would to God there were an Act made, that whosoever should seek directly or
indirectly, by himself or friends, by money or otherwise, any office in Church
or Commonwealth, till he were thereunto freely called and invited by such as
had lawful power, might thereby be disabled to enter, and be cast out, upon
proof, being entered. Then men would labor to make themselves fit, and that
might truly be termed a Calling, which now is nothing but an intrusion,
usurpation, or purchase. Thus the study of priuacie disturbes and overthrows
all blessed community; and turns the blessings of God into curses: for if God
send plenty, the poor Farmer cannot live, things are so cheap; that all the
increase he has cannot pay his Landlords Rent, it is set so high, and
proportioned to the greatest increase, and to the greatest price: And the
Landlord can abate nothing of his Rent, having set his apparel, diet, and
other expenses at the highest pitch; If he should abate of his Rent, he must
then abate of these also: Which neither his wife, nor his child, nor himself
will admit: Nay rather let the poor statue, let the Commonwealth decay, and
the whole run to ruin, then they reform any of their sins, or forbear
any of their superfluities. Thus therefore whereas we had wont to pray for
peace and plenty, whilst charity dwelt amongst us, now both rich and poor
must pray for war, scarcity, and famine, else one man cannot live by another.

This is the effect of priuacie, whilst every man cares only for himself, and
neglects the Commonwealth: but this is contrary to the practice of the
Pismire, who like a good Commonwealths man, gathers for himself and others
in community. And therefore Solomon sends us to learn there a lesson of true
policy and wisdom to do the like: Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, (says he)
consider her ways, and be wise: that is, provide for others as well as for thy
self, provide for thy self with respect to all: To do otherwise, is to play
the fool; thus to do, is to be truly wise.

3. The Conclusion or extraction remains, which is, to be wise: For that is
the end or scope of all; the thing wherein we truly resemble the Angels, and
excel the beasts. As one says very well, that Reading makes a full man,
writing a perfect man, and speaking a ready man: Eccl. 38.24
so say I here: consider the Pismire as a Naturalist, it will make thee a
great scholar; consider her as a Moralist, Eccl. 39.1.
it will make thee a good and diligent man; Consider her as a Politician, it
will make thee a good Citizen, Eccl. 39.4.
a good Common-wealths-man.

To be a great Scholar, a great Philosopher, to be seen in the hidden secrets
of Nature, to have the Arts ad vnguem, the Languages ad verbum, yea to know as
much in all as Aristotle; or more then so, as much as Solomon did, is not yet
to arrive at this point, to be wise.

To understand the whole body of Divinity, to resolve all the knotty
controversies that are in the world, or may be imagined, to confute all the
falsehoods, to confirm all the truths that are proposed and opposed, to know as
much as Solomon did; and more, as much as Satan does, is not yet to arrive at
this point, to be wise.

To be a great and perfect Politician, diving into those arcana Imperij that
are sealed up in silence; to be acquainted with all foreign Countries and
Customs, to know the natures of all people, and to be able to carry a sweet
hand, wherewith to manage them easily and naturally: to have a wit apt and
ready for all times and turns; fitting all persons, places, and occasions: to
have Giges Ring, to see all, yet be unseen: Mydas ears, to hear all, even
the whispering of the reeds: Argus eyes, to see all: Briarius hands; a finger
in every corner of the world: to dissemble more artificially then Machiauell,
more naturally then Lewis the eleventh: to exceed Achitophel in crafty
hypocrisy, to equal Hushai or Solomon in warrantable, honest, and necessary
policy, is not yet to arrive at this point, to be wise.

For he that will be wise, must not only labor for wisdom, (that is, to
get the Theory or bare Speculation thereof as it is a Science) but when he
has gotten that, he must labor with wisdom also, or else he can effect
nothing: that is, he must show his wisdom in action: for virtus in action
consist it. Wisdom is not given that we should sit still and sleep with it,
or play or dally with it, as with a pleasant companion, but to direct us in
virtuous undertakings.

There needs no wisdom to sleep, to be silent, or to be idle; the fool
can do all these as well as Solomon: But to vvatch when others sleep, and to
that purpose that others may sleep the safer; to work when others play, and
to that end, that the idleness of one may not be prejudicial to many, to all:
to speak when others will not, cannot, dare not; and so to speak, that others
may be informed, awaked, edified, warned, instructed, and made wiser: this
requires wisdom, this is to be wise: that is, diligent, discreet, and
courageous.

The idle and secure people were drowned in the general Deluge: there needed
no great wisdom to do as they did. A fool can sit still, and laugh, and
sing, till the water stop his vvinde, and he be drowned; and so can a drunkard,
or a madman: but to obey the voice of God, to vvarne and admonish others, to
build the Arc, to provide for the creatures, as a master for his servants, to
enter into and stay in the Arc, till the fullness of time appointed by God was
accomplished; this required wisdom, this was to be truly wise: Sap. 10.4.
as Solomon says, Wisdom when the earth was overflowne, preserved it again,
governing the just man by a little wood.

To waste and impoverish a plentiful Estate like a Prodigal, to suck the
life-bloud out of the Commonwealth, thereby to deject the spirits of men with
their fortunes, and so subjugate them under the yoke of slaverie, to draw all
the juice and marrow from the veins and bones of a people, requires no great
wit to bring about: We see Claudius the dullard, Nero the Mountibanke, Caligula
the debosht drunkard, (that had neither wit nor honesty) could do this as
well and as readily, as Tiberius, that had wit without honesty: But to fill
the veins of a destroyed estate, to enrich a Commonwealth, to restore
liberty, and to rule by virtuous Laws: this requires wisdom, and this is to
be thus wise. For the wealth of a State, stands not altogether in the wealth of
one man: The Prince may be rich, and the State poor; but if the State be rich,
the Prince must needs be rich also; his wealth consisting in his subjects love:
And what he is, compared with his own, is not respected; but what he is,
compared to his neighbors, enemies, or Confederates abroad: nor is it worth
thought what he has alone in particular, but what he enjoyes in the general,
as a Prince in his peoples affections.

To commit Idolatry, (as all the World did) to call that universal, common,
and catholic confusion, Genesis 1.13. and.12.1.
Unity; to run a whoring after our own imaginations, or the blind
obedience of our blind leaders, require^ no great light of wisdom, but what
the fire of our own lust affoordeth. But (to do as Abraham did) to come out
of Idolatry, to leave his parents and native Country; to deny our
predecessors, and our selves also enticing us to Idolatry, this requires true
wisdom, that is, to be thus wise.

Genesis 19.16.
To eat, drink, dance; and rise up to play with the Sodomites; to abuse our
bodies worse then beasts in sins not to be named, there needs no other
wisdom then to follow the sway of our own corrupt concupiscence; Sap. 10.6.7
a beast can do this (but that he has more wit then to do it) with as much
diligence as man; But to live soberly and chastely in this filthy place; to make
here a covenant with our eyes, Job. 3.1.
and ears, and tongue, and heart, Iam. 3.6.
that one should not set the other on fire; to leave this polluted place, not
to look back, or touch a ragge stained with the flesh, but with diligence to
flee from Sodom to Zoar, Jude. 23.
this requires wisdom, and this is to be thus wise.

This wisdom here spoken of, is requisite in every work we take in hand: It
lifts up the head of him that is low, and makes him sit among great men, and
it satisfies the desire of all men living: yea says Solomon, Pro. 22.29
A diligent man in his business stands before kings, etc. Nor can this
wisdom be attained without much diligence: for though God fills the heart of
every expert workman with wisdom, making him naturally apt to climb toward
some perfection, yet he has appointed labor as the means of attayning this
excellency; insomuch as we see such as exceed others in diligence, exceed
also commonly in the degrees of perfection, all those that are less diligent
and attentive at their works, and therefore it is said, Exodus 31.2 3.4.
that God filld the heart of Bezaleel the son of Vry the son of Hurr with
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, to find out curious works. So God
gives him wisdom to seek and to find out, but if he seek not he cannot
find; for labor is the means God has appointed to this end, and Bezaleel is
not borne a perfect workman, neither has he his art altogether by infusion,
but by instruction, and experience, and practice; nor yet by these (which are
second causes and means) without Gods blessing, which is the first and
principal. And doubtless though he would never have sought to excel in his
art except he had been wise, (which wisdom was a special gift of God
exciting him to seek, and directing him to find what he sought) yet he is not
termed wise till he has attained a kind of perfection in his art, by
diligence and industry; but then being (as we say) his crafts-master, he is
said to be w^se, because then his vvisdome, being drawn into action, is made
visible, and sensible, and profitable, which before seemed to be idle. And thus
likewise in the building of the Tabernacle, Exodus 35.
wisdom is attributed to those women who did spinne and work with their
hands, for the full and perfect furnishing of that holy place with rich and
decent ornaments. As if they were only wise which wrought, and the idle Gossips
were only fools. And perhaps it is for this that Solomon calls the Spider a
wise creature, Pro. 30.28.
because she lays hold with her hands in kings palaces: As if God set her
upon purpose there, by spinning to admonish idle Ladies of their duties: who
(alas) are grown so foolish, as they scorn, or have forgot to spinne with
the Spider, whilst yet of her they have learned to ensnare Butterflies, and to
poison them; yea to hang their copwebs in every corner of the Court, though
much of it be built with Irish Oak. Pro. 31.17.
The virtuous woman (says Solomon) ouersees the ways of her husband: she does
not overrule them as a Lady, and mistress, according to the new English
fashion, but she ouer-lookes and reviewes them as a good helper, to make all
sure, that there may be no ouersights; and she eats not the bread of idleness;
(that bread of idleness which is the common Diet bread of these days) what
therefore shall her reward be? Truly that which she has deserved, a double
portion; honor, and maintenance. Pro. 31.31.
Give her (says he) the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her
in the gates: since she has wrought she shall eat, since she has spunne
she shall be clothed; and she is clothed with her own web, her own works
praise her in the gates. All the world sees what she wears is her own, God
has given her a wise heart and diligent hand, so that she can both cover her
own nakedness, and help to cover the nakedness of her husband, children,
and household also. Such Clothes are far more rich then cloth of gold; and
this is praise enough for her, and shame enough for others, whose heads have
not wit enough, nor hearts will enough, nor hands art enough, to cover their
own sin, their own shame, their own nakedness. O Ladies blush for shame,
(if your sophisticate and adulterate beauties, in compounding whereof you only
use diligence, will suffer you to blush) blush I say, whilst you eat the
bread of Idleness, and toote in every basket like Flies, for the first
blossoms, to satiate your longing and lusting pallats, that would devour all
the increase and store of nature at a mouthful; blush, wihilst you are clothed
with the foreign labors of the silly Silke-worme; neglecting in the mean
time, the more commodious clothing of your Countriman the Sheep, whose
fleece, with artificial fingers, might be made fit to be worn, both in the
heat of Summer, and in the cold of Winter. Blush therefore at your apish
pride, and idle luxury; or, if you cannot blush, tremble, least with that
lady of Jerusalem, those sins be repaid with a severe judgment; whilst
ye are forced to eat, first the flesh of your Children, and after that your
own flesh, if the hungry Soldiers spare you so long, as judging your painted
carkeises too much infected and sufetted for their diets. But if you fear, and
desire to avoid this curse, hear and follow Salomons advice in this place;
for to you he speaks as well as to your Tenants and servants, whilst he
says, Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise.

Now, since vvisdome is so requisite for the life of man, as that without it a
man is worse then a Pismire; and, since we see to be wise, is not only to
know by speculation, nor only to go and to consider, but also to resolve, to
practice, and to execute what we know, and have considered, let us use
diligence in consideration: and first and specially let us consider who is the
author and giver of diligence and vvisdome; Eccl. 51.19
(for to find out that is none of the least parts of what we seek) and let
us seek her as Solomon did, Sap, 8.22.
that we may so find her as he did. I have loved wisdom and sought her
from my youth, I desired to marry her, such love had I unto her:
Nevertheless, when I perceived I could not enjoy her, except God gave her,
Sap. 7.7.
(and that was a point of wisdom also, to know whose gift it was) I went
unto the Lord, and besought him with my whole heart, and said, etc. See then
the effect of this: I prayed, and understanding was given me; I called, and
the spirit of Wisdom came upon me.

Eccl. 51.14.15*
When I was young (says Siracides) or ever I went abroad, I desired wisdom
openly in my prayer; I prayed for her before the Temple, and sought after her
unto far Countries. He traveled into foreign Lands, not only for his
private pleasure or profit, to attain the Languages, or learn fashions, or by
way of merchandise to enrich himself, (which are the ends proposed and
pursued by all our modern Travelers) but for the public, that he might
return able to serve the Commonwealth, and bring home some knowledge with him,
to enrich, adorn, or reform the State wherein he was borne.

Thus diverse of the Heathen Philosophers did the like, vvhilest either being
banished their Countries, or making a voluntary travel, they observed
whatsoever they saw might be beneficial to their Countries, and brought it
home with them for the general profit of all. Thus did Lycurgus, Pythagoras,
Solon, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca; and before all these, Moses, that
mirror of Magistrates; who being forced to fly from his native soil, in
forty years space had time to reexamine, and purge the Arts he had learnt in
Egypt, and by foreign conference, and diverse several changes of fortune, to
extract principles of wisdom and experience for future times. For assuredly
he that never met crosses or troubles, be his nature never so pregnant, can be
but a fool, in comparison of what he might be, or in comparison of others.
But the best Master is he that has served the best Pilot, he that has been
shipwrackt; the best Governor, he that has obeyed; and the best teacher, he
that has erred. Eccl. 25.6.
Assuredly the Crown of old men, (especially of Princes) is to have much
experience, and the fear of God is their glory. Cast your eyes back to
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David* and all the servants of God, and mark
how they were fitted for their vocations, and put to many hard schools to
learn wisdom: yea Solomon himself, into whom God infused a plentiful
portion of wisdom, did notwithstanding increase and perfect the same by
experience. So that though in his other words and writings he excel other men,
yet in his Ecclesiastes, (which is a survey, a review, a censure of all, both
of his life, his words, and works, and written in age after all this
addition of experience) he therein excels himself.

Consider in our own days what difference there has been betwixt Princes
and great persons, who have never felt or feared the change of their Estates,
and others who have been persecuted from their Cradles, and so forced to
beware of their seeming friends, as well as of their professed enemies.

Consider if ever Age affoorded such three Contemporaries, as Elizabeth then of
England, Henry the fourth of France, and James our present King and Sovereign.
The first and last persecuted from their Cradles, became thereby wise above
their fellows; and the one did till her last, and the other does continue a
Defender of the Faith, in spite of Hell, whose gates could never prevail
(though set vvide open) to touch a hair of their heads. The other, wise and
valiant, lost the true use of both with His Faith; when fear and humane
frailty, for politic respects, caused him to admit Their entrance into his
State, who never left vvorking till they cast him out: He by Gods just
judgment being made an example to vvarne other Princes, whilst he would not
take example by the like fall of His Predecessors.

A natural fool cannot be made wise by experience, nor any other man
without it. What knowledge has he (says Siracides) that is not tried? A man
that is instructed understands much; Eccl. 34.9.10.11.12.
and he that has good experience, can talk of wisdom. He that has no
experience, knows little; and he that erreth is full of craft. When I
wandered to and fro, I saw many things, and my understanding is greater then I
can express: I was oftentimes in danger of death, yet I was delivered because
of these things: that is, by experience of the like former evils.

And when all is done, if men hide up what they know, they may well flatter
themselves with an opinion of wisdom, of reservednesse, of privacie,
contentment, modesty, and I wot not what flourishes: and others may perhaps
soothe them in the same follies, and persuade them, that their cuts cover their
pride, sloth, and nakedness: but except we draw out, what we have drunk
in, for general use, we are Sluggards, and unprofitable servants: To which
end a Philosopher said to a silent observer of other men's mirth and free speech
at a Feast: If thou be a fool, thou do the part of a wise man to hold
thy peace; but if thou be wise, then do thou the part of a Fool to be
silent: For wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is hoorded up, Eccl. 20,
29.30.
says Siracides, what profit is in them both? Better is he that keeps his
ignorance secret, then a man that hides his wisdom.

But some object, that to utter all and draw our selves dry, is the next way
to be contemned: Common things are cast away, and empty vessels have the
lowdest sound. I answer, it is no matter, therefore I was filld to be
emptied, my praise is not expected from men, but from God. What skils it,
whether my soul departs with many concealements, (which might have bettered
others had they been left behind) or have freely discharged herself of all
her lading, of all she knows? The latter is far the better, I am the less
cumbred with account, and I shall be the more filled with fresh glory and
knowledge: Do thou thy duty betimes, Eccl. 52.30
and God will give you a reward at his time.

All that I have said is to this end, to lead you by the hand, to the Pismire
of the united Provinces, that considering her ways and course aright, (which I
purpose to lay down with as much perspicuity as I can to the meanest capacity)
we may by her example, and Salomons instruction, grow vviser then we are,
though we fall short of what we ought to be.

We have gone to Beelzebub the god of Flies, to the Indians, Turks, and other
Heathens, for Drugs to poison our bodies, under color of purging and clensing
them; for infinite vanities to discover our corruptions, under pretense of
hiding them. And thus for lack of consideration, have made all these things so
necessary to us, as if without them we could not live: So that had not
Columbus happily found out the new world in time, there must needs have been
an end of the old world long before this time.

We have gone to the Cantharides of Italy, and learned there to provoke lust,
under color of quenching it, To vitiate virginity under the color of
professing Chastity; To poison, under color of preserving or curing, To be
jealous over all but our own lives; To plot and practice with hell, for the
obteyning of earth; To be frugall of our vices, and prodigal of our honors;
To waste our estates in a retired kind of baseness, where sensuality may be
close and secure; To feed our selves, and to starve all others; To be worse
then beasts, and to make Saints of the Sodomites And thus for lack of
consideration, have made our selves Politic, Machiavelian, Atheistical
fools.

We have gone to the Silkeworme, and learned there to waste and spin out our
own bowels, to make our backs brave; To consume all in flourishes, Banquets,
Maskes, Revels, and merriments, vvhilest our brethren in one faith, go fasting
in sackcloth, are besieged with dangers, threatened with Massacres, and sit
mourning and weeping by the waters of Babylon: And thus for lack of
consideration, we have made our selves fantastique, dissolute, deboshed,
profane, prodigal and ridiculous fools.

We have gone to Abaddon the King of Locusts, and from that infernal pit of
falsehood, brought smoky superstitions, to darken our understandings in
discerning spiritual things, and old wives fables, and lying Legends, to
fright children, and infatuate men of more years then discretion: And thus for
lack of due consideration have lost our first love, and made our selves
blind, senseless, blockish, idle, and idolatrous fools.

We have gone to the Waspe and Hornet, which infect and sting all
Christendom, and with them have taken so deep a draught of the cup which the
Whore holds in her hands for all Nations to drink of; The brimme whereof she
has cunningly hunnied with fair pretenses of seeming piety, devotion,
charity, chastity, vvilfull poverty, obedience, unity, universality, and
spiced with glorious titles of the Catholic Church; as now we are grown
giddie and drunken, insensible of our own nakedness, and unwilling to hear of
it, and unable to hide it; And thus for lack of consideration we have made
our selves universal fools.

Let us now at the last (if it be not too late) go with the Sluggard, to the
Pismire of the united Provinces, and considering her ways, learn to be wise.

Neither need we be ashamed of such Tutors, who come of the same race
originally that we do, as our speech witnesses, which varieth more in
pronuntiation then in the elementarie foundation, as M. Verstegan, an able and
indifferent Judge in this case, declares. Besides, they are such whose
natures and manners we better agree with, then with any other Nation: having
ever found them plain, but sure friends, both in these latter times, when
Spain would have swallowed us, and before that for many hundred years
continuance, as the constant Leagues betwixt them and us manifestly proves.
Consider at this present, if they be not friends to us and our friends; and
foes to our foes* if we dare trust any but them, if they trust any like us; if
Nature has not bound us together in necessary bands of Friendship; and God by
miracle first made us means to preserve them, that they might now be a block
in the way to such as would devour us with greediness. If this be not so,
why did not the King of Bohemia resort to Spain, with whom we have outward
peace, as to a sure prop at need? Or why does he now stay and remain with
them, or at least leave his dearest Jewel there, whilst his own Country is
possessed and guarded by those trusty Spanish friends? A friend loves at all
times, Pro. 17.17.
and a brother is for the time of necessity. O Spain therefore, show thy
self a brother, or let the Illustrious Lords the States, be known and
accounted as they are, honorable, and religious friends! But I have forgot my
self; passion has transported me, I must leave these Elephants, and return
to the Pismire.

Dear Countrymen, read with patience that which follows, and consider it
advisedly. The contents are a brief collection of such good Customs and
Orders, as are established and practiced amongst this diligent and happy
people; some of which I could wish translated into our Commonwealth. Many of
them are known to diverse of our Countrie-men before; some of them put in
practice in some places already, but not universally known or practiced as I
vvish they were. I may miss to mention many, I may mention some amiss: I may
hap to set down some, that I might well omit, being neither proper nor
profitable to us. Many others could have done better; none did it; I have done
my good will; and where you like what I propound, apply it, follow it, and you
satisfy my private, whilst you profit the public. Go now to the Pismire, O
Sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise.

Now, that we may view all as in a Map or Lantskip with the best advantage,
we must consider, that this State has two great Enemies, the one by Land, the
other by Water, which they by their wisdom turn to be profitable friends; as
wise men make greatest benefit of their greatest adversaries. The first of
these is the State of Spain; the other is the Sea; the first unites them, the
other inricheth them; the manner how, I will as well as I may briefly and
plainly deliver.

The first, seeking to cast upon them that heavy yoke which they have shaken
from their shoulders, does by that means force them to stand close together in
their own defense, and by a firm confederacy, to consolidate their several
and distinct parts in a whole and entire body, who otherwise would fall
asunder, by division and contradiction upon every slight occasion, whilst it
might be said on them as it was of Israel, Then there was no King in Israel,
but every man did what seemed good in his own eyes.

I must confess, wishing them well, (as I do, and as he must needs do, that
wishes well to the present Church and State of England) I should rejoice to
see, (in stead of that monstrous head too big for the body, which has cut it
self off, by breaking asunder the fundamental Laws and Liberties of the
State, those Ligaments that tie members politic together) I should rejoice (I
say) to see some prevention invented against Change and Disunion, though with
as much caution and limitation, as the Venetians use in the election of their
Dukes. And in the mean time, I vvish them a safe War under so stayed and
advised a Chief, rather then an unsafe peace; which, bringing in corruption,
would soon open a door to the Conqueror. For, as the state of things now
stands, behold what profit they make by the vvarres, which the peace would
lose them.

1. First, it increases their Shipping, causing them labor to exceed their
Adversary by Sea, as far as He exceeds them by Land: Which truly, I
think, they have accomplished, so that whilst he assaults them at home, he
finds them threatening worse vvarres to him in both the Indies, and blocking
up every Haven of His with their Men of war. And this odds they have of him
in these vvarres, that (besides their selfe-sufficiencie, and the privy
contribution and aid of their friends and confederates, which tremble under
the formidable growth of the Spanish Greatness, and seek to hinder it this
way) if His Indies furnish him with means to assault, the same Indies furnish
them with means to defend: and I doubt not, but in time the war that now
infesteth all Europe, will be remooved farther off into Asia, Africa, or
America: and that He, who now is the common assaylant, will be driven in all
those parts of the world to be the Defendant, and to write Ne plus vltra in
Christendom.

As for the multitude of their Ships it is such, that whilst I consider it,
me thinks it probable, that as many of them inhabit the Sea, as the Land. Of
this I am assured, that diverse families have no houses but their Ships and
Boats, in which they were borne, brought up, and do live after a commodious
and cleanly manner: And as they were borne, so intend to dye freemen;
insomuch, as if Spain should justle them out of the Land, they are resolved to
people the Sea, and rather commit themselves, with Noah, to the mercy of the
waves, under Gods protection, then be subjected to men, whom they have found
less merciful in their powers, and more boundless and vast in their desires,
then the Ocean.

And yet this diligence of theirs, in winning much Land from the Seas
usurpation; and this providence of theirs, in making shift to live with their
Families at Sea in Ships and Boats, and Samoreuses, when their Goshen will
not afford that numerous people houseroome: and that generositie and nobility
of their natures, in struggling for their ancient and native freedom, against
so potent an Adversary, (a virtue that has been hereditary, and long since
observed by Tacitus in these warlike Batavians) are now all turned to vices by
Envy; Tacit. Annal. lib. 2. cap. 10.
who can see nothing good in this people, nor any thing evil in their
Adversaries. It is more just for Spain to supplant them, then for them to
supplant fishes; and that which does commend them, that they can live any
where, must so disgrace them, as they may be thought unworthy to live any
where. But let Envy still rail freely, whilst these enjoy their freedom;
and may they still want domesticke necessaries, whilst this want necessitates
their diligence, and occasioneth the increase of their strength by Sea.

As their shipping, so their Excise pays a great part of the war, and
returns that money which they disburse to the soldier home again. As we
see the Sun exhales vapors from the Sea; these, botteled up in clouds, fall
down in showers, and refresh the earth, and so by rivers and draynes, as by
veins, pass into the sea again, from whence they arose.

And this is to be seen, especially in the Excise of Wine and Beer where
every Heretic and Schismaticke, that loves his liquor though he hates the
State; and every drunkard and debosht person, who being first a slave to
sottishness, cares not to whom else he becomes a slave, are made by this
secret and insensible means to contribute toward the vvarres; yea and the
careless and improuident soldier, who spends his intertainement idely, and
sells (as it were) his blood for drink, and his flesh for bread, is, as if
he were a voluntary, and served at his own charge: for every payday, he pays
back his means to the Sutler, and he to the common purse.

Now as they pay Excise generally upon all Beer, so especially a great Excise
upon foreign Wine and Beer. 1. First because, though they cannot altogether
keep it out, for that it should hinder their trading, yet that this may be a
means to restrain and limit the excess thereof, being but for matter of
pleasure, not necessity.

2. Secondly, by this means their own Beer and Barley is vented at good
rates, which if ours were generally and freely admitted, would scarce be
vendible; and so men are excited and encouraged to sow, malt, brew, and to
seek to supply the Commonwealth within it self, without borrowing abroad.

And whilst I consider this, I can but sometime vvonder (perhaps in my
ignorance) at our restraints about the out-lading of Corn and Beer, even
when there is no dear^h but plenty, if men were forced to bring out their
store. Assuredly if in the time of scarcity, when God seems to call us to
fasting and humiliation, (as at this present) fasting were enjoined and
strictly observed, and the Alehouses daily and duly visited for avoiding of
idleness, drunkenness and excessive riot, there needed no other provision
against famine. But this is the plague, these Statutes being penal are begged
aforehand, or left to the pursuit of beggars and base Promoters, who compound
the forfeiture and coosen the Law; or committed to the oversight of such as
are Ingrossers themselves, who desire to have all things dear, that they may
vent their own commodities at the best rate, and so grow rich, though the
Commonwealth wax poor.

3. Thirdly from this Excise of foreign Beer and other commodities the State
makes more gain toward the maintenance of the vvarres and other public
works, then all the rest that deal in them. For in Beer especially they
double the price, and have clearly as much for the Excise as the Merchant paid
to the Bruer. Now in this they do the parts of provident fathers, who seeing
their prodigal children waste their portions, they underhand lend money,
which their children know not of, and so preserve their Lands from sale, and
their pawnes from forfeiture, returning them again when the have more wit to
keep them and use them.

And in my conceit this were a good Toil to take out frugall Foxes, and a
sure trap for our negligent drunkards and prodigal heirs; who being only
niggardly in public works where they should freely give, will grutch to
disburse six pence toward the maintenance of the Minister, and relief of the
poor, or twelve pence toward a Subsedy for defense of the State, or for the
Kings and kingdoms honor, when they will at that very time, willingly spend
ten times so much in riot and excess, never feeling or complaining of the
matter, though they continued this course every day, and cannot by persuasions
of reason, or the force and authority of the laws of God or man, be diuerted
and drawn from it: such a baseness there is in man, such a dull and beastly
sottishness in nature, to contrary Religion and reason, especially being
seconded in any evil by company, and confirmed therein by custom, past
reclaiming.

Now if the united Provinces had peace with Spain, as other Countries have,
or were in subjection to Spain, as not only the Spaniards, but some of their
own infected members, and some others perhaps of Ours, inconsiderately (as I
suppose) seem to desire: then neither should they be secure of their own
lives, estates, and liberties, nor their neighbors safe by them. For assuredly,
howsoever men flatter themselves, as the Catholic King would be King of all
Catholic subjects, so most of the^ seem to desire him for their head: But
should they be so unhappy as to have their desires, what were they but slaves?
since where the Spaniard comes, he sets himself down like an absolute and
tyrannical Lord, silencing all Laws but his own, which are as those of the
Medes and Persians; yea as those of Draco written in blood. Never did the
Lurdanes more Lord it in England, then they where they conquer, or be let in
upon any terms: tell me Naples, Milan, Antwerpe, if this be not true. And
though Religion be made the stalking-horse to infatuate and bewitch the minds
of men, and make them betray themselves and their Countries to slaverie; yet
the Lark being dared, and the Woodcocke in the Net, that mask is cast away,
and there is as much trust to their promises, as to the Moors their Kinsmen
and late Countrymen. So that because of this fear, as long as the contrariety
of Religion lasts, the innocent party cannot be safe without armor, nor
secure then. Show me in any part of Christendom, where any person professing
the reformed Religion has been spared, were he friend, neighbor, or
kinsman, if That side had strength enough to reach his throat: and
notwithstanding our advantages let slip in mercy, and none of them pursued
bloudily, how have they in all places, by all means waded in blood up to the
chinne, for the accomplishment of their designs? And this will continue as
long as Antichrist reigns; for the Wolf is bloody, and the Lamb simple; his
Fleece warm, and his Blood and Flesh sweet. But if the peaceable Gospel had
free passage and free operation, then indeed there were not only hope, but
security, that we should live in peace one by another, and that the strength
and riches of one King, should not be terrible to another; whilst God would
teach every one to be contented with their own, to attend with conscience the
charge they have in hand, the peaceable government of the States committed to
them, and as brothers to join their powers against the common enemy of the
Christian Religion; not so much seeking his subversion as conversion; nor
ambitiously thirsting after the enlargement of their own Kingdoms, as piously
desiring the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom. For as a covetous rich man, if
he seriously thought to what end his goods were given him, and what a strict
account he must make for them, would not so greedily hunt after his own hurt
and others loss: so assuredly, if ambitious Princes did well consider their
charge, and conscionably study upon the works and duties of their Callings,
(knowing, that as the people are given to be their servants, so they
interchangeably are given to serve the people, Antigonus Rex Maced. dixit,
Regnum esse splendidam servitutem.
that all may serve God) they would not with so much hate and hazard of God
and man, of soul and body, of their Kingdoms here on earth, and the Kingdom
of heaven, expose their subjects lives to certain ruin, for the
accomplishment of their inordinate and importunate desires (especially
Christian against Christian, brother against brothes) neither would they usurp
such a tyrannical and heathenish authority over their flocks, as with the
Great Turk to make their own wills, limits, and laws to the wills of all other
men; Hoc est deglubere pecus, and non tondere. But as the Pope, that spiritual
Tyrant, that Antichrist, has gotten Church-Courtiers to uphold his Regaltie,
with impudent foreheades and artificial falsehoods; so, these have gotten
Court Clergymen to become their Champions; who, being full of wind
themselves, have blown these bladders with flattery and forgerie, even to
forget their own vanity, to which they are subject, and to which they shall be
subjected in the end: whilst they imagine all other men to be made for their
pleasures; and their wills to be a more just law to their subjects then Gods Law
is or can be to them. Well might they be admonished by our Sovereign, who is
able to be Tutor to them all, more dearly to prise the lives of their
subjects, and not to seek quarrels to enlarge their Dominions, and to embroile
all Christendom, that they might fish for advantages, but rather to ouersee all
injuries, 2. Sam. 10.
but such as would startle David himself, knowing well, though wars be begun
for the pleasure of Princes, the subjects blood must determine the
controversy, and be powered out, as a sacrifice to appease the Furies.

To return to my purpose; If the united Provinces had peace with Spain, then
they must trade, as others do, at the appointment of Spain; who having once
the East and West Indies in possession, would force all Europe to be their
Retailers, and that upon most servile and unequal conditions. and so to take
all commodities of them at the second hand, and to vent them for their profit
only. Whereby, having before the Indies, those fountains of gold and silver in
their power, they would also this way ingrosse all the wealth of Christendom
into their coffers, and thereby enable and arm themselves to accomplish that
universal Dominion they aim at. For what should let them, whilst they had
the sinews of war at command, and felt themselves strong enough to rush into
the battle when they pleased, and so to surprise others unprovided and
unawares? whereas now the united Provinces meet with much of their Merchandise
at an indifferent rate, and sometime exchange Lead and Iron for Gold; not
admitting them to be Masters of the whole world by the Popes Donation, having
as good a title as they had, whilst they have a sword and power to make good
their title, as they did and do. Why should it be justice in them to take from
the Indies and inthrall them in servitude, and injustice in others, to take
again from them, and to redeem their own liberties? Especially when all the
gold they fetch from India, is but to make chains and fetters to captiuate
Christendom, and all free Nations? Let others look on and be laughed at,
whilst these share the world; or stand by and give aim, whilst these win the
prize; or help to hold up others, till their own time comes for correction;
the united Provinces will not lose their parts neither in the old nor new
world: for which (besides their own gain and glory) all Christendom is
beholden to them, whilst both they oppose this Monarch, and hinder his
monstrous and prodigious growth in the Indies, and also restrain him from
ouerflowing all Europe with an universal Deluge, as otherwise he would do.

Again, if the United Provinces were all one with Spain, or vassals to it,
then were their conjunction much more terrible: for having before the greatest
Land force of any Potentate in Christendom, if to this there were added their
strength at sea, wherein they exceed all Christian States but our own, who
then could vvithstand him? for, if he frighted us, even at Sea, in 88. when
we had these to help us, to guard our Coasts, and to keep back, and divert
the Prince of Parma from his intended attempts, what then would he do having
these to help him, and when he should find not only the Havens of Dunkerke,
Newport, Ostend, Sluice, but all the Coasts of Zeeland and Holland, as so many
mouths, open to assault and devour us at an instant; and oportune to land
fresh forces and supplies of all kinds at pleasure? This truth Escouedo,
Secretary to D. John of Austria, saw long since, and at this day the Spaniard
sees it too well; and therefore labors more for these Countries then for the
Indies; nay, he wastes and imployes willingly all his Indian treasure about
the fetching in of these; because he sees it to be more for his profit, at
least more conducing to the direct end of his aims, to have these then those.
For doubtless, if he were once absolute Master of this wise and diligent
people, he would soon be Master of all Europe besides. Since, besides the
conveniencie of Situtation, their industry is able to effect any difficult
work, which others think invincible: so that we see them powerful and
prosperous even in all actions they undertake by Sea or Land; and that they
carry any enterprise through, though it be against Himself, the most
powerful and politic Enemy in Christendom. Most powerful I call him in
regard of his Indies; most politic, in regard of his Jesuits; and an Enemy I
call and count him in regard of Religion; we being for Christ, and he for
Antichrist.

Thus had he these Countries joined to those He possesses together with those
that are Clients, subjects, or vassals to the House of Austria, Germany were
wholly possessed, open roades by Sea and Land made to the conquest of Denmark
and Sweden; France were besieged and girt about, England either subjected or
blockt up, and shut out of the world, and all Christendom in danger of a
violent and sudden surprise by Sea and Land. It concerns all these therefore
to look about them, especially the petty Princes of Germany, except they
intend to hold their Crowns at the courtesy of Spain, and become fellow
vassals with the rest of Europe, to the Catholic Sea and Scepter at once, as
they have dishonorab^y suffered their neighbors to be by disunion. Whereas
the united Provinces, Concordia res parvae crescunt.
making good their words with actions answerable, keep their own, and get
ground of the Spaniard, even where he assaults, and do honorably extend their
help to other Princes, even when the war knockes at their own doors for
entrance, and when all corners of the Land may hear the roaring of the enemies
Cannon, with contempt. So that all Europe besides is the more secure by reason
these States and their Countries are imbroyled, and they again enrich
themselves by that which impouerish the English and all other Nations, (for
which partly they may thank the wars) I mean by the East- Indian Voyages,
wherein they have these advantages, which (I suppose) others want.

1. First, they go with less charge then others both for men and victuals.
Their ships requiring fewer persons to man them, and their men less victual
and courser to keep them, then ours. Besides, many of them are venturers, and
so sharers in the gain: And therefore will be content to live with little, to
endure all difficulties, to work out all hazards with patience, and be good
husbands for the general, whilst they know the profit redounds to their
particulars.

2. Secondly, they carry out no coin from their own State, but what they
bring in of others; their own being kept base (perhaps for these purposes) so
that they furnish themselves elsewhere, and weaken not the wealth and common
stock which is current in the State.

3. Thirdly they vent the commodities which they bring from thence, for the
most part in other places, and return either money, or other more necessary
supplies, in stead of the less necessary, which they carry out.

4. Fourthly, they make (as I have before noted) an easy exchange, not trading
upon so strict conditions as we do, but as freely as the Spaniard does with
them and others; and so oftentimes meet their commodities half way, and
barter powder and shot, for Pepper, Cloves, and other spices.

5. Fifthly, They have a large territory and ample command in the East- Indies,
from whence they have expelled the Spaniard and Portugal by force, and so have
far better opportunity and conveniencie to trade there, then any other Nation
whatsoever; nay, they are able to lade themselves from their own Lands. Yea,
it is incredible what strength they have in those parts both of men, Forts, and
Confederates; and what a circuit of ground they command, whereupon those rich
commodities are growing: All which they have won with their industry,
wisdom, and valor, from this Enemy of theirs, having cracked his credit there
amongst the Infidels, as they hope to do here also amongst true believers.
Neither has He hope either there or here, ever to recover what He has lost
both in reputation and Rent, except He can work a division amongst
themselves, or at least betwixt them and us: which therefore to effect, He
turns every stone, and tryes all conclusions Policy can invent. But I trust,
even Those of theirs that are most interested in the quarrels of the Church at
home, and those of ours who are most interested in the Eastern quarrels, see
the issue of these differences too well, to give scope to their affections so
far, as thereby to be made instruments to repossesse the Spanyard either here
or there in the ground he has lost. Since what they at home help to give the
Spaniard, they take from their own Liberty, and what we take, or help to
take from the Hollander to give to that State, is to take from our selves, to
give to our enemies, whilst we weaken our best friends, and make the general
enemy of Christendom strong, for our own certain ruin amongst others.

As for the terrible grouth of the Hollander, which some seem to startle at,
it cannot fright us; since their principal strength is at sea, and so
obnoxious to many vnauoydeable dangers in their trade, except they hold good
correspondencie with us. For our very Coast will be ever able to command them,
and hold them in awe, and they must resolve either in storms to ride out all
hazards, and fight against wind, tide, rocks, sands, and all other casualties,
or to submit themselves to the mercy of our harbors. And in calmes or fair
weather they must pass every flie-bore, at least every Fleet they send out and
receive home, with a guard sufficient to keep us under hatches; otherwise we
shall be sure to gain more by their voyages, then they themselves that are the
venturers. Now how impossible it is for that State ^o prevent these disasters
of theirs, and advantages of ours, is apparent to any man that observes the
situation of their Coast and ours.

Thus therefore whether they trade as Merchants or men of war, and whether
they labor to increase their Estate at home or abroad, or to hold their own
already acquired, our friendship is so absolutely necessary, as they can do
nothing without it, nor stir out without leave. So that God has bound us
together by an vndissolueable band of necessity; and it were well therefore
that our hearts as well as our Lands, and our trades in all other places, as well
as at home, were so united. Now if I may have license after so many judicious
persons that have handled our trade in the East- Indies to and fro, and
grounded their reasons upon experience, to cast in my conjectures, I would say,
the cause we thrive not in that voyage, is:

1. First, because of our great charge; for our ships require more Mariners
then theirs, and the most that go have small or no ventures, Great men being
all the sharers: and those that go merely as servants, besides that they are
not so careful of the maine adventure as they should be, and would if they
were owners, will be well paid and full fed notwithstanding howsoever the Voyage
falls out.

2. Secondly, our ships carry out much silver, some by permission, more by
stealth; and this is sure, nothing weakens a State so much as transportation of
coin. Let other things be transporred out of the Land, or be dear or cheap
within the Land, all is one; this or that man may be the richer or poorer, the
State is the same still. But where money is exhausted, and the return does not
countervaile the out-going, there the State decays by degrees. As for example,
if our Cloth, Corn, Beer, Saffron, Tin, Hides, and the like, will pay for
our Silks, Wine, Spice, Tobacco, etc. we may still live, though we live
poorly (as luxurious bodies, who have good stomachs to supply and renew
their decayed strength and vvearied spirits) but if we waste more one way, then
the other will countervaile, whilst we have no other commings in of Bullion
from the Indies, as Spain has and we wont to have, our Kingdom must needs
decay and fall into poverty, wanting money, which is properly the wealth and
strength of a State: Even as we see natural bodies, when they are libidinous,
fall into consumptions, because their expenses exceed their revenues and
commings in.

3. Thirdly, we may observe our waste, and so our weakness in this kind,
when we spend in England more wine, velvets, Silks, gold and silver, in
Laces, Imbroderie, Guilding; more Sugar, Tobacco, Drugs and Spices, then they
do perhaps, in the places from whence we fetch them, and where Nature has
made some of them necessary nourishments: so that our own ships are not
sufficient to furnish us, but others also vent much of these their vanities
upon our Coast. Thus perhaps this or that man may be the richer by this Trade,
but I cannot conceive how the public purse is filled with Bullion, or the
Commonwealth advanced, but rather much impoverished, and miserably weakened by
it. As for such as say, The Kings Custom is the greater, and shipping
increased by it, I can conceive no probability in either, but conjecture, that
stock which is there wasted, and worn out with use, would in both these
respects, be more beneficial, were it any other-where, or any otherwise
employed.

4. Fourthly, we are tied to such hard conditions, as must needs be a venture
indeed, if we profit by the Voyage: For if we be strong, we must not touch,
without Spain seals the Warrant; and if we be weak, we become a prey to
them, or any other more potent. Thus we are sent out as sheep among Wolves,
and like Doves among Kites; and if we stir any of these contrary to express
order, that Justice, which would moderate all commerce amongst Christians, in
an even and equal Balance, makes a president of his own, and mues us up at
our return.

5. Fifthly and lastly, we have no Land, or a very little in those Parts, and
so not the like means from our own annual crops to lade our own ships, or
the like liberty and opportunity to furnish our selves by trading with those
several Nations, as they have.

But now if it were possible to unite our Trades there, and to bring both
Nations into one Corporation, it would be a means to strengthen and assure
both parts here and there, and to enrich both parts without fear of any third,
or falling out amongst our selves.

For I verily believe, that that disgust betwixt the two Nations in the East-
Indies, was not sent thither without a Romish practice: nor can I believe,
that those many delays and dallyings since used in the composition of those
grievances, and in not satisfying His Majesty's just demands, proceeded
altogether from free and loyal thoughts to their own State, but had the
corrupt mixture of Spanish Lees in the bottom. Which may teach us to be more
charitable, then to censure the whole Nation for the practice of some few:
since we may consider, this State is compounded of members diversely affected;
and that the good and honest people do suffer in our sufferings, whilst they
see the others offer us injury, upon purpose to make us break off, for the
benefit of their Grand Signior.

Thus we have seen a glimpse of that profit, which the united Provinces make
of their Land-enemy: their other Enemy is the Water both salt and fresh; of
this likewise they make a profitable friend, as I will labor briefly to
manifest.

The Sea lies continually raging upon their Coasts in such a manner, as if it
would hourly eat them up, and swallow all at a mouthfull. It over-lookes
them, and they seem to lie under it: yet they keep out this strong enemy at
the arms end by art and industry, having nothing but rampires and
fortifications of Sand to oppose it. To make these strong therefore, and to
unite them that they may not be blown away with the violence of every stormy
vvinde, it is incredible what pains they take, setting a kind of long grass
upon the same barren Sands, as curiously and carefully, as we set flowers and
herbs in our gardens: which grass once getting root, binds the earth
together, that the wind cannot readily come to blow it away, and teaches them
by the like combination to turn their weakness into the like strength. Now
this were nothing, if they had but a little bank to keep, but considering
what a large Coast they are to guard and make good in this manner, (vvanting
our natural wales of rock) it is a miracle that they should have so much
courage as to undertake it, and so much constancy as to pursue it, and so much
cunning as to effect it. I make no question if some Nations, who bear their
heads aloft, had the like work in hand, they would either never attempt it,
or faint and give over in the midst; and rather with the Heluetians, Caes. Com.
seek new Countries to inhabit, then be at such a continual cost and care to
defend their own against two such enemies at once: when these notwithstanding,
do not only keep their ground, but as they have dealt with Spain for his
intrusion upon their ancient Liberties, Rights, and Privileges, so here they
have won upon the Ocean, and recovered a great part from the Seas usurpation;
part whereof, having neither sand not other soil to help them, they defend
with stupendous heaps of stone, which, with incredible cost, they fetch
from their neighbor Princes, even in places far remote, for money; and with a
continual supply of these from time to time, keep out the entrance of so
furious an adversary. The assault and battery which the Sea makes in this one
place that I have seen, is about an English mile long or more, which they
defend and maintain with huge piles of timber (brought likewise from foreigne
parts) inter-lined with those heaps of stone forementioned about the breadth
of two or three acres all that way: otherwise the Sea would break in over
all, and soon determine the controversy betwixt them and Spain, taking
possession of all from both of them by force.

Thus we see how this people maintain their own, both against the King of
Spain and the Ocean, by helps which they fetch from foreign Nations; whilst
both there soldiers, wherewith they oppose the Spaniard, are principally
strangers, and the very walls and banks, whereby they hold out the Sea are
likewise foreign, and far-fetcht. And this is none of the least part of the
Pismires wisdom and diligence: to which Solomon sends us for imitation,
whilst he says, Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, Consider her ways, and be
wise.

Now as they have this open and able enemy, the Ocean, besieging them almost
about, and assaulting them without continually; so have they within the
factious fresh-waters, that will keep within no banks (like Schismatickes,
without the salt of sobriety and discretion) ouerflowing them at certain
seasons. Insomuch as their soil seems a sponge in Summer, and a standing
Meare in Winter; for then, almost, all the face of the Continent is under
water. But see what profit they make of this Adversary, whilst cutting large
passages from place to place with incredible cost, these waters work for them
continually as faithful servants, conveying their carriages by this means, to
and fro, in a cheap, easy, and safe manner. And such use doubtless do they
make of the several sects and Religions, by necessity tolerated amongst
them, to help to carry the general charge and burden of the Commonwealth,
with the greater ease and assurance.

Nay not only the water, but the wind also is their journeyman, and labors
continually for them by Mils and other Engines; some pumping and forcing the
waters out of their surrounded pastures; some pressing oils, others beating
flax, hemp, copper; some grinding corn, others spice; some making paper,
others sawing timber; and briefly, neither man, woman, or child, neither sea
nor land, neither water nor wind suffered to be idle, but wheresoever it
blows, it blows good to some of them. And it is remarkable and wonderful,
that though there be many of these Mils in every town, yet none of them lack
work, but have as much to do as they can turn their hands to attend. But
whilst we consider the harmony of the whole, together with the necessary
dependancie of one part with and upon another, we readily see, that these Mils
help to employ their ships, and their ships them interchangeably; So that
whereas one says vvittily but not well, How all the elements conspire there
together to be naught, to show their dislike of the naughty people, I may truly
say, All the naughty Elements are forced there to do good, to show the virtue
and diligence of the good people, who conspire together in honest labor and
artificial industry. And this is one of the causes they can do things they
undertake, at cheaper rates then many with us, because they make the
artificial Engine to work for them, which with the easy attendance of one
or two dispatcheth the business, perhaps, of twenty. Thus as Sertorius taught
his weak soldier to pull off the horse tail, hair after hair, which a
stronger could not move together all at once, so these make their strong wits
supply the defect of weak hands, and with the help of Pallas or Mercury,
effect that which Briarius would wonder at. By this means an infinite number
of people are imployd in Ships, Samoreuses, Hoyes, Skutes, and Botes, to
carry and recarry commodities, to fish, foul, and trade from town to town.
So that, though it be hard (as I have said) to determine whether the Land or
Sea be most inhabited by this Nation; yet it is very probable, and I verily
believe, that if their Land feeds one, and inricheth one, the water feeds
two, and inricheth ten for that one. And so excellently have they contrived
these channels, as they serve not only for necessary draines to their grounds,
and for highwayes in transporting their goods commodiously from place to place,
but for ornaments also to beautify as well as enrich their Towns, where the
Ships and Botes pass up and down through their streets, and load and
unload, take in, and deliver wares at their doors; the rivers being walled on
both sides with fair houses, and the banks set orderly and pleasantly with
trees in most places as you pass the common streets of greatest dealing and
stirring.

Thus trade they within land amongst themselves, to the exceeding pleasure and
profit of all, and abroad at Sea by the East and West Indian Voyages, by their
fishings for Whale, Cod, Sturgeon, Herring, and the like, they employ a world
of Ships and men, and by this means are not only able to maintain the
vvarres, but to help their neighbors also with Men and money: and
notwithstanding all this, to build and plant with such cost and curiosity, as
if they meant not to lose the possession, or did it for the use of other men,
especially their good friends the Spaniards. Nay rather they seem to build
thus richly and gorgeously upon purpose, as if they intended by that means to
entice the covetous and ambitious Spaniards to assault them; and yet withal to
assure the Assaylants of their resolution, to stand out to the last man; and
that they take not such pains for the pleasure of any other, but themselves
and their own children, especially not for their Enemies, whom they rather
contemn then fear, as these evidences manifest.

Now as we pass along, it will not be amiss to speak a word of their
buildings, which are fair, large, uniform, all of brick, edged with marble or
freestone. No cost is spared either to adorn them without or within, or to
adapt them to the owners use. Many of their houses are paved with black and
white Marble, and curiously fronted and in-layd with diverse rich pieces. Yea
the paving of their streets is such, being much of it brick laid edge-wise,
as does witness the general willingness of their hearts to advance any
public work either for necessary use or ornament: wherein they are a
people beyond comparison forward and liberal, so that all common works of
whatsoever kind, are with great zeal and diligence performed on all hands,
and that they may be well and substantially effected and maintained, no cost
is thought too much at any hand.

I tell not any of these nigh and notable things, as wonders far off, but
to make this vvonder the more notable, that being so near and so well known
by many, they are followed by so few, nay scarce imitated by any.

Their planting is likewise remarkable, where not only the several Cities
and towns have large, fair, and pleasant walks, set with trees after an
exact, artificial, and beautiful manner, and so kept and preserved with
great care and cost (as the private Gardens of great Persons with us, or as
Morefields of late, in imitation of these) but also the very hedge rows are so
fenced, and orderly disposed, and the highways so planted, as a man would
think he still traveled through private walks, not public roades, and
thorow-fares.

One reason of this may be, because through all these Countries there are
either none or very few Commons. Those that are, being very small, are thus
imployd for matter of ornament, where the common person is not suffered (as
with us) to spoil all at his pleasure, to cut down what his predecessors
planted; but all is preserved by general consent. Which I know not whether to
attribute to the good disposition of the people, and their care of posterity,
or to the wisdom and diligence of the Magistrates, executing good Laws
strictly and impartially which tend and respect public vtility; or to the
people and Magistrates jointly concurring and consenting in one for the common
good.

And that I have some reason for this doubt, consider that with us there is
more good ground wasted (to pass by Forests, Chases and Parkes, matters of
mere pleasure, or more pleasure then profit,) and not to mention Commons which
lie dry Winter and Summer) in fennes and surrounded grounds, then is contained
in all the Lowe-Countries; in all the Low Countries, I say, where means for
the maintenance of all these wars, and works, and buildings, and wonders before
mentioned, and after to be mentioned is found out. And these fennes or Commons
of ours (whatsoever other show they make to the ignorant and unexperienced at
first sight) serve for nothing but to breed idle persons, vagabonds, thieves,
and beggars: For either, being such, they resort to those places as to their
harboroughs and couerts, or coming thither able and honest men, are soon made
such: First, by the charge of the poor, which they find there, to whom they
are forced to contribute by the Law. Secondly, by the wasted soil, promising
fairly in the Spring, but deceiving their expectation in Winter, the time of
most need. Thirdly, by the conversation of their neighbors, corrupting one the
other by idle example. Fourthly, by the opportunity of places out of the way,
and so out of the eye of the Law and Magistrate, and giving shelter to all
disorders. So that in England generally, where you find the largest Commons,
there you may find these miserable enormities. Neither will the people learn
better either by reason or experience, so has superstition wedded them to the
errors of their Ancestors in every respect.

But in these Countries either through the lack of Commons, the diligence of
the Magistrate, or the good disposition of the people, it is far otherwise,
where there are none or very few beggars, except near the Court, and those
mostly of other Nations. For indeed every man works, and depends upon
himself (with Gods blessing) for his sustenance; thinking it a shame, that
two hands should not feed one mouth, and clothe one back: None but the aged
or impotent with them will ask any thing, and they very seldom; and that
rather by presenting themselves as objects of compassion to the passenger, then
by verbal solicitation. And this is so well known, as families falling into
decay, have died through penury, rather then they would make others
acquainted with their wants. Which obstinacy or pride of theirs I praise
not, but set the same down only to show the generositie and freedom of their
natures which abhorres dependancie. To prevent this inconvenience, the
charitable State is forced, where the like suspicion is had of want, to
search the houses of such, and to contribute toward their necessities, by a
kind of silent and close compulsion. Yea there is often found, that diverse of
these have been relieved by money cast into their houses, and that in large
sums by liberal hands, whilst the persons have kept themselves secret, as
doubting the rejection or return at least of their free benevolences, if the
receivers had known where to make restitution.

And now indeed I must confess, though their charities be not so full of
ostentation, nor spent in that sort, that we (by the example of our
forefathers) bestow ours; that is, at the door, (which course I condemn not,
but vvish continued, in regard of the aged and impotent persons, and in regard
of the covetous, who take an easy excuse to be uncharitable, and will
neither give privately nor publicly; and in regard of the vainglorious, Tit.
3.14.
who will give there publicly or no where) yet it is more properly, and I
think, more profitably bestowed by them then by us. For with us (as good
Customs may be corrupted) this Doore-dole (as I may call it) rather makes
rogues and vagabonds, then releeues aged and impotent persons. So that, as the
Abbeys, and other like houses, having in their hands the livings of many poor
people, (whose superstitious forefathers gave so much to the Church, as they
left nothing for their children) might well relieve at their doors such, as
under the color of devotion and long prayers, Luc. 20.47
they had before robbed and disinherited: so doubtless many with us, having
before fed themselves full with the sweat of other men's brows, even to
gluttony, drunkenness, and surfeiting, may relieve with their scraps,
crummes, bones, and broken beer, the necessities of such, as they, or their
predecessors, have before undone and made beggars, either by some hard Farm,
or by usury, or some crafty bargain, or by suites and molestations, or some
other the like cruel exaction. But these on the other side give little at the
door (except to the impotent, or to children) but their charities are more
properly and profitably placed, vz.

1. First, in putting out poor children apprentises, which have their trades
taught them freely, and their meat and drink they duly receive at the houses
of the better sort from day to day by turns, during their apprentiships: Where
notwithstanding they are not suffered to hang idly from their work, and to
loyter away the time, but fed, dispatched, and sent away presently. The like to
this, or rather better, was that act for binding out apprentises with us even
to husbandmen in the Country, which was hotly pursued avvhile by some good
Patriots with happy success; but this soon met discouragements, as many
other good things do, which are executed with more heat then constancy.

2. Secondly, their charities are seen in their Almeshouses for the aged
people of both sexes, severally by themselves; whose Rooms are kept, and they
tended, both in a necessary and neat manner; insomuch, as a man coming into
one of those houses (as every town has one of them at the least, very large
and fair, with gardens and all other necessaries for the delight and
recreation of weary age) he would judge them to be built only for show and
bravery: Yea, every several chamber or Cell is so adorned and furnished, as
it would not only content the dweller, but delight the beholder also: And a
stranger would rather judge them the habitations of rich Merchants, then of
poor decrepide and decayed persons.

I know no Nation exceedes us in these kinds of works, especially since the
Reformation of Religion, and that the Gospel came to be freely preached
amongst us, so that (to the honor of God and His cause be it spoken) our
thankfulness has been more fruitful, then our Adversaries merit: but
these of ours are the charitable actions of particular persons, so that one
place has (perhaps) superfluity of provision, having many Almes-houses, and
another lackes necessary supplies, having none: whereas in the united
Provinces these houses are maintained at the public charge of the State or the
Cities; and so every place is alike sufficiently provided for according to an
even and equal proportion.

3. Thirdly, their Wase-houses for poor Orphans are ordinary in every Town,
where great numbers of children of both Sexes, are educated, (as in
Christs-church Hospital in London) and some of them taught Trades, others
trained up in Learning, and every one employed according as they are inclined
and found capable; and then sent out to serve in the Church or Commonwealth,
when they are fitted for that purpose.

The women have choice to go or stay at pleasure: but if they marry, then are
they dismissed from thence, yet not empty handed, but so provided as may serve
to set up young beginners, lest they should seem only to marry, as with us
they use to do too often, to fill the Commonwealth with idle beggars.

4. Fourthly, their Guest-houses for the sick are general in all places, and
well provided of all necessaries as the other beforementioned. There the sick
find clean linen, good beds and fires, attendance, meat, drink, Physic,
Chyrurgerie, and whatsoever may help toward his recovery at the common charge
of the State. So that be he a native or a stranger, an inhabitant or hired
soldier, or any other person, if he be poor and sick, he is admitted and
provided for, till God dispose of him, either to health or death. Insomuch as
we shall not see in an Age, a poor man or a child lie sick groaning in the
streets, nor a distressed woman there traveling in childbed, in the eye of
merciless passengers; as it falls out too often with us, more I must confess,
out of foolish pity, for lack of executing good Laws for their timely
employment, and for prevention of idleness, then for lack of charitable
hearts to relieve their necessities once decayed.

5. Fifthly, their Bedlams and Dul-houses for distracted people, and their
Houses of correction or Tucht-houses, for idle people that will follow no
certain nor settled course of life, nor betake themselves to any vocation, are
as ordinary and general in every place as any of the rest aforementioned:
and all means used to reclayme the first to their wits, the other to their
honesties. Neither are any of these houses left to the corrupt and covetous
abuse of any one man, but their Rents, disbursements, vsages, and orders, are
duly and often visited and examined by the Magistrates and Preachers, and an
open ear affoorded to all complaints, with a speedy reformation of all
injuries and abuses enjoined.

6. Sixthly, their Lumbards or Loane-houses, are principally for the benefit of
the poor, where Brokers are not suffered to take fifty, or one hundred in the
hundred, and ratably in less sums even to six pence, to the grinding of the
faces of poor men, the discouragement of laborers, the maintenance,
enticement, nay, enforcement and provocation of theevery; but the poor may
upon pawnes supply his own necessity at easy rates of five or six pounds in
the hundred, and have reasonable time of redemption allowed.

Thus first they wisely provide to keep men from want, by employment, and
then provide to supply their wants, if age, sickness, infirmity, or casualtie
cast them into poverty, by unavoidable necessity.

And all these with many other charges domesticke and foreign, may the more
easily be sustained, whilst the people are naturally or customarily frugall,
and bound to be so, if not by Laws, (as we are to no purpose) yet at least by
the example of their Predecessors dead* and Superiors living, as I would to God
we were. This frugality of theirs appears in three respects; in their
feeding, and clothing, and calling: or in their diet, apparel, and titles.

1, First, their diet is but homely, every day is not a feasting day, but they
know God made a Sea as well as a Land, and appointed there should be Fasts
as well as Feasts. Yea, their whole life seems nothing but a fast from
superfluity, if we compare it with our own, except their excess in drink,
which is the only stain of their Nation: Neither is this so much as Rumor
makes it seem; for even in this vice I fear we exceed them; at least I am
sure, if they spend more time in drinking then we do, we spend more drink
then they use to do in the like time.

As for their feasts, if any excess be among them, it is there to be found,
and that rather in their long sittings, then costly surfers: for these their
meetings seem merely to be loue-feastes, and to be made more for society and
neighborhood, then for the delicacie of the Cates* which are neither various
nor chargeable. They travel not over Sea and Land for dainties, neither need
they travel far for Cooks; their own serve their turn, and fit their
stomachs and Pallates better, then either the luxurious Italian, or ryotous
French. Salt is their principal spice, and they travel to the Indies rather
for us then for themselves: since if they spend one pound of those Drugges,
we, for that one, (I believe) spend one hundred. And the same may be said of
Sugar and other compositions for sauces, which they bring to us, as to
Gluttons, whilst, like sober and temperate persons, they abstain themselves
from the excessive use of those unwholesome prouocations.

2. Secondly, as their diet is moderate, where all excess and waste is
avoided, so are they modest in their apparel, showing themselves constant to
their country fashion, and decently clothed every man according to his rank
and state. The Laws need not limit them, whilst Reason is their Law; and
they are ashamed go to in such apparel, as we shame to be without. I mean, as
with us the only glory is to be gay, and the greatest shame to be vnder-clad or
euen-clad to our Callings: so with them the greatest shame is to be gaudy, and
the greatest glory to be decently and modestly attired, equal to their
abilities, or rather under then above it: But now the light example of the
French, seconded by our more suitable conversation, has begun to taint them by
degrees with every excess, especially in apparel; and if the provident
Magistrate look not to it betimes, the unbridled and licencious youth will,
in this respect, undo the public, and weaue fetters of silk for their own
feet, which their plain and wise forefathers (in imitation of the renowned
Spartans) broke asunder by industry, and kept broken by frugality and
contented rusticitie. Assuredly the cucustomary subjection to any of these
vices effeminates the heart of man, and prepares a State fit and supple for any
other subjection, how base, dejected, or dishonorable soever it be.

3. Thirdly, as their diets and clothes are mean, so are they generally
contented with the estates and titles of their Ancestors, not vainly or
ambitiously hunting after the badges of Gentilitie or Nobility, and undoing
themselves to purchase either. For they think it a madness to clip their
vvings, thereby to impe out their trains, to lessen their means for the
increase of their charge, and to sell their Lands to buy titles. Much better
is it (say they) to be Earl of Holland in possession, then titular King of
Jerusalem. And by this contentment they enjoy themselves in a retired priuacie,
whilst the Commonwealth enjoyes them as able to serve her in all respects
publicly, as if they had styles answerable to their deservings. By this
means also they are not charged with such pomp and furniture either of
clothes, stuff, Plate, and attendants, as such a state would require, nor are
they forced, for the suckling and satisfying of these Calves, to draw milk
from the Commonwealth till blood follow, as they must do, should they heighten
their station.

I dare say, that their moderation in these three respects, is none of the
least means that they are so well able to go through with all other
difficulties; whereas with us the contrary affection in these particulars,
works the contrary effects, being the three principal causes of our
general want.

1. First for diet, it is vvonderfull, that the Belly and Back of England,
like Bell and the Dragon, by Luxury and Pride should devour all Gods blessings
which both by Sea, and Land it self abundantly brings forth; and which, if
men and not beasts had the disposing of it, were able plentifully to help
others: when as we, not therewith contented, as if it were some barraine part
of the world, and not one of the fruitfullest, do call for supplies out of
Ireland, and Scotland also, (especially of Beef and Mutton) when no Land in
Christendom is better furnished of those solid and substantial provisions
then our own. But those brethren of ours both in Ireland and Scotland are
content with dried fish, barly-broth, milk, whay, cruds, shamrocks,
long-woorts, roots, and the like, whilst they furnish us with their flesh
which they find so vendible in our Markets.

One of the causes of this may be the idle waste of our young store, even then
when they are new fallen from the dam. What droves of Calves, Lambs, Rabets, and
young Foul, with fish, fruit, and abundance of other viands, are daily devoured
in one City of London, before they come to maturitie, and that for the
satisfaction of every prodigal youth, and luxurious Dame?

2. Secondly, for apparel, besides that no man's memory can think upon all the
our-landish toys, which are howrely brought in, and made necessary to us, by
the change of so many new fashions that have floated amongst us in their
seasons) the principal clothing used amongst us, is both foreign and beyond
the ability of the vvearer, if either his estate and calling, or the Laws of
the Land were looked upon with respect. But we are more led in these things
by the example of our present superiors, then the Laws of our wiser
predecessors. It were braverie therefore indeed worthy of a Courtier, knowing
others would imitate and follow him in the head of the fashion, to adorn
himself with domestique ornaments, banishing those Dorres and Butterflies
from his ears and elbowes who durst buzze about him contrary persuasions; and
whilst he sees the Italian, French and Spaniard come in silks, to encounter
these with scarlet cloth; those English braueries, as our Ancestors had wont,
and our vviser neigbors use to do. What advantage has an imbrodered coat, of
a plain modest habit, in treaty or counsel? Only this, that the more sober
person knows there may be a sudden sharpness of wit, or a reserved
formality, no soliditie, where there is so much vanity. And now, I pray, when
Gallants know that this is the general opinion of the world, and their
outward habits is one of the principal marks whereby men guess at the inward,
what have they gotten by their affected bravery? nay how much rather, if they
be wise, have they lost, to buy the opinion of folly at so dear a rate?
doubtless, if in these kinds we could be so happily wise, as to moderate our
selves either by Laws or example, we should soon abate much of our
neighbors pride, who for lack of vent for their vanities would be forced to
spend them within themselves; and so our broad-clothes would in short time
fret out their silks and veluets, and we should learn by the frugall
example of the wise Pismire, to make profit of them, as they now make profit of
us.

The like may be said of that ambitious disposition or humor of ours to hunt
after titles, as if the Calenture of Spain had infected our more temperate
climate, and so intoxicated our judgments, that like persons giddy with high
climbing, or high looking, we ha^^ forgot our own standing, insomuch as the
Yeomandrie aspires to Gentilitie, the Gentilitie to Nobility, the Nobility to
Principality; Every one with Lucifer saying, Esai. 14.14
Ero similis altissimo. And thus confusion mixeth all, and marres all.

There are Laws to prevent all these disorders, and to keep every man in his
rank: But they lie dead, whilst these vices often live in the persons that
should execute them. So that the offense is lawful, the law is sinful; vice
has gotten the vpper-hand of virtue, and the Law now either serves to no end,
or only serves to show us our trangressions, and how apt we are to do
whatsoever Justice prohibits, though therein we contradict both the will of
God and the King. Would God that hereafter whosoever durst presume to beg the
penalty of a Statute ordained for preventing or removing these and the like
common annoyances, thereby to make the Law void for his private benefit,
(despensing with a general offense done to the Commonwealth) might be
counted a traitor (as truly he is no better) and so punished for his treason,
that others might hear, and fear, and do no more so. Deu. 17.13.


I might add fitly in this place the severitie of the Magistrates in the
united Provinces, in taking all mulcts of this kind where the transgression is
common, and employing such forfeitures to the general good of the State,
making with the blood of one Scorpion, an Antidote against the poison of
others: Likewise I might speak of their Mercy in that which concerns life,
insomuch as, though felony be death by their Law, yet few die for the first
offense, but have two or three admonitions by whipping, and branding, before
they be cut off as dead members. But indeed their general diligence so takes
them up, and prouides so well for their employment, as there are very few
thieves amongst them, in comparison of other Countries where idleness is more
permitted.

I must likewise tell you, how not only Robbery, but even that close kind of
theft, usury, which eats up all trading, and picks the pocket of every
profession, is no free-denizen in their Land, but a mere stranger or
sojourner, and that a very poor one: And how by this means Land is bought and
sold at good rates, and the stock of every man kept stirring in some kind or
other; which quickens the Commonwealth, and keeps the back of the Merchant
from breaking. And I could wish, by the way, with all my heart, that it were
banished England also, or at least muzled for biting so deep: Or, if neither
of these, yet that the bands and assurances might be publicly recorded, and
a part of the interest kept back to the use of his Majesty and the Church,
toward the redeeming of Impropriations. And great reason for this, since now,
offending against God and the King, they pay nothing of their increase to
either; but by this means might be restrained, or at least constrained to do
his Majesty service, and to recover to the Church their ancient right; which
to perform, I doubt not, from the tenths of the vse-money in England, a sum
sufficient might speedily be raised.

I might likewise show their equity, not only in deciding controversies, and
cutting off delays in Law with expedition, but also in providing for the
poor Debtor, who has not to pay his Creditor. For if it appear, that either
fire, sea, suretiship, trust, or some such cross, or (as we say) casualty,
has impoverished him; and that his wants arise not either from prodigality, or
sloth, or some personal defect in his Calling, he shall be enabled and set up
again; at least, if he be cast into prison, the merciless man, who with us
says, He will make Dice of his bones, shall be forced to keep him there at
his own charge. And so it is, if the suite smell of vexation in the Plaintiff,
or if the Defendant ought and be able, but fraudulently denies, or delays to
satisfy the Plaintiff, a quick and speedy trial manifests the truth, and
cuts off those demurres, which with us had wont to occasion greater loss of
time and money, then the loss of the debt, or thing in question could have
been to either party, at first without suite: though now to the honor of the
Clergy, Conscience begins to find the right end, to unwind that infinite
bottom of controversies, which the confused variety of opinions had made in
the determination of Right and Wrong. Yet whether that course of theirs, where
the imprisoned lies at the charge of the Actor, would do well or no with us,
I doubt; though there, I am assured, it neither makes any man the less wary of
his estate, or the less careful to pay his debts; neither is dealing any
thing the more dead; every man so honestly and directly aims to do what he is
able for the general satisfaction of all; so that few repent of any trust they
have affoorded others.

I might here also observe amongst them, Com lib. 8. cap. 12.
that which Comines observes of the Venetians, that upon every extraordinary
occasion, when they are to consult about any special point of State, or
execute any thing consulted of, which concerns the public safety, they begin
at God, and appoint certain Bid-dayes, as they call them, or days of Fasting
and prayer, to implore the direction and assistance of God in the prospering of
their enterprises. Com. lib. 8. cap. 12.
And as Comines, upon that occasion, both prayseth the Venetians, and
pronounces them blessed; so doubtless may I say of this people, that they
prosper the better in all their undertakings and attempts, for this their
solemn, devout, and pious proceeding. Whereas we pass by these, and the like
passages without observation, and have lost a Prince of excellent hope, and
have had the Daughter of our KING, great with child, Mat. 24.19 20. 1. Sam.
26.20. Revel. 12.1 2, 3, 4.6.
and in the depth of Winter, a state and season unfit for flight, and by our
Saviors direction to be prayed against; unmercifully hunted up and down like
a Partridge, or like that woman in the Revelation, pursued by the Dragon, from
the heaven of a Kingdom and Principality, through the wilderness of many
woes and miseries, with infinite other difficulties and barbarous indignities,
impossible to be proffered or forced upon Ladies by generous spirits, and
impossible to be borne and overcome, but by an invincible spirit: and have
seen a Palatinate spoiled, the chief City (a Sanctuary for the persecuted
members of Christ; a Seminary of piety heretofore) stormed, taken, possessed,
and made a Cage for unclean birds: yea, all the rest blockt up and besieged
beyond hope of recovery; The Church also amongst the Grisons, and in France
oppressed and persecuted; and yet for all this have not fasted a meal, shed a
tear, let fly a public sigh, or general groan, abated any of our pomp or
pride, for these afflictions and humiliations? but rather, like corrupted
flesh, swelled higher for these strokes; or as senseless limbs, have not felt
the cauterizing and cutting off our own members. Nay, 88. and the Powder Plot
are forgotten, or we have forgotten to give thanks for those deliverances; or
whether we may praise God for them or no, I know not, but I am sure of this,
that we do not.

Perhaps this may be the peoples fault, who are so far from observing
extraordinary and religious Fasts, as they will not obey the Magistrate
commanding ordinary and civil Fasts for politic respects. Perhaps it may be
the Priests, Joel. 1.14.
who should observe when God calls us to fasting, and then to admonish the
Magistrate, and blow the trumpet to excite the people to mourning.

Perhaps the fault may be general, Peace and Plenty having rockt us asleep
with a continual feast of sixty and four years long, so that now we have
forgot to fast, or have bodies unapt for that exercise. But wheresoever the
fault is, I wish it were mended.

I should conclude all with a touch of their Council, and politic Government
in point of State, but that the business is too deep and private for my
inquisition: Only I observe a general freedom permitted and used, where
general actions which concern all, and are maintained by all, are generally
debated, argued, fifted and censured by all men without contradiction. And this
(I think) to the end either that Rumor having scope enough to play in, may
die without an Echo, or that so the best and worst may be seen or heard, and
all danger and advantages discovered which are subject to the common eye. But
after all this, the resolution and conclusion is silent and sudden, whilst
they give all men liberty to inform, they themselves only direct and dispose
of the business: for they seek not the satisfaction of their own wills so
much, as the general satisfaction of all, where it may be with the good of
all. And whilst men do no hurt with their hands, they permit them freely to
do all the good they can with their tongues, without fear of punishment. No
man does any thing, which he is ashamed to hear of; or if he does evil (as
all men may err) desires to hear of it by any means, that so he may the
better and sooner know how to amend it. It is the insolent and obstinate which
hides his faults, and stops the mouth of truth by violence; the penitent
confesses his error, because he intends to give sat^^faction.

And now I have shown you but a glimpse or shadow of the true state of those
Countries, what need we seek for Plato his community, or Sir Thomas More his
Vtopia, when the realitie of their wishes and best conceptions are brought into
action; and the best of what they fancied might be, is here seen truly to
be, after a most exact and corrected Copy? And this is enough to make all
wise men well affectioned toward the people, which I wish with all my heart,
that so our association might be firm, our imitation safe. What shall we need
to travel to such places for fashions, as ^foord nothing but what wise men
and good men shun? Let us rather flock thither where all things abound, which
wisemen and good men seek: Fidelity in bargains and contracts, wisdom in
counsel, strength in war, brotherly love and assurance, modesty and
frugalitie* and that I may say all in a word, Piety, and Religion.

For that which I hear some whisper in scorn against this Encomium of their
piety, as if there were nothing less cared for then Religion amongst them,
where all Religions are tolerated, is easily cleared to an indifferent and
understanding Judge: considering, First, that they are in war, and must for
that cause hold good quarter with all, both in regard of their own infected
members, whose corruption might otherwise be wrought upon to break out, as
also in regard the burden of the war requires many able supporters, who
must be wooed and bribed with private liberty, to defend the public; and
oftentimes we see Judas carries the purse, and the most able are not always
the best affected. Secondly, where the gold and riches of Infidels are imployd
to invade the State, they think it lawful to use the gold of Jews, Turks,
and Heretics to defend themselves vvithall. But if any object, the Enemy takes
the Infidels gold by compulsion without contract, and therefore his act is
lawful: these say, They do it without compulsion, with the consent and good
liking of the Jew, and therefore they hold their course more justifiable.
Thirdly and lastly, they are a Commonwealth, and so want that absolute power
over their members, which Monarchies have and may use; and therefore are
forced sometimes to vvinke at singular Mischiefs, for the avoiding of
universal Inconveniences. Neither are they apt or desirous to press the
conscience too strictly, since God himself saues no man against his will.

But as I much lament that the wine of giddie Schism should dis-mantle the
Christian Commonwealth, to the scandal of Jews and Turks, and derision of
Atheists, vvishing with all my heart it were otherwise: so withal I vvish,
since such a happiness as universal Peace cannot be hoped for, till it please
God to effect it by miracle, that in the mean time there were an equal
toleration of Religion through all Christendom; with provision, that none but
one Religion should be professed, and publicly preached in one place, though
others might there live safely and freely without impeachment of their
consciences, persons, or goods; so they neither made attempt of violent
mutation, nor had public mee^ings, or harbored such teachers as were contrary
in opinion to the Church and State wherein they lived.

And (if it be lawful for silly subjects, who stand aloof off to pry into
the sacred Arc of their Sovereigns intent, and so to guess at their hidden
purposes) I verily believe, that this, or something like it, is that which his
Majesty aims at, if he could effect it as well in Italy, France, and Spain,
as he would upon those or better terms, willingly grant it in England.
Otherwise he sees it would be prejudicial and disadvantageous to the Truth,
to permit a tolleration only in England, except he could likewise establish it
universally. But then it were to be hoped, that Truth would get ground of
falsehood by familiarity; and that civil communion would prepare the mind for
spiritual, and not suffer such an averseness to continue amongst us, as is
now generally professed, when Christians hold each other in worse account then
Turks. Insomuch as some men say, and it seems not without some reason, that
they had rather live under the Turk, then under the King of Spain. For the
Turk will permit them the free exercise of their religion, at least the
liberty of conscience; but the Inquisition of Spain ties all men in a
Tyrannical manner to be slaves to Rome, and forces them with tortures to
renounce their Faith, doing violence to the will of man, which they themselves
hold to be free, even whilst they punish the person and will for being so. And
assuredly therefore, as religious pretenses and a strict observance of the
Romish Faith, have much advanced the Spanish Conquests one way, amongst fools
that will be easily misled with flourishes: so the pressing of the Inquisition
upon conquered Countries has hindered his Conquests in other parts amongst
wise and free Nations, who can look into those double drifts of policy. And
this discovery has saved Christendom from that Catholic subjection, at
which that State has mainely aimed, ever since it acquired the ambitious title
from that City and Sea, Apoc. 18.12 12, 13.
where the Mart of such royal Merchandise is kept.

For we see, whilst the Turk holds all men shall be saved in their several
Religions, so they be constant to them, these hold all Christians to be
Heretics, that adhere not in all points to their opinions though never so
absurd, abhorred, and contradictorie to the revealed will of God. And, these
supposed Heretics, they pursue with the utmost violence, malicious hearts can
express by cruel actions, Pro. 12.^^.
using them worse then a righteous man would use his beast, which he knows is
his fellow creature: When these, forgetting all respect to Man the true image
of God, as themselves are, do prefer dead idols of their own invention before
him; Yea, and think there is a sufficient cause to destroy him, if he will
not, with them, dishonor the Image of God which he bears by subjecting it
to one of their dead statues, the work of their own hand. This asperitie
must be removed on both sides by lenitives; which cannot be till the rigorous
Inquisition be abolished, and greater freedom given to Christians to converse,
and a better and more charitable conceit wrought and admitted on both sides of
each other. For then there might be hope of a general Counsel, where all
might freely and without peril or prejudice speak, which is the only
absolute Physic for this Malady.

But if this meeting might not yet be universal, in regard of that
imperiousness which Antichrist chalengeth, and exercises over the whole
Church, which will be hardly laid down without blows and blood; then, at
least, would such an unanimity and consent might be wrought amongst the
Reformed Churches by a general meeting, as leaving every Church free to their
own forms; might bind us together against the common Enemies, in such a
firm, sure, fundamental, and brotherly unity, for point of Faith, as a
Ceremony or shadow, or a singular conceit, or an opinion about the skirt or
hemme of Christ's garment, should not be able to shake or separate the
Communion, or to justle us from each other at such a distance.

But vvhither am I traveled beyond the wisdom of the Pismire, out of her
element? Zeal has transported me, and (I hope) that zeal which is according
unto knowledge. Paul may be thought mad, Festus is so: He cannot be besides
himself, who is not besides the truth. As for those which say, This course of
connivencie would breed Atheists, Libertines, Free-guests, and lukewarm
persons, (for I count them all one in effect:) I answer, Simo^ Magus will be
such, though he be Simon Peter's disciple, hear him preach daily, and see him
do miracles. Nor can persecution so well distinguish truth and falsehood, as
prosperity: Act. 5.38.39. Mat. 13.30.
It is Gamaliels counsel and sentence; Let them alone; for if their counsel
be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,
lest happily ye be found even to fight against God.

And now to return to my purpose, and to demonstrate all that I have said in
praise of this people, that my Countrymen may not pass the seas, or travel
far for a proof, let them look into Master Camden in his Britania, in the
title of Pembroke-shire, Camd. Brit. in Pemp. Speed. H. 3.
and also into Master Speeds Chronicle concerning little England beyond Wales,
inhabited by the Dutchmen in the time of Henry the 3. and see what they say,
both for the just praise of that people, for our and their consanguinity; and
for a brief, yet full confirmation of all that I have said, more largely and
loosely.

Or let every Reader take a nearer course, and look home to the next great
Town inhabited by the Dutch in our Land* and consider in what state such
places were at their first arrival, and how they have increased in wealth,
people, beauty, order, and trading, since their admission and entertainment
there, and (I believe) he will be of my mind.

To instance one place for all amongst many that I know, look upon the City of
Norwiche, which may be a mirror to all the Kingdom besides; and that partly I
might say, principally by their means. The order and good government of the
Magistrates, the diligence of the Citizens, their quick trading, whereby they
set many on work within ten or twelve miles round about the City, is notable
and admirable. This is principally occasioned by the example of the Dutch, as
also by a kind of virtuous emulation, to which the English are excited by
their diligence. And this, though it move envy in the baser and slouthfuller
sort, who are loath to see others live by them, and say they are prejudiced by
the cheap sale of such wares as the Strangers work: yet others of better mind
and metal, are encouraged by this, and provoked to fare hard, to be frugall,
to work early and late, that they may sell as cheap, and make as good work
as the Stranger.

Many necessary trades they have brought in amongst us, whereby our own
materials, and our men are jointly well employed: they have been the Inventers
of many profitable Engines both for peace and war: Travelers by Sea and Land
are beholden to their labors; and for the belly, they have taught us by roots,
fruit, and the Garden crop, to spare much flesh and Corn, if we were as
wise and willing to use them as they do. This doubtless is a good prevention
for dearth and scarcity, and I would it were made more general in our Land,
that so we need not spend all our flesh within our selves, at least not
borrow of others, who have far more need of their own then we. There was
once a course taken by the Judges to settle and reward such planters and
Gardiners at the public charge in every place; but being only propounded, and
never farther enquired after, it vanished, and died as soon as it was
conceived, before it could conceive and bring forth a years increase.

I might here also show you, how, notwithstanding their numbers, and that they
all, or the greatest part live upon their handie-labour, yet they are not
burdensome to the places where they are sea^ed, but rather every way helpful
unto them. None of them beg of us, their own poor they sustain within
themselves, (though they find us willing to help them) and in all respects
shame the slothful, cheer up the diligent, and satisfy the wise and
well-minded. So that we may evidently see, as Egypt was blessed both for
Joseph's sake, and in having him an instructor, to teach them to provide wisely
in a plentiful season against a famine; so are we happy, in having these men
with us as examples of imitation, and blessed also by God for their sakes.
Wherfeore to shut up all in a word:

Since God has given us one original, not only from Adam or Noah, or Iaphet,
but in a far nearer line to be derived from our first arrival in England,
and so fitted our natures and manners together, that (except some small
differences which will be betwixt Nation and Nation, even by the different
temperature of the soil and air, or other natural accidents, as betwixt
brother and brother in a house) we agree well, and seem as if we were one
people.

Since it has pleased God so to place us upon earth, that one may conveniently
help another in spite of the interposition or opposition of any third.

Since they may serve as necessary venters of our Commodities, and we as able
Suppliers of their necessities.

Since God has made both of us strong in shipping, so that joining in one as
we had wont, no Prince is able to touch either of us, but we remain Masters
at Sea; and that the only way to conquer us both, is to dis-vnite and divide
us.

Since we have held a league inviolable for many hundred years (a matter of
such moment, as France and Scotland would not be disjoynd in this respect,
notwithstanding the access, addition, and union of England) and have
interchangeably assisted and seconded each other in vvarres, and have done and
received more courtesies to and again of each other, then of all Christendom
besides: witness our Chronicles of old, the late sea fight in 88. as also the
acknowledgement of that grateful Queen of glorious memory, Elizabeth, in her
Letter to the Lord of Davenvord, Admiral of Holland, August. 14. 1598. in
these words amongst many others:

The love and diligence which my Lords the States have used in this action,
does witness unto us, That the sincere affection we have ever borne to the
united Provinces, and benefits bestowed upon them, have not been ill
employed, etc. And a little after in the same Letter; Moreover your zeal and
affection to usward, does increase our debt toward you* the knowledgement
whereof is so deeply imprinted in our heart, as we thought good by these
Letters to make some part of satisfaction, the which we entreat you to impart
to the whole company of our friends under your command; letting them
understand beside, that they may be well assured, that as heretofore we have
given sufficient testimony of our sincere affection toward their Country, we
are now by their valor and merit more incited, to augment and increase our
love in every part, as it becomes a Princess, who acknowledges the virtue
and desert of so worthy a Nation as yours; and so we will continue your very
good friend, etc.

Thus this good Queen a worthy witness beyond all exception, etc.

Since also God has honored our Nation to be the principal instruments of
their present liberty, and of all the happy benefits that thereby they enjoy;
let us not seem to neglect our own honor which depends upon the preservation
of their estate as our own creature. And lastly, to make these motives more
strong, and without which all the former and much more were nothing.

Since God has made us Professors of one true and reformed Religion, wherein
they may challenge properly to be Defenders of the Faith, and to belong to the
chief Defender of the Faith as well as we; let us join together in one as
brethren, and let not the malice of Satan, the Policy of Antichrist, the
treason and quarrels of the World, the exorcismes and charms of Jesuits, with
any other Spanish Court Holy Water, divide us, distract us, or discourage us;
but rather observing all these trains wisely, and viewing the end and scope of
their enterprises, let us weave our selves more closely together, and tie our
selves inseparably in a true-loues knot, that Alexander of Rome may neither
vnty nor cut asunder.

And for such as are contrary minded for other sinister respects, what show
soever they carry, I fear they neither vvish well to the present Church and
State in either Land: wherefore I would they would follow Salomons direction in
this place, since they slight mine, and go to the Pismire, and learn of her
to be wiser, lest the issue prove them to be none of the true Honorers of God
or the King.

An Apologue for an Epilogue.
THe Lion slept securely, whilst the Hunters were pitching Toils round about
him. A Pismire perceived the danger, and stung the Lion to wake him, with
Tandem resurges: He furiously start up, and would wreake his anger on the
presumptuous Pismire, that durst be so bold and busy to disturb his rest. To
whom the Pismire cried, My Lord, first look about you. He did so, and spyed
the Snares of the Hunters; escaped, and gave the Pismire thanks, saying; Quos
perdere vult Jupiter, hos dementat;
Quos tueri vult, suscitat.


Psalm. 141.5, 6.9, 10.
Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men
that work iniquity, and let me not eat of their delicates. Let the righteous
smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me, it shall be an
excellent oil, which shall not break my head, etc.

Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and the grinnes of the
workers of iniquity. Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I
withal escape.

Psalm. 20.9.
Save Lord; let the King hear us when we call. Amen.

FINIS.

