The grievances given in by the Ministers before the Parliament holden in June
1633. Propositions concerning kneeling before the bread in the Sacrament.
Master WILLIAM COUPERS Letter to the Bishop of Dumblane. The Bishops
instruction to Master Gawin Hammiltoun, Bishop of Galloway. Mr. George
Gladstones letter to the King. Master William Struthers letter to the Earl of
Airth.


Printed Anno 1635.

The grievances given in by the Ministers before the last Parliament in June
1633.
THE Ministers standing for the preservation of the purity of religion in
Doctrine worship, and government, assayed sundry means to have his MAJESTY
rightly informed of the estate of our Kirk, but the success was not
answerable to their expectation. Yet having the opportunity of his Majest.
coming to his native country of Scotland to be crowned, and hold his first
Parliament, they advised upon some grievances to be presented to his Majesty
and Estates. It was ordained by act of Parliament 1594. that four of every
estate should conveene twenty days before the beginning of the Parliament, to
consider all articles and petitions, which were to be given in, that such
things only might be put in form, and presented to the Lords of the articles
in time of Parliament, as were reasonable and necessary, and that such, as
were impertinent and frivolous, might be rejected. But it was not determined
who should make choice of the persons. Yet this was not observed before the
last Parliament. But upon the 16 of May 1633. intimation was made by
Proclamation, that all such, as purposed to give in any articles or petitions,
deliver the same to the Clerk Register betwixt and the first day of June, to be
presented by him to such of the estates and counsel, as should be appointed to
hear and consider them. The ministers fearing not to be heard otherwise,
appointed one of their distressed brethren Master Thomas Hog to present their
grievances to him, which he presented and delivered and took instruments
thereupon in the hands of a Notair.

Grievances and petitions concerning the disordered estate of the reformed Kirk
within this Realm of Scotland, presented upon the 29 day of May 1633. by me
Mr. Thomas Hog Minister of the Evangell, in mine own name, and in name of
others of the ministry, likewise grieved, to Sir John Hay Clerk of Register,
to be presented by him to such as ought according to the order appointed,
consider them, that thereafter they may be presented to his Majesty and
Estates, which are to be assembled at the next ensuing Parliament.
THE opportunity of this solemn meeting of your gracious Majesty and the
honorable Estates conveened in this high court of Parliament, and the
conscience of our duty to God and the reformed Kirk within this Realm of
Scotland, where we serve by our ministry, constraines us to present in all
humility to your Highness and Estates presently assembled those our just
grievances and reasonable petitions following:

1 Albeit vote in Parliament was not absolutely granted to ministers provided
to prelacies, but only upon such conditions as his Highness of happy memory,
and the general assemblies of the Kirk should agree upon, which is evident by
the remit and provision expressed in the act of Parliament holden at Edinburgh
in December 1597. And albeit the manner of their election and admission to the
office of Commissionarie, and the particular conditions and cautions to be
observed by Ministers vote in Parliament in name of the Kirk after long
disputation, were agreed upon by his Majesty present in person, and the
general assembly and were appoint^d by them to be insert in the body of the
act of Parliament, which was to be made concerning that purpose, Some Ministers
notwithstanding have been and are admitted to vote in parliament in name of
the Kirk as absolutely, as if the act of Parliament did contain no such
reference, and as if his Majesty with the general assembly had not agreed
upon the manner of their election and admission to that office, or upon any
limitations; whereby the Kirk has sustained great hurt and prejudice in her
liberties and privileges, and specially by their frequent transgressing the
first of the conditions although grounded upon the very law of nature and
nations. That nothing be proponed by them in parliament, counsel or convention
in name of the Kirck without express warrant and direction from the Kirck,
under the pain of deposition from their office; Neither shall they keep
silence, nor consent in any of the said conventions to any thing that may be
prejudicial to the liberty and weal of the Kirck, under the said pain. And
the second. That they shall be bound at every general assembly to give
account^ment the discharging of their commission since the assembly
preceding, and shall submit themselfes to their censure, and stand to their
determination whatsoever without appellation, and shall seek and obtain
ratification of their doings at the said assembly under the pain of infamy
and excommunication. Therefore our humble supplication is, that the execution
of the acts of Parliament of matters belonging to the Kirk, to which they have
voted in name of the Kirk, without any authority or allowance from the
general assemblies of the Kirk, be suspended, till the Kirk be heard, and that
in time coming ministers have no otherwise vote in parliament, but according to
the provision of the act of parliament, and the order of their entry to the
office of that commissionarie and limitation foresaid agreed upon, as said is.

2 Seeing ratifications of acts and constitutions of the Kirk can not be
construed to be a benefit or favor to the Kirk, unless the ratifications
pass according to the meaning of the Kirk, and the tenor of the said acts and
constitutions without omission, addition, or alteration of clauses, articles,
or words of importance, and that in the ratification of the act of the
assembly holden at Glasgow anno 1610. which past in Parliament holden 1612.
under the name of explanation, sundry clauses and articles were omitted, as
the subjection of Bishops in all things concerning their life, conversation,
office and benefice, to the censure of the general assembly, the censure of
Bishops incase the stay the censure of excommunication, the continuing of the
exercise of doctrine weeklie, the necessity of the testificat and assistance
of the ministry of the bounds for the admission of ministers, and other
clauses and articles are added and insert, as the different degrees of
Archbishops and Bishops, the power of giving collation of benefices granted to
Bishops, the disponing of benefices falling in their hands jure devoluto, the
appointing of Moderators in diocesan Synods incase of their absence, and some
words of the oath are changed: By all which omissions, additions, and
alterations, the Kirk has sustained, and does sustain great hurt in her
Jurisdiction and discipline. Our humble desire therefore is, that the Kirk may
be liberat from the prejudice of those omissions, additions and alterations of
the act foresaid.

3 Notwithstanding the general assemblies have been holden from the time of
reformation till the year 1603. at least once in the year and oftener pro re
nata, provincial Synods twice in the year, weeklie meetings for exercises and
presbyteries every week, for matters to be treated in them respective, and
their liberties were ratified in parliament anno 1592. and by that as a most
powerful mean, blessed be God, peace and purity of religion were maintained:
And in the assembly holden at Glasgow 1610. when Commissioners voters in
Parliament provided to prelacies were made liable to the censures of the
general assembly, It was acknowledged that the necessity of the Kirk craved,
that there should be yearlie general assemblies, And the Ministry were then
assured, that liberty would be granted upon their request, whereby they were
induced to condescend so far to the act then made as they did, which act also
bears in the very entry thereof a request to his Majesty, that general
assemblies may be holden in all times coming once in the year, or precislie at
a set and certain time, Nevertheles the wonted liberty of holding general
assemblies is suppressed, the order of the provincial Synods confounded,
presbyteries in a great part disordered and neglected, whereby divisions have
entered into the Kirk, Ministers are become negligent in their callings, and
scandalous in their life's, the godly are heavilie grieved, the weak are
scandalized, erroneous doctrine is delivered in Kirks and Schools without
controlement, the Commissioners voters in parliament lie untried and
uncensured, and atheism and popery increase: Our humble desire is therefore,
that the acts of parliament made in favors of the assemblies of the Kirk, and
specially the act of Parliament holden at Edinburgh in June 1592. be revised
and ratified in this present parliament.

4 Notwithstanding the observation of festival days, private baptism, private
communion, episcopal confirmation of children, have been rejected by this our
reformed Kirk, since the beginning of the reformation, and it has been
declared by act of parliament in the year 1567. that such only were to be
acknowledged members of this reformed Kirk, as did participat of the Sacraments
as they were then rightly ministered, which was without kneeling in the act of
receaving the sacramental elements of the supper, or immediate dispensing of
the same to every communicant by the minister; And that it was statute and
ordained in the same parliament that all Kings should give their oath at their
coronation to meantaine the religion then professed, and that form of
ministration of the sacraments which then was used: Nevertheles pastors and
people adhering to their former profession and practice are nicknamed Puritans
and threatened, not only without any good warrant, but beside the tenor of the
act of perth assembly, which contains no strict injunction, and contrary to
the meaning of the voters, and to the proceedings of that assembly, where it
was professed that none should be pressed with obedience to that act: Therefore
we humbly entreat that by ratification of the acts of parliament made before
that assembly and by such ways as shall seem good to your gracious Majesty,
and honorable Estates assembled, your Majesty's good people, Pastors and
Professors may both be purged from such foul aspersions, and may be freed from
all dangers and fears which may occur by occasion of that act of perth.

5 Albeit it be determined by the general assemblies of this our reformed
Kirk, what oaths Ministers should take at the time of their admission or
ordination, yet there is a new form of oath devised and urged by the admitters
or ordainers, upon intrants to the ministry, together with subscription to
certain articles devised by them without direction and warrant from any
assembly of the Kirk, yea or act of parliament, whereby the entry to the
ministry is shut upon the best qualified, and others less able are obtruded
upon the people to their great grief and hazard of their souls: Our humble
petition therefore is, that all such oaths and subscriptio^s urged upon
ministers at their entry or transplantation, may be discharged.

6 Notwithstanding there be constitutions of the kirk and laws of the country
for censuring of ministers before the ordinary judicatours ecclesiastical,
yet contrary to that order, ministers are suspended, silenced and deprived,
and that for matters merely ecclesiastical before other judicatours, which are
not established by the authority or order of the country and kirk: Therefore
our humble petition is, that ministers deserving censure be no otherwise
censured, then the order of the kirk does prescrive, and that such as are
otherwise displaced be suffered to serve in the ministry, as before.

The Presenter attended in Edinburg to co^pear, if need were before such, as
were to conveene to consider the articles and petitions, which were given in to
the Clerk Register. But there was no appearance of any such convention. The
Ministers therefore directed the brother above named to present the
supplication following to his Majesty, which he did upon the fifteen day of
Iunie in the Castle of Dalkeith, the same day that he was to make his entry in
Edinburgh.

This happy occasion with strong desires long waited for by your Majesty's
most humble and loving subjects the Pastors and Professors of the reformed
religion within this your Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland. The great fame, which
has often filled our ears, of your Majesty's most pious and princely
inclination to religion and righteousness, whence this Kirk and Kingdom from
their singular interesse in your Majesty's birth and baptism, have reason to
look at this time for a confortable influence: the body of this Kingdom in
heart joining with us, and only waiting for the least word from your
Majesty's mouth: The conscience which we have and which we trust is manifest to
all men that we are seeking neither riches nor honors to our selfs, but that
the sum and substance of our desires is to procure the advancement of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to see your Majesty's flourishing estate, in your
Kingdoms: All these and each of them move us to entreat in all humility your
gracious Majesty to be favorable to our petitions, which we have delivered to
the Clerk of Register to be presented to your Majesty and Estates at the
approaching Parliament, that they may be considered and receave a gracious
answer.

The King read the petition at length. Yet there was no more heard of our
grievances either among the Lords of the articles, or in open Parliament, where
nothing comes in voting, but that which first must pass the Lords of the
articles, and usuallie what passes through their hands is concluded by the
whole Estates in public. Not only were our grievances suppressed, but also
all former acts concerning the Kirk, were ratified. Howbeit it was well known
that sundry former acts had wrought great disturbance in our Kirk. An act also
in particular concerning the common habits of Kirkmen, (not of surplice or
other like superstitious vestures, as many mistake) was ratified and made a
point of the royal prerogative. Small hope had we of any better event
considering the dependence either of Noblemen upon the Kings favor for the
recoverie of their brocken estates, or of some other men for preferment, or the
fear of others to lose it, all knowing very well the Kings bent and
inclination.

For the better clearing of the equity of our grievances, I will set down
these few observations:

Great opposition was made by many worthy men of the ministry to Ministers
vote in Parliament, convention, or counsel, and not without reason. When it
was carried by plurality of procured voces in a general assembly holden at
Dundie anno 1597. against which and the two former assemblies M. John Davidson
protested, the nixt care of the sincerer sort was to have the Commissioner
voter in Parliament tied to a certain form of admission, and to some
cautions, that he degener not into a Roman or Anglican Bishop.

He was to be recommended to his Majesty, by the general assembly, and to be
admitted by the Synod as it then stood in integrity. The first two cautions ye
have heard in the grievances. By the third, the commissioner voter in
Parliament was bound not to prejudge the provision of other Kirks planted or to
be planted. By the fourth he was bound not to delapidar or dispone any part of
his benefice without the advice and consent of his Majesty and the general
assembly, and to interdite himself to that effect. By the fifth, He was bound
to attend faithfully upon his own particular congregation, where he shall be
minister, in all the points of a pastor, and hereanent to be subject to the
trial and censure of his own presbytery and provincial assembly, as any
other minister that bears not commission. By the sixth caution, In the
administration of discipline, collation of benefices, visitation, and all other
points of ecclesiastical government, he shall neither usurp nor acclaime to
himself any power or jurisdiction, farther then any of the rest of his
brethren, under the pain of deprivation. By the seventh, That in presbyteries,
provincial and general assemblies, he shall behave himself in all things, and
be subject to their censure, as any of the brethren of the presbytery. By the
eight, At his admission to the office of commissionarie, th^se and all other
points necessary he shall swear and subscrive to fulfill under the penalties
foresaid, otherwise not to be admitted. By the ninth, In case he be deposed by
the general assembly, synod, or presbytery from his office of the ministry,
he shall lose his vote in Parliament ipso facto, and his benefice shall vaike.

Such as plotted the course of Episcopacie and aspired to prelacies were
constrained for the present to condescend to these cautions, but were not
minded to stand to one jot of them longer then they saw occasions to break
loose. Because they were made countable by these cautions to the general
assemblies, they procured first a prorogation of the diets of the assemblies by
the Kings authority, and at last the bereaving of the Kirk of all liberty to
indict any assemblies, that so they might be freed from making any count at
all. After they had gathered strength and power to overrule assemblies of their
own devising, and after that some of the Ministry were banished, others
confined, a third sort drawn up to court, they procured a convention at
Linlithgow anno 1606. of Noblemen and Ministers nominat by them and recommended
by the King to the presbyteries to be sent to that meeting. The name of a
general assembly was concealed in the Kings missives. But soon after
presbyteries were charged with letters of horning to accept the constant
moderators chosen by that meeting, such as were styled vulgarly Bishops in
respect of their benefices to be moderators of the presbyteries where they made
residence. Synods likewise were urged to accept these Bishops for constant
moderators, howbeit no such thing was concluded at that meeting but their act
falsified.

This moderation did not satisfy their ambitious humor, nor was it well
accepted by presbyteries or the Synodes. In the year 1610. they were armed
with the power of the high commission, of which they were not capable, and
without consent of the Estates, contrairy to an act of Parliament Anno 1584. to
silence and deprive, fine and incarcerat Ministers, to command them to
excommunicat such as in their judgment deserved that censure, and to fine and
imprison other whatsoever subjects. After that they become thus great and
terrible, and now able to extort any thing from servile ministers, they
procured an assembly to be holden at Glasgow soon after like that other at
Linlithgow, but that there was more gold dealt among mercenarie ministers at
this assembly.

Soon after three of their number went to court to be consecrat Bishops,
returned and consecrated the rest of their fellows, no such thing being
concluded at that meeting as the office of a Diocesan Bishop, Anglican or
Roman, that is, to be the proper Pastor of all the congregations within the
Diocie, the power of ordination residing in him, and of jurisdiction flowing
from him. The presbyteries and Synods were only tied to these who were called
Bishops in respect of their benefices in the points, and in the manner
expressed and upon trust that they should be liable to the censure of ordinary
and set general assemblies. But they were not content with sundry articles of
that act, howbeit the assembly was overruled by themselfes, and they
consented, to the end that the Ministers there conveened might be induted to
yield so far as they did. Therefore when the act was ratified anno 1612. they
consented in Parliament to additions, alterations, and omissions, of sundry
clauses, as no doubt they had devised themselfes before. In the year 1617.
they consented in Parliament to the election of Bishops by Deans and Chapters,
which was inhibited by the acts of the assembly holden 1578. and condemned in
the second book of policy as popish. It was likewise far different from the
form of election and admission agreed upon with their own consents in the
general assemblies. What was proponed in Parliament for their advancement was
granted by the Estates, and consented to be themselfes as no doubt they had
devised. So they were their own carvers.

In end they brought in popish ceremonies to vex the Ministers and Professors,
and to give them some other subject to work upon, then to meddle with
themselfes, and their usurped authority.

Because they are conscious to themselfes of the nullitie of their assemblies,
and fear to want the concurrence of Synods and presbyteries they draw Ministers
and Professors before their court of high commission. But if this court were
not fortified and assisted by the Lords of secret counsel by whom it was first
authorized, their power in the high commission would be little regarded. Our
bondage then resolves upon the counsel.

Whatsoever be, the usurpation of the Prelates, the Ministry and Professors are
not to be excused. First for acknowledging or not opponing to their assemblies.
For the safety of religion depends not upon assemblies of whatsomeever
kind, but upon the liberty of free and right constitute assemblies. As in the
commonweal he were not to be thought a faithful patriot, who would not stand
as much for the liberty of a Parliament as his own possessions, because the
safety of all other liberties stands in the preservation of maine liberty.
Nixt, because they continue in subjection, notwithstanding we have not the
liberty of ordinary and set assemblies to censure them according to the
cautions and acts agreed unto by themselfes. Thirdly, because they give
farther obedience, then is required by the acts of their own assemblies, as if
they had an absolute power to direct and enjoyne as pleases them. But the
first is the fountain of all our mischief.

I have here subjoyned certain propositions concerning adoration before the
bread in the Sacrament without the knowledge of the Author, who is known to be
learned and judicious.

1. Besides that manifest and gross kind of idolatry, whereby divine or
religious worship is given unto the creature in stead of God, there is another
more secret and subtle sort, which rendereth not divine worship unto the
creature as it is considered in it self, but as it carries a certain relation
and respect unto God, who is to be worshipped for himself, and therefore is
commonly called Relative worship. The reformed Kirks convince the Papists of
manifold. Idolatry of this kind, and howsoever the Papists gather together
many fig tree leafes to hide their nakedness, yet there is nothing more
certain, then that both the Gentiles and Jews pleased themselfes in this sort
of worship, as may appear from Roman. 1. 20. and 23. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. and 15. and
many other places.

2. As in the grosser kind of idolatry it matters not, as touching the point
of idolatry it self, whither the object of adoration, and that which we
worship with divine honor, be the invention of our own head, or the creature
of God, as the Sun, Moon, or Stars, or made by our hands as an Image, or
some thing ordained of God, And finally whither it be a thing consecrated or
not for the adoration of the bread in the Sacrament is idolatry, no less then
the adoration of the Sun in the firmament, or the adoration of an image the
work of man's hands. For their error is more tolerable who worship for God a
statue of gold or silver, or an image of any other matter, as the Gentiles
worshipped their Gods, or a red cloth lifted up upon a spear, which is
reported of the Lappians, or living creatures as some time the Egyptians nor
theirs who worship a piece bread. Coster. Enchir. C. 12. In like manner, in the
other sort of worship which is relative, it is all one matter touching the
point of idolatry, whither the secondarie or subordinat object of our
adoration, and that which participats of the worship of God, be a thing
natural, as the Sun or the Moon, or a thing artificial, as an image, or
some thing ordained of God, but for an other end, as the Brazen Serpent, or a
thing consecrated of God, but not to be worshipped, as the Sacramental bread,
for although there be a very wide difference amongst those things in respect of
will worship, And because nothing can be a mean of the worship of God, but that
which is ordained of God, and the Sacrament is a mean of Gods worship, an
image is not a mean, yet in the point of idolatry there can be no difference
at all, because no creature of what somever kind can so much as take of the
worship of God without the guiltines of idolatry.

3. We fall into two evils, when we adore before an image, one is, when we make
the image a mean or middle of the worship of God without a warrant from God,
whence it is that adoration before an image is will worship, and although it
had no other evil in it but this one, it behooves to be (by interpretation as
they use to speak or by consequent) idolatry, for whosoever appoints of his
own head a new manner or mean of divine worship, by consequence also
appoints an other God, which he thinks delyteth in that form of worship. The
other evil is that adoration before an image is properly and formable
idolatry, because thereby religious worship is rendered unto another then unto
God, and in some measure and degree the image is made partaker of the worship
of God, which is cleared at large by the divines of the reformed Kirks. Now in
our adoration before the bread we are free of the former of the two evils,
because the Sacrament is a mean of worship authorized by God, but we cannot
possibly be free of the other evil, because the adoration before the bread,
and before an image are altogether a like in respect of the participation of
divine worship. They who are enemies to images (says Vasquez in his 2 book of
adorat. disp. 8. c. 13.) and use images only for history and remembrance, do
not bow their knees nor prostrat themselves before them: for so they should
adore them, with an external sign of worship. He who is religiously prostrat
before the cross (says the Bishop op Spalato book 7. page 293) he must have
the cross for the object of adoration. Although images were means of worship
ordained of God, such as the Sacrament is, yet were it not lawful to adore
before them. And the arguments whereby our divines prove the worship of images
to be idolatry, aim not at this point to show that images are not lawful
means of worship, for that were nothing else but to prove that worship before
images were will worship, but they labor for this, that the Papists while they
adore before images they give that unto the creature, which is proper unto God,
and the Papists in this question use not this defense, that images are lawful
means of worship, but that the worship of images is relative, and resolves
upon the paternes whose images they are.

4. That we may have a further insight in this truth, we must learn, as in
other parts of divine worship, so in our adoration before the bread, to
distinguish betwixt that which is internal in the mind, and that which is
external in the senses and gestures of the body or (as the schoolmen speak)
betwixt the spirit of adoration, which they make the inward affection of
subjecting our selfs to that which we adore, And the external mark or sign
of adoration, which they also call the material part of adoration, for suppose
it were true that the whole thoughts and affections of the soul were taken up,
and exercised about the thing signified in the Sacrament, and that nothing were
intended but to render the whole worship unto God, yet the very nature of the
Sacrament (which is well called the visible word) of necessity does require
that our eyes and therefore our gestures, the bowing of our knees, and that
whole material part of adoration be directed toward the elements in the act of
receaving, in so far that although the elements were nothing else to the mind
but only signs to bring us to the right remembrance of the thing signified,
it cannot be eshewed, but they must be the object of the outward adoration of
the body, which is directed toward them, and therefore adoration before the
bread, must needs be the adoration of the bread, even as the adoratien before
the image, the adoration of the image, while the image to his mind, that
adoreth, is nothing else but a sign, bringing the pattern to his remembrance.

5. Since there be two kinds of divine worship, one immediate, as for exemple,
Prayer, Thanksgiving, the religious hearing of the voice of God speaking to us
immediately: The other mediat, as the ordinary hearing of the word, and
receaving of the sacrament. It is both lawful and suitable to use the gesture
of adoration in Prayer, in thanksgiving, and when we hear the immediate voice of
God, because no visible middle comes in betwixt God and us that can be the
object of our adoration, But in the ordinary hearing of the word at the mouth
of the Preacher, and in the act of receaving the Sacrament, it is neither
suitable, nor lawful to adore; for that were to adore in a mediat worship, or
to adore mediatlie, which both by force of truth, and confession of both sides
must be Idolatry.

6. It is therefore unlawful to adore before the bread, or to kneel in the
very act of receaving the Sacrament, not only by reason of the danger of
bread worship, wherein the bread is adored in stead of Christ by the ignorant
multitude, neither is it only unlawful, because it is idolatry to adore
before the bread for reverence and due regard of the Sacrament, which can not
be avoided by them who adore according to the meaning of the article of perth
assembly; But it is also unlawful, because adoration before the bread, even
in the very nature of the action it self, is idolatry, neither is it possible
for any man to make his adoration before the bread not to be Idolatry, except
he will take away the element that is the Sacrament it self from the Sacrament,
which is impossible.

7. And therefore they are to be commended, who far from all idolatry, and
from all peril and appearance of idolatry do sit or use an ordinary table
gesture in the supper of the Lord: Since neither the Euangelifls nor the
Apostle Paul have written so much as one word, which may give the least
suspicion, or ground of conjecture, that Christ and his Apostles did change
their ordinary, and common form of sitting at table: Since it is certain
from the whole frame of the institution that the supper of the Lord was an holy
feast or banquet, and since by so doing the whole institution of Christ, which
is very many ways defaced by kneeling, is kept safe and sound. It is not
far from blasphemy (says Paraeus) to say, that the Kirk has with greater
wisdom made any change in the Eucharist, for what were that but to say, that
the Kirk is wiser then Christ himself, as if he had not known well enough,
what was able to procure greatest reverence to the Sacrament, or what should
carry with it the least peril, which is a Blasphemy worthy of the followers
of Antichrist.

Master William Cowper minister at Perth his letter, written before he was
Bishop of Galloway, to Mr. George Grahame Bishop of Dumblane, Anno 1606.
BRother, I have received your commendations from B. which were needles, if you
had kept your wonted heart. As for me, I never hated you, your course wherein
ye are entered I never loved. Although the fruit ye enjoy be sweet, yet the end
shall prove it never grew on the tree of life. Doing in a work of conscience
with doubting turns light in darkness, whereupon follows induration. Whereof
it follows that many in our Kirk without feeling are coursers against their
brethren, that have done more good in the Kirk for edification of others then
ever themselfes did, having neither eyes to see, nor hearts to feel how
dangerous their estate is, who can not rise but with the falling of many who
in God have entered this ministry, closing the fountain that God has opened.
One of your own told me, long ere the last Ministers went to England, that
they were written for to reason, but the end proved prison, and no appearance
of returning to some of them. These are the first fruits of your preferment.
Here ye stand, and therefore I can not stand with you, except it be to witness
to God in mine heart against you, that ye have gone wrong. Ye hope in this
course to do good, but it is hard for you to work miracles. At least ye will
hold of evil: But how shall ye draw in a yoke with them that are drawing on
evil daily. Ye will not go beyond the caveats of the general assembly. But
the answers given to the commissioners of the Kirk at the last Parliament by
the Chancellar (we enter not Bishops according to an act of the assembly, but
according to that which they were an hundredth years since) detexit fraudem. I
heard it given, and so did the chief of themselfes, A. B. C. ye skarre at them
whom ye were blyth to see, ye like not the light ye loved, ye count these
preachings unpleasant, wherein ye were wont to rejoice. These may tell you ye
have fallen. Consider your self, where ye was, where ye are now, and quantulum
illud sit propter quod nos reliquisti. Thus loving yourself, and not your way,
I end.

Master Gawin Hammilton Bishop of Galloway was sent up to Court by the rest of
the Bishops, after the convention of the Estates, which was holden about the
end of January 1609. I have here set down the instructions or memorials
recommended to him by the rest of the Bishops, written by M. John Spotsewood
then pretendit Bishop of Glasgow and subscrived by him in name of the rest.
Memorials to be proponed to his most excellent Majesty.
1. YOu shall relate the proceedings of the late convention, and what affection
some that were present keithed therein, that his Majesty may be for seen with
men's disposition, for the better choice of those to whom the affairs shall be
concredited.

2. You shall remember the care we have had of reclaiming the Marquis of
Huntlie, and the Earl of Arrall from their errors, and the small profit we
have seen thereof, and insist for his Majesty's favor to the petition of our
Letter.

3. Anent the Ministers that are confined, your L. shall excuse the requeest
made by us in some of their favors, showing how it proceeded, and further
declare that of late they have taken course to give in supplications to the
counsel for their enlarging to a certain time, for doing their particular
business at session and otherwise in the country, and that some of the^ have
purchased license by the votes of the counsel, albeit we opponed. Therefore
beseek his Majest. to remember the counsel, that the confining of these
Ministers, was for faults done by them to his H. self, and that they should be
acknowledged and conf^ssed to his Majesty and his H. pleasure understood
therein before the grant of any favor, otherwise they shall undo all that
has been hitherto followed for the peace of the Kirk.

4. Touching the erections, it is our humble desire to his Majesty that the
Noblemen, in whose favors the same have been past, may take order for the
provision of their Kirks, according to the conditions made in Parliament, or
then discharge their erections: which seems best to be done by an act of this
ensuing session of Parliament, for which his Majesty's warrant would be had.
And some such like course would be taken for the prelacies erected, which have
past also the constant plat, that the presentation of Ministers to the modified
stipends at the vacantie of the Church should be in his Majesty's hand,
whereunto though his Majesty's express commandment was given of before, no
heed was taken by such as had the charge of affairs.

5. Since this matter of the commissariats imports so much to the reformation
of our Church government, as this being restored in a little time, the rest may
be supplied which will be wanting, it shall be good to remember it by a serious
letter to my Lord of Dumbar, that we may know in due time what is to be
expected. And since our greatest hinderance is found to be in the session, of
whom the most part are ever in heart opposite unto us, and forbear not to
keith it when they have occasion, you shall humbly entreat his Majesty to
remember our suit for the kirkmens place, according to the first institution,
and that it may take at this time some beginning, since the place vacant was
even from the beginning in the hands of the spiritual side with some one
kirkman or other till now, which might it be obtained, as were most easy by
his Majesty's direction and commandment, there should be seen a sudden
change of many humors in that estate, and the commonwealth would find the
profit thereof.

6. Anent our conference with the ministry, your L. will declare the time that
is appointed, and reasons of the continuation of the same.

7. Because in the time of Parliament cheeflie, it should be expedient to have
the Bishops to teach in the pulpits of Edinburgh, his Majesty would be pleased
to commend this to my Lord of Dumbar by a particular letter, and to require
also the Ministers of Edinburgh to desire their help at that time, if it were
for no other end, but to testify their unity and consent of minds to the
Estates.

8. Because the Kirk of Leith lies destitute in a sort through the Bishop of
Rosse his age, and the imprisonement of Mr. John Murrey, and that the said M.
John is no ways minded, as appears, to give his Majesty satisfaction,
neither were it meet, in respect of his carriage, that he should return to
that ministry, and to insist in his deprivation with the Commissioners might
perhaps breed us a new difficulty, if his Majesty shall be pleased, we do
hold it most convenient for the errand, that the said M. John be conveened
before the counsel by his Majesty's command, and by them charged to waid in
the town of Newabbey, and some miles about, having liberty to teach that
people, among whom he shall find some other subject to work upon then the
state of Bishops. And for the provision of Leith, that his Majesty would be
pleased to command the presbytery of Edinburgh, in regard of the Bishop of
Rosse his age, and the said M. John's transportation by his H. appointment, to
have care that the said Kirk of Leith be planted with all convenient diligence
by M. David Lindsey sometimes Minister at Sant Andrewis, for whom both the
people is earnest, and we may have sufficient assurance to his Majesty's
service. And incase the said presbytery prove wilful, that another letter to
the same effect may be sent to the Commissioners of the general assembly, who
may take order to see that matter ended, if such shall be his Majesty's
pleasure, and this would be done with all diligence convenient.

We cannot but remember also the misorder kept in the country, that once was
happily repressed, wearing of gunnes and pistols, and humbly beseech his Maj.
that some new course may be established for searching of such persons, and
delating of them to the counsel, that they may be punished, and the Thesaurer
may have commandment to make choice in every country of certain that shall
be thought fittest to search, who shall be known only to his L. self, and
satisfy them for their pains, to the end this insolence may be restrained.
Particularly it would be forbidden in the granting of commissions, that this
liberty be not permitted, for this is one of the causes of their so open
dealing, as said is.

These particulars, your L. would have care to propone to his Majest. at some
fit time, and see the answers thereof dispatched accordingly.

Glasgow by the warrant and at the desire of the rest of my Lords the Bishops.

Master George Glaidstones sent this letter following to the King in August
1612. whereby the reader may perceave what were their plots and preparations
before the Parliament following in October where the act of Glasgow was
ratified, or rather altered.
Most gracious Sovereign.
AS it has pleased your Maj. to direct me, and my Lord your Majesty's
Secretary for advising anent our affairs to be handled in this approaching
parliament, so happily did I find him, and my Lord of Glasgow both in this
town, and conveened them both immediately after mine arriving, and with good
advisement we have made choice of these things which are most necessary, and
have omitted these articles which may seem to carry envy or suspicion, or
which your Majesty by your royal authority might not perform by your self.
But we all hold fast this conclusion, that it is most necessary and
convenient, both for your Majesty's service, and weill of the Church, that the
Day viz. the 12. of October shall hold preciselie, to the which the parliament
was proclaimed upon the 24. of this instant. I will assure your Majest. that
the very evil will, which is carried to my Lord Chancellor by the nobility and
people, is like to make us great store of friendship, for they know him to be
our professed enemy, and he dissembled it not. I thank God, that it pleased
your M. to make choice of my Lord Secretary to be our Formalist, and adviser of
our acts. For we find him wise, fast and secret We shall not be idle in the
mean time to prepare such, as have vote to incline the right way. All men do
follow us and hunt for our favor, upon report of your Majesty's good
acceptance of me and the Bishop of Cathnes, and sending for my Lord of Glasgow,
and the procurement of this Parliament without advice of the Chancellar. And if
your Majesty will continue these shining beams, and shows of your Majesty's
favor, doubtless the purpose that seems most difficill, will be facilitat to
your Majesty's great honor and our credit, which, if it were greater then it
is, your Majesty could receave no interesse. For besides that no estate may
say, that they are your Majesty's creaturs as we may say, so there is none
whose standing is so slipperie, when your Majesty shall frown as we. For at
your Majesty's nodde we must either stand or fall. But we refer the more
ample declaration of these purposes and other points of your Majesty's service,
to the sufficencie of my Lord of Glasgow, and my good Lord Secretary, the
fourteenth Bishop of this Kingdom. But my Lord of Glasgow and I am contending,
to which of the two Provinces he shall appertain. Your Majesty who is our
great Archbishop must decide it. Thus after my most humble and hearty thanks
for your Majesty's good acceptance, and gracious dispatch lately which has
filled the ears of all this Kingdom, I beseech God to heap upon your
Majesty the plenty of all spiritual and temporal blessings for ever, I rest

Edinburgh the last of August 1612. Yours Majesty's mosthumble subject and
Servitour S. Andrewis.

Master William Struther one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, and a Conformitane,
howbeit he was content to accept a fat Bishopric, yet was content in end to
forgo the lean ceremonies to live in the greater ease and peace, as this
letter following directed to the Earl of Airth, to be presented to his
Majesty, testifies.
My very good Lord,
I Visit your L. with this letter, and that for the end which I spoke mcore
largely in conference, ever for the peace of this poor Kirk, which rent so
greevouslie for ceremonies. There is also some surmises of farther novations of
organes, Liturgies and such like, which greatly augments the grief of people,
but the wiser sort assure themselfes of his Majesty's royal wisdom and
moderation, that his Majesty would impose no new thing, if his Majesty were
timouslie informed of these, and the like reasons.

1. Because King James of happy memory made the Marquis of Hammilton promise
in his Majesty's name to all the Estates of this Land solemnly in face of
Parliament, that this Church should not be urged with any more novations then
these five articles, that then were presented to the Parliament, upon which
promise the Parliament rested, and gave way the more cheerfully that these
articles should pass in act of Parliament.

2. Nixt, because the motion, that is said to be made to his Majesty of these
novations, is made by and beside the knowledge and conscience of the kirk of
this land, who are heavily displeased for that motion, and more because it is
alleged to have been in their name, who knows nothing thereof but by report.

3. Because our church lies already groaning under two wounds, the first of
the erection of Bishops, the other of kneeling. But if a third be insticted,
there is no appearance but of a dissipation of this church. In the first people
were only anlookers on Bishops state. The second touched them more in
celebration of the holy sacrament, but yet lest arbitrarie to them, But this
third will be greater, because in the whole body of public worship they shall
be forced to suffer novelties.

4. Because the Bishops are already publici odii victimae and borne down with
contempt, and that vexation is intolerable, when they depose any brother for
not conformity, they scarcely can find an expectant to fill the empty place,
and that because they become so odious to the flock, that they can do no good
in their ministry. But if any farther novation be brought in, the Bishops will
find ten for one to be deposed, and that of those who have already given
obedience to the five articles, who will rather choose to forsake their places,
then to enter in a new fire of combustion.

5. Lastly, because it is observed by such as are judicious, that the former
shismes have shaken the hearts of the people in religion, and has produced
odium vatinianum among brethren, poprie is increased in the land, and if any
farther come in, it will be seen, that universally people will be made
susceptible of any religion, and turn Atheists in gross.

Your L. knows I am not one of these who stand out against order, but do
suffer for mine obedience, and therefore the more boldly I suggest these
reasons unto your L. I dwell in the most eminent part of this land, and so have
occasion te see more what is the fruit of a shisme. I profess an unspeakable
grief to see any thing done that may trouble the peace of a church, and devide
the hearts of a good people from a good king. Our fire is so great already,
that it has more need of water to quench it, then oil to augment it.

Edinburgh the 28 of Ianuar. 1630.

