THE DECLINATOR AND PROTESTATION OF THE Archbishops and Bishops, of the Church
of SCOTLAND, and others their adherents within that Kingdom, Against the
pretended general Assembly bolden at Glasgow November. 21. 1638.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN RAVVORTH, for GEORGE THOMASON and OCTAVIAN PULLEN, and
are to be sold ar their shop, at the Rose in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

It is his Majesty's pleasure that this be printed, for the which, this shall
be your warrant.

Hamilton.

WE Archbishops, Bishops and other Under-subscribers for our selves and in
name and behalf of the Church of Scotland (whereas it has pleased the Kings
Majesty to indict a General Assembly of the Church, to be kept at Glasgow,
November. 21. 1638. for composing and settling of the distractions of the same.)
First do acknowledge and profess, that a General Assembly lawfully called
and orderly conveened is a most necessary and effectual mean for removing
those evils wherewith the said Church is infested, and for settling that order
which becomes the house of God: and that we wish nothing more then a meeting
of a peaceable and orderly Assembly to that effect. Secondly we acknowledge and
profess as becomes good Christians and faithful subjects, that his Majesty
has authority by his prerogative Royal, to call Assemblies, as is
acknowledged by the Assembly at Glasgow 1610. and Parliament 1612. and that it
is not lawful to conveene without his Royal consent, and approbation, except
we will put our selves in danger to be called in question for sedition.

Yet nevertheless in sundry respects, we cannot but esteem this meeting at
Glasgow most unlawful and disorderly, and their proceedings void and null in
law, for the causes and reasons following.

First, before his Majesty's Royal warrant to my Lord Co^missioner his Grace
to indict a lawful I
free General Assembly; the usurped authority of the Table (as they call it)
by their missives and instructions, did give order and direction for all
Presbyteries to elect and choose their Commissioners for the Assembly, and for
seeking of Gods blessing to it, to keep a solemn fast Sept. 16. whereas his
Majesty's warrant for indicting of that Assembly was not published till the 22.
of that month: so that they preventing and not proceeding by warrant of Royal
authority, the pretended Commisioners being chosen before the Presbyteries
were authorized to make election, cannot be reputed members of a lawful
Assembly.

A lawful Assembly must not only be indicted by lawful authority (as we
acknowledge this to II
be) but also constituted of such members as are requisite to make up such a
body. For if according to the indiction none at all do conveene; or, where the
Clergy is called, there meet none but Laics, or more Laics then of the
Clergy, with equal power to judge and determine; or such of the Laics and
Clergy as are not lawfully authorized, or are not capable of that employment
by their places; or such as are legally disabled to sit and decide in an
Assembly of the Church: a meeting consisting of such members cannot be thought
a free and lawful Assembly: by that Act of Parl. Ja. 6. par. 3. cap. 46. 1572.
Every Minister who shall pretend to be a Minister of Gods Word and Sacraments
is bound to give his assent and subscription to the Articles of Religion
contained in the Acts of our Sovereign Lords Parliament, and in presence of the
Archbishop, Superintendent or Commissioner of the Province, give his oath, for
acknowledging and recognoscing of our Sovereign Lord and his authority, and
bring ae testimonial in writing thereupon, and openly upon some Sunday, in time
of Sermon or public prayers, in the Kirk where he ought to attend, read both
the testimonial and Confession, and of new make the said oath, within a month
after his admission: under the pain that every person, that shall not do as is
above-appointed, shall ipso facto be deprived, and all his Ecclesiastical
promotions and living shall be then vacant as if he were then naturally dead,
and that all inferior persons under Prelates be called before the Archbishops,
Bishops, Superintendents and Commissioners of the dioeeses or province, within
which they dwell, as the Act bears.

All of the Clergy conveened to this Assembly III
pretend themselves to be Ministers of Gods word and Sacraments, and have
benefices or other Ecclesiastical livings: yet nevertheless the most part of
them, have never in presence of the Archbishop, Bishop, Superintendent or
Co^missioner of the Diocese or Province subscribed the Articles of Religion
contained in the Acts of Parliament; and given their oath for acknowledging and
recognoscing our Sovereign Lord and his authority, and brought a testimonial
thereof: and therefore they are ipso facto deprived, and their places void, as
if they were naturally dead, and consequently having no place nor function in
the Church, cannot be Comissioners to this Assembly: hoc maxim attento, that
the said persons not only have never given their oath for acknowledging his
Majesty's authority, nor can show no testimonial thereupon, as they are bound
by the said Act: but also having as subjects comprehended in the representative
body of this Kingdom, Promised to acknowledge, obey, maintain, defend, and
advance the life, honor, safety, dignity, sovereign authority, and
prerogative Royal of his sovereign Majesty his heirs and Successors, and
privileges of his Highness Crown, with their lives, lands, and goods, to the
uttermost of their power constantly and faithfully, to withstand all and
whatsoever persons, powers and estates, who shall presume, prease or intend,
any wise to impugn, prejudge, hurt or impair the same; and never to come in
the contrary thereof directly or indirectly in any time coming. As the Acts of
Parliament Jac. 6. Parl. 18. Cap. 1. Car. Parl. Cap. 1. does proport.

And moreover, being obliged at their admission to give their oath for
performance of this duty of their alledgeance. And to testify and declare on
their conscience, that the King is the Lawful Supreme Governor, as well in
matters spiritual and Ecclesiastical as temporal, and to assist and defond
all Jurisdiction and authority, belonging to his Majesty by the act of Parl.
1612. yet notwithstanding of the said bands, acts and promises, whereby the
said persons are so strictly bound to the performance of the premises, his
Majesty having ordained by act of Council at Haly-rude-house Sept. 24. 1638.
and proclamations following thereupon, that all his Majesty's Liedges of
whatsoever estate, degree or quality, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, should
swear and subscribe the said confession, together with a general band for
defending his Majesty's person and authority against all enemies within this
Realm or without, have not only refused to subscribe the said band and
Confession, but have in their Sermons and other speeches, dissuaded, deterred,
impeded and hindered others of the liedges to subscribe the same, and publikly
protested against the subscription thereof: and thereupon cannot conveene nor
concur Lawfully to the making up of the body of an assemby of the Kirk, as
being deprived and denuded of all place and function in the same.

A general Assembly was condescended to, III
out of his Majesty's gracious clemency and pious disposition, as a Royal
favor to those that so should acknowledge the same and acquiesce to his
gracious pleasure, and carry themselves peaceably as loyal and dutiful
subjects, which the Comissioners directed to this Assembly supposed to be of
the number of those that adhere to the last protestation made at Edinburgh
Sept. 1638. do not so account of, and accept, as appears by the said
protestation: whereby they protest, that it shall be lawful for them, as at
other times, so at this, to assemble themselves notwithstanding any impediment
or prorogation to the contrary: as also by continuing their meetings and Table,
discharged by authority, refusing to subscribe the band according to his
Majesty's, and Counsels, command, for maintaining his Majesty's Royal person
and authority, protesting against the same, still insisting with the liedges to
subscribe the band of mutual defense against all persons whatsoever, and
remitting nothing of their former proceedings, whereby his Majesty's wrath was
provoked: thereby they are become in the same state and condition wherein they
were before his Majesty's proclamation and pardon; and so forfaite the favor
of this Assembly, and liberty to be members thereof. And others of his
Majesty's subjects may justly fear to meet with them in this convention, for
that by the Act of Parl. Jam. 6. par. 15. cap. 31. Prelacies being declared to
be one of the three estates of this kingdom, and by the Act of Parl. Ja. 6.
par. 8. cap. 130. All persons are discharged to impugn the dignity and
authority of the three estates, or any of them in time coming, under the pain
of treason. And whereas the King by his proclamation declares Archbishops and
Bishops to have voice in the General Assembly, and calls them to the same for
that effect, as constantly they have bin in use in all Assemblies, where they
were present, as appears by many acts of the General Assembly, ordaining them
to keep and assist at the same, as in the Assembly at Edinburgh December. 15.
1566. At Edinburgh. 6. March. 1572. At Edinburgh. May 10. 1586. and by a letter
written by the Assembly March. 6. 1573. to the Regent, earnestly desiring his
own or his Commissioners presence, and the Lords of Council, and the Bishops
at the Assembly. They notwithstanding by the said protestation Sept. 22.
declared Archbishops and Bishops to have no warrant for their office in this
Kirk, to be authorized with no lawful Commission, and to have no place nor
voice in this Assembly, and withal do arrogate to their meetings, a
sovereign authority to determine of all questions and doubts that can arise,
contrary to the freedom of the Assembly, whether in constitution and members,
or in the matters to be treated, or in manner and order of proceeding: which
how it does stand with his Majesty's Supremacy in all causes and over all
persons, we leave it to that judgment whereunto it belongs, and do call God
and man to witness, if these be fit members of an Assembly, intended for the
order and peace of the Church.

Giving, and not granting, that the persons IV.
foresaid directed Commissioners in name of the Clergy to this meeting were
capable of that authority, and that the said Presbyteries had the authority to
direct Commissioners to the General Assembly; yet have they now lost and
fallen from all such right, if any they had, in so far as they have deposed
the Moderators, who were lawfully appointed to govern them, by the Bishops in
their Synods, and elected others in their place, contrary to the Act of the
Assembly at Glasgow 1610. and Act of Parl. 1612. ordaining Bishops to be
Moderators at these meetings, and in their absence, the Minister whom the
Bishop should appoint at the Synod. So these meetings having disclaimed the
authority of Bishops, deposed their lawful Moderators, and choosing others
without authority, cannot be esteemed lawful convocations, that can have
lawful power of sending out Commissioners with authority to judge of the
affairs of this Church.

And yet does the nullity of the Commissions V.
flowing from such meetings further appear in this, that they have associate
to themselves a laick ruling Elder (as they call them) out of every Session and
Parish, who being ordinarily the lord of the Parish, or the man of the greatest
authority in the bounds, does overruled in the election of the said
Commisioners, both by his authority and their number, being more then the
Ministers, whereof some being ordinarily absent, and five or six or so many of
them put in list and removed, there remain but a few Ministers to voice to the
election: and in effect the Commissioners for the Clergy are chosen by
laymen, contrary to all order, decency, and custom observed in the Christian
world, no wise according to the custom of this Church, which they pretend to
follow: the Presbyteries formerly never associating to themselves lay elders in
the election of the Commissioners to the General Assembly, but only for their
assistance in discipline and correction of manners, calling for them at such
occasions as they stood in need of their Godly Concurrence, declaring otherwise
their meeting not necessary, and providing expressly that they should not be
equal, but fewer in number then the Pastors, as by Act of Assembly at Saint
Andrews April 24. 1582. (where Master Andrew Melvill was Moderator) does
appear. Like as these forty years by gone and upwards, long before the
re-establishing of Bishops, these lay elders have not bin called at all to
Presbyteries. And by the Act at Dundie 1597. whereby it is pretended that
Presbyteries have authority to send these lay-Commissioners, it does no wise
appear that those lay elders had any hand in choosing of the Ministers. And
this is the only act of the Assembly, authorizing Presbyteries to choose
Commissioners to the General Assembly: nor have lay elders sat ordinarily in
Presbyteries upon any occasion these forty years, and upwards: nor ever had
any place nor voice in the election of Ministers, for the General Assembly:
and consequently these chosen by them to this Assembly have no lawful power
nor authority. VI.


Beside, the persons Ecclesiastical pretended to be authorized Commisioners
to this Assembly, have so behaved themselves, that justly they may be thought
unworthy and incapable of Commission to a sree and lawful Assembly.

1. For that by their seditious and railing Sermons and Pamphlets, they have
wounded the Kings honor and sovereign authority, and animated his liedges to
rebellion, averring that all authority sovereign is Orignally in the
Collective body, derived from thence to the Prince, and that not only in case
of negligence, it is Suppletive in the Collective body, as being cummunicate
from the Commontie to the King, Cumulative not Privative: but also in case of
maladministration, to return to the Collective body; so that Rex excidit jure
suo, and that they may refuse obedience.

2. Next they are known to be such as have either been schismatically
refractary and opposite to good order settled in the Church and State; or such
as having promised, subscribed, and sworn obedience to their Ordinary, have
never made conscience of their oath; or such as have sworn and accordingly
practiced; yet contrary to their promise and practice, have resiled, to the
contempt of authority, and disturbance of the Church; or such as are under the
Censures of the Church of Ireland for their disobedience to order; or under the
Censures of this Church, or conveened, at least deserving to be conveened
before the Ordinaries, or a lawful General Assembly, for diverse
transgressions deserving deprivation: as first, for uttering in their Sermons,
rash, and irreverent speeches in pulpit against his Majesty's Council and
their proceedings, punishable by deprivation: by the Act of Assembly at
Edinburgh, May 22. 1590. Next for reproving his Majesty's Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, contrary to the Act of Assembly, at Perth, Maij 1. 1596. Thirdly,
for expressing of men's names in Pulpit, or describing them vively to their
reproach, where there was no notorious fault; against another Act of the same
Assembly. Fourthly, for using Applications in their Sermons, not tending to the
edification of their present Auditory; contrary to another Act of the same
Assembly. Fifthly, for keeping conventions not allowed by his Majesty, without
his knowledge and consent; contrary to another Act of the same Assembly.
Sixthly, for receiving of people of other Ministers flocks to the Communion,
contrary to order, Acts of Assemblies and Counsels. Seventhly, for intruding
themselves into other men's Pulpits, without calling or authority. Eighthly, for
usurping the authority to covent their Brethren, and proceed against them to
the Censures of suspension and deprivation. Ninthly, for pressing the people to
subscribe a Covenant, not allowed by authority; and opposing and withstanding
the subscribing of a Covenant offered by his Majesty, and allowed by the
Counsel: Beside many personal faults and enormities, whereof many of them are
guilty, which in charity we forbear to express. But hereby it does appear,
how unfit these persons are to be members of a free and lawful Assembly.

Nor does it stand with Reason, Scripture, or VII.
practice of the Christian Church, that Laymen should be authorized to have
decisive voice in a General Assembly. In that Act of Dundie 1597. whereby
these Elders pretend to have this place, there is no Warrant expressed for
them, to deliberate and determine. Their presence and assistance we approve,
being allowed and authorized by the Prince. The Kings Majesty's presence in
person, or by his Delegates, we hold most necessary, to see all things orderly
and peaceably done; and that he have the chief hand in all Deliberations and
Determinations. Nor do we refuse that any Intelligent or moderate man may
make remonstrance of his opinion, with the reasons of it, in that way that
becomes him in a National Assembly, due reverence being kept, and confusion
avoided. But that any Layman, except he be delegate by Sovereign
Authority, shall presume to have a definitive and decisive voice; we esteem
it to be intrusion upon the Pastoral Charge, and without warrant. May we not
therefore entreat my Lord Commissioner his Grace, in the words of the Fathers
of the Fourth General Council at Chalcedon? Mitte for as superstuos. Nor will
a pious Prince be offended with it; but with Theodosius the younger will say;
Illegitimum est, eum qui non sit in ordine Sanctissimorum Episcoporum
Ecclesiasticis immisceri tractatibus -- And Pulcheria the Empress commanded
Strategus, Vt Clerici, Monachi and Laici vi repellerentur, exceptis paucis
illis quos Episcopi secum duxerunt. Upon this respect was Martinus in that
Council of Chalcedon moved to say; Non esse suum sed Episcoporum tantum
subscribere. VIII.


If these pretended Commissioners, both Lay and Ecclesiastical were lawfully
authorized, (as it is evident they are not) and for none other cause
declinable, yet the law does admit, that justly a judge may be declined, who is
probably suspect. And of all propabilities, this is the most pregnant, when the
judge, before he come to judgment, does give sentence of these things he has
to judge. This made our Reformers protestation against the Council of Trent
valide, and their not compearing justifiable, because Pope Leo 10. had
precondemned Luther, as appeared by his Bull, dated 8. Iuni* 1520 renewed by
Paul 3. dated in August 1535. This was the cause why Athanasius would not give
his appearance at some Counsels, nor Hosius of Corduba, nor Maximus Patriarch
of Constantinople. But so it is, the most part, if not all of the said
Commissioners directed to this meeting, have precondemned Episcopal
government, and condemned, at least suspended obedience to the Acts of the
General Assembly and Parliament concerning the five Articles of Perth, have
approven their Covenant as most necessary to be embraced of all in this
Kingdom: and not only have given judgment of these things before hand, but
by most solemn oaths have bound themselves to defend and stand to the same: as
does appear by their Covenant, Petitions, Protestations, Pamphlets, Libels and
Sermons: and therefore by no law nor equity can these pretended Commissioners
be admitted to determine in this meeting, concerning these persons and points,
which before hand they have so unjustly condemned.

Further, with no law nor reason can it subsist, that the same persons shall be
both Judges and IX.
Parties. And we appeal the consciences of all honest men, if all, at least
the greatest part of the pretended Commissioners, have not declared themselves
party to the Archbishops and Bishops of this Church: for in that they have
declined the Bishops to be their Judges, as being their party (as their
Declinators, Petitions, Declarations and Protestations do bear) have they not
simul and semel, and ipso facto declared themselves to be party against
Bishops? Whom they have not only declined, but persecuted by their calumnies
and reproaches vented by word and writ, in public and in private, by invading
their persons, opposing and oppressing them by strength of an unlawful
Combination, for the subscribing and swearing whereof, they have by their own
authority indicted and kept Fasts, not only in their own Churches, but where
worthy men refused to be accessory to these disorderly and impious courses,
they have by aid of the unruly multitude, entered their Churches, usurped upon
their charges, reading and causing to be read that unlawful Covenant, by
threatening and menacing compelling some (otherwise unwilling) out of just fear
to set their hands to it; by processing, suspending, and removing obedient and
worthy Ministers from their places, by the usurped authority of their Table and
Presbyteries. And whereas by all Law and justice, persons finding themselves
wronged in judgment, have never been denied the remedy of declinatory and
appellation: nevertheless not a few of these Presbyteries have proceeded
against sundry worthy Ministers, who have declined and appealed from their
judgments, without respect to this defense: by these means craftily intending
to disable them to be Commissioners for the Church: directly or indirectly
causing their stipends to be kept back from them. By which means not the
least part of the subscribing Ministers have been gained to their Covenant.

But it is without example uncharitable and illegal, that under the pretext of
summons (the like whereof was never used, nor in the like manner against the
most heinous malefactors in the kingdom) they have devised, forged, vented and
published a most infamous and scurrile libell, full of impudent lies and
malicious calumnies, against the Arch: and Bishops of this Church: and have
first given out from their Table, the order prescribed in these subsequent
Articles, which we have insert, that the world may be witness of the
illegality and malitiousnesse of their proceedings.

I. TO desire the Presbytery of every Bishop, especially where he keeps his
residence, as also the Presbytery where his Cathedral seat is, to have a
special care of this Bill and complaint against the Prelates, and particularly
against the Bishop of their Diocese.

II. That some Noblemen, if any be within the Presbytery, some Gentlemen and
Barons, some Ministers and some Commons, who are not chosen Commissioners to
the Assembly in their own Name, and in Name of all other Covenanters or
Complainers, either within the Presbytery, or Diocese, or whole Kingdom, who
are not Commissioners to the Assembly, will adhere and assist in this
Complaint, that they present this Bill to the Presbytery.

III. That they who are Complainers have a particular care to fill up the
Blanks left in the Bill, in the subsumptions of the particular faults committed
by the Bishop of the Diocese, against these general Rules, Canons and Acts: or
if these Blanks will not contain the same, that the Complainers draw up in a
particular claim, all the particular faults and transgressions of the Bishop
of that Diocese against these Rules, Canons and Acts, or any other Law of the
Church or Kingdom, and present the same to the Presbytery with this general
Complaint. And if they cannot get the particulars presently ready,
notwithstanding, they present without any delay, because of the scarceness of
the time, this Complaint as it stands with the Blanks: and in the mean time,
may gather any other particulars against the Assembly, to which this Complaint
is to be referred.

IIII. That the Presbytery finding the Complaint important, and the General
Assembly so approaching, refer the same to the General Assembly, by an Act
of this reference insert in the Books of the Presbytery.

V. That upon this reference of the Complaint to the Assembly, the Presbytery
admonish the Complainers apud acta, to be present at the said Assembly, for
assisting and verifying of the said Complaint.

VI. That the Presbytery ordain all their Pastors, out of Pulpit on a
Sabbath Day before Noone, to cause read publicly this whole Complaint and the
Presbyteries reference to the Assembly, and so to admonish the Bishop of that
Diocese, the delinquent complained upon, with the rest of his Colleagues to be
present at the General Assembly to answer to the particular Complaint, both in
the particular and general heads thereof, given or to be given in; and to
abide the censure and trial of the Assembly thereupon. And likewise, out of
Pulpit to admonish all others who have interest either in the pursuing or
referring this Complaint, to be present at the said Assembly.

That the Presbytery insert in their Presbyterie-Books the whole tenor of
this Complaint both in the general and particular heads thereof; and that they
have a care to cause deliver by their Ordinary Beadell, to the Bishop of the
Diooese, a Copy thereof, and a Copy of an Act, referring the same to the
Assembly, and summon him to compeare before the Assembly. And if he be within
the Country, and cannot be personally apprehended, to affix a full Copy thereof
upon each dwelling place, and upon the most patent door of the Cathedral
Church and Episcopal seat.

VIII. That the Complainers within the Presbytery where the Bishop is
resident, or has his Cathedral, be careful to keep correspondence with those
in other Presbyteries within their Diocese, who best can specify and verify
their Bishops usurpation and transgressions, and who had particular Articles to
gather particular Declarations and Informations of the same.

IX. That some of these Complainers in their own Name, and with Warrant and
Power from the rest, without failing attend the Assembly with the general
Complaint and particular verifications and specifications of the same.

X. That in case the Presbytery where the Bishop has his residence, or where
he has his Cathedral and Episcopal seat, refuse to receive this Complaint,
or refer the same to the Assembly, or to admonish or cite the Bishop
delinquent, before the Assembly, to answer to the Complaint; that the Gentlemen
and others who are Complainers to the Presbyteries, upon their refusal take
instrument in the hands of the Clerk of the Presbytery, or any Notarie, and
protest that their refusal of the ordinary care of Justice, procured (without
doubt) by the Bishop of that Diocese delinquent complained of, the equivalent
of Law and Reason, be a formal Citation of him. Which Protestation they may
affix upon the dwelling house of the said Bishop, or upon his Cathedral
Church, or the prime Church within the Presbytery. And that they may deal
with any other Presbytery within the Diocese, who is better disposed, and upon
their receipt of the Complaint, will refer the same to the Assembly and cite
the Bishop in manner above-expressed, to compeare before the said Assembly.

XI.Item, Perhaps some Minister within the Presbytery may think some Heads of
this Complaint not to be relevant in his Opinion, or know the Bishop not to be
guilty of all the particular Heads contained therein: yet he in Justice cannot
refuse to refer the trial of the Relevancie and Probation thereof to the
General Assembly, especially, seeing the Relevancie and Probation of more or
fewer Points against the Bishop of the Diocese is sufficient, and seeing the
subsumption of every particular Head is against the Bishop of the Diocese, with
his Colleagues.

XII.Item, To desire the Presbytery, upon Complaints upon any persons within
the same, against any scandalous Minister either in Doctrine or Life, either to
judge the Complaint, or refer the same to the trial and censure of the
General Assembly, and so to admonish and cite the Ministers complained upon,
to compeare before the General Assembly for that end.

According to which articles, upon Sunday October. 28. they caused read the said
Libell in all the Churches of Edinburgh notwithstanding my Lord Commissioners
command given to the Provest and Bailies to the contrary: except in
Haly-rude-house, where it was read the next Sunday, as it was in other Churches
of the Kingdom; proceeding herein. 1. Against all charity which does not
behave it self unseemly, nor delights in the discovery of men's nakedness,
nor take up a reproach, nor backbite with the tongue; much less to write a
book against a brother. 2. Against the order prescribed by the Apostle: not to
rebuke an Elder, but to entreat him as a father: and by the Act of Parl. Jam. 6
par. 8. discharging all persons to impugn or to procure the diminution of the
authority and power of the three estates or any of them. 3. Against all lawful
and formal proceeding, specially, that prescribed by Act of General Assembly
at Perth Martij 1. 1596. whereby it is ordained, that all summons contain the
special cause and crime: which the said Libell does not: nameing only
general calumnies, reproaches, and aspersions, without instruction of any
particular, but leaving these to be filled up by malicious delation, after they
have defamed their brethren by publishing this Libell: as appears by the 8.
and 11. articles of the said instructions. And against the order prescribed by
the Assembly at Saint Andrews April 24. 1582. whereby it is enacted, that in
process of deprivation of Ministers, there be a libelled precept upon forty
days warning, being within the Realm, and threescore days being without the
Realm, to be directed by the Kirk and such Commissioners thereof, as elects
and admits the person complained of, summoning them to compeare and answer
upon the complaint. And in case of their absence at the first summons, the
second to be directed upon the like warning, with certification, if he fail,
the Libell shall be admitted to probation, and he shall be holden pro confesso.
Which form not being kept in a summons inferring the punishment of
deprivation, the same cannot be sustained by the order of that Assembly. 4.
Against common equity which admits summons only by the authority of that judge
before whom the delinquent is to compeare. Whereby the summons directed by the
authority of these pretended Presbyteries, cannot sustain, for compearance
before the General Assembly, nor could reference be made from the Presbytery
to the General Assembly, the parties never being summoned to compeare before
the Presbytery, whereby either in presence of the party, or in case of
contumacy, the complaint might be referred to the Assembly. That there was no
citation before the reference, is clear, by the said instructions. And what a
strange and odious form it is, to insert such a Calumnious Libell in the
Presbytery-books, without citing of the parties to answer thereto; and to cite
Bishops before the General Assembly by the said Libell, by publishing the same
at Churches, to which they had no relation, and were many miles distant, we
leave it to the judgment of indifferent men. 5. Against all decency and
respect due to men of their place, the said persons, being men of dignity, and
some of them of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council, and known to be
of blameless conversation, and to have deserved well, thus to be reviled and
traduced, does redound to the reproach of Church and State, and of the Gospel
whereof they are preachers. 6. Lastly, to omit many other informalities against
their own consciences, which we charge in the sight of God, as they must
answer before his great and fearful tribunal, if they suspect and know not
perfectly, according to the judgment of charity, them who^ they thus accuse,
to be free of these crimes wherewith they charge them, at least of many of
them; as appears evidently by the 11 article of the said instructions, having
therein libelled the general, and have yet to seek the specification thereof,
from the malice of their neighbors, if so be they can furnish it. By which
informall and malicious proceeding, it is most apparent, that our said parties
do seek our disgrace and overthrow, most maliciously and illegally. And
therefore we call heaven and earth to witness, if this be not a barbarous and
violent persecution, that all circumstances being considered, has few or none
to parallel it, since the beginning of Christianity: and if we have not just
cause to decline the said pretended Commissioners, as our party.

Moreover, can these men expect, but in a lawful Assembly they were to be
called and censured for their enorme transgressions foresaid? And will any man
think, that they can be judges in their own cause? It is alleged out of the
Canon Law, against the Pope, that if the Pope be at variance with any man, he
ought not to be judge himself, but to choose arbitrators. And this may militate
against them; except they be more unruly then Popes. Ludovicus Bavarus and all
the Estates of Germany with him, did plead this nullity against the sentence
and proceeding of Pope John 22. and of his Council. And the Archbishop of
Cullen 1546. did plead the nullity of Paul 3. his Bull of excommunication,
because he protested, that so soon as a lawful Council should be opened, he
would implead the Pope as party, being guilty of many things censurable by the
Council.

But the late Protestation does show the authors X.
thereof to be no less injurious to our place and authority, then they are
over weening of their own. For it is against reason and practice of the
Christian Church, that no Primate, Archbishop, nor Bishop, have place nor voice
deliberative or decisive in General Assemblies, except they be authorized and
elected by their Presbyteriall meetings, consisting of preaching and ruling
Elders (as they call them) and without warrant or example in the Primitive and
purest times of the Church.

This also does infer the nullitie of an Assembly, if the Moderator and
President for matters XI.
of doctrine, and discipline, shall be neither the Primate, Archbishop, nor
Bishop, but he who by plurality of Presbyters and laymens voices shall be
elected: which happily may be one of the inferior Clergy or a lay-person, as
sometimes it has fallen out. Whereas Canonically, according to the ancient
practice of the Church; the Primate should preside: according to the
constitution of the first Council of Nice Can. 6. of Antioch Can. 9. and of
the Imperial Law Novell. constitut. 123. cap. 10. and according to our own
Law. For what place in Assemblies Archbishops and Bishops had in other
Christian nations, the same they had (no doubt) in Scotland, and yet still do
retain, except by some Municipall law it has bin restrained, which cannot be
shown. For the restraint of their authority by the Act of Parl. 1592. is
restored by the Act of Parl. 1606. and 1609. and all acts prejudicial to their
jurisdiction, abrogated. Neither does that Act 1592. establishing General
Assemblies, debar Bishops from presiding therein: nor the abrogation of their
Commission granted to them by Act of Parl. in Ecclesiastical causes imply and
infer the abrogation of that authority which they received not from the Parl.
but from Christ, from whom they received the spiritual oversight of the
Clergy under their charge: whereto belongs the Presidentship in all
Assemblies for matters spiritual, always with due submission to the Supreme
Governor: which is so intrinsecally inherent in them, as they are Bishops,
that huc ipso that they are Bishops, they are Presidents of all Assemblies of
the Clergy: as the Chancellor of the Kingdom has place in Council and
Session, not by any Act or Statute, but hoc ipso that he is Chancellor. By Act
of Parl. Bishops are declared to have their right in Synods and other inferior
meetings; but by no law restrained nor debarred from the exercise of it in
National Assemblies: and the law allowing Bishops to be Moderators of the
Synods, does present a list in absence of the Metropolitan, to whom of right
this place does belong, as said is, out of which the Moderator of the General
Assembly shall be chosen. For is it not more agreeable to reason, order, and
decency, that out of Moderators of Synods, a Moderator of the General
Assembly should be chosen, then of the inferior Clergy subject to them?

As concerning that Act of the General Assembly 1580. whereby Bishops are
declared to have no warrant out of Scripture; if corruption of time shall be
regarded, the authority of that Assembly might be neglected, no less then that
at Glosgow 1610. But it is ordinary that prior acts of Assemblies and
Parliaments give place to the posterior: for Posteriora derogant prioribus. And
there past not full six years when a General Assembly at Edinburgh found,
that the name of Bishops has a special charge and function annexed to it by
the word of God: and that it was lawful for the General Assembly to admit a
Bishop to a benefice, presented by the Kings Majesty, with power to admit,
visit, and deprive Ministers, and to be Moderators of the Presbyteries where
they are resident, and subject only to the sentence of the General Assembly.

As for that Act at Montrose, let them answer to it that have their calling by
that Commission. We profess that we have a lawful calling by the election of
the Clergy, who are of the Chapter of our Cathedralls, and consecration of
Bishops by his Majesty's consent and approbation, according to the laudable
Laws and ancient Custom of this Kingdom, and of the Church in ancient
times, and do homage to our Sovereign Lord for our Temporalities and
acknowledge him solo Deo minorem, next unto God in all causes, and over all
persons Spiritual or Temporal, in his own Dominions supreme Governor. But
now we may take up Cyprian his complaint, Lib. 3. Ep. 14. Quod non periculum
metuere debemus de offensa Domini, quando aliqui de Presbyteris nec Evangelij
nec loci sui memores, sed neque futurum Dei judicium neque praepositum sibi
Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub antecessoribus factum est, cum
contumelia and contempta praepositi totum sibi vendicent? Atque utinam non
prostrata fratrum nostrorum salute sibi omnia vendicarent. Contumelias
Episcopatus nostri dissimulare and far possem; sicut dissimulavt semper and
pertuli: sed dissimulandi nunc locus non est, quando decipiatur fraternitas
nostra a quibusdam vestrum, qui dum sine ratione restituendae salutis,
plausibiles esse cupiunt, magis lapsis obsunt.

Lastly, it is most manifest by the premises, XII.
how absurd it is, and contrary to all reason and practice of the Christian
Church, that Archbishops and Bishops shall be judged by Presbyters; and more
absurd that they should be judged by a mixed meeting of Presbyters and Laics,
conveening without lawful authority of the Church. How, and by whom, they are
to be judged, according to the custom of ancient times, may be seen by the
Counsel of Chalcedon, Can. 9. and Council. Milevit. Can. 22. and Council.
Carthag. 2. Can. 10. Nor do we decline the lawful trial of any competent
judicatory in the Kingdom, especially of a General Assembly lawfully
constitute, or of his Majesty's high Commissioner, for any thing in life or
doctrine can be laid to our charge: only we declare and affirm, that it is
against order, decency, and Scripture, that we should be judged by Presbyters
or by Laics, without authority and Commission from Sovereign authority.

For the reasons foresaid, and many more, and for discharge of our duty to God,
to his Church, and to our Sacred Sovereign, lest by our silence we betray the
Church's right, his Majesty's authority, and our own consciences, We for our
selves, and in name of the Church of Scotland, are forced to protest, that this
Assembly be reputed and holden null in Law Divine and human: and that no
Churchman be holden to appear before, assist or approve it: and therefore,
that no letter, petition, subscription, interlocutor, certification,
admonition, or other act whatsoever proceeding from the said Assembly, or any
member thereof, be any wise prejudicial to the Religion and Confession of
Faith by Act of Parliament established: or to the Church, or any member
thereof, or to the jurisdiction, liberties, privileges, rents, benefices, and
possessions of the same, acts of General Assembly, of Council and Parliament
in favors thereof; or to the three estates of the Kingdom, or any of them, or
to us, or any of us, in our persons or estates, authority, jurisdiction,
dignity, rents, benefices, reputation, and good name: but on the contrary that
all such acts and deeds above mentioned, and every one of them, are and shall
be reputed and esteemed unjust, illegal and null in themselves, with all that
has followed or may follow thereupon.

And forasmuch as the said Assemby does intend (as we are informed) to call in
question, discuss, and condemn things not only in themselves lawful and
warrantable, but also defined and determined by Acts of General Assembly and
Parliaments, and in practice accordingly: to the disgrace and prejudice of
reformed Religion, authority of the Laws and Liberties of the Church and
Kingdom, weakening his Majesty's authority, disgracing the profession and
practice, which he holds in the Communion of the Church where he lives, and
branding of Reformed Churches with the foul aspersions of Idolatry and
superstition: we protest before God and man, that what shall be done in this
kind, may not redound to the disgrace or disadvantage of Reformed Religion,
nor be reputed a deed of the Church of Scotland.

We protest that we embrace and hold, that the Religion presently professed in
the Church of Scotland, according to the Confession thereof, received by the
estates of this Kingdom, and ratified in Parliament the year 1567. is the
true Religion bringing men to eternal Salvation, and do detest all contrary
error.

We protest, that Episcopal government in the Church is lawful and
necessary: and that the same is not opposed and impugned for any defect or
fault, either in the Government or Governors; but by the malice and craft of
the Devil, envying the success of that government in this Church these many
years by past, most evident in planting of Churches with able and learned
Ministers, recovering of the Church rents, helping of the Ministers stipends,
preventing of these jarres betwixt the King and the Church, which in former
times dangerously infested the same, keeping the people in peace and obedience,
and suppressing of Popery, which in respect either of the number of their
professors or boldness of their profession, was never at so low an ebb in
this Kingdom, as before these stirs.

We protest, that, seeing these who for scruple of conscience did mislike the
Service book, Canons and high Commission, which were apprehended or given forth
to be the cause of the troubles of this Church, have now received satisfaction,
and his Majesty is graciously pleased to forget and forgive all offenses by
past in these stirs; that all the subjects of this kingdom may live in peace
and Christian love, as becomes faithful subjects and good Christians, laying
a side all hatred, envy, and bitterness: And if any shall refuse so to do,
they may bear the blame, and be thought the cause of the troubles that may
ensue: and the same be not imputed to us, or any of us, who desire nothing
more, then to live in peace and concord with all men under his Majesty's
obedience: and who have committed nothing against the Laws of the Kingdom and
Church, that may give any man just cause of offense: and are so far from
wishing hurt to any man, in his person or estate, notwithstanding all the
indignities and injuries we have suffered, that for quenching this present
combustion, and settling peace in this Church and country, we could be content,
after clearing of our innocence of all things wherewith we can be charged, not
only to lay down our Bishoprics at his Majesty's feet, to be disposed of at
his royal pleasure, but also, if so be, it pleased God, to lay down our
lives, and become a sacrifice for this atonement.

We protest in the sight of God, to whom one day we must give account, that we
make use of this Declinator and protestation out of the conscience of our duty
to God and his Church, and not out of fear of any guiltiness, whereof any of
us is conscious to himself, either of wickedness in our lives, or miscarriage
in our callings; being content every one of us, for our own particular (as we
have never showen our selves to be otherwise) to under go the lawful and most
exact trial of any competent judicatory within this Kingdom, or of his
Majesty's high Commissioner.

And we most humbly entreat his Grace, to interceed with the Kings Majesty,
that he may appoint a free and lawful General Assembly, such as Gods word,
the practice of the Primitive Church, and laws of the Kingdom do prescribe and
allow, with all convenient speed, to the effect the present distractions of the
Church may be settled. And if there be any thing to be laid to the charge of any
of the Clergy, of whatsoever degree, either in life and manners, or doctrine,
or exercise of his calling and jurisdiction, he may be heard to answer all
accusations, and abide all trial, either for clearing his innocence, or
suffering condign punishment, according to his transgressions: declining
always this Assembly, for the causes above written. Like as by these presents,
we, and every one of us, decline the same, the whole members thereof, and
Commissioners foresaid directed thereto, and every one of them.

We protest that this our protestation in respect of our lawful absence may be
received in the name of us under-subscribing for our selves, and in the name of
the Church of Scotland that shall adhere to the said Protestation, and in the
name of every one of them, from our welbeloved, Doctor Robert Hamilton,
Minister at Glasford, to whom by these presents we give our full power, and
express mandate to present the same in or at the said Assembly, or where else
it shall be necessary to be used, with all submission and obedience due to our
gracious Sovereign and his Majesty's high Commissioner: and upon the
presenting and using thereof, acts and instruments to crave, and all other
things to do, that necessarily are required in such cases: firm and stable
holding, or for to hold, what he, or any of them, shall lawfully do in the
premises.

In witness whereof, as we are ready with our blood, so with our hand we have
subscribed these presents, at the palace of Haly-rude-house, New Castle, and
Glasgow, the 16. 17. and 20. days of November. 1638. et sic subscrbitur.

Jo: S^ Andreae Arch.
Pa: Glasgow.
Da: Edinburgen.
Tho: Gallovidien.
Jo: Rossen.
Walterus Brechinen.


