THE PHILOSOPHERS BANQVET.

Newly Furnished and decked forth with much variety of many several Dishes,
that in the former Service were neglected.

Where now not only Meats and Drinks of all Natures and Kinds are served in,
but the Natures and Kinds of all disputed of.

As further, Dilated by Table-conference, alteration and Changes of States,
Diminution of the Stature of Man, Barrenness of the Earth, with the effects
and causes thereof, Phisically and Philosophically.

The third Edition.

Newly corrected and enlarged, to almost as much more. By W. B. Esquire.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Vavasour, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Temple, near the Church, 1633.

To the Reader.
THe Back and Belly, two unsounded seas
Oreslow al goodness of these later days,
The new Saints worshipped since the old went down,
In Church, in Court, in City, and in Town:
With such devotion, that men now attend
Not hours appointed, but whole ages spend
In these Idolatries rendering more due
Then blindfold zeal e're tendered to the true.
Sloth, Pride, and Pleasure cleave so near the skin,
They make each single birth a trebletwin:
Incorporate so in body and in blood,
To thousand vices, but small grains of good:
Let but conceit thrast forth a strange attire
In France, it sets three kingdoms straight a fire;
Which leave not burning till they have ^sted down
Lordships and patrimonies of renown:
Melted the earth, and Chimick't into gold,
Done that which none e're did, but one we hold
Proceeded further in more strict degree,
Converted Gold in it Gards of Gallentree:
And still like Alchimists toyling the Stone,
T^ll gold, and silk, and earth and all is gone.
Let but a Hellen of some mean degree,
Of far less beuty, more unchaste than she,
Inhabit wildernesses under ground,
If she be false and fair, she shall be found:
Let Gluttony at hours near so unmeet,
Slighted all Circumstance weight by discreet,
Whilst wary Cautions, with most strictest heed,
Being all observed, are less often then we need,
Sit down full charged to overcharge it more*
A thousand dangers waiting at the door:
Yet notwithstanding all her fearful guard
There she arrives, and will not be debard:
Let Bacchus keep his Cider in a cell,
Resort shall crowd him wheresve're he dwell
Let him dig mountains, be they never so high
Unto the roots where there soundations lie,
And like to artfull Pioners work deeper,
To keep their liquor stronger, cooler, sweeter;
Industrious Porters, Cobblers, Tinkers, Swain,
Will wind it up with their eternal pains,
With Wheels and Buckets, which not night nor day,
Shall even rest going up or down the way,
Whilst paths vntraced, former steps vni rod,
Become as Dunstable, more worn, more broad:
But should an Angel to no other end
But only this, from heaven to earth descend,
To tell the world of sickness in her health,
T'informe her that she is poor for all her wealth,
To give new Rules, and contradict the old,
Though never so bad his Custom should be col^,
And though his doctrine should confute the crimes
That have consumed whole ages in their times
Noth^ng it were, his pains should be rewarded
With crowds most strangely wondering, not regarded:
Let Virtue courted in her best array,
By learning with all titles that she may,
Appear so glorious, that the Suns bright eye
Suffer eclipse in her resemblancy:
Upon whose glorious person and attire,
Heaven might look gracious, and the earth admire
Yet this sweet virgin virtue, learning art,
Decked with the marrow of the world, and art
Not not crept into in least particular sense,
In skirts and Borders of small consequence
But by some sign of man, and proof of wit,
When after many years o're-take not it;
Yet after tedious hours, and toyled brains,
Days, nights, and Books, Costs, thoughts and endless pains.
It being arrested, and laid hold upon,
At the whole suit of mankind should be none
To join in action to maintain a Trial,
In joint approuement against so strong denial
He that could seite in likeness of a face,
Being well accoultred and set out to grace
The meanest matter, thought e're bred in brain,
It should be descanted and read again.
Making his comma's (in his portrait w^fe)
Some pretty nose, his per^ods l^ke to eyes:
If that prevail not, what would then be better
To hang Bacchus clusters, sparkling ore each letter?
Or both together, sure that would not miss,
For they are twins, embrace, and love to k sse:
And all our hot bloods, both with strength and might,
Pursue them endlesly both day and night.
Bidding us cross all Books and Lines deface,
Blot out our Sentences, and give them place:
And then success our Labor shall attend,
Crowning our undertakings with good end.
These though we know impossible to do,
To run with humor we jumpe near unto.
Placing some part of Venice in our book,
As of Geneva we have taken a nooke.
Here Is wicked women, as the one has so;
And here are virtues as the others show:
Here are strong drinks, your Beer, your Ale, your Wine,
Your choice of meats, your grosser and your fine:
And widows with their heaps of hoarded gold,
That would beo Lad^ed, though a month to hold:
And here is good company, d^scourse at will,
Philosophers, Physicians, arguing still:
Sociates for every man, means for digestion;
Can we want custom then, who makes a question?
To the Iuditious Reader, and him that would buy this this Book, thus further
in the commendation and use thereof
Good Reader, many things has been written by many men, and the over cloying
humor of this age has so ouerburdened the world with multiplicity of al kinds,
that searce there is one subject left, upon the head whereof a hundred have not
trampled over: amongst which impartial handling, if it be possible to say any
one corner has escaped this scrutenous search, and been raked over with a
lighter hand than other, I may say it is this, although not denying, but most
parts hereof have been formerly handled and drawn into large volumes, both to
the tediousness and cost of the Reader and buyer, whereas in this they are
effectually and briefly abridged, to be turned unto with facility and ease;
diverse excellent additions of things very material and necessary, out of
Albertus Magnus, Lemnius Scotus, and others, being in this second impression
inserted, which in the former addition were neglected, (although very pertinent
to this purpose and argument) the which whosoever has formerly bought and read
in the infancy and imperfectnesse, shall not repent him to do it again in
this maturity and ^penesse it is now grown unto. The use of this Book is, to
make a man able to judge of the disposition and state of his own body, of the
effects, natures, and dispositions of those things we daily feed our bodies
with. The next is, to give us a general insight and brief knowledge of
Emperors and Kings, or men of greatest place and eminency that are most
notified in the world for virtue or vice. All these interlaced, with excellent
positions, witty questions and answers upon diverse and sundry argument^, the
perfect use and insight whereof, does accomplish a man for discourse, behavior
and argument at the Table of our superiors: Written first by Michael Scotus in
Latin, and for the benefit, good approbation and like thereof, formerly done
into English; and now thirdly published and augmented (being a book of
special notice in this kind) to as much more, by the same Author;

W. B. Esquire.

A Table of the several Chapters and principal things contained in this Book.
OF Man. page 1 A division of the body of man, and the use and office of the
inward members thereof. p. 4 A Comparison of man's life to the four seasons of
the year. p. 7 How to choose out a place convenient for habitation, with such
respects therein as are chiefly to be observed. p. 8 Of the hours of eating,
and time appointed for that service. p. 11 Of the appetite and custom of
eating. p. 13 Of the order of our meat and refection. p. 15 The nature and
quality of the most usual meats and drinks that are taken at our tables. p. 18
Of Wine and the qualities thereof. p. 21 Of Mead, and the properties thereof.
p. 24 Of strong-Ale. p. 25 Of the natures of all kinds of flesh. p. 26 Of wild
flesh. p. 28 Of Kiddes flesh. p. 30 Of Lambs flesh. p. 31 Of Rams flesh. p.
32 Of Calves flesh, and Ox flesh, Vulg^, Beef and Veale. p. 33 Of the diverse
kinds of Hogs flesh. p. 34 Of Hearts flesh, Hares f^esh, and Bears flesh. p.
35 Of the members of Beasts. p. 36 Of flesh in pieces. p. 39 Of all kinds of
wild-Fowle. p. 40 Of the Hen. p. 42 Of young Pigions. p. 43 What parts of
Fowls are best. p. 44 Of Eggs, and the properties thereof. p. 45 Of Milk. p.
46 Of Cheese. p. 50 Of Fishes. p. 51 Of Pulses. p. 54 Of Pot Herbs of all
sorts. p. 58 Of Fruits of all sorts. p. 67 Of sundry kinds of spices. p. 80 Of
sauces, as Mustard, Salt, Vinegar, Honey, and Oil. p. 83 A Regiment of health.
p. 87 Brief and excellent rules for health. p. 91
The end of the Table of the first Book.
OF Emperors. p. 97 Of Kings and Princes. p 102 Of the Bishops of the Gentiles.
p. 113 Of the true Nobleman. p. 116 Of Soldiers. p. 119 Of Muster-masters, or
Electors of Soldiers. p. 123 Of Philosophers and Orators. p. 126 Of
Physicians. p. 129 Of Young men. p. 132 Of Old men. p. 136 Of Cities,
Merchants, and Merchandise. p. 141 Of Handicrafts. p. 143 Of Rich men. p. 147
Of Poor men. p. 150 Of Hunters, p. 153 Of Judges. p. 154 Of Stewards, or
Bailiffs of Lords. p. 156 Of Lawyers, on the Advocates of Judges. p. 157 Of
Friends and Friendship. p. 160 Of Kinsfolk. p. 162 Of Good women. p. 164 Of
wicked women. p. 167 Of married women, p. 169 Of Good widows. p. 171 Os
Virgins. p. 174
The end of the Table of the second Book.
WHether air be more necessary to life than meat. p. 179 Whether is more
necessary to life; meat or drink. p. 180 Whether evil meat or evil air hurt
the body more. p. 182 Whether sleep or meat be more necessary to the body. p.
183 Whether out of evil meat may be engendered good blood. p. 184 Whether may
we walk or sleep presently after meat. p. 185 Why in omitting our h^ure
accustomed we tose our appetite. p. 186 Whether the strong or the weak
stomach endure the longest fast. p. 188 Why we can contain hotter meats in
our mouths, than in our hands. p. 190 Whether those that fast long, endure
mere hunger or thirst, p. 191 Whether those that have hot Stomachs are
satisfied with little drink. p. 194 Whether water does more allay the thirst
than wine. p. 195 Why these of moist stomachs that desire little, yet are
capable of much drink. p. 196 Why Agues and other sicknesses sometimes are done
away by things hurtful and contrary. p. 198 Of things hurtful after meat.
ibid. Questions of bread. p. 203 Whether it be physical to be drunk once a
month with wine. p. 205 Questions of flesh, p. 209 Questions of Eggs. p. 211
Of Fish. p. 215 Resolution of certain mixed Questions. p. 217 Of the dangerous
and clymactericall years and days of man's life. p. 222 Of the excellent
virtue and nature of stones. p. 223 A direction for study, delivered by a
Gentleman to his sons. p. 226 To power scalding oil, or melting lead into
the hand, and not to be burnt with it. p. 230 To keep Ink from freezing.
ibid. Of the strange effects wrought by some members of the Owl. p. 131 Of the
Want or Moale. ibid. Of the strange effects of some parts of the Blackbird. p.
232 A way to make Doves increase. ib. To untye a knot without touching. p. 233.
Philosophical conference between some Fathers of the Church. p. 234 In what
part of the body the heart is. ibid. From whence the name of Cardinal derived.
p. 235 Why in ancient times men used to make their Sepulchers by the highway
side. p. 236 Why in old times was there so few Monuments erected for the dead,
and now so many. p. 237 What is the reason, that of later times, Devils, and
Visions, and such like, have not been so frequent as in former times. p. 242
Questions of the Sun, the Moon and Stars. p. 244 Questions of Physicians.
p. 246 The greatest City in the world. p. 250 The Physicians best rule for
health p. 252 How many Diseases (as Deaths Harbingers) are incident to the body
of man. p. 253 Socrates excuse for srugall fare to his wife. p. 256 To what the
world is compared. p. 257 The distance betwixt the Earth and the Moons, and
Stars. p. 258 Whether Peter were ever at Rome or not. p. 259 Whether Wisdom or
Riches are m^st precious. p. 263 What is the most troublesome idleness. p. 264
Of sleep. p. 266 Gf dreams. p. 267 Pilates wives dream. p. 268 Of
Ingratitude. p. 271 What are the most loving creatures to man, and the most
hateful. p. 373 Of the Aspe, and the nature of her poison. p. 274 Of the
Silke-worme, and her nature. p. 275 Of an Idiot and a wise man. p. 277 Of
Philosophy. p. 279 Of Time. p. 280 Of Metals. p. 281 Of Courtieos. p. 282 A
comparison of man's life. p. 284 Of the River of Sambatia. p. 291 Of Springs.
ibid. Of the best waters. p. 294 Of the chief^st felicity in the world ibid. Of
Death. p. 299 Of the Messengers of Death. ibid. Of the Moon. p. 301 The
chiefest of all meats, and the principal of all sa^es. p. 305 The resemblance
of the mind. p. 306 The means to prevent fear. ib. The most excellent action
of the hand. p. 307 The hardest of all Hercules labors. p. 308 The
Country-mans observation of the Rainbow. p. 309 The fairest Object to behold.
p. 313 The Comparison of these Times. p. 315 The strangest things of these
times. p. 316 The greatest loss of all others. ibid. The best part of the day
for study. p. 317 Why the morning is colder then the evening. p. 318 Why we
desire forbidden things. p. 326 Of Fortune. p. 329 The wonders of the world. p.
330 The beginning of Time. p. 331 The part of the year that pleases the Eye
more then the Belly. p. 332 The biggest Bird in the world. 333 Of the Sterke.
ibid. Of him that tilleth another man's ground, and leaves his own barren. p.
334 A description of Seed-time. p. 335 Whether there were Vines before the
flood or not. p. 336 The reason why Wine is dearer ^ow than it has been of
old times. p. 337 Whether there be Mermayds or Sirens in the Sea or not. p. 342
Of the soul. p. 344 Why the soul of man is called the lantern of God. p.
346 The secrets of writing. ibid. The most faithful Messenger. p. 347 What
things we most love and esteem. p. 349 Whether our Country or our Parents are
to be most honored. p. 352 Whether money makes a rich man or not. p. 353 When
do Enemies profit us, and our Friends hurt us. ibid. Of the Empires. p. 354 Of
the Roman Empire. ibid. The Answer of a Coward. ibid. Where a man is counted
evil when he commits least. p. 355 Of the true use of all Learning. p. 356
Whether Education alters nature or not. p. 358 Ernes^s Couns^ll to hi^ friend.
p. 359 Of the stomabke. ibid. Of Oppertunity. p. 361 Why the Earth is most
barren where the richest Mines are. p. 363 Diogenes Counselconcerning lending
and borrowing of money. p. 364
The Preface to the Matter.
THat Health is about Gold, and a sound body above infinite Riches; is a Text
of Truth, approved with most joyful acknowledgement, to their comforts that
entirely possess it, and know the worth by the use, not by the want: as do
those poor and life-weari^d wretches, whose pleasures by sicknesses perplexed,
and days spunn^ out in grief and misery by the contrary; yet what is this
precious stone to the Dunghill-cocke, or the richest ^ifts of body or mind^
fortune, to him that is not Gemmarius; one that truly understands their
value, and valueth them according to his understanding: The Crab, the Gangrene,
or the Stone, that put the knife to inscition, or the saw to abscition, and
Traytor-like, rack the body with tortures, not inferior to death: cry out in
him that is patient of this misery: Happy man that art borne from these woes,
that art free from these maladies. Cherish therefore that good which is so
precious in life (thou that enjoyest it) which keeps off death, and sweetens
all the affictions that oppose us in life, and abuse it not in Riots, in
surf^ts and disorders, things so apt to deprive it; the loss being so great,
and the pleasures so small, and without which, all humane solace is but sorrow;
all rejoicing is but mourning, and life it self is but death. For to him that
has the highest titles, the largest honors, the fairest revenues, nay, all
the pleasures that the earth and Sea to boot can afford; yet what are all
these present, where (...) ^ne is wanting? Therefore to the preservation of
that which is, and redeeming of that which has been, but is not, our
Philosophers propose certain Rules and directions, for the ordering, reducing,
and maintaining of man's body in health; which like a Clock, by reason of the
many several particles and connexions thereunto belonging is ever subject to
diversion and error. For as Galen, the Light of Physicians writes, of that
little window, or light of Man, the delicacie whereof, not the least creature,
or attomic in the world, but by accident, may sore offend, yet that there are
subjectory and pertinent peremptory infirmities besides thereunto belonging
engendered, by Rheumes, Convulsions, and other operations of the brain, and
strings thereunto official, 52. diseases: If then so many disastrous Planets
reign over one little member, had it not need of sight and light to prevent
them? And if to this one, so many to the whole body of man, how many are
incident, and what curiosity therefore is to be given to our steps, when
without their limits they are so many enemies of Nature, ready to seize upon
us? And which discipline and direction being observed we may lengthen out our
days with joy and delight to the last period of their prefixment, when either
sickness or casualty, one Accident or other shall fall upon us, to the
accomplishment of that Sentence which was never yet frustrated by any, nor ever
shall, whilst the foure^ indes blow one against another. For against that,
here is no prevention, (Contra vim mortis, non esc medicam^ in hertis) although
some, and no mean Clarks, have thought and written to the contrary, that Age
might be kept back, and sickness kept by, which if it may be for a time, we
conclude, it cannot be for ever.

That Age may not be kept back, though sometimes tardied in his speed.

Friar Bacon, a man of infinite learning, study, capabilitie and Art in his
time, amongst many other his strange and impossible endeavors, published a
book De retardanda Senecture; or the keeping back of old age, the which
whilst he himself in observing and prescribing the Rules, Orders,
Observations, and Retardadation thereof, grew old in the act, and himself was
overtaken with age: Let the air in her wholsommest kind, with the most nicest
ceremonies that Physic or curiosity observed, Fennes and Marshes, and the
low and unwholesome vapors of the earth unsuckt up thereby, the unsavory breath
whereof may breathe contagion into windows: In stead thereof, brush over
Rocks and Hills, and Fields and Fountains, with the wholsommest perfumes that
the best matters may give it to work upon, bring health through the Crannies,
and receptacles of our houses, and breathe it in at the nostrils of the most
healthful creature living; let him rise early, not walk late, be temperate in
Diet, moderate in exercise, wary in lust, cheerful of disposition, sit not
much, walk not sildome, surfeit never, know the disposition and state of his
own body, from the largest content, to the least particular: be a Physician
himself, on himself; use the art and direction of all the world, and all the
Colleges and Physicians therein: yet notwithstanding shall age creep upon
him, and burden him with her weight, and the unnecessary luggage of her
carriage, which is strength in peevishness, weakness in performances, will to
desire, yet want to execute, as helplesly is daily experienced. For otherwise,
who would wear his head white, and his beard gray, his eyes hollow, and his
ears deaf, black veins, and dry brains, a dropping nose, a wrinckled brow,
shaking hands, and toothlesse gummes, feeble legs, and shrunk sinews, that
might ransom himself, either by pain or price. The old Courtier, inamored of
his young mistress, slighted more for his want, then his will, having some
sparks of heat, not yet extinguished by antiquity, would offer (if it might
be) more then the portion of his supple hammes, to enjoy the one, but to
obtain the other: likewise the face once adorned with beauty, and more adored
th^n the Indian sun, now crept into wrinkles, and folded up in the pleats of
antiquity, and more ecclipsed then the Sun (for this I say) what pain or
price so heavy, that these creatures of lightness would not undertake, but
that this ceaselesse lackey to eternity, trouped with Kings to his pages, never
turns back to make amends in his regresse, for any injury he effects in his
progress; which makes one complain in a Sonnet to this effect as follows.

Could age like days as nights ensue,
Each morning sresh her self renew:
What Lady then at nights decay,
But would in the morn begin her day?
For where is a face so much declinde,
That bears not youthful thoughts in mind?
That often peep with oily eyes,
Through doctor'd strange adulteries,
Upon the world in silk and Gold,
That grieve to think they are so old:
The Matrons in their rip^st age,
That should have wisdom as their Page,
So much inclined to this Devotion,
That to obtain't would give an Otian;
Old age, bad cloat^es, such grief imparts,
They break or wound al women's hearts
Therefore the Philosophers, not to persuade impossibilities, would have no man
think but they must be old; but would have no man old before he be wise, yet
somewhat to run with the current of humor, have here added certain linkes
or lengthenings to these Summa Desideria, and as much as may be done by art, or
precept, labored to keep back these aged wrinkles, that deprive our beauty
and strength, and nip the flower of all worldly delight, and therefore do here
at their Tables, disccurse of Seriacum jocis, according to the rules of
wisdom, which says, Mingle thy cares with joys, and thy sorrows with
delight: crown the morsels of thy labor with the height of thy contentment,
and reserve some times for thy vacancie and freedom: For the bow that is
always bent, must needs be weakened, and unapt for use. And where sorrow,
grief, and vexation, which suck veins dry, and roll up the countenance in
wrinkles like a scrowle of scorched parchment, ever lie tugging, what can be
expected but the wast ruin, and deformity of the whole body? and therefore at
thy Table, in thy Chamber, in thy places of rest and retirement, lay thy cares
and affairs, and worldly thoughts aside, till time of convenient deliberation
or prosecution require them. For as says Macrobius, Moderate mirth at our
tables, beautifieth the body, enlightneth the mind, and causes a good
digestion in the stomach, delights our selves and our company, and
increases knowledge: and with his opinion likewise, it seems altogether
convenient and fitting, that our discourse at the table should either concern
the natures of those meats and drinks we furnish our tables with; or the
natures and conditions of those that accompany us at our Tables, or ingenious
positions and questions, to exercise our wits at our Tables, or of such
pleasant conceits and jests as do exhillerate our company, and cause mirth at
our Tables.

And therefore I have determined to call this present work, The Philosophers
Banquet; dividing it into four equal parts or Books, as the nature of the
four subjects we chiefly handle, conveniently require.

THE PHILOSOPHERS BANQVET.
CHAP. I. Of MAN.
IN the Creation of the World, and the admirable composition and frame thereof,
with the diversityand distinction of all the creatures therein, and the
several forms, shapes, dispositions, and Natures there^of: although the least
of them in co^ation, may take us up with wonder and astonishment perpetually,
yet to his Omnipotency and Power that created them, they were facile and easy:
For he spoke but the Word, and they were made; Fiat Lux, and facta est Lux: Let
there be Light, and there was Light: and so of the rest. But when Man was to be
made, as Lord and Ruler over all the rest, there was a conjunction of the
Trinity, and consultation of the Godhead, about the producement of so
excellent a creature: Faciamus, Let us make man according to our Image; Indue
him with soul and body, capability, and reason, giving him dominion over the
Fowls of the air, the Fishes of the Sea, and all the creatures of the Earth.
Therefore Man thus highly honored, thus deliberately made, endued with a form
so Angelical, prerogatives so royal; Status corporis celsus, erectus in
Coelum; a stature of body ascendant, and lifted up toward Heaven: a mind so
delate and ample, able to comprehend the height and depth of mysteries, asuring
the World in a moment; yet not contained in the world, as one writes Men's D^
simulac^
very pithily of this speedy messenger:

She is sent as so one to China, as to Spain
And thence returns as so one as she is sent:
She measures with like length, and with like pain,
An elm of silk, and heavens wide spreading tent.
The contemplation whereof, made King David, being stirred up with the wonder
and love of such a workman, to break forth into this 138. Psalm of passion, I
will magnify thy Name, O Lord; how wonderfully am I made? All the works of
thy hands are wonderful, as my souie has tasted, and knows right well; my
mouth was not hid from thee, being made in darkness; How wonderfully was I
fashioned in the womb of my mother? Thine eyes saw me arude and indigested he
aps, and all my members to thee were as written in a book, which afterward
were not perfitted, but in many days. And this little, concerning this little
world, Man, especially for a draught of the outward shape and lineaments: his
honor, his excellency, his majesty, his discourse and reason, his beauty, his
Angelical faculties. Now let us a little Anatomise in our consideration of the
inward part of this workmanship, and how each article and member in his
function and office is ^mployed; in the which, the very tract of the feet, and
print of the fingers of that Divine worke-man, that thus wonderfully has
formed them, does most evidently appear; the which the more we meditate of,
the more we shall admire.

CHAP. II.
A division of the body of Man, and of the use and office of the inward members
thereof.

Quest. HOw is Man's body divided?
Ans. Into two parts; Simple and Compound.

Q. What are the parts simple?
A. They are these, which being divided, do notwithstanding keep the name and
Title still of the whole, whereof they were a part, as every piece of flesh, is
flesh.

Q. How many are the parts simple?
A. Nine. (viz.)

1. Bones. 2. Ligaments. 3. Gristles. 4. Sinews. 5. Pannicles. 6. Cords, or
Filiaments. 7. Veins. 8. Arteries. 9. Flesh.
Q. How may they severally be distinguished in their use?
1. Ans. First, Bones; the foundation and frame of the body:

Senseless, Dry,
Cold, and Earthly.
2. Secondly, the Lineaments are white fastenings, proceeding from the Bones,
void of blood and sense.

3. Thirdly, the Gristles are a stay to the Bones, that they rub not overhardly
one against the other, and more earthly, dry, and hard, then Liguaments, but
not so much as the Bones.

4. Fourthly, the sinews are a tough substance, proceeding from the brain, or
marrow of the backbone, and give sense and motion; which the former do not,
being altogether insensible.

5. The office of the Pannicles, which are little skins, made of sinues and
liguaments, are to defend and keep together the members, and to impart to many
of them sense; ^he 3 first, ^e 3 prin^pal mem^rs of life first for^ed in the
^ombe.
as to the Heart, Liver, Brain, Lungs, Spleen, and Kidneys.

6. The Filiaments serve to draw nourishment, being as it were slender threeds,
and some to retain the same and expel what is superfluous.

7. The veins are thin and slender pipes, carrying the thicker blood into
all the parts and members of the body, and have their beginning of the Liver.

8. The Arteries are Pipes of thick and strong skin, which carry the vital
spirit throughout all the body, and proceed from the heart, they are also
called Pulses: The Veins and Arteries are joined together, to the intent the
Arteries might receive Nourishment from the blood, and the blood in the veins,
warmth from the vital spirits in the Arteries.

9. The Flesh is a substance made of thick blood congealed, and is (as it
were) the clothing of the body.

And so these are the parts, divisions, and offices of the members belonging to
the body of Man, framed by the wonderful composition, and providence of God.

A comparisen of Man's age, to the four seasons of the year.

1. First, his Infancy is compared to the Spring, because it is hot and moist.

2. Secondly, his Adoloscency, or youth, to the Summer, because it is hot and
dry.

3. Thirdly, his virility or manhood, to Autumn, cold and moist.

4. Fourthly, his old Age to Winter, being cold and dry.

CHAP. III. How to choose out a place fitting for the erecting of a convenient
habitation for the Pleasure, Rest, and solace of Man, and the exercise of this
his admirable composition and Faculty.
FIrst, single out a convenient place or soil, where you mean to erect your
Edifice or building, not far distant from some running River, Fountain, or
other water, and bordering near some Thicket or Grove; or shadowed with Elmes,
or other Trees, for they are a very delectable object to the Eye; for they many
times besides, break the heat of the Sun, and the rage of the winds, and are
convenient both for shelter and sight. And likewise as in these, so you must be
regardfull, that the air wherein your situation should be, be not corrupt and
damped by the Exhalation of Fogges, and other vapors sucked up by the Sun
from Fennes and Marshes, and other low and rotten grounds there neare-unto
neighboring. For the air is a great preserver, or drawer-on of health or
sickness, and has a powerful hand in the state of every man's body; and is
the original cause of many dangerous diseases, and much continued health.

And for the Foundation thereof, it is necessary and convenient, that it be
placed upon a dry and sandy ground, of some fit height and elevation, with the
windows toward the Sunnerising, except the prospect otherwise persuade you.

All these things being thus considered and effected, compass in a plot of
ground convenient for a Garden, which stored with variety of sweet herbs and
flowers, yields much content and profit, both for the pleasure and health of
man. To the which, not impertinent, wrote that Doctor, who thus versified his
Direction:

Aer fit mundus, habitabili^, ^c luminosus,
Infectus neque sit, nec olens Foetore cloa^.
Which is thus Englished.

A Builder that will follow wise direction,
Must first foresee before his house he make,
That the air be clear, and free from all infection,
And not annoyed with stench of ditch or Lake.
And as for the situation to the former directions, I add, that a care be had
that the ways be good, and fair; and that there be convenient woods, waters,
and such like; not being ore-topt with too high hills to hinder prospect, or to
pen in too much heat, or cold; causing thereby too sudden changes: after this,
for the building I thus advise briefly, Let it be rather useful then
sumptuous, like enchanted Castles built in the air; out of which Knights
errant were wont to rescue captived Ladies: thus furnished with a convenient
seat and building, then let the studious of health be observant what meats and
drinks are most nutritive, and what time most convenient to be taken as they
hereafter follow.

CHAP. IIII, Of the hours of Eating, and of the times appointed for that
service: of which one says: Horacibiest qvando stomachus desided rat escam.
THat there are dietary times and hours appointed for man's Repast and
Refection, as decency and order requires, is not unknown unto any, yet we
though allowing they may be observed at all times for civility and fashion,
conclude, we may not sometimes partake of them without satiety and danger. For
concerning our times of eating, Rasis says, it is then most convenient to eat
(not at the times appointed) unless it so happen that the substance and weight
of our meats before taken are decocted and descended to the inferior parts of
the Belly; and those parts are become light and easy in themselves, in the
which no extention or crudity remains: convenient exercise having proceeded
thereupon. For indeed to prescribe against the strictness of rule, whenever
the appetite best serves, then it is thought most wholesome and convenient to
eat. For as says Rasis, we must be wary we dull not the edge thereof by
overlong fasting and breaking of hours, unless it prove false unto us, as it
does most usual with Drunkards, and such like unordered and ill Dieted
persons: but after that a man of good observation and Diet shall desire to eat,
and the nourishment taken before was neither gross nor much, and which he
finds now well digested, let him then Diet himself an^w without delay; for if
he defer so long that he lose his appetite and stomach which before served
him well, then is he either to take the sirrup of violets, vinegar, or warm
water, and then to keep fasting, till by vomit his appetite be renewed again.

And furthermore, it is to be observed, that every man take those meats that
stand best with the state and disposition of his Body, and do eat as often as
before he has been most accustomed unto; for use and custom being once
associates of long familiarity, do so incorporate and colleague withus, that
they become part of our selves; unless he have grown upon an ill ordered
custom, which is altogether to be taken heed of and avoided, though not
suddenly, as at once, yet by little and little; For, Consuetudo est altera
natura; Custom is another Nature, and will not easily forsake us hastily: And
for our times of repast, they should be so ordered, that at least we should
eat once in one day, and at most not above twice: or that which is more
temperate, to eat thrice in two days. For as it is good for them to eat twice
in one day, that have weak and moist bodies, so it is hurtful for them that
have bodies fat and gross; but to those that use much exercise or labor,
greater quantities, and grosser meats may be less offensive. But to other of
studious, nicer, and sicklyer constitutions, and contrary dispositions,
contrary observation is to be regarded.

Averrois, the Comment^r upon Avicens Canticles, says, It is a more
commendable manner to eat thrice in two days, then twice in one day: because
it is thought, that the act digestive is finished in the third digestion, in 18
hours; for the which, when there shall be taken three meals in two days, the
digestion shall be perfected in this time throughout all the members, or very
near: whereupon we conclude, that our repast is then to be taken, and our
bodies fed, which is the peremptory rule not limited to time or order, either
long or short, when a perfect digestion is made throughout the body of that
taken before.

Diogenes being asked what was the best dining time, answered, For a rich man
when he could get a stomach, and for a poor man when he could get meat.

CHAP. V. Of the order of our eating and refection.
THe Reason oftentimes that ous digestion becomes slow and evil, arises for
the most part out of the diversity of meats of diverse natures and qualities,
taken at once, without distinction or order; preferring gross before subtle,
and light before heavy, and dry before moist; and that we eat much, and exce^d,
when we should take little, and forbear; and because of the tedious delay,
and long interposing betwixt the beginning and the ending of our meals. And
therefore to help digestion, hindered by these or any other occasion, it is
prescribed, that our meat should be prepared and fitted according to the
seasons of the year, and to the Temper of our bodies, (that is to say) hot in
the winter, and cold in the summer; yet not in extremes in either: For we
must abstain from those Sorbilia, supping meats, but immediately removed from
the Fire, as from those that are so cold, that they are kept as under the snow,
other Countries presidenting us in the example.

Avicen in his Canticles says, that in our meals and repastures, we should so
far become Physicians over our own bodies, as to mingle those that are moist
and soluble, with others that are stiptike and binding, so allaying the
violence in both, by the mutual moderation of eithers quality, that we may
enjoy the temperature of them, to our health and pleasure, by this mixitive
application of viands sweet and delicious, with those that are tart and more
eager; dry with moist, and liquid with dry. And this our Commenter holds to be
both a precept and Cannon, in this golden rule or government of diet: being so
necessarily required in the preservation of our health: and that all things
should be measured in quality, in quantity, in time and order, according to
this meet and convenient direction, whereby our bodies may be preserved in
health, which otherwise will fall upon disorder and ruin.

A little pausing after withal, both for physic and fashion, though a full
stomach would rise, and an empty would sit down: unto which, that Poet was
witty that thus prettily compared Marriage to a Feast:

Marriage (says he) has often compared bin
To Public Feasts, where meet a public rout:
Where those that are without, would feign go in,
And those that are within, would feign go out.
CHAP. VI. Of the natures and qualities of the most usual meats and drinks
that are taken at our Tables, the more rarelier omitted.
TO distinguish of the several natures of all kinds of meats and drinks,
were, I take it, a work to guild gold, though peradventure it might be
satisfactory to some that have more wealth then health, and more curiosity then
wisdom; for it has been a question disputable, whether there be any perfect
health or no, but a dependence or neutrality between sickness and health;
like Hypocrates twins, always together: and siuce I know the greatest part of
the world, rather takes care to compass and possess them, then like Physical
Naturalists to pick holes in their wholsomenesse: as if God, that made all
things good, had made nothing perfectly wholesome. And first of Bread, the
Staff of life.

Of all other kinds of Bread that are, Rasis says, that bread that is made of
wheat is most convenient for all men: because being well salted, leavened, and
baked, it is found more subtle and digestable, and more long^r comfort the
stomach, th^n bread of any other kind.

Averrois, upon Avicens Canticles, gives a reason here of, saying, It is of
better digestion, for the well sifting and seperatiou of it from the Branne,
but it is fiower of digestion therefore, Branne being a sudden preparativ^
thereunto. And that Bread is accounted the best, which is baked in a Furnace of
Iron or Brasle, temperately salted, and leavened, and made light like a sponge.

Rasis as before, says, that Bread unleavened, is hardly digested, and slowly
departs the stomach, causes pain in the belly, a stopping in the Liver, and
the stone in Reins. Rasis further says, that Barley bread is colder then
Wheat, and of smaller nourishment, Barley Bread.
and ingenders windiness and Choler, and other cold infirmities, hardening
the belly, and binding it.

Bread of all other grain, is according to the nature of the grain. And Avicen
further adds, that no Bread is to be eaten, until it be one night old.

Bread is the staff of Life, of all the rest.
Fine Manchet is the whitest, and the best:
Physicians, of all Breads, this Maxim hold,
Too new, are neither wholesome, nor too old.
CHAP. VII. Of Wine, and the qualities thereof.
Wine, as says Isacke, in his third bcoke of Dyets yields good nourishment,
keeps the body in health: neither is there any meat or drink found so
comfortable unro it, for the natural heat and familiarity it has
therewithal; exceedingly strengthening digestion, the heat thereof being like
unto our natural heat; and therefore soon converted into pure and perfect
blood: Moreover, it clarifies all thick, grosle, and corrupt blood, and opens
and cleares the entrances and passages throughout the whole body; especially
the Veins, for passage thereof: opening the stoppings likewise in the pores
and pipes of the body, driving away the dark mists, fumes and follies begotten
of sorrow between the fancy and the brain; strengthening all the members of
the body, ch^aring the heart, and making the mind forgetful of sorrow;
causing mirth, audacity, and sharpness of wit, inlightning the understanding:
but all these with moderation, preserving sometimes even in extremities. And
therefore (says Solomon) Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish;
and therefore with these and the like arguments to be given, we conclude in the
generality, of the v^rtue and praise thereof, That the use is excellent, the
abuse set aside.

Some ancient Writers have reported, that the wine of great Tyria has this
effect, that it will heat cold bodies, and cool hot bodies; moysten dry, and
dry up moist: and oftentimes so, that the thirst is hereby more suppressed then
by any other thing. Rasis says, that wine generally inflameth the Liver, and
heateth the stomach, yet prepares a passage to our better digestions,
increasing blood, fattening the body, and augmenting natural heat, and helping
nature in her own proper acts: strengthening digestion, expelling super^uity
of humors, with case and facility. Health and strength being increased
thereby, and old Age retarded and kept back: and last of all, comforting the
heart, and chearing the countenance. But if it be taken super^uously, it
hurts the brain, dries the sinews, sometimes causing Cramps, Appoplexies,
and sudden death to ensue. And further thus one writes thereof,

It Is Wine a drooping, fainting heart does cherish;
And wisdom does prescrib't to those that perish:
It heats the blood, and elevates the brain;
But yet to much thereof we must refrain
The wise man's cups not many ought to be,
For Bacchus says, I fill to them but three;
What more they take, and do not order keep,
Fighting, some madness it procures, or sleep.
CHAP. VIII. Of Mead, and the properties thereof.
Drink made of Honey, according to Rasis, is exceeding hot, and caus^th a
redness in the face, and is very hurtful to those of hot complexions, but for
those of phlegmatike more convenient: And therefore the Commenter upon Avicens
Canticles, says, that this Honey-water is better then wine to those of cold
bodies, and weak sinews.

CHAP. IX. Of strong Ale.
ALe (as says Rasis) especially made of Barley, weakens the Nerves and
sinews, causes dullness and headache, yet provoke Urine, and represseth
the heat of Drunkenness.

That which is made of Wheat, mixed with Parsley and other herbs, is adjudged
best of all men, as that which is only puffed up with forcible ingredients, to
show a strength in weakness, wherein no virtue or goodness remains else, is
accounted worst. Of which one writes,

Ate for antiquity may plead and stand
Before the Conquest, conquering in this land:
Bear that is younger brother ^o her age,
Was then not borne, nor ripe to be her page:
In every pedling Village, Borough, Town,
Ale played at football, and tript all lads down:
And though she is rivall'd now by Beer her mate,
Most Doctors wait on her, that shows her state.
CHAP. X. Hereafter follows a discourse of the natures of all kinds of flesh.
FLesh (as says Isacke) is of great nourishment, fatt^ning the body, and
making it strong and lusty; and those that use it continually, and in ample
manner, are so replenished therewith, that they find a fullness of blood and
strength in nature, and need often Phlebotomy, and especially the more, if they
add wine thereunto.

Commonly all Flesh much heats, and therefore is not held convenient for those
that have agues or fullness of blood, or any other diseases that are nourished
thereby. That flesh that is red without fatness, is of greater nourishment
than that which is fat; and engenders less superfluities, and more strengthens
the stomach: We divide all manner of Flesh into these two kinds, gross and
fine; those which are gross, are convenient for men of labor and exercise:
those which are more subtle and easy, to those of contrary dispositions, yet
not utterly abandoning the former, lest thereby they abandon their strength: to
which effect one writes merrily, and may be thought on seriously, as
follows,

Two men being once put to their choice of meat,
The one would gross, the other finer eat:
The one chose Beef and Mutton for his share,
The other Partridge, Plover, Pidgeon, Stare;
These and no other might they feed or take,
For certain years, and for experience sake:
The time expired, they both were brought to view,
To see of these, the effects that would ensue:
The first thus Dieted with homely fare,
Was fat and frolic, the other lean and bare:
And he cried Beef, still looking huge and big,
The other weak and bare, exclaimed on Pig
And his winged dainties, whose sweet meat were sour
To him, eatvp ofthose he did devour
CHAP. XI. Of wild flesh.
EVery living creature generally, according to Isacke, in his tstird book of
Dyets, is either wild or tame; the flesh of all wild Beasts is (for the most
part) more dry, and of harder digestion, then of the tame, and yields a worse
nourishment to the body, by reason of their much motion and labor, and heat of
the air, and Sun wherein they live without shelter or shade, by which they
are so parched and dried up, that they are scarce manducable; at least little
nourishing, excepting only the wild Goat, whose natural coldness and
humidity, by heat and labor, is both allayed and tempered: as also through
their much motion, and agitation, the savor and rankness of their flesh is
taken away; and so becoms a fit help to digestion. The flesh of all beasts
that are tame, are aeqnivalent with this one of the wild, and of greater
nourishment then any other, by reason of their shadowed and temperate airs,
yet something gross and hard of digestion they are, but the Male more light
and easy then the Femole, being of more calidity and moystnesse, and therefore
more laudable: But the gelded hold the mean betwixt both.

CHAP. XII. Of Kiddes Flesh.
KIddes flesh, according to ^sacke, is very temperate, having in it no
admixture of evil, no separation of good, yet though it beget so temperate a
blood, it is seldom without some appertinent cause prescribed to men of
labor, or gross constitutions, which prosper better upon stronger substances;
but men of easier exercises and devotions, a meat better than this is not to be
found, being not so weak, but that it may well nourish the body; nor so strong
as to fill it with repletion and gross humors, but yielding a well mixed blood
and substance, betwixt gross and subtle, betwixt hot and cold. And he
further says, that those that are milch are better then the other, both in
nourishment, savor, and digestion; and breed better blood, for the milk
betters the natural humidity.

CHHP. XIII. Of Lambs flesh.
Lambs flesh, according to Isacke, is not good, although sucking, by reason of
the abundance of humor, slyminesle, and Phlegm that it engenders, whereby
being taken, it slippes out of the stomach before it be digested. Averrois is
of opinion, it receives some better temper from the earth.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Rammes-flesh.
RAmmes-flesh, according to Rasis, is more grosser then Kidde, and does more
increase strength and humors, and in some degrees equals the Kidde; the younger
are the best for food, but the old for the flock: the flesh of either being
well digested, yields much and good blood, but especially the Weather, or
gelded, because the heat and moisture thereby is tempered, whereby they yield a
good savor and taste: yet Galen exceedingly disables the Flesh of Rams in
every degree, and commends the flesh of Calves.

CHAP. XV. Of Calves flesh, and Ox flesh. (vulgo) Beef and Veale.
CAlves-flesh, according to Averrois, is exceeding good and commendable, not
having in it that Skinny coldness that Ox flesh has; and for the excellent
taste and relish it has, come second to none; aequivalent herein with the
Kidde, whom hitherto we have preferred before others; yet failing in other his
virtues, engendring not so good humors.

Bullockes-flesh, according to Bullockes flesh.
Isacke, engenders a grosle, thick, and melancholy blood, giving much
nourishment to the body, yrt is hard of digestion, and slowly departs the
stomach, dispearsing itself into all the members, and exceedingly stuffing
the belly; so that if melancholic persons shall much feed thereon, it will
procure unto them the rising of the Spleen, Quartane Agues, Leprosies,
Cancers, and many other diseases, according to the complexion; which whosoever
experienceth shall find most generally true.

CHAP. XVI. Of the diverse kinds of Hoggesflesh.
HOgges-flesh (according to Avicen) is more natural to the constitution of Man
then many other creatures, being more cold and moist, especially the tame and
homebred; but the wild are contrary, being hot and dry, and of less
nourishment.

The best are not to be taken often, but sometimes, and the best parts thereof
are those least accounted of; as the feet, ears and cheeks: these being
exceeding nourishable, and yielding a good digestion; easing, and making
soluble the belly, by reason of the much moisture and humidity they have yet
provoking not urine, as some hold the contrary, and to those of weak Dyets not
so commendable: the young are the best, best nourish, and engender best blood.

CHAP. XVII. Of Harts-flesh and Hares-flesh.
HArts-flesh is melancholy and hard of digestion: the young are best, the middle
age not so good, the old worst of all, but the gelded-yong have a degree of
goodness above the rest, because their heat and dryness is best tempered. Yet
Avicen says, notwithstanding Thy Hearts tail, so^ part is poison.
their grosenesse, they are swift of desention, and engender quartane Fevers.
The utmost of the tail is poison.

The Hare especially (says Isacke) engenders melancholy blood, because the
creature it self, and the flesh thereof are exceedingly melancholy. Yet
Isacke Hares flesh.
says, The Flesh thereof becomes something more tender being hunted, and
killed in chase. Therefore says one.

The Hare's a creature more delighted in
For sport and pleasure, then for flesh or skin.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Members of Beasts.
THe Head is gross and much nourishing, heats the body, and therefore is not
to be eaten but in cold seasons; out of which unfit application is the Collicke
often engendered. Whereas taken in fit seasons, it much comfort the blood,
and augmenteth spern. But the brain therein being cold, Breeds a loathing, and
hurts the stomach, and is when to be eaten, first of other meats, yet with
regard, being good for those of hot complexions, as enemy to the contrary:
those afflicted with any cold diseases. In some it strengthens nature, and
mollifies the stomach: in others, not depending much upon the constitution.

The Vdder is cold and gross, The Udder.
and although it nourish much, yet is it slowly digested.

The Liver is hot and moist, and hard of digestion, and slowly has Lver.
egression: yet I sack says, it ingenders good blood: but the Livers of those
that give suck are H^rt
best: yet the Liver of a Hen is better then any other.

The Heart is of a hard substance, slow of digesticn, but being well digested,
nourishes much.

The Lungs are easy of digestion, and quickly pass the stomach, Lungs.
for the lightness and rareness of the substance.

Tho Raines are illaudable in two things: One for the grossness and hardness
of the substance; Raines.
the other, because it receives the nourishment from the fatness of the urine:
whereby they engender grosie and thick blood.

Rasis says, that red flesh without fatness, engenders a thick blood, with
few superfluities; but the fat nourishes more, yet engenders a moist blood
sikewise, with more superfluity of humors, but of more nourishment.

But that which is betwixt both, engenders a temperate blood, and is best.

The Feet engenders a slymie Yeet.
blood, yet the former are more light and hot: the hinder, more heavy and cold.

CHAP. XIX. Of flesh in pieces.
FLesh boiled in pieces (as says Rasis) is the worse therefore, and nourishes
little, in respect of that which has the true use, which is boiled whole: yet
it is good for those that abound with raw humors, drying them up, and being
very assistfull that way. Flesh baked.


Flesh that is baked, is gross, and yields much nourishment, yet is hardly
digested, unless it find a strong hot stomach, it binds the belly most
properly, especially when no fat or oily thing is eaten with it.

Flesh boiled with pepper and eggs, is ever hot, and therefore French man's diet
best manducable in cold seasons; being a meat which strengthens the body, and
nourishes more than any other meat. Besides, it increases sperme and blood,
making the body strong, beautiful, and able, and inciting to lust: yet in some
it breeds a loathing, heats and ingenders the stone.

CHAP. XX. Of all kinds of Wild-Fowle.
VVIlde-fowle (as says Isacke) are generally mote light and subtle then
others: All Foul do little nourish or strengthen the body; yet the wild more
than the tame, having both a tenderer skin, and easier substance: the cause
of their rerenesse is procured by their much motion, and dryness of the air.

The tame likewise in some persons, ingenders good blood, and are more
temperate in one degree then the other, by reason of their moderation of
labor, and humidity.

Of all other Birds, the Stare is the most subtle, the young Partridges,
Chickens, the Pheasant and the Hen, and the young more light then the other,
breeding a better blood, and more strengthening the appetite: the male being
best, by reason of the temperate fatness.

But the best of all tame Foul He^es flesh.
is Hens flesh, being an excellent preservative against the Leprosy: And it is
said that the brain of the Hen augments the substance of the matter of the
Brain, and sharpens the wit: which in this manner we find further commended.

The Hen of all Fowls is accounted best;
In two things far excelling all the rest:
For first, to them that want or brain or wit,
The Hens brain does augment both that and it.
And in her body she the Egg does breed,
The Yolke whereof turns to much Blood and Seed.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Hen.
THe Hen (according to Isack,) is less humid then her Hen.
Chicken, and therefore hardly to be compared to the Chicken for
temperatenesse in digestion: yet being well digested, yields better nourishment.

Rasis says, that the Stares flesh Star^.
of all other is best.

The Quails flesh next unto ^uaile.
that, adjudged not over-hot in digestion, because it engenders little of
superfluous humors. After Partridg
these, the flesh of young Partridges, yet something grosser are they, they are
stringent, yet of much nourishment.

CHAP. XXII. Of young Pigeons.
YOung are of a vehement heat, inflames the blood, and engender Pigeon^.
Fevers. Isacke says, young Pigeons are very hot, copious, and moist,
wherefore yield gross nourishment, which is witnessed by their tardinesse and
slownesse of wing: but being fledged, and put to flight, become more light and
easy of digestion; they are good for the Phlegmatic, but hurtful to the
Chollericke.

Duckes, says Isacke, are worst of all Water-fowles: and their Duskes.
flesh (as Rasis says) engenders much superfluities, and breeds a loathing in
the stomach, yielding little sustentation to the body, and some are of a rank
savor, which adds to their ill.

CHAP. XXIII. What parts of Fowls are best.
THe belly of all Fowls according Belly.
to Isacke, is griesly and hard of digestion, but being digested, yields much
nourishment: yet of all other, the Gooses is best: for her store of moisture in
her wings, after that the Chickens. And likewise the Liver, more nourishable
then the other: yet the wing of every Foul more commendable then both, because
of the labor and motion thereof, whereby all superfluous humors are dissolved.

The neck of the Goose and Neck.
Hen, are better than those parts in any other foul: likewise those that are
cut, are better than the rest.

Chickens are better then any other, because they yield better nourishment, and
purer blood.

Likewise commendable are the parts of Stares, Partridges, Hens, and Cocks.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Eggs, and the properties thereof.
Eggs, as Isacke aforesaith, yield much nourishment, because Eggs.
the whole substance thereof, especially the yolke, for the vicinity it has
with man's nature, is easily thereunto converted.

The Eggs of Hens and Partridges, Partri^g Eggs,
are better then any other: both which much augment sperm and incite to lust.
After those the Duck-egge takes place, although Duck-egs
it yield but evil nourishment. But Goose-egges are loathing; Goose-egs
yielding an evil taste and savor. The yolks of all Eggs are hot, and easy
of digestion, the white is cold and viscous, and not so easy. And concerning
the yolke of the Egg, some writers are of Yolke.
opinion that it converts into as White.
much blood and nature, as it is in weight and quantity it self.

Rasis says, that Eggs fried hard, are hard of digestion, and Eggs fried.
slowly depart the stomach: but the soft are otherwise, being easy and
light; but those which are trembling, neither hard nor soft, are in the best
measure handled.

An Egg you well may take, and crack, or cut,
Though meat you do forbear, dreft by a slut.
Or thus;

An Egg, an Apple, and a Nut,
May be eaten with a slut.
CHAP. XXV. Of Milk.
Milk, says Isacke, is a near neighbor to blood. For it is nothing else but
blood concocted in the vdders in the second course for it receives the
whiteness and taste from thence.

Rasis says, that new milk is a neighbor to Temperatenesse; and although it
be cold and moist, yet does it fatten and strenthen the body, helps those that
are in Consumptions, restores the Lungs wasted, cures the dry Cough, and
asswageth the heat of the Urine: yields a good nourishment and moisture to dry
bodies, and reduces the blood to a good temper; Likewise augmenteth sperme,
yet the conversion thereof is swift, and therefore not to be used of those
that have Fevers, nor of those that have any pain in the head, through any
disease. Those that are troubled with Collickes, or any other the like, Cowes
milk,


Cowes milk of any other, is accounted most gross, and is good for all those
that would fatten their bodies.

Asses milk, for all those that Asses milk
would macerate themselves, and make lean their bodies, being moist, subtle,
and piercing, and naturally good against the Consumption of the Lungs.

Goats milk, betwixt both these, Goats milk.
holds a temper, but Sheeps milk above all other engenders superfluities.

Isacke says, that milk being used of those that are in health, so Sheep
milk,
not often in time, nor much in quantity, ingenders good blood, moystens the
belly, helps the breast, the Consumption of the Lungs, and the pain in the
bladder, especially if it have lost the watrishnesse thereof, being compounded
and thickened with some other thing, as Rise, or such like.

Rasis says, that the milk of Butter helps the flux of the belly, Buttermilke.
the red choler, and those that have lean and weak bodies: And the better
does it those things, if some hot Iron shall be oftentimes quenched therein.

Whey likewise has his virtue Whey.
cleansing the Scab, the Iaundise, and pushes of the skin, and the red
Choler, and cools the stomach, heated by inflammation of Wines, or other hot
drinks.

Fresh-Butter, skins the rawnesse (...)
of the throat, destroies Ringwormes and Tetters, and abateth the redness of
the face, taking away the wheales and pimples thereon, and so clears the
skin, and beautifieth the Complexion: yet does it ascend the top of the
stomach, and there breeds a kind of loathing.

Butter sod weakens the stomach, but mollifies hard impostumes; Butter Codde.
and being applied in plasters, helps the biting of Vipers, or other venomous
beasts: yet the continual eating thereof, breeds Phlegmatic diseases; yet
notwithstanding more soluble and nourishable it is and of greater virtue then
many other things.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Cheese.
NEw Cheese is of nature cold and gross, neither can be said to be simply
good, being so cold and heavy of it self, but being old it varies therein
according to the antiquity: that which is of a salt sharp taste, is both hot
and burning, causing thirst, drying-up the body, and little nourishing; yet
that which is old and fresh, being taken in a small quantity after meat,
closes the mouth of the stomach, taking away the saciety, fullness, and
loathing from thence, which may be caused by excess of sweet meat taken before.

Isacke says further, that Cheese for the most part is bad for the heaviness,
it over-loads the stomach withal, and the hardness of digestion in it; and
thereby the often users thereof are incident to the Chollicke and stone in the
Reins, yet measurably taken, the less it offends; Of which one thus merrily
jests:

(Cheese,
The Rich and Poor do both eat
Yet both alike not feed;
The Rich man takes it for his taste,
The poor man for his need.
CHAP. XXVII. Of Fishes.
FIshes (as says Isacke) are generally cold, and do engender Phlegm, and are
fit and convenient to be eaten hot, and of those of dry complexions, and
especially in the Summer time, and in hot Countries: for very unfit they are
for cold and moist complexions, especially, in cold seasons and Countries.

There are diversity of Fishes, as Sea-fishes, and Riuer-fishes: The Sea-fishes
are those that are Sea fishes River-fishes.
bred in the Sea, but those that are bred in the Banks, and stony and sandy
places, are more subtle and laudable, and more easy of digestion then other
of the Sea-fishes are, and do engender more and better blood, yet slowly pass
out of the stomach, by reason of their le^e moisture.

But Fishes of sweet-waters, are for the most part gross and slymie and harder
of Digestion; yet they more easily pass the stomach; but though they are
less nourishable then the Seafish are, yet these are best, and thereby
bettered, that are bred in running-waters, being stony at the bottom, and
far from the anncyance of Cities, or any other filth.

But Fishes in abiding Ditches, and standing-waters, are worse then the rest,
for the harshnesse of their taste, and hardness of Digestion: and especially
the worse, if they be far from the Sea, or other Rivers, whereunto no
Freshwaters have recourse.

Rasis says, that all Fishes are hard of digestion, staying long in the
stomach, causing dryness and thirst; and from those that are fresh, is
engendered a Phlegmaticall blood, which does breed an ill slyme in the body, out
of which springs many infirmities.

Therefore those Fishes are to be chosen and reputed best, whose substance is
not slymie, nor very gross, nor has any evil smell, or d^e soon putrify;
nor are such that remain in Lakes and Marshes nor stinking-waters, nor
standingpooles, or in a place where they have ill meat, nor those that remain
amongst weeds.

Salt-Fishes are by no means to Salt-fishe
be eaten, unless at such a time as one would Physic himself to vomit
thereupon; If any man desire them, let him take a small quantity thereof, and
let him take it with some oily or soluble meat.

The River-Crabs, according to Auicen, are very good for those ^rabbes.
that have weak bodies; and being eaten with Asses-milke, are good against the
Consumption of the Lungs. Likewise the broth made thereof, will dissolve the
hardest impostume engendered in the body if it may have access thereunto.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Pulses.
NExt are we to speak of some kinds of Pulses, and first of Rice.
Rice: Isacke says in his third book of Dyets, thar Rice is dry in the fourth
degree, and hot in the first; and being boiled with water, helps the
chollicke, and being boiled with Almonds, becomes soluble and laxative,
nourishing well, begetting good blood, and augmenting sperme; and the water
thereof takes away pimples from the face, and clarifies the skin; but the
Rind Rice-water.
or Pills thereof are reputed poison as says Avicen, yet being taken in drink,
do extenuate pain in the mouth, and break the impostume upon the tongue.

Beans, according to Isacke, are Beane^
either green or dry. The green are cold and moist in the first degree, and
nourish little, but beget gross and raw humors, and cause a windiness in the
belly: but the old are cold and dry in the first degree, and begets a
windiness and grosnesse in the uppermost part of the belly: from whence
arises a fume that hurts the brain, whereupon ensue idle Fancies and dreams;
they are of much digestion, but are retained long in the stomach.

The great white Bean being White Beans
not old, is the better; and being boiled with water, loses much of his
grosnesse and windiness; especially if the first water shall be taken away,
and a second added thereto, and so after well boiled, and eaten with Mints,
Origan, Cinnamon, and such like. And they that would be clear of complexion,
and mundifie their skin and bodies, let them use to wash them with the flower
thereof.

Rasis says, that green Beans beget raw humors in the stomach, A receipt
for women
and procure Phlegm in the entrails, and a windiness in the guts.

Lentils, according to Rasis, are cold and dry, and engender melancholy L^tils,
blood, dry the body, dim the sight, and engender many other diseases, being
often used.

And Isacke further says, that they fill the brainewith gross and heavy
fumes, from whence proceeds a pain in the Head, and fearful dreams
thereupon.

Ciches (as says Isacke) are Ciches.
both white and black; the white are hot in the first degree, and moist in the
middle, and are hard to digest, causing inflammation and windiness; insomuch
that the flesh is extended and puffed up thereby: whence it comes, that the
eaters thereos are of clear skin: For the Flesh being puffed up, becomes
thereby the more white and clear.

The black are hotter then the white, and less moist; and help the opilation
of the Liver, being boiled with Parsley, and Liquorish, and the broth thereof
drunk, increases milk and sperme, and provokes Urine.

Pease, as says Arnold de Villanova, in his Tract of the Government Pease.
of health, are of this nature; that if they are moystened with Ciches a whole
Night in sweetwater, and the day following boiled with two or three heats, and
then strained, and being strained, kept, and at meat, being heat again with a
littlewhite-wine, and a little of the dust of Spike-nard and Saffron, and a
little salt, and supped at the Table, or taken with a piece of bread, cleanses
the veins of the Head, and the passages of the water: and the more efiectually
does it, being boiled with Parsley and Alisanders.

But the vulgar are too much deceived, that think they should be softened
again in Lee, because by that second softening, all the thin substance and
appetite is added, which by the first mollifying was separate and lost.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Pot-hearbs.
NOw according to our Method, are we to speak of Pot-hearbs, that their
effects may be the better known.

Garlic, according to Rasis, is hot and dry, causing thirst, and provoking
lust, expelling windiness, and heating the body; yet is not to be eaten of
persons of hot complexions, neither in hot countries, nor seasons. Galen
calls it the Countrey-mans Treakle; and the stench thereof, Beans or Lentils
being roasted and eaten after, will take away. Likewise* Rue being chewed, and
a little of it swallowed into the throat, has the same effect. Also wormwood,
Mynts, or wild-mynts being chewed, and a little vinegar taken after them, are
likewise adiuvant therein. The like does the root of Beets, being eaten, as
Pliny notes: though the old verse seems to import otherwise, which says,

If Leekes you like, but do their smell disleeke,
Eat Onyons, and you shall not smell the Leeke:
If you of Onyons would the seem expel,
Eat Garlic, that shall drown the Onions smell:
But against Garlicks savor, at a word,
I know but one Receipt, and that is [ ]
Sorrel, according to Rasis, is Sorrel.
hot and dry, and the virtues thereof are to bind the belly, sharpen the
stomach, help Red choler, and quench thirst. And Avicen says, that the
mouth being rubbed with the juice thereof, is a present remedy for the
Toothache.

Dyll, according to Isacke, in Dyll.
his second book, is hot and dry; and being taken in wine, dissolveth
windiness and Tumors, and the leaves thereof sod in oil, have the like
effect: And further, refresh after labor, and provoke sleep, as the seed
being drunk does Urine; increasing milk, and clensing the belly from
putrefaction of humors.

Auicen likewise notes, that it causes sleep; and further, that it helps
the bulking in the stomach, caused through the operation of meats: but the
often eating thereof, weakens the sight, though it lengthens the shortness of
the wind, caused through Phlegm, and stuffing in the Lungs. Likewise it
expels worms in the body, and helps a bad digestion.

The Garden Lectuice (according Lectuice.
to Isacke) is better than any other herbs, for the engendring of a good
blood, and is the better, not being washed in water; howsoever it is easy of
Digestion, a procurer of Urine, and good against the red choler, cooles the
boiling of the blood in the stomach, causing sleep, and augmenting sperme and
milk.

The Mynt (says Isacke) is hot Mynts.
and dry in the second degree; provokes an Appetite, takes away all putrefying
humors, supples the Sharpn^sse of the Tongue, being rubbed therewith, and the
mouth being washed with the Decoction thereof; and the powder of the dried
Mynt, is sweetened against the putrefaction of the Gummes, and rottenness of
the Teeth.

Cresses (says Isacke) does heat the stomach and the Liver, mollify Cresses.
the belly, provoke Lust, scowre the Lungs, help the shortness of wind, and
therising of the spleen: and taken of women with child, does cause abortions
and untimely births.

Poppey (says Isadke) is white Poppey. Opium taken, causes sl^eping to death.
and black; Of the black is made Opium, but the white is more laudable, and
of better disposition: Of both which Dioscorides says, that the eaters thereof
shall be subject to much sleep and sorgetfulnesse.

Rasis says, that the seed of the white Poppey is cold; and eases Whiee
Poppoy.
both the throat and the breast, and augmenteth sleep.

Alisanders, or wild Parsley, as says Serapion, being made into Alisander
a Plaster, and applied unto either Pushes, Morphew, or Scab; do cleanse it
exceedingly. Likewise ease the pains of the Bladder, and the Reins, opening
the pores of the body, and scouring the passages of the urine, and expelling
fweat: Likewise cleanses the Liver, and dissolveth windynesse and chollicke.

And further, Rasis says, it is hot and dry, and although it much help the
Appetite, yet causes it headache, and other pains therein: whence proceeds
fantasies and ill dreams, much hurting those that are troubled with heat, and
therefore after it should be eaten Purslane and Endive, to ullay the heat
thereof; yet being eaten raw, it cleares the conduits of the Lungs from gross
humors, opens the opilations of the Liver, and asswageth the pain in the throat

Purslane, according to Rasis, does quench the heat, dryness, Purslane.
and thirst in the body, binds the belly, and eases the pain in the Teeth,
and helps those that are troubled with the Flux, caused through redness of
Choler: Likewise it diminishes sperme. Avicen says, Let Warts be rubbed To
take awaywarts
therewith, and they are taken away.

The Raddish, says Rasis, is hot and dry, and stays long in the Raddish
^aves.
stomach; withal, it diminishes Phlegm, but elevates the meat to the mouth
of the stomach, and causes vomiting: the leaves thereof further digestion,
and help the Appetite, taken in a small quantity before meat. Isacke says,
being taken after meat, they allay the windiness thereof, causing it to
descend with the own substance.

Dioscorides says, the Root being taken with salt, breeds store of milk,
provokerh Urine, and women's monthly Terms; and being put into a hollow Tooth,
with a little Ginger, the Gum being rubbed therwithall, it allaies the pain
exceedingly.

Rapes, according to Isacke, are Rapes.
hot in the second degree, and moist in the first, and of more nourishment then
other herbs, yet are hard at first to digest: They do dillicate and mollify
the flesh, and provoke lust, and augment sperme. Pliny says, that the Rape
being boiled and applied, drives the cold from the feet, and has a mavelous
virtue to inlighten the understanding.

Rue, according to Isacke, helps the Digestion, and has a virtue Rue.
to expel all gross and slymie humors, to dissolve windiness in the
stomach, and moysten the belly.

Avicen says, that it takes away the smell of Garlic and Onions, sharpens
the sight, and abateth lust.

Sage, according to Dioscorides, represseth the menstrues in women, Sage.
causing abortions, and untimely births: and the leaves and branches thereof,
being fried, stay the itching or tickling of nature: The Juice of the leaves
thereof, being rubbed upon hair of any color, turns it to black, likewise
helps the biting of venomous beasts.

Spinach is good for the Lungs, Spinach.
the Throat, and the Stomach, making soluble the belly, and giving good
nourishment.

Sow-beard, or Mushrome, according to Rasis, is cold and gross, Mushrom
and being taken raw, ingenders Phlegmes, the Chollicke, and windiness in the
guts: neither is it to be eaten but with hot sawces, and meats, but the red is
not to be eaten at all. Toad-stoole.


The Toad-stoole is much worse then the Mushrome; for it has choked and
killed many that have taken it; and the best that it does, is but to breed
Phlegm in the body in abundance.

And these are signs of the deadly nature and disposition of it; the
softness, slyminesse, and grosnesse: and which being cut in the middle, and
but set out of hand, it does instantly putrisie and corrupt.

CHAP. XXX. Of Fruits.
GAlen my Father, because he eat no Fruit in all his life, lived long, and in
health: whose example in his life, I imitated, but then being dead, my example
lost, I began to eat fruits, whereupon insued unto me many infirmities:
Afterward I abstained from all green fruits, and was free from many
infirmities which before I was incident unto; and all indeed, unless a days
Fever, or sudden passion, and my Friends which were counseled by me, and
abstained likewise, in their whole lives, were not troubled with many diseases.

Figs, according to Rasis, do Figs.
cleanse the Reins from the Gravel and stone; but being new, they are windy,
though otherwise they breed little of ill humor, especially if they find the
stomach clean: But if not, they putrify Figsbreed Lice.
therein, and corrupt, and the often eating thereofbreeds Lice.

Datet are hot, and give a nourishment to the body, thickning Dates.
the gross blood, and polluting it, especially if taken often at meat:
likewise they hurt the Teeth, and increase Phlegm.

Dioscorides says, Dates are hot and moist in the second degree, and easier
digested then Figs, and more provoke Urine, but those that use them, shall be
incident to the swelling of the spleen and Lyver.

Grapes, as says Rasis, being Grapes.
ripe and sweet, are hot in themselves, yet of less heat then Dates, neither
do they cause opilations as Dates do: yet are they windy, and some degree
more hurtful; they fatten the body much, and cause erection of the yard; but
those of the slenderest skin, do the soonest descend, and are lest windy.
Those which are sour and tart, are of less heat than the sweet; and these
being washed in cold water, and eaten before meat, do quench the heat in the
stomach and Lyver.

Bitter Grapes are cold and stringent, Bitter Grapes.
and repress the red choler and superfluity of blood: but those that are dry
and temperate in heat and nourish well, make no opilations as the Date does,
although they are stronger, and nourish more.

Pomegranats, that are sweet, Pomegranates.
says Rasis, in stead of cooling the body, engender a heat and windiness
therein: yet they supple the throat, as the sour do cause a sharpness and
gnawing in the stomach, and engender wind in the Heart and Lyver; yet says
Avicen, they allay the red choler, and heat of the blood, repress Fevers, and
vomiting.

Isacke says, that the P^megranate apples are more usuali for Medicine, than
meat, for they give but small nourishment: although it be good, yet, says he,
they do quench the sharpness of humors, comfort the stomach, and the juice
thereof, being dropped into the eyes of the sick of Areceit for the Iaundise.
the Iaundise, takes away the yellown^sse from thence.

Citrons, says Rasis, whether they be sweet or sour, do strengthen Citrons.
the stomach, but especially the sour: They bind the belly, being taken
before meat, but taken after, dissolve it; but the sour are ever the most
potent in the operation thereof.

Pears, according to Galen, being taken before meat, do bind, Pears*
but after meat are laxatiue. Isacke says, that sweet Pears are temperate,
especially if they be eaten with the Toad-stoole, it takes away the toughness,
and makes them of a lighter digestion.

The wild Apples, according Apples*
to Rasis, as aforesaid, are cold; and the more sour they are, the more
stringent they be, much deriving their effects from thence; and withal,
ingendring a slymie substance in the mouth of the stomach.

Avicen says, that Sweet-Apples naturally do strengthen the heart; Sweet
Apples.
and baked, help the appetite but little, though some affirm the contrary:
the daily eating thereof fills the veins with heat.

Peaches, according to Avicen, Peaches.
if they be ripe, are plersant in the stomach, and cause an appetite to meat,
and therefore are not to be eaten after other meat, but to go before, and
especially those meats that are dry, because otherwise they corrupt the same:
They are slow of digestion, and are not perfectly good, though of much
nourishment.

Isacke says, that the great Peaches, (if they be ripe) do mollify and
loosen the belly, but the unripe do bind it. The lesser Peaches are good for
the stomach, and do abstract from thence all satieties and loathing.

Medlers, according to Isacke, are cold and dry in the first degree Medlers.
strengthen the stomach, and expel chollericke digestion, provoking vomits
and urine: but those are most directory, that are taken before meat, and do
most comfort the stomach, least hurting the sinews thereof; which if
afterward they do, Dioscorides says, there are many that imagine they help
the loathing of the stomach ^ing taken in the instaht thereof.

Of Cytron-Apples, Avicen says that the Rind thereof being held Cytron Apples.
in the mouth, yields a good savor; the juice thereof kills Ring-wormes,
the Decoction thereof causes a good color in the Face, and fattens the Body.

Mulberries ripe and sweet, according Mulberries.
to Isacke, do moysten the belly, and provoke Urine, but soon depart the
stomach: but being taken fasting, in cold water, are very cooling, quench the
thirst and extinguish heat.

Plummes, says Isacke, are of two sorts, white and red: The Plummes
white are hard of digestion, and hurtful to the stomach; the red are moist
and soluble by nature, and much mollify the belly, and help the red choler;
yet being taken often, hurt the stomach; but before meat ever the less.

Cherries, according to Isacke, are very convertible, but engender a Cherries.
gross^Phlegme and slymin^s in the concave places of the Lyver and spleen, and
therefore oftentimes engender Fevers, and are bad all manner of ways, but best
if taken before meat: for otherwise they swim on the top of the stomach
being full, and there are soon turned into rottenness.

The Almond, according to Almonds.
Rasis, is temperate and hot; and although it supples the throat, yet it is
heavy to the stomach, and there does remain long, opening the opilations of
the spleen, and allaying the heat of the urine, and being eaten with Sugar, do
increase sperme.

Garden-Parsley, says Isacke, eaten, opens opilations, provokes Parsley.
Urine, binds the belly, hurts the diseased of the Falling Sickness, and is
especially bad for women with child, breeding ulcers and Pushes upon the body
thereof: neither can we commend the virtue thereof to any, because it contracts
all the humors in every member together in the stomock, whence proceeds
vomiting, the Seed and branches, both provoke Urine, yet the seed more then the
branches.

Orage or Attriplex, as says Orage, or Artiplex
Rasis, is cold and moist, does mollify the belly, and nourish well, and is
good for those that have hot Lyvers: Yet Pliny says, that by them many
diseases are engendered as wheales, and pushes, and such like.

Red-Carrots, according to Rasis, Red Carrots.
are hot and windy, and hard of digestion, and do add a sharpness unto the
sperme; withal, provoking urine and lust, as begetting ill blood and humors.

Beets, according to Pliny, are Beets.
of two kinds, white and black * The black being sodden in water, do cure
the Itch, and the juice thereof does help the giddiness in the Head, and
allayes the singing in the Ears; and likewise as it provokes urine, and
helps the pain in the Teeth, it stirs lust, and excites: It is always
good against poison.

Borage, a^cording to Constantine, is hot and moist in the first Borage.
degree, and naturally purges the red choler, and eases the Heartache. The
herb eaten raw, according to Platea, begets good blood. The stalk, as says
Rasis, ingenders the black choler, and begets fantasies and dreams, yet does
lenifie the breast, and throat, and aslwageth drunkenness.

The broth thereof drunk without the herb, loses the belly, but the herb
eaten with the broth, hindeth it, by the strange contrariety it has: And
therefore that the extremity may be tempered, let the first broth be cast away,
and after boil it, with something that is fat.

Onyons, as says Avicen, being Onyons.
eaten with vinegar, do neither cool nor heat, cause Thirst, nor suppress
it. For these virtues it is most commended, as says Diossorides, that it
helps the appatite being eaten, as the juice thereof dropped into the nose,
purges the Head. The juice whereof, rubbed with vinegar upon the Face, takes
away spots: the much eating thereof molifieth the belly, and provokes to
sleep.

Gourds, says Avicen, much prevail against choler, yet are Gourds.
hurtful for mellancholy and phlegmatike persons, the juice Receipt for
toothache
thereof held long in the mouth, asswageth Tooch-ache.

Cummin is hot and dry, according to Rasis, and much helps Cummi^
digestion, dissolveth windiness; Taken with vinegar, stay the monthly terms
of women, and being taken in drink, or anointed thereon, stops the
bleeding of the nose, and often used, it causes palenesse, and abateth color:
as the seed thereof being mingled with water or drink, allayes the windiness
and griping of meats boiled with them, and being severally taken, kills worms in
the maw.

Fennel, as says Isacke, and the seed thereof, augmenteth milk, Fennel.
helps the opilation of the lyver, purges the raines, and bladder, and
breaks the stone, and is forcible against Quotidian-agues, and taken with
meat, helps the running of the eyes.

Isope (as says Rasis) is very hot, Isope.
and being much eaten, dims the sight.

Bitter-Almonds, according to Bieter Almonds'.
Isacke, are hot and dry in the end of the second digestion, do both extenuate
and strengthen the stomach, and dissolve all slymie and gross humors:
Likewise cleares the breast and the Lungs from Phlegm, and opens the opilations
of the Lyver and spleen.

Nuts, according to Rasis, do Nuts.
turn all chollericke thick humors that they find in the stomach, into
choler it self; and do cause an aching and giddiness in the head; but that
this hurtful and ill nature may be taken from them (says one) they ought to
be laid a whole night in warm wat^r, and so to be cleansed and moistened.

Dioscorides says, two Nuts, with two dry Figs, and twenty Rue leaves, with
a grain of salt, Pr^seruatiue against posson.
being all beaten together, and eaten fasting, make a special preservative
against all poison.

Filbers, according to Rasis, are less hot than small-nuts, but more Filberds.
heavy; and they are virtuous in Medicine, against the prickings of Scorpions.
Serapion says, that Filberds being roasted, and eaten with a little Pepper,
do exsiccate and dry up Rhumes.

Chestnuts, according to Constantine, Chestnuts.
are windy, and provoke lust, ye^lding much nourishment, yet are hard of
digestion, but being roasted (says he) become more easy and behoveful, both
in goodness and taste.

The Wall-nut (says Isacke) is Walnut.
unobedient to Digestion, and much hinders egestion, though it procure Urine:
and the cating thereof (says he) are commonly more for pleasure than profit,
since they little nourish the body, but much offend it.

CHHP. XXXI. Of sundry kinds of Spices.
PEpper (according to Isacke) as aforesaid, well digesteth our Pepper.
meat, allaying the windiness therein, yet being a spice very hot, much heats
the stomach and the Lyver, hurting those exceedingly that have hot bodies,
especially much used in the summer.

Ginger is hot and moist, and a Ginger.
Digester of meat likewise, and is good for those of cold Lyvers and stomachs,
as otherwise much beneficial to the body; besides, helping the Rhumes in the
Eyes, likewise drying up al superfluous moistures in the Head, the decayers
both of memory and wit.

Setwell, according to Avicen, Setwell.
is the Triacle and Quintestence of all poison, yet says Constantine, being
well compounded, it dissolves all windiness in the body, and strengthens the
stomach, provokes an appetite, takes away the stinch of Garlic, being put
into the mouth: And Macrobius says, it allayes the heat and inflammation of
winds.

Galingale (according to Rasis) resolves windiness, breeds a Galingala
good smell in the mouth, pleases the stomach, and is a Digester of meats.
And Auicen says further, it asswageth the chollicke passion, provokes lust,
and mitigates the pain in the reins.

Cloves, according to Avicen, are hot and dry in the third degree, and well
relish the body, sharpens Clou^s.
the sight, helps the pain in the stomach and Lyver.

Cynamon, according to Rasis, is hot and dry, and strengthens the stomach and
the Lyver, helps ^namen
digestion, expels windiness, opens opilations, provokes the Menstrues and
urine.

Saffron, according to Isacke, is hot and dry in the first degree, Saffron.
strengthens the stomach and Lyver, and is good against the shortness of the
wind, and likewise for women laboring with child. Rasis speaking of himself,
says; There was a woman in travel long, and could not be delivered, and I
gave unto her 3. 1 of saffron, and she was presently delivered: and likewise of
others have I often tried it, and found it unfallible: And further in the A
receipt against drunkenness.
commendations thereof (says he) it being put into a cup of wine, and drunken
therein, much exhillerateth the heat, and cheareth the countenance.

Pliny, in his second book says, that he that first drinks Saffron in the
morning, may drink all day after with what company soever, and never be
offended therewith.

Carawayes, according to Constantine, Carawais
are hot and dry in the third degree, and dissolve windiness, strengthen the
stomach, and kill worms in the belly, further digestion, and provoke urine.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Sawces; as Mustard, Salt, Vinegar, Honey, and Oil.
MVstard is hot and dry, in the middle of the fourth degree: and thereby dryes
up the Mustard
moisture of the head and the stomach: And some say, that being drunk in the
Morning fasting, it cleares the humors of the head, and much helps the
understanding. Pliny says in his second book, being taken in Vinegar, it
breaks the stone.

Salt, according to Rasis, is hot Salt.
and dry, abstracting all hurtful and moist humors from our meats, relisheth
the taste thereof, and sharpens the Appetite; but being overmuch taken, dryes
the body, and hardens the bloo^, weakens the sight, and dlminisheth Sperme, and
breeds the itch.

Vinegar is cold and dry, and macerates Vinegar.
the body, diminishes strength, strengthens the black choler, and dryes up
sperme, but weakens the red choler and blood, makes subtle, and piercing the
meats wherewith it is mingled.

Honey, as says Isacke in his Honey.
second book, is hot and dry in the second degree, and through the pores of
the body emptieth all ill humor, caused through any ind^gestion or
Distemperature thereof, and much cleanses the veins, and therefore is good
for those that are cold and moist by nature, and especially for old men; but
ill for those of hot bodies and complexions, because thereby it is changed into
chollericke humors, especially by the heat of the blood.

And further Avicen writes thereof, that being raw, it ingenders windiness in
the stomach, and a bitterness in the breast, and a sharpness at the Heart,
procuring also vomits and egestions.

The Oil of Olives, (says Oil of Olives.
Plynie in his fourth book, describing the nature thereof,) is to soften the
belly, clear the Face, expel poison from the Heart, allay windiness, help
the Eyesight, assuage the pain of the head, and all burning Fevers.

The Oil of Nuts (says Rasis) Oil of Nuts.
is very hot and binding, and according to Avicen, helps the shingles, S.
Anthonies fire, and the Fistula in the corners of the eyes.

The Oil of Almonds, according to Rasis, is very temperate, O^le of Almonds
and eases the breast and the Lungs of many infirmities, as also the Bladder
and the Reins; yet breeds a loathing in the stomach and slowly descends:
According to Dioscorides, it takes away the spots in the Face, and heals and
closes up all skarres, and grounds of wounds that usually remain after the
cure, helps the dimnesse of the Eyes, and takes away the scurfe from the Head.

The Oil of Poppey is adjudged to the nature of Poppey it self.

Thus having discoursed of the nature and qualities of the most principal
meats and drinks usual amongst us, we come now to set down as a necessary
addition to the first book, a short direction and rule for preservation and
continuance of Health.

Regimen Sanitatis.
A Man's own observation upon his own body, experimentally, what he finds
good, or evil, is the best Physic to pr^serve health; but it is a safer
conclusion to say, This agrees not well with me, therefore I will leave it
off: then, that I find no offense in this, therefore I may continue it; for
strength of nature in youth passes over many infirmities, that he must pay for
hereafter in age.

Discover and discern the cre^ping on of old age, yield to it, and think not
to do as formerly thou have, for Age will not be kept off.

Beware of sudden change, in any long accustomed point of Diet or health; and
if necessity enforce it, fit thy self to it; for it is a secret both in Nature
and State, That it is safer to change many things of less moment then one of
more consequence.

Examine thy custom of Dyer, Sleep, Exercise, Apparel, and the like; and try
in anything thou shall judge hurtful, to discontinue it by degrees; but so, as
if thou do find any inconvenience by the change, thou may return: For, it
is hard to distinguish that which is generally held good and wholesome, from
that which is good particularly, and fit only for thine own body.

To be free minded, and chearefully disposed at hours of meat, sleep, and of
exercise, is one of the best precepts of long lasting life.

As for the passions and studies of the mind, avoid envy, anxious fears,
anger, fretting inwardly, subtle and knotty Inquisitions, sudden joys, and
exhilerations in excess, sadness not communicated. Entertain hopes, mirth
rather then joy, variety of delights, rather than surfeit of some one wonder,
and admiration: And therefore, Novelties and studies that fill the mind with
splendid and illustrious object, as Histories, Fables, and contemplations of
this Nature, are good.

If you fly Physic in health altogether, it will be too strange for your body
when you shall need it: if you make it too familiar, it will work no
extraordinary effect when sickness comes. I commend rather some diet for
certain seasons, then frequent use of Physic, except it be grown into a
custom; for those dyets alter the body more, and trouble it less.

Despise no new accident in your body, but ask opinion of it, and that quickly.

In sickness, respect health principally, and in health, action; for those
that put their bodies to endure in health, may in most sicknesses, which are
not very sharp, be cured only with diet and good keeping.

Celsus could never have spoken it as a Physician, had he not been a wise man
withal, when he gives it for one of the greatest precepts of health and long
life, That a man do vary and enterchange contraries; but with an inclination
to the more benign treame.

Use fasting and full eating, but rather full eating: watching and sleep, but
rather sleep: fitting and exercise, but rather exercise, and the like: so
shall Nature be cherished, and yet taught masteries.

Physicians are some of them so pleasing and conformable to the humor of the
Patient, as they press not the true cure of the disease: and some other are so
regular in proceeding according to Art, as they respect not sufficiently the
condition of the Patients Take one therefore of a middle temper; or if it may
not be found in one man, conjoyne two of either sort, and forget not to call
as well the best acquainted with your body, as the best reputed for his own
faculty.

The Physicians further counsel.
Principiis obsta sero medicina paratur,
Cum ^ala per longas, invaluere moras.
Englished.

Delay not any known disease te^ long,
Left thou grow weaker, and it grow more strong.
Brief, but excellent Rules for health.

RAw fruits thy stomach will annoy,
Beware of drinking late,
L^ng watching with disordered hours
Will soon impair thy state.
Impatience is no friend to health,
A fretting irefull mood
Will stir the veins, and hurt the brains,
And eke infect the blood.
Eat seldom of the salt and sowr^
The windy roots eschew,
The Lemm^n and the Cowcumb^
Will make thy stomalke rue.
The bale and bane of eyes and sight
Is Venus, Wind and Fire:
Often looking down does burthe much,
Cold water they desire,
To rub, to kembe, to stretch thi^ arms,
If fasting that thou be,
To body, head, and spleen also,
Are wholesome things for thee
Noone-sleeps, much sloth, and si^ting still,
What breed they else but woe?
Who ever saw a sloathfull man,
A healthful body show?
To ache, to gout, to stone, to rhum
To palsy, piles and all,
A lazy body by desert,
Continually is thr all.
Use Exercise in measure then,
If sound thou will be still,
But after sweat, beware of cold,
For that will breed much ^ll.
^Ware how thou sit, or ^e on ground
For that thy joints will lame:
Thy body draws soon from the earth,
That will corrupt the same.
The early morning mountain walks
And eke the running streams,
Refresh the wearied spirits of man,
When Phoebus shows his beams.
But 'war at night when dew is fallen
And Sun by course is set,
Then noisome Air, e're thou beware,
Will soon thy Corpse infect.
A Pothecaries shop of Drugs,
Let not thy stomach be;
Nor use no Physic till tho^ need,
Thy friend advises thee.
Let seldom blood but when disease
Or Plurisies do call,
But after fifty years be past,
Beware, bleed not at all.
Eschew lewd lust, if thou be wise,
Hot spice, and wine for bear;
Fly sunfet, riot, and ^xcesse,
And eke l^ng sweating, hear.
Observe those Rules and Lessons well,
Keep Neck and Feet from cold,
So may thou live by naturs course
Till years have mad thee old.
And so ends the first book of The Philosephers Banquet; containing a
Discourse of the Natures, Virtues, and Dispositions of those things that are
eaten and drunk at our Tables, as they are collected from the works of the
most Famous and Learned Doctors, both of ancient and modern times.
THE SECOND BOOK; OR, SECOND COURSE at the Philosophers Binquet.
PROEME.
HAving now discoursed of the nature and virtue of those things, which are
usually eaten and drunken at our Tables; Next it remains that we proceed with
the manners and conditions of those that may accompany us at our Tables: Of
which Macrobius says, that there is nothing more conjunctive or proper to
wisdom, then the fitting of our speech to Time, and Place, and Persons, as
occasion may call us.

And therefore that the Pallat may be the better seasoned with the variety and
passages of our discourse from one thing to another.

We will begin to discourse of Emperors, Kings, and Potentates, applying
the wise sayings, and constant resolutions, ever to our selves; and that in a
double use: The one for our discourse and pleasure, which also manifests our
industry and Reading; the other for our imitation and practice, which likewise
proclaims our inclination and virtue, as well to prosecute, as know the
steps; the frugality of one, the parcimony of another, the Resolution of a
third; (and as striving to eschew their vices,) so still making the best of
every their good, the pattern of our level and aim; and because our minds
aspire, and our inclinations are to discourse, and admire the Acts and
Achievements of our Superiors: therefore we will first commence with
Emperors.

CHAP. I. Of Emperors.
SVetonius, in his book of the twelve Caesar's, thus writes Iul. Caesar
of Julius Caesar, That he was of Wine very sparing, as his very enemies have
not denied; about his meat indifferent, as appears in his travel, where he
came into an Inn to eat, and finding nothing but green herbs and oil, he
fell to them, not disdainfully, when others neglected the same; to show that he
neither despised the simplicity of the man, nor the homeliness of the cates.

And thus further Suetonius adds, that he was of very small diet for meat, and
very sparing in wine: drinking never at Supper above thrice, as at no other
time, but for necessity: And sometimes for his drink would he take Bread
sopped into water, or the fruit or juice of Cowcumbers, or of Apples.

Haelimandus, of the Institution of Princes, says further, that Julius Iullus
Caesar.
Caesar cast his Baker into prison, because he made him better bread then the
rest of his soldiers: And concerning his resolution, the success of his
wars, and the dangers of his enterprises well witness the same. As that when
upon a time being committed to the Sea, in a little bottom, and a great
tempest; the Marriner^ hopeless of help, as fearful of danger, cried out,
We shall perish; Fear not (says he) you carry Caesar. And for his sobriety,
it was so much, that when Pomponius Caesar^, vehi^.
Flaccus, and Piso, his two familiar Friends, had continued Banqueting two
days, and one night, in the excess and gluttony both of meats and drinks,
he took from the one, the Province of Syria, whereof he was Governor; and
from the other, the stewardship of his house, for the hate he bare thereunto.

It is always set down in the acts of the Romans, that Augustus Caesar was a
man of small Diet, Augustus Caesar.
whom a little Bread, or a few small Fishes, or a few green figs, or a little
Cheese would suffice; and where it is further added, that he would feed in any
place, or at any time when his stomach best served him.

Suctonius reports, that Tybe^ius Tyberius Ner^.
the Emperor was at first very Regular and civil, tracing the steps of his
father, but afterward became so debauched, and exorbitant a person, so
exceeding in drunkenness and gluttony, that of Tyberius he was called
Biberius; of Claudius, Caldius; of Nero, Mero: and so proceeded from one bad,
to another worse; that at last he might be superlative in evil, eternally
famous for his infamy. He caused the City of Rome to be set on fire in four
several places at once, and whilst it burned, rejoicing in some sort with
Heliogabulus, to be heir to himself; he played upon his Lute, reciting
certain verses out o^ Homer: Yet as if this were not enough (says the same
Author) that he might be unparalleld for ever, he afterward caused the belly
of his own Mother to be ripped, to see the place wherein he was bred, and
once lay. He caused Senica his School master to be set in warm bath, all his
veins being cut, that he might bleed to death; as you may see in his Effigies
before his book.

Domitian the Emperor, excelling in pride, amongst many other Domitian
of his abominations, gave command to his Subjects to call him Saint (...)
ban^ed to Pathmos
god: In his time Saint John was banished to Pathmos.

This Emperor, for his cruelty afterward, was murdered by his own wife: an
unnatural death, for an abominable life.

Hegysippus reports of Vitellius the Emperor, in his fourth Vitellius the
(...) rour.
book of the destruction of Jerusalem, that when the City was besieged, and he
enuiron'd round with his enemies, yet that still he continued in his riotous
excess of gluttony and drunkenness, even to the very last hour, lest he
should lose the glory of his former shame; when in the end he was pulled from
his Banquet, dragged into the very midst of the City, and there slain; at once
^uing and bleeding, pouring out his blood, and casting up his gall; which if he
had long lived, what with his various luxury, and copious gluttony, he had
wasted and consumed the whole Roman Empire. To conclude, he was slain when he
had reigned eight months, and five days, the price of which time, Rome has
long felt to lie heavy upon her.

Of Adrian the Emperor, I find nothing greatly strange nor admirable, Adrian.
but that he was so exceedingly inclined to Dogs and Hunting, that he erected
for his Spaniels and Greyhounds, sepulchers and tombs wherein he buried them.
He ended his life by bleeding at nose.

CHAP. II. Of Kings.
FRontins Stratagemater in his Alexander.
fourth book, and third Chapter, reports of Alexander the King, that in his
journeying and travel, he would content himself with a little bread, or cold
water. Again, in his fourth book, and seventh Chapter, he reports, that in
his tedious and hot journies, through the Deserts of Africa, being with his
whole Army oppressed with thirst, yet when one of his soldiers brought him his
helmet full of water, he powered it forth in the sight of them all, to show that
he would suffer and endure it for them. Helimandus, as aforesaid, reports,
that when Piso had invited Romulus to Romulus^
Supper, where noting his sobriety in refusing of Wines, said unto him, O
Romulus* if all men would or could imitate thee in thy condition, Wine would be
cheap: but it would be dear (says he) if every man might drink as freely as
I may: that is, if every man might drink as much as he would, for I have drunk
as much as I could.

Valerius reports in his fifth book, and sixth Chapter, that Alexander the
King, being driven on a time by Tempestin in the winter Alexander.
season, happened to come unto the house of an old Macedonian soldier of his,
who was now grown crooked, and furrowed with age, having taken his seat hard
by the fire side; O says he, behold the subduing power of age: This body have
I known able to withstand the greatest violence of weathers, or persecutions
that might fall upon man: These hands have been able to weeld the sword, and
could have made a way through the thickest, with their unresistable potency,
and they are now palsied, and unable to gripe, scarce to lift food to the Head,
(shall I live to be so?) The old man rising from his seat, to do his duty to
the King, with his own hands he set him down again, full of compassion and
commiseration.

It was then no marvel if they counted it pleasure to serve so many years
under such a Captain, whose care extended even to the meanest in his Camp,
with as full regard as to himself.

Pyrrhus the King, being at a certain Banquet amongst the Tarentines, K. (...),
as he passed from thence through the streets, a drunken man lay fast asleep
in his way, whom by some he was instigated to punish, which he refused to do;
intending to use him otherwise for his pleasure, and therefore commanded him to
be taken up, and brought unto his Palace, there laid on a bed of Down, in a
Chamber roofed with gold, and hanged with silk of costly colors; when he
should waken, his servants to attend him, and invest him in rich Robes prepared
for the purpose, with a Table furnished with all varieties of dainties, or
cates; as copiousn^sse of wines, which was executed accordingly: when he, after
his bestiall manner, having surfetted in excess of meats, powered down his
cups in abundance, his servants still attending and supplying their
emptiness, yet making no answer to any thing he questioned, being so
commanded, applied so long, until at last he fell again fast asleep: which
seeing, the King commanded him to be stripped again into his own Rags, and
from thence carried to the place where before he lay, which was accordingly
done.

The next day, when he awaked again, he reported that he had the most glorious
dream that ever deluded the sense of man, relating, as fantastically
conceiving, what was substantially done, being sorry that he ever waked again;
thinking it better (as he said) to be a sleeping King in conceit, than a waking
beggar. By the which, the King thus morald, He was unfit to govern others,
that could not govern himself.

Pontus, King of India, as Quintus Pontus, King of India.
Curtius mentions, was of that resolution and valor, that when Alexander the
Great, by whom he was afterward subdued, came against him with a great and
populous Army: One of his soldiers deserying them marching a far off, told
the King that the pikes and lances of the enemy were so infinite in their
number, that they darkened the Sun: who answered, The better for us, then we
shall fight in the shade.

And in the skirmi^ and joining of the Battles afterward, when K Pirr^us
pressing foremost himself, and in greatest danger, his Soldiers dropping
down at his heels as they followed him, he turned about, and told them, You
must not adventure so far as I do:

Habent enim Principes peenlia^ (...) quond^ Fori^ s^am; For Kings hauce a
certain Luck of their own: though afterward it fell out that he was slain
in that batteli himself.

CHAP. III. Of Princes.
PLutarch to Tyrianus, of the institution of Princes, says, Plato affirms,
that when Governors oppress their Subjects, it is as if the Head should
oppress the members of the Body, whereof it partakes it self. But when
Subjects oppress their superiors, it is as if the Pupil should assault his
Tutor, or should kill him with thatweapon he gives unto him for his own
def^nce.

Haelimandus, of the institution of Princes, says, That Princes should be like
Physicians, which never use sharp medicines, but when the case is so
desperate, that things of easier nature benifit not at all.

Whereupon Lucius says, that a Prince should be old in learning manners and
wisdom: though otherwise young in years, as in vanities; and in many things
should imitate the practice of the learned Physicians, which sometimes cure our
diseases by the contraries of their accidents, as surfets by abstinence;
abstinence by repletion; sometimes by cauterising and incision; otherwhile by
unguents, and lenitive Applications; according to which, Plutarch versifieth.

Sit piger ad poenam Princeps, ad proemia velox,
Et doleat quotiens cogitur esse ferex.
Which is thus Englished:

That Prince does govern with most due regard,
That slow does punish, but does swift reward.
Of which mind was a virtuous Princess in the land (and no Q. Eliz.
doubt is a Prince at this day) who would oftentimes say in grief of mind, and
passion of spirit, when she was to sign any warrant for the Execution of any
condemned offender,

Would God I could never have Written. Which well witnessed her to be, as our
gracious King now is, K. Charles
according to this Rule, Princep^ ad poenam piger, ad proemium velox.

Aristotle in his third book of Politiques, thus further writes, concerning
Princes: That Prince (says he) that does to his understanding and knowledge,
bear rule over me and my subjects seems to refer his governmen^ and theirs
to the subjection (...) God and his Laws. But he (...) ^ith to his natural
man, bear (...) over me, subjects himself to the dominion of a beast.

For when Rage and Concupiscency bear rule in a Prince, himself (many times)
as good men are slain therewith: for which cause it is said, The understanding
is a Law, setting the Appetite aside.

Vegetius de Remilitari, in his first book and first Chapter, says, that the
Prince, of all others, should be learned and virtuous, upon whose good parts or
defects, the eyes of whole kingdoms are fixed and bent, either to admire or
dislike: and as he may do most good with his learning and virtue, (...)
so most danger depends upon his ignorance and vice.

For how can he give every man his own, that wants this Rule and measure
whereby to discern it?

And therefore says Heliman^us, writing to the like (...) ^rinces should
wholly (...) themselves to the study of Wisdom, and practice of Virtue. For
as the least spark or scruple of merit in them, is more spread and blown by
the breath of Rumor, then whole flames, whole ounces, in persons of lesser
eminency.

So likewise their errors and corruptions: To which effect these seem to
accord, as with their Author;

The Crow does bathe his cole-black wings in mire,
And unperceiued fly with filth away:
But if the like the snow-white Swan desire,
The stain upon her silver Down^ will stay.
Poor grooms are sightlesse night, Kings glorious day.
Gnats are unnoted wheresoever they fly,
But Eagles gazed upon with every Eye.
And Princes are the Glass, the School, the Book,
Where Subjects eyes do learn, do read, do look.
CHAP. IIII. Of the Bishops of the Gentiles.
VAlerius in his fifth book, and Oratius Pulnellus
fifth Chapter, reports of one Oratius Pulnellus, a Gentile Bishop, that had
built and consecrated a goodly and famous house to the honor of Jupiter; when
in the pronunciation of their solemn Ceremonies, holding his hand upon a post,
he heard that his son was slain dead, yet notwithstanding, as wholly possessed
with the zeal of his offering and devotion, never removed his hand from the
post, nor changed his countenance, nor cea^ed from his exercise; lest thereby
he should passinate in the nature of a father, then ^rdent in the duty of his
calling.

In like manner, Zenophon being to celebrate the sol^mne sacrisice, Zenophon.
and having finished it, news was brought him that his eldest son was slain
in the wars: which hearing, immediately he takes the crown from his head,
and sets it by; then further demanding how he dyed, it was told him, fighting
valiantly: then took he the Crown again and put it on his head, more
rejoicing (as it seemed) at the heroical valor and manhood of his scnne, then
by his death discomforted, or perplexed.

Hieron. contra Iovinian, lib. 2. introduces one Hoemon a Stoic, setting
down the lives and orders of the ancient Priests of Egypt, that they always
remained in the Temple, all worldly cares and businesses set aside, in
contemplating the natures and causes of things, the motions of the Orbs of
Planets, that they never married, or saw their Children or Kindred, from the
time that they entered into that divine Order, they abstained from all flesh and
wines, especially to mortify appetite and lust, which from thence chiefly
arises; nay, so strict they were, they seldom eat Bread, yet the oil of
Olives they knew, yet frequented it sparingly. What should I speak of Fowls
or flesh, when the Egg and the milk for their nearenesse to either.

Of which, one was (as they said) but a jelly of the Flesh, and the other
blood, only changed in color: A Footstool served them for a Pillo^v for
their heads: Bedding as coursely, as faring hardly.

Aristotle, in his tenth book of his pollitiques, writes of the care of these
Priests about their gods, and the curiosity of their Buildings wherein they
remained, their diligence and circumspecti^n, that nothing decayed that was
about them, which was so much, that nothing could be more. Some were called
Princely Priests, some Kingly, some provosts, and some Masters.

Behold then, if the Bishops and Admoniti^.
Priests of the Gentiles, were so austere in their Religion, of so great
abstinence and sanctity in their kinds, what should be the devotion and
fervency of Christians? not to come short of them that come short of heaven.

CHAP. V. Of the true Nobleman.
TVlly, that famous Orator, (whom the displesure of Antonius T^lly (...) by one
of A^. s. ul. diers for a (...) ora^on made against him for his (...)
bere^t both of head an^ hand, the publishers of so many famous works,) in his
book D^ Senectute, reports of one Syresius, a Nobleman of Athens, tha^
repr^hended the Avarice, and private respects of many great personages in that
kingdom: still ^rging un o them, that no man was borne for himself, so much
as for the good and profit of his Country and others; and therefore concluded
against them, that the rule, and sentence, and even nature it self was
pe^verted in those which so much derogated from t^ence.

Cicili^s Baldus, in his Book, De ^ag is Philosophi, reports of one ^mundas,
who being raised by his ^ferts and valor, into places of ho^our and dignity,
was upbraided of some for his ignobility and baseness of birth: who answered?

I rejoice the more that I have Ingenui^ non rec^pit (...).
risen of my self, but they may grieve, and not the less, that they have
fallen by their selves; both us being the authors of our own honors, and
dishonours. See further (quoth he) how unjust you are, that being vicious of
your selves, yet would attra^t the virtues of others in your behalfes: yet will
not yield me the desert of mine own. You envy my honor, my labor, innocence,
my dangers, because through these I have obtained it: I derive not my pedigree
from far, neither are my honors hereditary by succession. The Ensigns and
badges ther^of, are my quiver, my pike my helmet, and banner, wor^e and borne,
with the Characters and skars ins^ulpt and carv^ upon my flesh in manly
victories.

To which purpose sait^ Iuvenall wit^ily, Malo pater; I had rather thy Father
were Thersites, thou his son being like to Achylles, taking the arms of
Vulcan, then Achylles thy father, thou but proving a faint-hearted Thersites.

Albertus, upon the first book of Ethics, reports, that Dioclesian the
Emperor that so well governed the Commonwealth* a^ f^st was a shepherd, and
elected even from the flock. And therefore he is the truly generous man, says
Seneca, that is naturally inclinde to virtue, not he that is borne great
without it.

CHAP. VI. Of Soldiers.
VAlerius in his third book and second Chapter, rela^th of a famous soldier
of Augustus Caesar's band, and one that had been in many battles against
Anthony, at last betrayed by a wile, was taken by his enemies, and sent to
Anthony in Alexandria: where brought before this King, his enemy, he asked
whose Soldier he was now? whom this noble Captain^ answered, None but
Caesar's: then being asked what he would do to save his life, answered, That
he would draw his sword; being asked if he would forsake his master Caesar,
answered, he would dye thereon rather. The King noting his valor, constancy,
and resolution, sent him back again ransomelesse and freed to his Master,
wishing that all his Soldiers had the like resolution: so he saved his life,
in seeking to lose it; whereas otherwise he had lost it, if he had sought to
save it.

Frontinus Strag. lib. 4. cap. 1. says, that Flacco and Varrone, Consuls, were
the first that disposed of Soldiers; for before they were governed by
Tribunes: Their Oath was, that they should never forsake their stations er
Ranks, by diflike or fear, or any other occasion, unless by fetching of
weapons, or pursuing the Enemy, or for some cause to serve the City; yet not
those but by permission.

Helimandus, as aforesaid, speaking of the resolution of Soldiers in their
times, thus commend^th them: Our^ Soldiers are so bent, that they go as
willingly to their Graves, as to their Beds: to the Field, as to a Feast: For
in their Banquets they discourse of Arms; and in their Tents they discourse of
Banquets: Death they fear not, Honor they seek for.

Vaierius says, the first beginning of wars was from the Romans; the motives
thereof, ambition, largeness of Empire, disdain of corrivalry, avarice,
contempt, popularity; the decyding of these short Mono-sillables, Mine and
Thine; These (says he) and their regards, have laid aside softness ofraym^nt,
taught Smiths to become Tailors, clothed the back in Iron and Steel; These
have changed soft musicks into shrill sounds, devised those Artificial
Thunderclaps that have cost so dear a^price: These have ploughed the Seas,
mangled the earth, and raked whole mi^lions in their timelesse ashes: Upon
which light adventure, and easy exposure of life, a learned Gentleman of our
times, and not unfitly, draws an argument from thence of the S. L. D.
Immortality of the soul: hereunto so vehemently inducing us, which if she
were not as she is, (faith he) Immortal,

We should not find her half so brave and bold,
To lead us to the Wars, and to the Seas;
To make us suffer hunger, watchings, cold,
When she might feed with plenty, rest with eas^.
And further,

Although some things a change to see have sought,
Yet never thing did long to turn to naught.
Valerius writes of a Soldier in his time, so cowardly, that to make himself
unfit for the wars, maimed his hand by cutting off two of his fingers: which
the Senate and people understanding, seized upon his goods, and cast his body
into perpetual prison; that so he that would not adventure his life in the
field valiantly, should certainly lose it in the dungill shamefully.

CHAP. VII. Of Mustar-masters, or Electors of Soldiers.
VEgetius says, he would have none to the wars, but such as were resolute
and valorous, careless of life, and fearelesse of death; or such as took
pleasure therein: and withal, were inured to sorrow, travel, and labor. Of
which, none (says he) having spirit, seems more fit than the ^usticke
fwaine, nursed up to labor and toil, which to dig breath out of the earth,
and bread out of the stones, has endured the violence and persecution of the
Air in the sundriest kinds of extremities, which knows not what life ^escio
quomodo nimis ^tem ti ^es quiminus (...) nouis (...)
is, that never tasted of delecacie in Diet, the ease of rest, the pleasure of
pleasures; that knows not what it is to stretch his limbs upon beds of Down,
to Fare deliciously, to Cloth sumptuously; and in a word, which knows no more
of true life, then the beast in the Wilderness: he who stretches out his
hours in stretching forth his sinews, constant to endure all labors: he
which bears off the heat, and bears out the cold: Such (says he) stand in my
Election.

For heart and hand, valor and labor must conjoyne, and those where policy
leads forth, success attends thereupon, as the examples of the Romans
manifest: which no other way, but by the Discipline of their Camps, and
exercise of their Arms, and resolutenesse of their men, over-ranne the whole
world. And as we oftentimes see an expert and selected band of men, though
small in number, put a multitude undisciplined and ignorant to the slaughter.

Frontinus in his fourth book, and second chapter, relates of Alexander, King
of Macedon, sent out by Philip his father, with a small Army of expert
Esquires, and Gentlemen, overcame many kingdoms, and slew infinite numbers of
his enemies. And it was the saying of a worthy Captain, and successful in
Arms, that he ever steeled the forefront of his army with men of highest
spirit and resolution: alleging that an Army of Lions, led by a Heart as their
Captain, would be put to flight by an Army of Hearts, led forth by a Lion as
their Governor: So much in such a kind, is of force, an exemplary fear or
valor, as thereupon oftentimes may depend the advantage or lost of a whole
Army or victory: which if once lost, like a marriage ill made, undone for ever.

CHAP. VIII. Of Philosophers and Orators.
ARchiterentinus, lib. 6. reports of one Aristippus, a famous ^ippus,
Philosopher, when being Ship-wracked on the Sea, with the rest of his company,
the waters devouring all the Substance they had, themselves very hardly
escaping, were afterward cast ashore on the Island of Rhodes, where finding
some geometrical figures carved on the side of a tree Aristippus cried out to
his fellows with joy, Let us hope well, for I have traced out the footsteps of
men: Afterward going to the Town of Rhodes, he there disputed in the
Universities with the Philosophers, and the learned in Arts, of whom he was
enriched of by many gifts, whereby he did not only help himself, but also
the rest of his fellows, both with clothing, and other necessaries of life.

Now when they were to depart into their Countries, they asked him what they
should report at home? To whom he answered, That Possessions, Riches, and all
outward things must give place to Liberal Sciences: for when these are thrown
into the Sea, destroyed by the sword, devoured by the enemy, subject to all
kind of devastation and ruin that remains in the bosom, and will bring to
the Grave; and nothing is our own truly, that we may be dispossessed of.
Plotynus, a famous Philosopher, was so addicted to the contemplation hereof,
that he chose out a solitary seat for himself, separate from the conversation
of men, despising all worldly Riches, sought after these true Riches indeed
(...)

Aristotle, in his book of the Secret of Secrets, Asks what so famoused and
memorized the kingdoms of Greece, that their lives and Acts are so divulged
thoroughout the whole world? but the diligence of the studious men, and honesty
of the Wisemen, and the Liberality of the Rich men, and the love to Wisdom
and knowledge, above al other things:

Aulus Gellius? reports, amongst many other famous deeds and excellent
qualities of Philip the father of Alexander, King of Macedon; that he was
careful to have his son well instructed in learning and knowledge: And
therefore sent him to Aristotle the Philosopher, for that purpose to be
instructed and taught.

CHAP. IX. Of Physicians.
ISidorus says, that the Art of Physic first sound out by A^ pol^o.
Physic was first invented and found out by Apollo, and practiced amongst
tste Graecians, yet afterward obscured and concealed; until again by
Aesculapius his son it was revived and made manifest. For which presumption
he was said to be slain with a Thunderbolt, and so was the Art and Author
destroyed at once: and from that time lay concealed for the space of 500.
years, to the time of Anexersis, King of the Persians. At the end of which
time, Hypocrates, the son of Aesculapius, reduced it to light: Since which
time (says one) it has set up many, though overthrown more; been Midwife
to many a secret birth, and heard many a blushing confession. I never read that
it raised any since or before from death to life, but sure I am, since it has
transported many from life to death: and Physicians hold that there is no
health, but a neurrality between health and (...).
so busy besides has it been, for the enlargement of her Empery, that it
has found a defect in all health, and quarrelled with the best of all meats,
and drinks, and exercises: Whereunto he seemed to consent, that thus merrily
Meeter'd:

Who takes his meals by Physical direction,
Shall lose his health as well as his Complexion.
It Is said, the poor man's labor is his Physic; the rich man's Physic is his
labor.

Valerius reports of Alexander, King of Macedon, who sick at Tharsus, had a
potion tempered, and given into his hand by one Philip, which was under him
both an Earl and a Physician; when at the instant of his taking, came
cautionary Letters to the King to beware of Philips potion, for that he was
corrupted by Darius to poison him: which having read, without further delay or
demand, he drunk up his potion, and then showed Philip his Letters. For which
constant resolution and opinion of his friend, he received an immortal reward
from the gods, as a perpetual love from his subjects.

Though afterward, as Quintus Curtius writes, in his return to Babylon,
Dedicating some time to Banqueting and pleasure, solemnity, and triumph with
his neighbour-Princes, and States, for Confirmation of Amity and League: which
ended, as in requital of such kindness of his, a Physician of Thessaly (so
pretending) ordained another; To which the King was invited accordingly, with
all his followers, though dearly to his cost: who even i^ the midst of his
Banquet, and King Alexander (...).
depth of his Bowels, having received his deadly potion, he suddenly groned,
as if he had been stabbed with Ponyards, and so fell down to the ground
sick, that never after rose with life. And thus the end of this Banquet, was
the death of the King.

The Author of this Treachery (though most by cunning sorrow, seeking to
conceal it) was Antipater, one of his Captains, who succeeded him in his
kingdom. And thus Alexander ended his life by poisoning, in the twelfth year
of his reign.

CHAP. X. Of Young men.
MAcrobius relates of papyrius, a Boy that would oftentimes, come to the Court
with his Father a Senator.

Upon a time returning home, his mother questioned him what his father had done
there? The boy answered, he must keep counsel, or be excluded. whereupon,
like a Woman, the more denied, the (...), threatened to (...) him with rods, or
otherwise (...) him, unless he would (...) it (...) her.

The Boy willing to satisfy his mothe^ yet to ke^pe the counsel of h^ thef,
told her sainedly, they were about a Decree in Court, that every husband should
have two wives, or every wife two husbands, which the next sitting was to
determine.

The mother thus possessed by her son, immediately went and related it to the
rest of the wives and Ladies of the City; who with an unamine consent (as a
matter merely concerning them all) came to the Court the next day; craving
that it would please them to Decree, that every woman might have two husbands,
rather than every husband two wiues^ laying the heaviest burden upon the ablest
bearers, by their wisest discretions,

The Senate wondering herea^, (not knowing whence it proceeded) vntiil the boy
told them what he had passed to his mother the day before, in the importunity
ofher unreasonable demands: which hearing, they commended his wit and
discretion, gave him free admittance into the Court, but excluded all other of
like years, as held not of his capability.

Manlius Torquatus, at first was so dull and incapable of understanding, that
he was reputed and adjudged by his father, as one that would be unserviceable
to him, and unprofitable to the Commonwealth: and therefore sent him into the
Country, to be trained up a domestical life, severed from Court: who
afterward, became so pregnant and valorous, both in mind and body, that he
delivered his Father, and the whole Country from ruin and danger. Fortune, it
seemed, willing to obseure his beginning, that his end and recovery might be
the more glorious.

Scipio Africanus, he which seemed to be borne with the whole consent of the
gods, as the man, for a pattern of virtue above all other, yet in his youth
was he accessory to the error of his years, following the whole sway and
stray of youth, only setting luxury aside: yet afterward, became a man of
that Wisdom, Excellency, and Virtue, that he was the wonder and admiration of
his time. And therefore young years, though something they presage, yet they
keep not always Level. For it is the Evening that crowns the Day sometimes,
that the Moaning seems not to point at.

CHAP. XI. Of Old men.
POmponius Trogus, lib. 2. relates, when Alexander went to the wars, he
chose not the youngest men, not the strongest men, but Old men, and such he
termed the Fathers of War: Affirming in the choice of these, he chose not as
he thought, bare Soldiers, but Masters of Arms, men of Experience. And
therefore admitted no man Leader of a Company, that was not aged 60. No man
Leader of a company (...) ^o.
And being so directed and furnished with the experience of age, and Arms, he
hopefully expected victory.

Valerius writes in histime, that youth gave so much reverence unto Age, as
ours to their natural Fathers. And further, in commendation of Age, Josephus
in his Antiquities, says, No man makes seruple of those things which are
stamped with the seal (...),
of Antiquity. So God has given a long life to Astronomy and Geometry, for the
excellent uses they have, which otherwise could not be obtained.

We read in the Chronicles, about the year of our Lord, 1129. that Johannes de
Tempor^us, who lived 60. years after the death of Charles the great, whose
Esquire he was, and aged at his death, so honored for his Antiquity and
Gravity, that he was almost amongst his people esteemed as a god: but now in
these barren and declining times of ours, as our old men want their reverence,
so are they shortened in their age; our young men soon ripe, conclude, our old
men soon rotten. For as the earth decays in her fert^ and power, not yielding
that vigor, virtue, and strength that formerly it has to plants, herbs, and
vegetables, depriving us thereby of many of our former benefits of health: all
conspiring our brevity and ruin.

So likewise our statures, with their virtues, are suddenly shrunk up, and
epitomized into lesser volumes, conclude a defection in all things, not to
ransacke former Antiquities, hold we but equiuolence with two or three hundred
years passed: Then produce me such an Edward, as King Edward the third; the
monument of K, Edw. 3. his sword at VVesim. Guy, E. of (...). Chapter Brondon. D.
of suffulke.
whose puissance yet remains to this day: Such an Earl as Guy of Warwick:
Such a Duke as Charles Brandon: To which purpose he well meditated, that thus
pithily wrote to that effect.

Where Is n^w the man that lives unto the Age, Methusalem lived 936 years

Fit to become Methusalem his Page?
Alas, (...) scarce live long enough to try
Whether a new-made Clock run right or lie.
So short's our life, that every Peasant strives
In a torn house or field to have three lives:
And as in lasting, so in le ngth is Man,
Contracted to an inch, who was a span.
For had a man at su^ in Forests straid,
Or ship-wrack'd on the Seas, one would have laid
A wager, that an Elephant or Whale,
That met him, would not hastily assail
A thing so equal to him: now, alas,
The Pigmey's and the Fair^es well may pass
As credible, Mankind decays so soon,
We are scarce our fathers shadows cast at noone.
And therefore with S. I. D. conclude.

If Death destroy us quite, we have great wrong,
Since for our service all things else were wrought:
That Dawes, and Trees, and Rocks should last so long,
When at an instant we must pass to naught.
Lastly, to conclude, we read in the beginning of the Roman hystory, Romul^s,
the first founder of the City of Rome.
that Romulus, that built the City of Rome, and called it after his own name,
chose to his Senators, an hundredth of the most grave in years and experience:
by whose counsel he determined all things: which Senators for their Age and
Gravity, he called Fathers.

CHHP. XII. Of Cities, Merchants, and Merchandises.
A Ristotle, in his second book of Politiques, says; A City is a certain
unity of people, congregated and gathered together for a mutual comfort and
society of life: which City must be furnished with provision of Su^nance, with
Arts Liberal and Mechanical; for the State thereof consists upon many
Supporters. Thirdly, it must contain Rewarders of virtue, and punishers of
vice. Fourthly, there must be a^bundance of Riches. Fifthly, (Divinorumturba) a
convenient number of Divines: And if any of these want, it is not a perfect
City. Likewise there must be Civility and Concord: because, as says Osorius,
The wise Citizens of Athens, made wise by their own harms, have found, that
by Concord, small things have increased; as by Discord, great things have
diminished to nothing.

A certain Phiiosopher upbraided by some with his poverty, and fruitlesnesse
of his study, to show (though he despised) yet that he could, if he sought
them, obtain riches, foresaw by his Astronomy, a great scarcity of grapes
would ensue the winter following, whereof as yet there was plenty: wherefore he
bought of the Husbandm^n, unweeting hereof, at a rate exceeding small, most of
the grapes in Thyro and Myletus.

Now when the time came that a fruitful Vintage was expected, to supply their
store again, which f^ll out otherwise; and many sought unto them for that
which themselves were unfurnished of, he suddenly vented his (...) ^ ^ much
money together, he showed that it was easy for a Philosopher to become rich if
he would, but these are not the riches they study for.

In the like manner, we read, how in the Siege of the Praenestines, that by
reason of a Famine which there happened, a Mouse was sold for two hundred
pence: For the punishment of whose Covetousness, it pleased the gods, that the
Extortor thereof dyed by Famine, that would not preserve another, but at so
dear a rate.

CHAP. XIII. Of Handy-crafts.
ARistotle, in his book of the Secret of Secrets, makes mention of a King of
the Indies, that had a Son, whom he was most careful to have instru^ted and
brought up in Learning and Arts; and to that end sent him far and near with
great pomp and magnificence, as was fit for the Son of such a Father: But
his diligence profited him nothing; for the Child could not bend to conform
himself to any thing, unless to some Mechanical Art or Profession: About
which, the King being troubled in mind, called together all the Sages of his
kingdom, and they all agreed in this opinion and consent; That out of the
wonderful influence and operation of the Planets, the nature of the Child was
fashioned thereunto, and could not be removed.

Contrary hereunto, was there a certain Weaver who begot a son, which by
diverse pr^sagements forefhewed that he was like to grow up to some wise
Counselor or Statesman in the Kingdom: which his parents not considering,
would have often instructed in their own Art, which he resused, as also diverse
other mechanical professions, unto which by no means he could be induced or
drawn, ever addicting himself to the society of Philosophers, and other
Learned men, as to the study of sundry Arts and Sciences, to understand the
motions of the Orbs and Planets, the government and affairs of Kingdoms and
States, and such like: and in the end became a Counselor to the King Augustus.

Returning from the wars with victory, a poor man met and presented a Crow
unto him, which he had taught to speak and salute the King, with Hasle Caesar,
noble Conqueror. A second presented likewise a Parrat: A third, a Pie, and all
saluted him in like manner, with Ave Caesar: which nov^ the King affecting
well, received, and rewarded their Tutors. This seeing, A poor Cobbler, as
ambitious, as covetous as ^he rest, would needs take upon him to accomplish on
a fourth Crow, which with the expense of much victual and labor, was by no
means capable as the rest: Therefore he in despair of success, would
o^tentimes say to his Wife, noting the unaptnesse of his Scholar, All our cost
and labor is lost: Which words, with their often repetition, though not the
other, she learned to speak. Afterward presenting her to the Emperor, as
the rest, He answered, Friend, I have at home saluters enough of this kind
already. The Crow being mindful of her old garb, presently replied there
unto, (All our cost and labor is lost,) Whereat Caesar laughing, commanded her
to be bought likewise.

It is also read in the Chronicles, of the son of a certain Carpenter, which
being unlearned, carved these words upon a spear of his Fa^hers, Dominabor a
mari, (...); admarae; I shall rule from Sea to Sea. The which words a Priest
happened to read, and hearing that the Boy was unlearned, counseled his
parents to send him to the School, which they did, and he afterward became
Pope of Rome.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Rish men.
FMilius Probus, in his book de Duc^bus extrans gentium, there mentions the
son of an Athenian Prince, so Heroically minded in his wars and travels,
that having in many places gardens, and storehouses of provision, set over
them no Keepers; that every one that would, might without interruption make use
thereof at his pleasure. Besides which, he had many Footmen laden with money,
attending on his person where ever he came, that if any one wanted his help,
he might instantly supply them, lest by deferring he should seem to deny
their requests.

At Supper, it was his custom to send forth to the Market, and other open
places, and Thorowfares, to call thereunto all destitute and indigent persons as
could be found. And this he omitted not every day; he made many rich, he
buried many poor men at his cost, and ha^h left to this day few Imitators
behind him. In like manner, we read of Anectetus, King of Cecilia, that he
would say, a wise man would esteem of Gold as Earth: For as the one covers him
alive, so the other incloseth him dead; and that it was far more excellent to
be rich in virtue then in substance: who when he supped in vessels of Earth,
which he esteemed as his richest plate, would thus answer to those that should
object it, I am King of Cicilia, and a potters son: Esteem reverently of thy
Fortune, who-ever thou art; and suddenly being made rich, be not suddenly made
proud. Marcus Curious, a King of like humility, careless of outward pomp and
ceremony, ^o affected poverty and low linesse, that when his Subjects mistaking
the end of his thoughts, thinking to have elevated him unto an higher pitch,
sent him a great quantity of gold and silver, desiring him to mak^ use thereof:
which he (...), saying; Tell the Samnites, their King had rather rul^ over rich
men, than be a rich man: and tell withal, that Marcus Curious can neither be
conquered in war, corrupted with money, or subdued by affection: without
wealth being rich, without use, having money to attend him: For it is not the
much having, but the little desiring, that makes thee truly rich. As our
Author to that effect well implies.

That man that true content would find,
Unto his Fortune fits his mi^ de:
But he that (good) does ill importune,
That to his mind would fit his Fortune.
CHAP. XV. Of Poor men:
FRontinus, lib. 4. eap. 1. there mentions of one Scipio, a man of such
willing poverty, that after his affairs and service, successefully ended in
Spain, with the preservation of a whole Province, he departed from thence in
all his poverty; nor would accept or any recompense or reward for the same; nor
had he that money left to give his Daughter in dowry, which the Senate
afterward supplied, with his unwillingnesse. Dioclesian the Emperor, that
exchanged the government of a Kingdom, for the Tillage of a Garden, averred
therein to have found more true delight and content, then in all the false-Face
of outward Pomp and glory in the World besides, confirms our late sentence,
That though he was poor in having little, yet he was rich in desiring
nothing. Photian an Athenian, lived always poor, though hemight have been
often enriched by honor and rewards presented unto him by the people, which he
ever refused; as that rich reward of Silver and Gold, sent to him by King
Philip, with messengers exhorting him thereunto; urging withal, that though
peradventure he himself could not want it, yet for his sons, that he should
accept it. To which he answered, That if they shall be like to me, this Earth
alone shall suffice them; if otherwise, I will not with my Cost their Luxury
and Avarice should be cherished. In like manner, when Gyges, King of Lydia,
puffed up with youth, and strength, and riches, the whirlewinds of that vanity
demanded of Apollo, an ancient Priest of his, if he thought any man more happy
than he? who preferred unto him, as one well knowing these maskes of vanity,
Aglans a poor Arcadian, but something more Aged: one so free from
Covetousness, that he never passed over his own fields; so exempt from
Gluttony, as moderately contented with his own store; from pride, as clothed
with the Wool of his own flocks: where under his roof of Thatch, with a
small Retinue, (no vanities allure, no provocations incite, all which in thy
glittering Palaces, thronged with varieties of all kinds of objects, are
resident,) where he drinks his Cups without fear, eats his morsels without
danger, breaks not his ^umbers with affrighting dreams, his brains with
foreign and domestical cares, lives to himself and his meditation, which is
truly to live and not languish, these happinesses attending his poverty and
freedom, which thy bondaged Greatness is exempted from: and therefore more
happy then thou. His being, as one well says,

That true life which is to live,
To r^st secure, not rise to grieve.
CHAP. XVI. Of Hunters.
EVsebius in his Chronologies, mentions of Philometer, King of Goths, who
expulsing certain Women out of his Army, for their Adultery, wandering through
the Woods, were by certain Fawnes, or Wild men, as is supposed, impregned, or
got with child, as Munks, and Fawns, and Devils, have desired and accomplished
the act with their kind, from whence proceeded these deformed births of men.
Eusta^hius the Tyrant, Eu^ach, Emp.
in his hunting, had a vision of Christ upon the Cross, appearing unto
himbetweene the horn^ of a Stagge; who immediately after, as the Chronicles
mention, was baptized with his wife and family, as Christ had foretold him; and
afterward for the Name of Christ, sustained many af^ictions, with his whole
Family therefore.

CHAP. XVII. Of Judges.
CAmbyses the King, as Valerius mentions, caused the skin Cambyses, King.
of a certain Judge of his to be pulled off; and his son to be placed
therein to give Judgment; by which cruel and new kind of punishment, he so
provided that none should afterward be corrupted.

Seleucas made a Law, that whosoever Seleucas,
should be taken in Adultery, should have both his eyes pulled out. Into which,
it so unhappily happened, that his own son was the first that incurred the
penalty thereof: for whom the whole City, in love to his Father, for the
remitting of his punishment became Mediators; which he long withstood, till at
last (as appeased with the prayers of the people in some measure) he looked
thus mercifully upon his son, as to take from him but one of his eyes, and
satisfy the rest with pulling out another of his own. So remaining a
merciful father, and a just Judge: For as one says Iustissime sequitur
severitas Iudi^ ubi procedit Iniquitas pecca^tis.

In like manner, a certain constroversie arising betwixt Alexander the King,
and some of his soldiers; where, by a judgment in the Camp, the King was
condemned: which he very willingly accepted, and patiently underwent, giving
his Judges thanks: whose fidelity he had tried, in that they preferred Justice
before Greatness.

Of whom (...) thus add, though my Author grudges,
Many such Sons we have, but few such Judges.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Stewards, or Bailiffs of Lords.
Josephus recites of Tyberi^ the Emperor, that though he^ was wavering in many
things, ye in this was he ever constant, the having once appointed Procurators
over any of his Provinces, he seldom or never changed them, The reason where
of he thus gave, being demanded, that it was to spare his poor, knowing that
if he reserved them but for a while to that purpose, they would Tyrannize in
their times with more bitterness, which he showed by the example of one
wounded, lying in the way, yet not removing a multitude of Flies from his sore,
which another coming by (imagining that he suffered them through weakness)
drove away: To whom he answered, Thou have done ill in so doing, because they
were full of blood, and sucked but sparingly, whereas those that come fresh, will
sting me more grievously: Sic and novi Praefides and Balius.

CHAP. XIX. Of Lawyers, or the Advocates of Judges.
HElimandus, of the institution of Princes, there infers, Demosthenes
demanding of Aristiodes what Fee he had for pleading his cause; who answered, a
Talent. To whom Demosthenes replied, I had more for holding my peace: To which
one alludeth well, that a Lawyers tongue is a precious piece; that is paid both
for speech and silence, Valerius reports of a certain woman (an Inne-keeper)
who received money into her custody from two of her Guests, with this Caution,
that she should deliver it to neither alone, but to them both together. A
certain time after, comes the one to receive it, pretending the other to be
dead, and to take it away: shortly after comes the other to demand the same, in
manner of the former, which the woman refused to deliver: he called her before
the Judge, for whom Demosthenes there pleaded, saying, The woman is here ready
to discharge he^ ^rust, which without thy partner absent, she cannot do,
either by law or conscience: For as thou thy self confesses, it was so
delivered unto her, that she should not deliver it to the one without the
other, which thou peradventure deceitfully claymest alone, So by this wisdom
she acquitted her former folly; for the other having all, was never found by
his fellow to demand in part. In like manner, a certain old-Souldier, having a
suit in Judgment, asked Caesar to be present in Court, to favor him: to whom
Caesar gave a good Advocate: which seeing, he thus bespake him: O Caesar! thou
endangered in the Asian wars I fought no Advocate, but fought for thee my
self, witness the skarres of these speaking wounds. Which Caesar so hearing,
went forth, and came to Court in person; not fearing so much to be accounted
proud, as to bed thought ungrateful.

CHAP. XX. Of Friends, and true friendship.
VAlerius, in his fourth book, and fourth Chapter, relates of Hamm^n and
Syncias, two Friends, so combined in League and Amity, that when Dyonifius the
Tyrant would execute the one of them, who betwixt his sentence and death, had
obtained at his hands, that he might visit his friends, and order his Estate,
for whom the other was content to be engaged: Now the day assigned being come,
yet the party not returning, every one condemned the folly of his Surety,
though he nothing dismayed thereat, nor mistrusting the Loyalty of his Friend,
which now at the very hour enjoined, contrary to the expectation of all men,
returned; preparing himself to dye; which the Tyrant here a^ amazed; as the
rest, not only acquitted from death, but withal, desired to be admitted as a
third, into their bond and society. Tarquinius, for the ravishment of Lucrece,
being driven out of his Country, first called to mind the remembrance of his
friends and foes, saying, he was most sorry therefore, that he should never
be able to requite the one, nor revenge the other. Seneca in his book De
Clementia, mentions one Arthesius, a Philosopher, that had a Friend both
poor and sick, yet one that through shamefastness concealed both; which this
friendly Philosopher noting, took a bag of money and put it under his
pillow, the other not knowing thereof, that unprofitable shamefastness set
aside, it should rather be thought he had found what he wanted, then
received what he required, from another.

CHAP. XXI. Of Kins-folke.
VAlerius in his first Book, and first Chapter, sets down an ancient
custom amongst the Heathen, once a year to celebrate a feast, to which were
invited, nor any suffered to come, but the Kindred and Alliance of one
generation, or stock: where (amongst themselves) a^l Controversies and wrongs
whatsoever were decided and heard, to the perpetual preservation of their
amity and friendship.

In like manner, in his eighth book, when Decius the Emperor would have
resigned to his son his Empereall Diad^m, he refused it, saying, I fear,
(...) being made Emperor, I shall forget to be a Son: ther^ let my Father
still govern with that, and let it be my part to submit my self to his
government.

A certain woman condemned to death, was by the Praetor cast into Prison, by a
murderer there to be slaughtered: who touched (as it seemed) with some
humanity, deferring her present execution, thinking it better she dyed by
Famine than by his hand; and to that end suffered none to come to her, but her
own only daughter; at whose arrival, he searched that she brought unto her
no food, or other manner of sustenance, Now many days being passed, and he
wondering she lived so long, at last found out that by the sucking of her
Daughters breasts, at her coming unto her, her life was prolonged and
lengthened: which news and strangeness of fact, and natural unnatural
preservation, being certified to the Judges, was not only admired, but
pitied, and she pardoned of her life. Now what does not zeal undertake? or
what so unaccustomed, as the Mother to be nourished by the breasts of her
Daughter? One would think this to be against the law of Nature: but that
indeed it is nature it self, that bindsvs to the love of our Parents.

CHAP. XXII. Of good Women.
A Good Woman must first of all despise vainglory and ostentation, the
Ornaments of Pride, and bayts of luxury, and devote her self to the education
of her Children, and well ordering of her Family: after the example of C^rnelia,
the wife of Gracchus, who would say, A good Woman must rather strive to be
adorned with the inward beauty of the mind, wherewith God and good men may be
affected, than with the outward Blush and Gloss of the body, whereby the
devil and his saints may be allured; according to the Poet:

A Woman Fair and Chaste, which no Dame can
Esteem, much easier found, then a good Man;
Sets not her self to sale, nor seen would be;
Rather her virtues fly abroad then she.
Valerius, in his fourth book^, and fourth Chapter, relates, how when the
Lacedaemonians were imprisoned by the Spartans, and there reserved in durance
for capital punishments, their wives of noble blood and spirit obtaining leave
of their keepers to visit them, by changed attires set them at liberty, they
themselves possessing their rooms, as willing to undergo their punishments:
and afterward of Noble resolutions admired and pardoned: admired for their
love, pardoned for their Noble attempt, that held life inferior to love.

Seneca likewise in his sixth book de Clement. there mentions, how when
Augustus the Emperor was debating with himself how he might be best revenged
of one that had plotted his death, asked counsel of his wife, who thus advised
him; Do (quoth she) as the Physicians do, who when usual remedies profit
not, assay the contrary: so thou having not prevailed by severity, assaie what
may be done by clemency. Which saying he so well liked of, that he embraced it,
and after winked at the fault, to punish it upon this resolution:

This fact will only make thee loved for fear, But happy Monarchs still are
feared for love.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Wicked Women.
AFter the death of Ninus, Ninus, King of Assri. some suppose the builder of
Ninivy.
King of Assiria, Semiramis his wife succeeded in his stead, suppressing 24.
years that kingdom with slaughter, incest, and luxury: this woman burning in
lust, and thirsting after blood, amongst many of her incestuous acts and
slaughters, when she had tired others, and wearied her self, she committed
incest with her ownesonne, as wickedly conceived, as shamefully brought forth:
and seeking to cover her private ignominy with a general wickedness and
refuge, she ordained, that between parents and children no reverence nor
ceremony was to be used; that marriage should be unnecessary, for that every
one should take whom he best liked, freely to use or dismiss at his pleasure.
The wi^e of Scylla was openly unchaste: Pompey the Great, Conqueror of the
whole world, had a woman Pompey. Scylla. Cato.
infected with that sin. Cato the Censor, had a wife but of mean birth, yet
incontinent and proud, which no man would have thought could happen to Cato.

Agrippa writes of one Messelina, a woman so incontinent, that she
prostituted her self in 24. hours, to 22. several men at the common Stews:
at last wasted in body, but not satissied in mind, she returned.

Iustine likewise mentions, how Grippus, the son of Demetrius, having with
great danger and peril delivered and freed his Country and kingdom, and
escaped dangers abroad, was sought to be in trapped by his mother at home; who
for her ambition and unnatural desire to reign, had most unwomanly, for that
end prepared a cup of poison to present him in recompense of all his travels;
as having likewise, in his absence, made away his brother; which Grippus
suspecting, distrusting the impiety of his mother, commanded her to drink,
which she not refusing, drank, and was poisoned.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Married Women.
Ivli^ the wife of Pompey the Great, and daughter of Caesar, when she beheld
her husband return from the field with his garments all besmeared with blood,
such an instant terror possessed her, that she presently fell in labor, and was
untimely delivered of her conception, with her grief and sorrow. and the loss
of the whole world, When Hamelius was upbraided of some women that he kissed,
for his stinking breath, he asked his wife why she told him not of it. She
answered, I should so have done, but that I imagined all men's breath of that
favor: therefore it was very like her mouth never came so near any other as
to discern it.

En^ylia the wife of Africanus, was of so great charity and patience, that when
she knew her husband had offended with her maid, yet she contained her self
beyond measure unto him, both in fidelity and love; not answering his
expectation with fury or fro^ardnesle, but jealous to wrong so great a husband
as Affricanus, either in word or action; as further, not to show her self
hateful where her husband had loved: after his death she gave her in
marriage, and continued faithful to the end. When Sulpitia was withheld by
her mother Maria, ^est she should follow her husband Lentulus being banished
into Italy, notwithstanding she could not be retained, but that she got out
in an unusual attire with two of her maids, and two servants, and came unto
him secretly, refusing not to banish her self, to enjoy his presence, without
which, wherever, she lived in banishment.

CHAP. XXV. Of good Widows.
MAcrobius says, that the word Vidua a Widow, comes of Divisa: or as one
would more properly say, a viro divisa, divided, or divided from a man. Amongst
the ancient women of elder times that were contented with single marriages, it
was their glory to be honored with the crown of chastity, but the experience
of many marriages has much increased the suspicion of intemperance and
inconstancy. The daughter of Marcus Cato, when she had bewailed the death of
her husband a month together, the longest date of our times: she was asked of
some of her friends which day should have her last tear, she answered, the
day of her death.

Truly intending what the Trag.
Q. but fainedly spoke,
In second husband let me be accursed;
None weds the second but who kills the first:
A second time I kill my husband dead,
When second husband kisses me in bed.
And when some of her kinsfolks persuaded her to marry a^ other husband, in
regard she was young and beautiful; she utterly denied, saying, If I should
meet with a good husband as I had before, I shall ever fear to lose him: If I
shall meet with a bad one, what need I such a sorrow after such a grief. In
like manner, Portia was persuaded, after the death of her husband, to marry
again, she answered, A happy and chaste Matron never marries but once. In like
manner, Valeria having lost her husband, would marry no other; and being asked
her reason, answered, that her husband lived always to her. In like manner, of
Arthemesia, the wife of Mausoll, King of Carnith, that amongst many of her
commendations The Tomb of Mauso^
this is a principal, That after the death of her husband, she still remembered
him as if alive, and built for his honor and memory a Sepulcher of wondrous
beauty and cost, the like whereof was not to be found: of which woman my
Author thus comparatively concludes:

Such wives, their living husbands did not wrong,
That after death remembered them so long.
What our short mourning Widdowi used to do,
That so soon marry, and forget them too,
I can but guess; but sure it may be told,
That love was never much hot, that is so soon cold.
CHAP. XXVI. Of Virgins.
HIeron. contr. Iovin. in his book so called, there mentions what honor and
respect the ancient Romans ever attributed to their Virgins. In that their
Consuls and Emperors, such that triumphed in state after their victories,
yielded as every degre^ and dignity, reverence to them.

Nyeanor having achieved the victory of Thebes, was so overcome with the love
of a captive Virgin, whose nuptial voluntary embraces he so desired, which of
few would have been refused, though in her found no admission; which forced
him to complain, that he found more captivity in the eyes of such a Virgin,
then in the strength of a kingdom, when he, her lover and a King, wept and
lamented over her selfeslaughtered body.

Turcya, a Vestall Virgin, defamed with the loss of her Virginity, in
manifestation of her innocence, took a Riddle, beseeching the goddess, that
if she touched her sacrifices with a chaste hand, to make it possible that she
might fetch water out of Tyber with that sieve, and carry it to her house,
which was effected accordingly, and she cleared of her suspicion.

Claudia, a Vestall Virgin, had in suspicion likewise of dishonor, Aug. de ci^
dei, lib. 10.
having fastened an Image in the house of Mars, near unto Tyber, to prove her
chastity, with her girdle she drew a ship that many milions of men could not
remove from the place. Likewise Augustine in his 39. book, speaking of an
ancient custom the Romans had to this purpose, which was to bury alive the
corrupted Priests of their Vestall goddess.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK; OR, THIRD COURSE served up to the Table at the Philosophers
Banquet.
PREFACE.
HAving spoken of the manners and conditions of those that we may accompany at
our Tables: Now thirdly, it remains that we briefly propose certain Table
questions, with their resolutions, for the exercise and search of our wits,
which many times employing our minds hereto, keeps in those things which
otherwise the heat of our bloods, and aptness of our natures, so fraught, are
apt to lavish against our selves.

For when men well have fed, and blood is warm,
Then are they most improvident of harm.
And therefore are such passions to be brideled with a premeditated
instruction, lest they afterward redound to our detriment and loss. To that
end I have here thought it necessary to set down certain easy questions and
answers, pertinent to such time and place, supposing nothing can be more
pleasant or profitable, either to our selves or others, then the delight and
recreation that may arise from thence.

Question 1. Whether Air be more necessary t^ life then meat?
FIrst it is demanded, whether Air be more necessary to life then meat? to the
which is answered meat, because that is supposed most necessary to the body
that restores her defect, or makes a member, or part of a member. Now meat is
of this nature, according to Avicen, and therefore most necessary. Yet
Constantine Contra*
is of the contrary opinion, that faith, Air is more necessary thereto than
meat; For life consisting in natural heat, because naturali heat is the
fountain of life, therefore that which tempers natural heat, is the most
necessary* now air drawn in by the breath is of this kind. And therefore
those that come newly from prison, or from any other place deprived of this
benefit, first desire a fresh air, and afterward meat and drink. To
conclude, life consists Conclusion.
strongly in both, in the one by restoration of members lost, and
consideration of members had; and thus far the first very powerfully intends.
But the nutriment of natural heat, that is the origlnall of life, immediately
is caused from the quality of the ay^e, and therefore the air, because it
immediately respects life, we conclude is the more necessary, and predominant
to the conservation of life.

Quest. 2. Whetber be more necessary to life, Meat or Drink?
SEcondly, it is demanded whether to life be more necessary, Pro.
meat or drink? To which it is answered, that meat; (although drink be the
more desired) because that is most necessary that restores the members, than
that which but convayes the meat, and disperceth it in the body; but meat is
ordained to restore the members, drink but for the dilation of that meat
through the members, Ergo, etc. But that drink is both more, and more
earnestly desired then meat, the reason is, because drink cooles the burning
of the natural heat, and therefore is more necessary to life then meat, as the
air. Drink has these two properties; Cont.
the one, that it dispearseth the meat to the members, and therein meat is more
necessary than drink. But secondly, drink mitigates and tempers the natural
Cont.
heat, and so conserves it, which otherwise would dry the body, and cause
death, and therefore is more necessary to the body then meat: by which
conclusion, any creature lives longer without meat then without drink.

Quest. 3, Whether evil meat, or evil air hurt the body more?
THirdly, it is demanded, whether evil air, or evil meat hurt the body more?
It is answered simply, that evil air; first, Pro.
because it more hurts the heart the fountain of life and heat. Secondly,
because it changes more often, and cannot be shunned. Thirdly, because it
more suddenly affects: and these three manner of ways, evil air hurts
more than evil meat: yet notwithstanding Cont.
some hold the contrary, that evil meats are more nocent, because they remain
longer in the body, and cleave faster to the members, and therefore hurt most,
having so much time and means thereunto.

Quest. 4. Whether fleepe or meat be more necessary to the Body.
FOurthly, It is demanded whether sleep or meat be more necessary to the
body? to the which is answered, That the body is more decayed by the lost o^
meat than sleep. The reason is, that sleep restores not the decay of nature,
neither removes the action of natural heat from the moist substance, the
wasting whereof causes death as meat does, and therefore is the more necessary,
as likewise, because there are in man three virtues, life, nature, and soul,
and the soul's not suppli^d as the other two, and therefore that nutriment
that answers the virtues vital and natural, is more general than that which
only answers there virtue ani^all.

Quest. 5. Whether out of all meats be engendered good Blood?
FIfthly, it is demanded, whether out of ill meat may be engendered good blood?
which is answered according to Haly, that there may: the reason wher^of is thus
given, Because good Meat may be ill digested, and so an ill Blood proc^ed
thereupon; as contrarily, ill meat may be well Digested, and so from thence a
good Blood be engendered: For we must observe, that in every meat there is a
double nature: which upon the strength of the appetite furthered by digestion,
is either convertible to good or bad blood.

Quest. 6. Whether we may walk, or sleep presently after meat?
NExt is demanded, whether after meat we may presently walk? To the which is
answered, that there is a double kind of motion: the one where of may be
termed labor, which is not here prescribed for wholesome or laudable. The
other kind of motion, an easy passing and stirring of the body: and hereby
the meats are depressed to the bottom of the stomach, and a more easy,
laudable, and absolute digestion caused thereupon; and this manner of walking
is commended. Next is demanded, whether after meat, immediate sleep may be
tolerated? To which is answered, that the Stomach being full, desires a more
open action and vent; which sleep ensuing hereupon seals up, thereby causing
an inordinate heat in the sto^acke, whereby the meats become crusted and baked,
as bread in an Oven, over-heat without vent, wher^upon ^nsue Rhumes, and other
diseases in the head: and therefore sleep is to be prolonged after meat, for
our better Digestion and health.

Quest. 7, 8, 9.
7. Why in omitting our hour accustomed, we lose our Appetite?

8. Whether after meat the Body be more hot, or before?

9. Whether Fasting more hurt the Chollericke or Phlegmatic?

7. FIrst, it is demanded, how the Appetite becomes lost, in omitting the
usual hour of our custom? To which it is answered, the stomach being empty
of former matter to work upon, attracts the ill humors from every part of the
body, and of them does it feed, and is fantastically satisfied, and desires no
more: wherefore we are taught in this case to drink a draught of warm water,
and so renew our Appetite again by vomit.

8. Next is demanded, whether before or after meat the body be more hot? To
which is answered, that it is very apparent, the Body to be more hot after
meats than before, both in quantity and quality, according to Galen, in his
Book De summa Medicina: where he affirms it trebly increased, as may be
experienced by the application of a moist skin to the stomocke, both before and
after Meat; as by Physic, or otherwise. Though some are of opinion, that a
coldness after meat betokens better health.

9. Next is demanded, whether fasting more hurts the Chollericke or
Phlegmatic m^n? To which is answered, the chollerick; because the heat is
more strong in the chollericke stomach, than in the phlegmatic, and
therefore wastes and desires more: Besides, phlegm may be converted into blood,
but choler not: and so the phlegmatic man has within him matter for blood,
by which his appetite may be the better sustained, but the chollericke not: and
therefore in him is the hardlier endured.

Quest. 10, 11, 12.
10. Whether the strong or the weakest stomach endures the longest fast?

11. Whether those of small Diet, longer sustain hunger, than those of more
ample?

12. Why those that eat most greedily, are soonest satisfied?

10. NExt is demanded, whether the strong or the weak stomach indures the
longest Fast? To the which is answered, that the strong: which although it more
desire, and receive, yet that it can the longer abstain and forbear, as the
weak the contrary, though little desiring, yet often needing.

11. Next is demanded, whether those accustomed to eat much, can longer
forbear food, then those of more sparing Diets? To which it is answered, that
they may: because of the abundance of former Repletion, whereby their greater
heat is diminished, which therewith diminishes the appetite, and therefore can
endure the longest fast, and so of the contrary.

12. Next is demanded, why those that eat most greedily, are soonest satisfied?
To which is answered, that in their greediness (and often gaping) they suck
in much air, which fills tue veins and so takes away the stomach.

Quest. 13, 14.
13. Why we can contain hotter meats in our mouths, then we can hold in our
hands?

14. Why if the hungry drink, their hunger is allayed: but if the thirsty eat,
their thirst is not satisfied?

13. FIrst is demanded, why we can contain hotter meats in our mouths, then in
our hands? To the which is answered, that the inward heat within the body is
the most perpetual and vehement: and therefore whatsoever ^tward heat
presented thereun^o, is weakened by the greater contained within: as the heat
of the Fire is abated by the beams of the Sun; which is the reason that we
do not instantly swallow down whatsoever hot meats we receive in our mouths,
but by some breath and pawsing dismiss them. So invocating as it were a
Moderator thereto, but the hand unassi^ted with any such virtue, is therefore
inferior hereto.

14. Next is demanded, why if the hungry drink, their hunger is abated, but if
the thirsty eat, their thirst is not satisfied? To the which is answered, That
Drink being taken, immediately runs into all the parts of the body, and so
fills the veins; but meat being more grosser, has not that sudden
aspersion, and therefore wants that certain effect. But it suckes up all
humor and moisture that it finds in the way, and therefore the more
augmenteth thirst.

Quest. 15, 16.
15. Wheth^r those that fast long, endure more bu^ger or thirst?

16. Why we (...) a more delight when our thi^st is suppressed by Drink, then
when our hunger is satisfied by Meat?

15. NExt is demanded, whether the fasting do more thirst then hunger? To the
which is answered so, and as natural heat continually works upon the humors
of the body, for their nourishment is ever in agitation, as is experienced upon
Children, which in their young years through their vehement heat do eat more
and more often, then the more aged: and as contrarily in old men we see that
they more easily endure fasting, through the defect of their Natural heat,
then Children: and as likewise we see in men of middle age, their natural heat
stirred up with any exercise, more strongly desire meat then otherwise they
should. Therefore we conclude, this heat being always in operation and desire,
and drive the proper temperer thereof, is therefore much more earnestly
desired, as necessarily required, then meat; for as formerly the ordinary fast
of the body, desires her sustenance (which is meat) so this extraordinary heat
thereof, the more delayed, the more exceedingly vehement, and therefore the
more desires to be tempered; which so effected, p^rswades the body with
greater patience to expect the solidity of her repast.

16. Next is demanded, why the body is more delighted, when the Thirst is taken
away by drink, then when our hunger is suppressed by meat? Whereto we answer,
that Drink is of a more delate and piercing quality: at once spreading it
self into the body and stomach, making in all parts a joint and sensible
delight? wh^as the meat is slowly dispersed, and therefore the (...) thereof
much diminished.

Quest. 17. 17. Whether those that have hot stomack's are satisfied with little
drink?
NExt is demanded, whether those that much thirst through the dryness of their
stomachs, are satisfied with little Drink? To which is answered, (according
to Galen) that they are: the reason whereof may be thus given, That when all
the Members do equally partake, the Stomach is then of least Capacity,
because every member sustaineth her own want. But when the stomach it self
is only dry, although it thirst exceedingly, yet is it satisfied with little
Drink, because the quantity thereof is but small, contained in it self,
whereas for the most part the less sensible thirst dispersed throughout the
Body, though of less incitement, yet of more acceptance and receipt, though
continuing therewith longer satisfied, then the mouth of the Stomach only,
which is quickly dry, and quickly moystened.

Quest. 18. 18. Whether water do more allay the thirst then wine?
NExt is demanded, whether Water more quenches the thirst then Wine? To the
which is answered, according to Galen, Thirst is engendered two manner of ways:
the one by fasting, the other, out of heat and dryness of the heart. Now that
which is caused through the emptiness of the members, is most extinguished by
Wine, whieh is both thereto as meat and drink: and therefore only natural to
extinguish the same.

But that Thirst arising out of the heat and dryness of the heart is of
twofold: The one, having his beginning merely out of Heat, which is allayed by
some thing cold, as Vinegar, etc. The other caused out of dryness, and that is
quenched by things that are moist. In like manner, that chirst which is caused
out of heat, is of threefold: the one arising from the stomach, the other
from the lungs, the third from parts more remote. That which arises from the
lungs, is suppressed by the attraction of a cold air. That which arises from
the stomach, and other parts near adjoining, by cold water. But that which
proceeds from members more remote, is extinguished by water likewise: but
having something that is subtle mixed therewithal, to make it more p^netrate,
of which nature is Vinegar: for water of it self is slow in action, and
therefore has need of some commixion, subtle in his own kind; and therefore
let Vinegar be added thereunto.

Quest. 19. 19. Why those of moyft stomachs that desire little, yet are
capable of much Drink?
NExt is demanded, why the moist stomach, though it little desire, yet is
capable of much drink? To the which is answered, that by reason of the humor
and moisture it has, it is stretched like unto the belly, und therefore is of
larger capacity then otherwise the dry: and therefore the Scythians, English,
Why the Dane, ^utchman, and (...) d^nkmore then the Spaniards
Dutch, Polanders, and Danes drink much byreason of the moisture of their
stomachs, and the capacity thereof: whereas in Spain and other hot
Countries, contrariwise they drink often, but little, by reason of the heat
of their stomachs, which through much dryness is hardened, and of little
receipt.

Quest. 20, Why Agues, and other sicknesses, s^metimes are done away by things
hurtful, and contrary, as Beef, Eeles, etc.
TO the which is answered: that Nature so violently ouerburdened, more
earnestly labors to unload it self, which sometimes it does, and
prosperously, as otherwhile the raw cold.

CHAP. I. Of things hurtful after Meat.
1. AMongst those things that are hurtful after Meat, it is first demanded,
From whence arises the eructation or belching of the Stomach? To the which is
answered (according to Galen) that the bitterness and belching thereof, is
principally caused by the shutting up of the heat in the body, and straightning
of the narrow passages that should bring in the Air to cool it, whereby it is
the more increased, which of it self is the original ground of all
bitterness in the Stomach, and the more especially so, if beginning to Digest
it, it be afterward hindered by excluding this cold.

2. Secondly, it is demanded, why presently after our meats received, this
bitterness is not felt in the Stomach? To the which is answered, that meats
newly received, some little time do remain in the stomach, in their own
nature, as if they were without us: and therefore as yet cannot this
bitterness be engendered by them. But when as the natural heat begins to
digest, and is by some accident or other hindered, whereupon follows an
indigestion: from whence arises this bitterness, and therefore is not
presently perceived.

3. Thirdly, it is demanded why this bitterness more often happens to them
that sleep, then to those that wake? To which is answered, That by sleep the
stomach is closed up; that the meats received cannot descend into the bottom
thereof, where the Digestion is made, but remain in the upper part; where
swimming, they putrify and corrupt, and cause a windiness and belching
therein, which otherwise would be avoided.

4. Why Wine being hot in nature, should not produce diseases of like kind,
but contrary, such as are cold? To the which is answered, that Wine causes not
the disease, unless by over-charging the brain and nerves; but repletions
follow indigestions, and indigestions cause cold diseases: and therefore Wine
produces no other but cold diseases.

5. Next is demanded whether sick persons may eat much, as they were
accustomed when they were well? It is answered thereto, that Custom is another
Nature; and therefore he which has accustomed to eat much in Health, must have
some relation thereto in his sickness, eating oftener (according to Rasis) then
he which in health was but of spare Diet.

6. Next is demanded whether for sick persons, having lately recovered their
health, bread or flesh be more convenient? To the which we answer with Rasis,
that flesh: and because amongst all other meats Hogges-flesh is most
nourishing, therefore that flesh is Hogs-flesh of al other most nourishing,
most convenient for them, being most easy of Digestion.

7. Next is demanded whether flesh or bread be most convenient to those that
are troubled with Agues? It is answered, that two things are to be respected
therein: first, flesh is of an easy digestion, and therefore thought more
convenient: fecondly, Bread is easy conversion, and therefore more convenient
then Flesh, and because flesh by the fatness, does more easily inflame.

8. Next is demanded whether Flesh or Wine are to be preferred to those that
have newly recovered their Healths? To the which is answered, that Flesh; and
therefore the vulgar are much deceived that think Wine, because amongst all
other things it is the most easy converted into blood, spiritual and natural
heat, and therefore to be taken after Flesh.

10. Next is demanded whether he that is lately recovered from his sickness,
must for some certain days observe theOrder and Diet that he used in his
sickness, or not? To the which is answered, that so; and that for three
reasons: First, for the weakness of Nature, Secondly, for the not breach of
Custom. Thirdly, for the imbecility ^d state of his body, after his si^knesse,
and this reason alone is sufficient: because from (...) we are not to make
(...) ^ure, but by little and (...) therefore we conclude the ^ment or
Government which ^as used in sickness, is to be (...) for a time in Health,
and not presently to be forsaken or left off.

CHHP. II. Questions of Bread.
FIrst, It is demanded why Bread of Wheat does more nourish than of Barley? To
the which is answered, according to Aristotle in his Problemes, because of the
moderate viscosity and moisture, most requisite therein, for the better
conglutination and fastening thereof to the body, which the other wanting, is
not therefore held so convenient.

2. Next is demanded wherefore bread that is stale, is either more whiter than
that which is new? To the which we answer, the cause of the blackness is the
water therein, which in bread that is stale is dried up, and therefore the more
white.

3. Next is demanded why bread unsalted is more heavy than that which is
salted? To the which it is answered, that salt dries up the moisture therein,
for which reason likewise it becomes more light and white.

4. Next is demanded why bread of Wheat becomes not hard, being old, as other
bread does? To the which is answered, that the Wheat has in it a certain
sweet and humane moisture, which is as it were the life thereof, that suffers
it not to be harded

5. Wherefore Bread that is made of new corn, is no so good as that which is
made of the old; the reason is, that new grain has in it too great a moisture
and watrishnesse than is commendable, and therefore Bread made thereof is not
so good as of the old.

CHAP. III. Questions of Wine. Whether it be Physieal to be drunk once a month
with wine.
1. FIrst, it is demanded whether, according to Avieen in his Canticles, and
Rasis likewise, it be physical to be drunk with Wine once a month? To the
which is answered, with the Commenter upon the Canticles, that their opinion is
erroneous which so affirm: for although Wine, according to Galen, is the most
agreeable to man's nature, in respect of the natural heat, and nearness it
has with our bloods, being in degree thereto, as Oil to the light or fire:
yet as much and superf^s Oil puts out the fire and light, ^o much wine our
natural heat; and as it is more agreeable to our natures being thinn^ and
clear, so notwithstanding, it is more hurtful to the animal and sensible
heat, and the organs thereof; that is, to the brain and sinews: and therefore
Galen concludes, that water is better than wine, especially for those that
have weak nerves.

2. Next is demanded why children being hot in nature, are not lovers of Wine,
but old men? To the which is answered, that old men are hot and dry, but
children hot and moist.

3. Next is demanded what humor is most engendered of wine, whether Phlegm or
blood? To the which is answered, that because wine breeds cold diseases, as
formerly we have proved, therefore does it more engender phlegmaticall humors
than any other; and the renson is, because when much Wine is taken, it is not
fully digested, and whatsoever remains in the body indigested, is converted
into phlegm, and therefore of wine, by reason of the often exceeding therein,
is more engendered than of any other thing. But wine being moderately taken, is
more converted into blood than phlegm.

4. Next is demanded why strong wine comfort the stomach, and hurts the
brain; but weak wine effects the contrary? It is answered, the stomach
does digest, and digestion comes of heat, therefore it seems to help the
stomach in digestion, because it adds to the heat, which the weaker does
not. But wine the stronger it is, from it do the more vapors arise into the
head, and so much more hurts the brain.

5. Next is demanded whether wine or meat are the greatest comforters of
natural heat? To the which is answered, according to Isacke, that wine: and
the reason is, because it more easily and swiftly converteth into naturallheat,
and does more strengthen than meats do. But meat, being couerted, is of longer
durance, and greater restoration.

6. Next is demanded whether if wine be to be given to one that is weak, new
or old be the more commended? To the which we answer, against the opinion of
the vulgar, that in this case the new is better than the old: and the reason
is, because Wine, by how much more it is new, by so much less it inflameth,
and therefore in this respect better than the old.

7. Next is demanded why Wine purged from his lees, is of greater strength and
force, but less lasting? It is answered, because relying upon no other
Element, it is every way exposed to ruin; for the Lees by sustaining and
nourishing, is as it were the root.

8. Lastly, it is demanded whether Wine hurt the brain? To the which is
answered, according to Isacke, that it does: and Galen likewise affirms the
same, though it strengthens the stomach (when first received) and heat the
blood, yet through the vapor it hurts the brain, especially by replenishing
them, but the veins in drinking it.

CHAP. IIII. Questions of Flesh.
1. NExt is demanded whether Flesh roasted or boiled be more moist? To the which
is answered the roasted, that by the heat of the fire is hardened and roasted on
the outward parts, whereby the humidity and moisture is shut up and retained
within, that it cannot go forth. But in that which is boiled, the outmost
parts become softened and tender by the moderate heat of the liquor, that the
moisture therein has the freer vent and issue forth, and therefore meats
roasted, although they seem more dryer without, yet within they are more moist,
and the boiled more dry.

2. Next is demanded why the Moone-light does more putrify flesh that is
killed, than the heat of the Sun? It is answered, that there can be no
putrefaction unless heat and moisture conjoyne together. Now the putrefaction
of Cattle is nothing ell^ than a certain defluxion lying h^ in the body,
converting the solidity of flesh into humor; for heat is it be temperate and
mean, nourishes humors; otherwise more violent, it extenuateth and dries
them up: therefore of such flesh, the Sun as it is more hotter, extracteth
all the moisture, and so dries them up, and corrup^eth them. But the
Moone-light, in which there is no manifest heat, but a kind of lukewarm
influence increasing the humor, does the more and more suddenly the same.

CHAP. V. Qu^stions of Eggs.
1. COncerning Eggs, it is first demanded whether the yolke or the white be of
more heat? It is answered, that amongst all the humors of the body, the blood
is the hottest, yet most temperate in heat: and therefore that which comes
nearest to the nature of blood, is nearest of the quality, of which is the
yolke, and therefore the more hotter.

2. Next it is demanded, why the yolke being put into water, immediately
descends to the bottom, but the white contrariwise swimmes on the top? It is
answered, that the white of the Egg is siymy and viscous, and cleaves unto
that whereunto it is put, and therefore put into water, swims on the top; but
the yolke descends with its own weight.

3. Next is demanded why Eggs in birds are of a more harder shell than those
of Fishes? To the which is answered, that Fishes expose their Eggs in watery
and moist places, and therefore need but soft shells. But falls contrariwise in
more hard and dangerous places, as upon Rocks, and Hills, and such like; and
therefore nature has more warily provided for them, and for their withstanding
hurt and danger, until their young ones come to perfection.

4. Next is demanded, why Eggs in birds are of greater quantities, though
fewer in number than those of Fishes? To the which is answered, that Birds are
of greater heat than Fishes, which is the cause of the greatness of their
Eggs; but the multitude out of the matter which is the principle of division,
and therefore because Fowls have more heat than Fishes, therefore the Eggs
are greater in substance but few in number; and so contrariwise of Fishes.

5. Next is demanded, why Eggs in Birds are of diverse colors, and those of
Fishes not? It is answered, because the heat in Birds is more strong, which
does separate those things which are of adverse nature, as the yolke from the
white, etc. but in Fishes the heat is more weak; and therefore cannot separate.

6. Next is demanded why the Eggs of Fishes are round, and the Eggs of Fowls
are of a longer figure? It is answered, that heat moves to his centor,
especially to a piramidall figure, as appears in a flame of fire that ever
ascends upward, and ends still in a point. And therefore because heat is more
strong in Fowls than in Fishes, the Eggs of Fowls are longer, the Fishes
more round, because their heat being weak, dispearseth it self thereinto.

7. Next is demanded why some Eggs crack in the fire, and others not? It is
answered, that those most crack in the fire which are of most windiness, from
the which when the shell is broken in the fire, out comes the wind with
violence and noise, and this most happens when the outward heat is strong;
whereupon if the Egg of any Foul be put into such a fire, the shell is
quickly broken, and the windiness comes out with great violence and noise
which yet it does not, if the heat or fire be but small. But in Eggs of
Fishes, ^here is proportionably the great windiness, and therefore they crack
much in the fire, as we have experience by the Herring, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of Fishes.
1. FIrst, it is demanded whether Fishes eat their own spawne or not? It is
answered, that they do. First, because they are greedy and ravenous through
the coldness of their stomachs: and next, because they are dull of sense, and
discern not betwixt their own and others, and therefore most greedily devour
their own with others.

2. Next is demanded whether Fishes chew their meat? It is answered, not: the
reason is, First, because if they should chew it, they should superfluously
swallow the water, to the suffocation of themselves: Secondly, because they are
gluttenous, and do ^t greedily, they swallow it whole undivided.

3. Thirdly, it is demanded why rain is convenient to Fishes, and hurtful to
Birds? It is answered, that to Fishes raine-water is very convenient, because
it washes in the sweet of the soil, which being mingled in the waters, the
Fishes much feed upon, and grow fat. But Birds are of another nature, living in
the air, and supporting their bodies by the wing, which hereby their feathers
being fastened together, their flight is hindered, and their use and living taken
away, and therefore more hurtful for them than Fishes?

CHAP. VII. Hereafter follows the Resolution of certain mixed questions.
1. FIrst, it is demanded why the Gout happens to them most commonly that eat
many kinds of pulses. It is answered out of Galen, because they are hard and
windy, and not easily digested, by reason of which indigestion ^egme the
original of the gout.
they are turned into Phlegm from whence the gout most usually has her
original.

2. N^xt is demanded, why Beans being that they are windy by decoction, lose
not their windiness as Barley does? To which is answered, that Beans are of
nature more windy than Barley, and because they are of a more gross and
compact substance, therefore more hardly altered, than Barley which is more
thin and easy. Wherefore says Isacke, according to Galen, by decocting of
Beans we lose not their windiness, but by strong seething, we something
diminish it.

3. Next is demanded why the eating of Figs breeds Lice? Why the ea^ng of
figs breed Lice.
To the which is answered, that although figs of themselves soon putrify
and corrupt, yet have they a property to present all inward corrupt humors
they find in the body, to the uppermost part of the skin; and out of such
humors are Lice engendered, although otherwise sometimes by sweaty and unshifted
linen between the skin and that alone, as the two parents without any other
materials engendered; to which effect one merrily jesteth upon a lousie shifter
in this Epigram, as follows:

By want of shift, since Lice at first are bred,
And after by the same increased and fed:
I cannot see why Crambo should have many,
Since that is sure he shifts as much as any.
Yet Auicen thus far commends figs, that they cause a good color in the
face, by driving the blood to the outermost part of the skin.

4. Next is demanded, why wine being drunk after any rotten fruit tastes
bitter? To the which is answered, that from the fruit is derived a certain
bitterness which remains upon the tongue, which being mixed with Wine makes
it of a bitter taste.

Next is demanded whether new Honey be better than old? To the which is
answered, that it is otherwise with Honey than with Wine, because the newest
Honey and the oldest Wine is ever the best: and the reason is, because the
nature of Wine is moist, but the nature of Honey dry: the experience whereof may
be taken in medicine, where those having dry bodies are moystned with Wine, as
those that are moist and phlegmatic are dried with Honey.

5. Next is demanded why oil in the top, wine in the middle, and honey in the
bottom is ever best to begin with the last first? It is answered, because that
honey which is best, is waightier than the other, and so sinketh down to the
bottom, and therefore in a vessel of honey, that in the bottom To choose
Honey.
is ever the best.

6. But in a vessel of wine the middle, because the bottom thereof is
thickened with Lees, and the top is troubled with air; whereupon the husbandmen
knowing it not sufficient to keep it in a close house, mine and dig deep to
lay it in the ground, so to remove it from the air as much as they can, by
which it is so manifestly hurt, that it is scarce conserved in a vessel half
full; and therefore that in the middle removed from these inconveniences is the
best.

7. But that oil which remains in the top of the vessel, or in a vessel
half full, is both the best, and bettered thereby, because the air entering
into it, dries up the vacuous and superfluous humor wherein it lies, so making
it both of better taste and quality.

8. Next is demanded, why oil sometimes is frozen, but wine more seldom? it
is answered, that in oil there is a cause of congelation being glutenous and
thick, which in wine there is not being of a more liquid and strong virtue.

9. Next is demanded, why Vinegar being that it is most cold, is never frozen,
seeing that the coldest things are most apt thereunto? It is answered, because
Vinegar is the most liquid amongst all other humors, and the most piercing and
tart, which like the sea being always respersed with his own bitterness,
does never freeze.

Next is demanded why pepper and mustard do gnaw the outward skin, and hurt
the stomach? To the which is answered, being opposed unto the outward skin, it
works thereupon in his full virtue and nature, which is to corrode and gnaw;
but being descended into the stomach, the force thereof is abated through the
quality and nature thereof, and so cease in that effect.

Of the dangerous, Clymactericall years and days of a Man's life.
EVery seventh year throughout a man's whole life, is a Dangeru^ years of a
man's life.
Clymactericall and dangerous year; likewise the 9. and 63. year, which old
men uery hardly escape.

There are likewise in the year three dangerous Mundayes to begin Three
dangerous mundays.
any business, to fall sick, or undertake any journey: viz.

The first Monday in April, which day Cain was borne, and his brother Abel
slain.

Second Monday in August, which day Sodom and Gomorah were destroyed.

The last Monday of December, which day Indas was borne that betrayed Christ.

Of the Excellency, Virtue, and nature of Stones.
THe Turcoyse-stone, if the Turcoyse stone.
wearer of it be not well, changes his color, and looks pale and dim,
but increases to his perfectness as he recovereth to his health, with which
our Poet thus accords in his comparison,

As a compassionate Turcoyse that does tell,
By looking pale, the wearer is not well.
Many other precious Iemmes there are that lose their virtue and splendour,
worn upon the firger of any polluted person, and therefore lewd and unclean
livers, such as defile their bodies with women, never adorn themselves with
these dissenting Jewels, which would blush at their shame, and bettay their
suburbs, A rich investure, says one, they are, but of small use in our days,
hardly meeting with a finger that spoils them not.

Like wise that there is both excellent beauty and virtue in these as in other
of that kind, may appear in the care which Moses had to ad^rne the vesture of
the high Priest with 12. Iems, which also Ezechiel, and S. John in his
Apocalips have remembered, in which there were not only beauty and color, but
mavelous effect.

In the end of August, the Moon increasing, there is found in the Swallows
belly a stone of excellent virtue for the cure of the Swallowe^ stone.
falling sickness, and which drives up the thin and glutinous humors whereupon
it is chiefly engendered.

There is likewise found in the head of an old Toad, a stone very Toad-stone.
precious against all inflammations and swellings, as bytings of venomous
beasts, poysonings, and such like.

Likewise there is sometimes found in the head of a Carpe, a Carpestone.
stone that stancheth all bleeding at the nose.

A Direction for Study and Art, delivered by a Gentleman to his Sons, for
their securer election and choice, wherewithal, showing briefly his opinion
what studies are most painful, yet least pr^fitable; what, contrariwise, of
most worth to be embraced, or vanity to be rejected.
FIrst for Divinity, the highest, Divinity.
best, and primary election in the world, though it be not thy profession, let
it be thy study, knowing that if ignorance of the laws of a temporal King,
cannot excuse; how much more in this superior degree and offense shall it be
nullified; and because all other art and study in the world is vain, that is
not by some relation intended to this knowledge and practice.

Secondly for Law; if thou would be soon rich, soon Law.
practice, so shall other men's dissentionsbe the cause of thy peace, and thou
shall be like a Chyrurgions instrument: the breath which every man spends in
vain, shall not pass from thee without value; nay, as it shall be thy profit
to speak, so shall it be thy gains to keep silence; and for the calling, it
may be honest, so thy conscience therein be just.

For Physic, I know not how Physic.
the practice should be bad, since the aim thereof is so good; for health
being a Jewel to every man, which when it is to be bought at the hands of the
Phycian, may be valued accordingly.

For Astrology, and the overtedious observation and judgment of the stars,
taken from Agrology.
the vanity of the Chaldeans, who were believed of their imperites, that by the
influence of Planets, and secret relations therein, they were as Gods
Privy-Counsellors, solely to discern and prognosticate the events and
destinies that should befall them, throughout the whole course of their lives:
the folly of which men the Prophet Esaias thus mocketh, Let the Esaias 10.
Wise man, and Sages of heaven, with their observations, predictions and
knowledge, stand forth, and save there. And likewise Jeremy in another place,
Fear not the predictions by the heavens, because the laws of the people are
vain; or their demonstrations, because they are deceitful: which words yet
condemn not altogether the use of Astrology, which has some end and profit,
but condemns those professors which make vain ostentation to the people, of
certainties, by uncertainties.

Next unto this is the vanity of Chyromancers, which by taking Chypoman^y.
their direction from the lines of the hands, do exceedingly trifle and
deceive, running into significant errors, by the unsignificant traces thereof,
to which small credit is to be given.

Like unto these, or if other more Alchumy.
vain, are Alchymists, which professing to turn their brass into silver, or
their silver into gold, turn all into vapor, which turns to nothing; this
has the fairest aim, but the rarest hit of all other; the greatest hope, but
the smallest comfort in the way; insom^ch, that I had rather miss the one,
than sorrow in the other.

Nygromancy is an Art by which Nigrom^cy.
the bodies, or rather the semblance of those in their graves are raised up and
questioned, as we read Phytonissa to have done, by a fained and deceitful
representation of the body of Samuel, to gratify Saul the King. Kings 1. 2^


Like unto these are Hydromancy and Pyromancy, which work Hy^romancy.
Pyromancyugury.
by the water and the fire. Likewise Augury or divination by birds, by their
singing, chirping, or such like.

Hereafter follow some few receipts of Albertus Magnus, and our former Author.
To power scalding Oil, or melting Lead into the hand, and not be burned
therewith.
Annoint the palm of your hand with the Juice of Mallows, or Mercury, and you
may do it for a space, but not long, being two of the hottest liquors that
are, into which if you put but Tin or Lead, they presently melt; which water or
any other liquor besides effects.

To keep Ink from freezing.
PVt three or four drops of Aqua vita into the Standish, and the Ink will not
freeze, though the weather be never so hard.

Of the strange effects wrought by some members of the Owl.
TAke the heart of an Owl, and his right foot, and put it upon one that
sleeps, and he shall reveal unto thee whatsoever he has done, or whatsoever
he knows, that thou shall ask him, and this has been experienced of late
time.

Of the Want or the Mole.
THe Want or the Mole is a creature of strange effect, as the Philosopher
conceives, who being put into the neast of any Bird, can never bring forth her
young; as also the water wherein she is decocted, being rubbed upon any thing,
AA. that was black immediately changes it into white.

Of the strange effects of some parts of the Blackbird.
IF the quils of her right wing be taken and hung up in a house by a red thread,
no creature can sleep in that honse until they are taken down; and if the
head thereof be put upon any one that sleeps, they shall reveal unto thee
all their secrets with a loud voice, as has been experienced.

Away to make Doves increase and multiply.
AUicen says, that Aristotle was of opinion, that if the milk of a woman
twice married over, put into a vessel of glasle, and either buried or hung up
in the door where the Pigions fly^ out and in, they would keep together, and
increase to infinite numbers.

To untye a knot without touching.
Go into a Wood, and find where a Pie has builded her nest, and has young
ones, and tie some string round about the hole where she goes in; the which
when she shall perceive, she immediately flies for a certain herb which she
puts to the knot, which presently breaks it; then falls the herb down,
which thou may take up and reserve to such a purpose.

Hereafter follows a Divine and Philosophical conference between some
Fathers of the Church, and some Philosophers of Nature, proposing and
propounding Pious, Learned, sharp and pleasant Aenigmaes, abstracted out of
many and sundry Authors, as well sacred as profane; which marvellously make to
comprise wisdom, and nourishing of liberal wits, to the informing of the
Judgment, and to the delight of all lovers of knowledge.
Propositions follow.

Q. IN what part of a man's body is his heart?
A. That Anatomists will tell us, and also the Scriptures will direct us, that
both the heart of the wise man, and of the fool, is in the center or middle of
the brost: but the Scripture yet further says, that the heart of a wise man is
in his right hand, but the heart of a fool in his left.

Q. How does the old Testament and new begin?
A. Both from Adam; the one from the first Adam; the second from the second
Adam, describing his generation: I only admire the power of that God, which
besides, above, against nature, effects whatsoever he pleases.

Q. From whence is the name Cardinal derived?
A. Of Cardus for a hinge; for even as a door turns upon his hinges, so does
the Church of Rome upon these hinges the Cardinals, and by their counsel and
direction is governed: Of which one writes in imitation of Virgil,

Qui Bauium non odit, amet tua Carmina meui?
Qui satanam non odit, amet tua dogmata Papa,
Who in mercy has no hope,
Let him love thy Dogmaes, Pope.
Q. The Devil of old was said to have two daughters, Cove^ousnesse, and
Luxury; and he married the one to the Jews, and the other to the Heathen; and
now of their offsprings all Nations and sorts of people are affianced.

Q. Why in times past did the ancient build their Sepulchers by the
highway-side?
A. To admonish all men of death.

Diogenes hearing of the death of a great rich miserable man, says, he has
not lived his own life, but has left it unto others.

Uir, Conjux, Genetrix, natus, fraterque, sororque,
Hic duo sint, quamv is nomina pluracarent;
Error enim sceleri, causam dedit, ^iscia nupsit,
Illi quem peperit, filid mista patri.
Husband, wife, mother, son, and sister both,
And brother, this pair make, by plighting troth, at unawares.
It is said a certain woman which error married her son.

Q. Why in old time was there so few, or almost no Monuments erected for the
dead, and now so many?
A. Men desired to live by their virtue and good works, and they speak the
good man's praise; for God has so pronounced, The memorial of the Just shall
be blessed, but the memory of the wicked shall rot: and likewise those that
have done well, are without doubt with God, and seek not glory on earth,
having blessedness at the head of the fountain. Many fair Monuments now
enclose not only rotten bones, but unworthy bones and ashes. Many a fair
Tomb stands like a bad cause made good by the gilded varnish of words and
fri^nds.

Q. Of the prodigius wife of Lot her Sepulcher and change, what say thou?
A The Statuary, or Pillar of Salt into which Lots wife was turned, was,
according as Alcinus the Poet says, such an one that you scarce know it from
glass, or stone, or metal, but by the saltish taste. At this time and
accident what did Lot her husband, as one questioneth; which is thus answered
by the Poet:

Hoc valde hic miram, quod Lot non flectitur ipsam,
Nec sociam sequitur, primo constantior Adam;
Quamquamid credomag is factum quia visa refer,
I am nequit elinguis, qua si comperta referret:
Forsan et in similes, ausis temeraria traxit,
Credulo and imposuit, virgo primana marito.
Englished:

Many hereat admire, he did no^ slack
His forward pace, nor ever looked back:
He was more staid than Adam, that did eat
Because his wife commended him the meat:
So he escaped the Judgment, and knew none,
Because he held his way, and journeyed on.
Q. What body was that that had a portable Sepulcher?
A. Jonas in the Whales belly.

Q. What was Absolons Sepulcher?
A. This degenerate son of a good father was hung up in the air, and covered
over with stones for the memorial of so unnatural a patricide.

Q. How would Socrates, dying, be buried?
A. Quoth he, bury me after the easiest and cheapest way. And concerning
sumptuous tombs and monuments, erected commonly in our days, one asks the
question why we so exceed therein, seeing those men that talked with God, would
be buried but in caves; and they wanted not wealth, for they were rich men, as
Abraham, Isacke, and the like.

Q. What thing was that which was brought forth in the world, lived in the
world, sinned not in the world, spoke in the world, died in the world, and yet
shall never be partaker of the world to come?
A. Balaams Ass.

Q. When is it that the dead bury the dead?
A. Then when those impious dead in sin, bury the dead in body.

Q. Why is it not read in holy Scripture, nor am^ng the Fathers, nor any
Ecclesiastical writers, that the devil ever swore?
A. That impure spirit wants a soul, and so has nothing to swear by, so
cannot tie himself to any promises, being the father of lies, and a manslayer
from the beginning. Christ has sworn many times which is King of kings, and
of truth the Truth, and a most faithful keeper of his promise, of which no
word shall fall to the ground; therefore happy we whose good he has sworn;
and wretched we if we believe not this truth it self, having bound it with an
oath: The devil promises many things, but performs none; and Christ
promises nothing but it is as good as done; therefore I will r^ly on the on
the one, and not credit the other with the smallest belief.

Q. Does the Devil know our thoughts or no?
A. Not, but by conjecture; for God only is the searcher of the heart: the
Devil reads it by observation, and can pierce no deeper. He is the subtle
Serpent, and therefore we are fore warned to stop evil motions in the
beginning: for as a Serpent if he one^ get in his head will easily wind in his
whole body; so we are counseled, principi^s ebsta, keep out the head.

Q. What is the reason that of later times, Devils, and visions, and
apparitions, and such like, have not been so frequent as in former times?
A. Since the light of the Gospel came into the world, these Diabolical
delusions, and works of darkness have with-drawne themselves, which in times
of Popery and Ignorance were more frequent as the Oracles at the coming of
Christ were.

Q. Jobs substance was much in Camels, a great and knot backed beast, and yet
it is said, this Camel with as much ease shall go through the eye of an
needle, as a rich man to enter into heaven: now what is the nature of this
Camel?
A. Stories mention, that they are of a gentle and towardly disposition, and
knowing their own height, will stoop down to receive a burden, and then they
will erect themselves and pass along; if they find themselves over-burdened,
they will either lie down or cast it off; and therefore noting too much, so
hardly rich men shall be saved that do not, over-laden with temporal riches
and security, cast them off to lighten them in their journey to heaven: The
Camel is a beast very strong, and very fierce in his venery; it drinks but
once in four days, then mudding the water. Of this Beast thus the Poet:

En citius tenuis, per acus transire foramen,
Deform is poterant inania membr^ Cameli.
To thread the postern of a Needles eye,
Is such an Art no wisdom can descry;
And yet the Scripture says, with as much ease
A rich man may be saved, as one do these.
But this is meant of unpenitent rich men, that heap Pelion on Ossa, and so
overburdened think to creep through the narrow gate as strait to such as the
Needle eye to the Camel.

Q. Are the Stars, ^r the Sun living creatures, as some have thought?
A. They are not, though Origin seems to intimate so much, because the Stars
are commanded to keep their course; and in Judge. the Stars in their cours^s
fought against Cysera; and in Jeremy the Sunn is termed the Queen of heaven:
And in the Psalms, It comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and
rejoices as a Giant to run his course: And in Job, the Stars are thought to
be capable of virtue and vice, because there it is said, The stars were not
pure in his fight; yet all these approve not against our first negative.

Q Which is the swiftest star of all other?
A. Phosphorus, or the morning star, or Evening star, being both one; for
that rises first in the morning, and sets last in the Evening: this great
Planet, of some called Venus, sometimes goes before the Sun, and sometimes
follows the Sun; she is called the wife of the Sun, because she is up
after his setting, and rising; last up, like a good wife, looking that all
things be in safety after her husband is in bed, and first of al rising in the
morning

Q. Why do we not see the stars in the day time, in regard they always shine?
A. Because they are darken^d by the greater light of the Sun.

Q. What statre was that that led the wise men unto Christ?
A. It was no ordinary Star, nor one that was made at the Creation of the
other; but extraordinary for this especial occasion; and it differed from
other stars in brightness, motion, and situation of place; for it was
placed in the Firmament of heaven, the other in a higher Orb, this in an
inferior region of the Air: And when the Wisemen came to Bethlem, it went
and stood over the house, that these Magi might know it, being instructed of
God in their own Ant, for they were Astronomers.

Q. What Art is that that every man is most apt to credit, there being no
greater danger in any lie?
A. Physic and Physicians, that make use of all the most vildest things that
be, as Scorpions, Toads, Serpents, and the like, and these will tell thee there
is nothing so abject, so small, or base, or hurtful, that this Art will not
turn to some good use; for God never made the most beautiful thing in the
world, simply for view, and love; nor the most deformed, for hate; but all for
use, though all things are not known, nor all virtues of all that are known;
that was for Salomons wisdom to have undertaken to decipher.

Q. What was the wise man's answer to an ignorant Physician that told his friend
he was grown old?
A. Because I use not many Physicians; which implies, nor much Physic.

Says another old man,
These hoary plumes, like moss upon an Oak,
By seeing much, yet suffering more, I took.
Long have I seen the worlds uncertain change;
Joy moves not me, Affliction is not strange.
One having spent much money upon the Physicians, and being never the better,
was persuaded by a godly friend, that if he had given that money to the poor,
the true Physician, Christ, would have cured him.

On a time it was disputed at Pope Alexanders Table, whether it were better for
the Commonwealth to have many Physicians, or none at all: some affirmed they
were not to be tolerated in Country, for Rome was 60. years without, and
never better health than at that time; (says the Pope) and if Physicians had
not been, the world would scarce have contained her people by this time. A
worthy saying of the Pope; if they send bodies to the grave, he and his souls
to Purgatory, nay hell.

Q. To whom is life very long, or very short?
A. Life to them that do nothing, very long; but to them that are ever doing,
very short: Ars longa, vita brevis.

Q. Who is the best treasurer of his own goods, according to the divine Poet?
A. He that lays up treasure in heaven.

Aedifica in patria, Bore^s ubi nullus and imber,
Conde ubi nec furto, deripiu^tur opes;
Hospititum est tellus, coelum patria nostrum,
Et Regnum, et certe, quisque parantur opes.
Lay up thy Treasure, to secure thy fear,
In Heaven, where all is sure is trusted there.
Q. Who was he that bult the first City?
A. Cain; and that out of his fear to preserve himself from his enemies, the
name thereof was Hanoh; and beside this, there is no other City named before
the flood, Genesis 4. 7.

Q. Which is held to be the greatest City at this day in the world?
A. Quinsay, as Histories report; of which, wondrous things are delivered; it
contains in it 1200. Towers and Turrets, and so many sumptuous Stone-bridges;
numberless numbers of men, Citizens and strangers: as who does not likewise
admire at Niniuey, which was three days journey from gate to gate.

Q. What is the greatest preserver of friendship?
A. Nothing is more amiable, nor more conjunctive, than the likeness of good
affection and manners, according to the Poet:

Haec res and jung it, junctos, et seruat amicos. Q. Who is that at ence loves
and hates, flies and ^lowes, threats and intr^ats, is d^ry and plea^d, would
and (...), (...) at once sad and (...) thing.
A. This (...) ^an hardly be resolv^d, unless another Delius show it; yet thus
i explibate it in a word:

It is meant of Love and Lovers, for it is a kind of phrenzy, and they are for
the time possessed with a short madness; for Amare and supere vix dijs
conceditur.

It is a question of Solomon, Pro. 6. whether a man can hide fire in his
bosom, and not be burnt? now there is a second question, whether Love or Fire
burn hotter; now the fire must have fuel near, but the fire of Love burns
at a greater distance.

Q. What are held the most n^cessary things of a man's life?
A. We desire many things yet we brought nothing into the world, nor we shall
carry nothing out; at death each man lays by his load; for the world had bi^
beggard long ago, if rich men could have carried their substance with them. In
the mean^ time, if we have but water, fire, Iron, Salt, Bread, Milk, Honey,
Wine, and Oil, House to cover my head, Garments to cover my nakedness,
Current mundus, forwe have all and enough.

Q. What is the Physicians best rule for health?
A. Temperance, avoiding satiety and fulnesle.

A certain wise King, Cyrus by name, (as stories mention) never sat down
without a stomach, nor never rose without an emptiness: So Galen,
Asclepiades, Bartholus, all these, and many other, that took their diet by
weight, whereas some other gluttons furnished their Tables by Alphabet; those
were such as the French Proverb says, Dig their graves with their teeth.

Q. How many diseases (as Deaths Harbingers) belong to the body of man, as is
supposed?
A. There a^ so many they are hardly to be numbered: some Physicians think
there are two thousand; and certainly there is no member in a man's body, that
is not diversely a^icted; and now of late years, diverse new diseases are sprung
up that are without names; Diseases increase, and Plants and Herbs decay and
lose their operations, which bring death so near us, he continually looks in
at our windows; and the longer our life is, the more numerous are our sins,
even whole Miriades: and at last comes death, and with a little pin bores
through our wall of health, so farewell man.

Constantius, our noble Countriman, and Emperor, more fuller of heroical
virtue than fear of death, being sick, and demanding lus Physicians counsel,
was resolved, that a has of Infants blood would cure him, answered, I had
rather be continually sick, or presently dye, then with Herod's cruelty
preserve one life with so many deaths, or a cure worse than the disease.

A fellow having his leg to be cut off, in the thought of his misery cried
out and said to that skill, that death loves not Chyrurgery.

Vah non est tanto digna dolery salus. The Pope is called Summus; that is, the
highest; because he is suprajus, contrajus, and extrajus: because he is above
Law, against Law, and without Law.

A Cardinal for his exceeding great pride being rebuked by a King of France,
who told one that the Apostles in their times were more humble and plain,
answered nothing thereto, but told the King, Kings in ancient times were
Heardsm^n and Shepherds.

A great man demanded of the Pope, for the pomp of his Church why he did not
create more new Cardinals; that (quoth he) willingly I would do, if I could
create a new world, for this is too little for those that are already:

Tres su^t convive, Germanus, Flander, and Anglus,
Dic quis edat melius, quis meliusve bibat:
Non comedes Germane, bibis tu non bibes Anglus,
Sed Comedis Comedis Flandre bibisque been.
Three feasts there are, you hardly can match such,
Betwixt the English, German, and the Dutch:
Now of these three, which are they of the rest,
That eat and drink, or drink and eat the best?
Thou German for thy drink claim thou thy share,
Thou English, for thy trencher take thou care;
Then Dutchman out of both take thou thy fare.
Q. Whether do Cups of silver, or Cups of glass sooner quench the thirst?
A. Cups of Glass: for Cups of silver do a little allay it for the time, but
that thirst is incurable; for crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.

Q. What was Socrates excuse for his frugall fare to his wife?
A. If they be our friends, here is enough; if they be not, here is to much.

A certain drunken man called Sobriety the beasts virtue, and would be
opposite so much, that he made himself a beast.

Q. What makes the Terrestrial Globe?
A. The earth and the water makes this one globe, according to the Poet:

Terra atque vnda, Globum faciunt quis crederet unum,
Scilicet haec semper manat, at ill^ manet.
The earth and water, though they rest and move,
Are married in one globe by powerful Jove.
Q. What is the world for her instability compared unto?
A. To the wheel which ever turns round of which one writes,

Vtrota voluitur indique pingitur ut rota mundus;
Quippe volubilis, et variabilis as ruibundus.
Another of the world.

In mundo nihil constat, in orbe^ vertitur orbis,
Quid mirum? recti qued sit in orb nihil.
Even as a wheel is turned on his pin,
The world so in the world, and all therein.
Q. How much distance do Astronemers reck^n from the center of the earth, to
the sphere of the moon, and to the fixed stars?
A. To the Moon 16340. to the sphere of the fixed Stars, 17269660. But this
question is more deep than can be truly resolved by me or any other. Syraeides
denies the height of heaven can be measured by any: so says another wise man,
the height of heaven, the depth of the earth, and the heart of Kings are
undemenfitive.

It is God that measures the heavens with his spanne, weighs the mountains and
hills in a balance, and gathers the waters into his fist, Esaias 40. 12. 22. It Is
he only that knows these obscurities, the heights above, and the bottomes
below; where fadome line could never sound the depth. Hesiodus triflingly
says, if a line were let down from heaven, in ton days it would not come to
the earth: but these, as inscrutable, we leave, though it argues our ignorance
in our own dwelling.

Q. Whether was Peter ever at Rome?
A. This question has bred much controve^sie: but we deny that Peter was ever
there, but Simon has, and many other Simoniacks.

Q. What may covetous Patrons be likened unto?
A. To the Devils Factors, that buy and sell livings as men buy and sell horses
in a Fair, a fair Chapmandise; and these care not so a man have Entia,
whether he have Scientia or no, or Conscientia or no; because they make account
that silver is better than Latin.

Q. What does David understand by a dead dog, and a flea?
A. In these words he does upbraid Saul of cruelty, that he himself being a
Prince, should so fiercely seek revenge of one so lowly in his own eyes, as
to compare himself to a dead dog, which other dogs will not bite, and to a
Flea which we trample under foot.

Every man is tender of himself, and therefore we write our evil deeds, and
other menswrongs we do, in the dust; but our good works, and our wrongs, in
marble: according to the Poet:

Pulvere quiledit, scribit, sed marmore laesus. Q. What weapons are those that
are both the Instruments of war and peace?
A. The Sword and the Mattock as it is in the holy Writ, Swords are turned into
Mattocks, etc.

Q. Is it just to hate the person for his vices sake, or to love the vices for
the persons sake?
A. It is a fault in either; for thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart:
we must love the person, and hate the vice.

Diogenes seeing a fellow begging for his living, said, well done friend, thou
labourest that thou may not labor.

Q. What are those two great inventions in the world, invented and found out
about 150. years ago, and both by a Friar named Sivart?
A. Printing and Gunnes: of which one writes,

Printing and Gunnes are both but late inventions
Quickness of work is either their intentions:
Since whether they have wrought more harm or good;
They have brocht such doctrines, let so many blood: Is yet unjudg'd.
Honest a siquid feceris cum maximis laboribus,
Cedentibus laboribus, Dulcis manebit gloria:
Sui turpe quid comiseris cum gaudij amplissimis,
Abibit omni gaudium turpi manente infamia.
He that with labor virtue does attain,
The labor's past, but the virtue does remain:
But if with infamy thou pleasure buy,
The pleasure passes, though the shame never dye.
Few words, but full of sense, which ought to be written upon every ones door,
carved upon their posts, printed upon their hearts, and expressed in their
lives.

What difference between the rich man and the fool, both dye alike: and
between the Ashes of Vashty the most beautiful Queen that ever was, and the
blackest Egyptian bondwoman? No distinction can be made, as not for beauty,
so not for wisdom: but put them both naked into an unknown Country, and then
the difference shall be easily discerned: For a wise man is more precious than
riches, and nothing is worthy his comparison: length of days is in his right
hand, and in his left glory and riches.

Pontanus relates of a Traveller that said he had been at Bonouia, but said he
had not met with one living wise man, but many dead ones, and those tied in
chains, meaning Books.

Q. Whether is Wisdom or Riches more precious?
A. Wisdom; and that have diverse wise men chosen before Riches: as Salom^n
chose Wisdom, and not Riches: Moses forsook Pharaohs Court, Diogenes the
Court of Alexander to ^onverse with Philosophers: and what does it profit a
fool to have wealth, when it cannot buy Wisdom,

Q. What is the mind and study of the slothful man?
A. Saint Bede will answer, the slothful will and will not: he would reign
with God, but not labor with God: they like the reward when it is promised,
but not the work when it is to be done: but they must know, Qui non laborabit
in hoc seculo, non manducabit in futuro: and it is labor that nourishes the
most generous minds.

Q. What is the most troublesome idleness?
A. Diverse jesting at supper, amongst other questions, this was propounded: one
was of one opinion, and another of another, but Publius said, the gout in the
feet.

This tale was moralized upon by certain laboring, but ignorant people, that
thought the Magistrate and the Minister lived in too much ease, and too much
honor, and with too little pains, when their labor, as they thought, was too
great, their profit and esteem too little: To this a comparison was made on a
time, when silly sheep could speak; and then at such a time it was the sheep
said to her master, I marvel much, that we receiving nothing of thee, but are
forced to seek our livings out of the earth, from whom yet thou take wool
and Cheese, and Lambs, yet thy dog that brings thee none of these profits,
he is fed with bread from thine own hand. But then it is said, that the dog
thus replied, And worthily I receive my allowance, for I am he that keep and
preserve you, lest thieves steal you, or wolves devour you, whose custody if
I neglect, you cannot eat one morsel securely: The sheep hearing this, was
content with every lot, and ever since, being so conui^ted, have held their
peace. Extant to this there is another story, how on a time the members
complained against the belly, how it was idle, and did nothing, but devoured
their labors; and how every member took pains, and they were all weary, and
would continue their exercise no longer for this idle member: this done, the
belly debarred from her wonted allowance, imparted no strength to the hand, the
leg grew feeble and could not walk, and the whole body could not support it
self for feebl^nesse: which seen and perceived, a Parliament was called, and
every officer put to his former task, and all became as before.

Q. Of sleep what do the Philosophers aver?
A. That it is the Porch between life and death: that death is a long sleep,
and sleep a short death; that it is natures sith that cuts away half our
life.

Of Dreams.
One dreamed that he should not believe dreams, because they are for the most
part false: if he did believe them, then it follows that he should not
believe them: if he did not believe them, then it follows that he should have
believed them, because they were dreams and false, their contrary being true.

Q. Is that compact lawful or possible amongst the living, that the first dead
should come back to his fellow and bring news of the state of the other world?
A. It is neither lawful not possible, though such fables be ordinary in
Popery; and so Baronius stories it, that Marcellus Ficynus, returned back
according to his compact, to reveal what he had seen: but we are taught
otherwise in holy Writ, where the rich man would have sent Lazarus to have
forewarned his brethren, but could not.

Q. What is thought of Pylats wives dream, that had truth with it?
A. Many have several opinions thereof: some think it was the devils
suggestion to hinder man's redemption: other, that she was a godly matron, and
saw his Innocence, which God would have at all times to appear: and if it had
been of Satan, it might more have advantaged his purpose to have dealt with
the hig^ Priests, and the rest of his enemies: but the reason of this w^ the
providence of God so to manifest his innocence.

Q. What four small creatures are those on the earth, which f^ their wisdom
are preferred before men?
A. 1. Formica a ferendis micis: The Ant so called of carrvin^ of crumbs, which
for their wisdom are termed a people, an^ that they provide their meat in
summer, and fearing tempests, labor by Mooneshine.

2. The Conies, a people likewise not strong, but they make their houses in the
Rock.

3. The Locusts have no King, yet they go forth in swarms.

4. The Spider that weaveth the web that is in palaces of kings, thas no
mortal man can imitate, and all this but a net for flies; yet mark with what
curiosity she disposes her threads.

Pallas me docuit, texendinosse laborem,
Nulla mihi manus est, pedibus tamen omnia fiunt.
Of this one writes, where God is present, the weakest Spiders weo is a Castle:
where absent, the strongest Castle is but a Spiders web: As these presage
death, and so labor to prevent it, so the Squirrell presaging storms, turns
the little window in her draw, ever fromwards it,

Q. What creature of all other is the most profitable to man, in whom is
nothing but good?
A. The sheep, our founder, content with her own coat and color, though by
us her allusion varied many ways, and changed into many colors: of which one
writes,

Quid meruistioves, placidum pecus, inque tuendo
Natum homines? pleno quae fertis in ubere nectar,
Mollia quae nobis vestras velamina lanas
Prabetis, vitaque magis quam morte juvatis.
Englished.

This gentle Creature, of all good things full,
That feeds us with her flesh, clothes us with wool,
Lives with us as friend, why should the knife
After so many takings, take her life?
Q. What Creatur s of all other love their young most?
A. The Ass and the Ape: the Asle will pass through a thousand obstacles to
come to her young, yea, even through fire: the Ape kills his young with too
much dandling: to these may be likewise added the Turtle and the Storke.

Q. In what things are many men Imitators of Apes?
A. In following the follies and vices of other men, rather than their virtues:
like sheep, one going before, all the rest following after, though into danger.

Q. What is the most inhumane thing, and reckoned as prime am ngst other vices?
A. Ingratitude; which the very beasts scorn to repay, as you may read more at
large in Aulus Gellius, of the old Lion that had the thorn in his foot, when
Antroclus coming, by signs that he made to him perceived it, and ventured to
pull it out; which done, the Lion not only did him no hurt himself, but
protected him from all others, and ever after acknowledged his kindnesle.

Q. Whether are their greater creatures on the earth, or in the Sea: Solo aut
Salo?
A. There is nothing, as some Writers affirm, that is on the Land, but the
same is in the S^a; but bigger creatures are in the Sea, than on the Land: the
Behemoth is a beast like many beasts, which for his hugeness is said to drink
up Jordan, upon whom scale is so fastened to scale, she can hardly be pierced:
this beast is thought to be either the Whale or the Crocodile, more largely
spoken of in Job: The Elephant, a creature of the land, of incomparable
bigness and strength, amongst other not to be paralleld, so likewise diverse
other: but here I mean not pursue this story, else might I draw out my
discourse somewhat longer, in parallelling the Creatures of the Sea and the
Land, as Plutarch does his Greeks and Romans, but those you may read more at
large in Aristotle, Gesner, and others. The King of beasts is the Lion, and his
terror consists most in the eye, and in his roaring: Whereupon it is, The Lion
roares, and who is not asraid? Amos 3. 8. And it fills all other beasts with
such terror, that those that by their swistnesse can escape betake them to
their heels.

Q. What is the most envious creature against man, and what the most loving?

A. The Wolf and the Dog; Albertus Magnus writes, that he had a Dog that
would hold a Candle all supper time: and the love of this Creature is so great,
that some that have had their masters slain, and buried, would not remove from
the place, till they were starved away; and after they have noted the murderer,
and discovered him by their strange seizing on him, and would not be beaten off
till the matter by this strangeness has been discovered and found out.
Between the Wolf and Lamb there is such an Anpithathy in nature, that being
dead, and these skins made into Tabers, the sheep skin will not sound
till the other be removed away.

Q. What little Serpent is that against whose sting and poison there is no
remedy.
A. The Aspicke, whose stroke is mortal: Cleopatra, that sumptuous Queen of
Egypt, being desirous to dye, to prevent Caesar's purpose in her own disgrace,
would be stung to death by these Serpents; and to that end, a Country man
brought her two covered over with green leaves in a Basket, and so had access
through Caesar's. Watchmen: when after she was struck, dressed her self in
all her richest robes, and so went and laid her self upon her bed, and dyed,
her waiting Gentle woman sitting at her feet; for which Caesar was much
grieved, intending her spoil should have graced his triumphs throughout Rome:
The story is more at large in Daniels History, and in many other Authors that
write of this woman. Plynie writes of this Serpent, that it has some sense,
or rather affection, and if it conceive a wrong, will find out the party, and
approach unto him thoroughout all dangers.

Q. What little Creatures are those, that for workmanship excel, and with
their workmanship cloth man?
A. The Silke-worme, that out of her own bowels weaves a bottom, n which they
involve themselves, and enclose themselves in death: to whose Art, Courts, and
your costliest Gallants are indebted for their silk: and whose choycest
colors, yet after their costliest dies, may be matched by the Butterfly, as
Stelia says, even the freshest colors in the Court of Spain: for he that
dresseth this Worm to match the Courts bravery, clothes the Lillies of the
field to match Salomons Royalty: yea, and your Gallants of these times, and the
most costly, such as hang whole Lordships on their backs, whole Manors on
their legs, are not clothed like one of these: and yet for all this,

Nudus ut interram venit, sic ^ndus abibit?. There is extant of Constantius our
former Author, and noble Emperor, that in his time he set out a Proclamation,
but far from his intention, yet to this purpose, that all Christians should
depart his Court, or forsake their Religion, and none but licentious and
irreligious Courtiers should inhabit: Upon this, many grounded Christians
contemning such honors said them down and departed; which the Emperor seeing
would forsake all rather than God, recald them back, and set them in chief
places, banishing the rest; for, says he, how will they be loyal to me, that
are not true to so good a master as God.

Q. Is faith to be kept with an Enemy?
A. It is: for we are not so much to weigh to whom we have sworn, as by whom
we have sworn; and he that believes thee swaring by the name of God, and
has been deceived, is more faithful than thou that so have deceived him.

A deceptation between an Ide^, and a wise man out of Petrarch.

Orator. I know my self to be a wise man.


Idiot. Learned, it may be tho^ wilt say; Learned there are some, though but
few, but wise men almost none: some are learned by Art, but fools by nature:
for it is one thing to speak wisely, another thing to live wisely, another
thing to be thought a wise man, but the greatest thing to be a wise man: and
there is some that say, there is not a wise man, which whether that be true or
false, I will not dispute.


Orat. The Hebrews say, their Solomon was a wise man, and yet his wisdom was
ecclipsed by his number of Wives and Concubines that drew him to Idolatry. O,
but the Romans had wise men, Loelius and Cato; and Greece it self, while it
flourished, had seven Wise men, but now they common in all societies.


Id. Yea, such are now accounted wise in all societies, that creep upon their
bellies with the Serpent, and lick up the worldly dust: and he that brings
most honey to his hive, he is accounted the most wise; but it is in the worlds
reckoning, not in truths judgment, and so I leave them to their wisdom: But
to decypher a wise man, I have heard him to be the chief, that in every action
can counsel himself wisely. Secondly, He that can obey a wise man's counsel;
Wise men were never more scarce than in this particular time of noted wise men,
for then wisdom had left the earth, which now so abounds in every place.


Q. What labor of all other, is the most sweetest to remember?
A. Iucundi acti labores: labors past are pleasant, especially the labors of
an industrious youth, recounted in the goodness of a knowing age: therefore,
says one, Tolerate laborem for san et haec olim memonisse iuvabit.

Q. Amongst this Dispute of Philosophers, one demanded what was Philosophy?
A. It was resolved to be that which was a cure for all diseases, both in body
and mind; to be that which teaches a man to be good for goodness sake, and
not for fear or compulsion: and that was the sum and substance of all
Philosophy, which so many large volumes can but anatomize, and is here
comprised in two words. Sustinendo, et Abstinendo: that by the one we be not
too much dejected, nor by the other too much puffed up: an answer worthy of
Apollo and the Muses. And to this purpose says another, it consists faerendo
et spaerendo.

Q. What is the wisest of all things?
A. Th^es Milesius answered, Time; for it finds out, teaches and alters all
things. But one of Pythagoras Scholars of late time said the contrary, and
that it was the most rude and unknowing, and the master of all ignorance: for
with his own long waste, it wrapped all things in ignorance.

Times office, says one, is

To show the Beldam daughters of her daughters,
To make the child a man, the man a child,
To slay the Tiger, that does live by slaughter,
To tame the Unicorn, and beasts most wild:
To fill with worme-holes stately Monuments,
To feed Oblivion with decay of things,
To blot old books, alter their contents,
To pluck the quils from ancient Ravens wings:
To spoil Antiquities of hammerd steel,
And turn the giddy round of Fortunes wheel.
Q. How are metals to be known, and how is a man's heart to be discovered?
A.
Era puto nosci tinitu vt pectora verbis,
Sic est nam^; id sunt utraque quale sonunt.
For words and metals is one touchstone found,
And that is the ear, for both are known by the sound.
Q. How many are mentioned in Scripture to have been raised from death to life?
A. Eight: 1. The widows son of Screpta, by Elias: 2. the son of another
widow, by Elizeus: 3. one buried in Elizeus Sepulcher: 4. Iayrus daughter: 5.
the son of another widow in Naim, Luke 7. 15. 6. Lazarus by Christ: 7.
Tabitha by Peter: 8. Eutichus by Paul, Act. 20. 22. So only eight persons
preserved in the Arc.

Q. How many steps has the Courtiers ladder?
A. There is no man rises but by more steps than one: but there is only one to
come down, or rather a downeright precipitation: It is, says one, the
Stepmother of virtue, and the purgatory of rich men.

Therefore let him that fears the headlong coming down, fear the steepy
going up: for, Plures beavit Aula, plures perdidit, et quos beauit perdidit.

And as another says,

Qui Iacet in Plano, non habet vnde cadat. I call hear to witness the most
fortunate of Courtiers, the slipperinesse of this footing: Seianus with
Tyberius, Clito with Alexander the Great, Philotas, and others Histories are
full of these examples: therefore he that is wise with Demosthenes, let him say,

Tanti poenitere non aemum: for,
Tutius in caula blanda quam vivitur aula:
Aula vale, caula sim magis ipse comes.
The Country hall more freely yields a life
Of quiet peace, not mixed with Courtly strife:
Court therefore fare thou well, I know this true,
The Country I embrace, so Court adue.
Q. Why then should one come to the Court, and converse with great ones?
A. A young Divine commended the faith of the Devils; for, says he, they
believe and tremble: So, hear what Courts speak, but with a kind of terror;
and come to Court, as a man would come to the fire; where if he come too
near, he shall be burnt: if he keep too far off, he shall be a cold.

Medium tenuisse beatum. Q. What thing is that which for the brittlenesse is
compared unto a man's life?
A. A Glass, which though nothing is more brittle, with safe keeping may be
preserved long: but be we never such wary Pylots, we dash this frail
vessel, for all our care, against one Rock or other; it comes unprevented for
all our care, nay, undeserved, if we respect only disorder, even as the Poet
thus more fully expresses it:

Mane virens flos est, cinis est sub vespere vita,
Fide, cinis rursus, flos gener^sus erit.
In The morn a flower, at night cut down and shore,
Yet faith shall one day this dead flower restore.
Q. What is that short, more short, most short?
Ver breve, flos brevior, vita brevissima:
At been si morimur, vita paerennis erit.
Englished.

The spring is short, a flower more short, man's life most short of all:
Yet a good life shall piece out death, no death shall be at all.
What better than life? A good fame: what better than good fame? A mind
conscious of Innocence: what better than that? To dye well. To live to the
world is death; but to Christ, life.

Of sudden fears, they are more said to color the hairs, than age; as is
experienced by Mariners:

Rebus in aduersis, venit acclerata accelerata senectus. Q. What is that that
takes away teeth, and adds wrinkles, and turns our gold of youth, into the
dust of age, and so changes us, as if we were old new ones?
Non habitus, non ipse color, non gressus eunt is,
Non species eadem, quae fuit ante manet.
Englished:

Not habit, color, form, ought we enjoy,
But he is changed worse, better to destroy.
An old man said, he carried a great load, for he bore 80 years, and all the
troubles these had begot.

Another old man said, before Age I cared how to live well, in age how to dye
well. Old men, they say, carry their feet in their hands, and their teeth in
their pockets: that is, a Staff and a Knife.

Q Who are those in holy Scripture that are called childr^n of an hundred
years old?
A. Those that have run over many years from their birth, yet never entered
into the school of wisdom, fear of God, or divine knowledge: old in years,
but young in knowledge.

Q. Are there not some men that spend their lives altogether in vanity?
A. A many that when they are going out of the world, know not wherefore they
came; being like to him that has sailed upon the sea, but has more been
tossed hither and thither than gone forward to arrive at his wished port: of
such a man one may say, This man has not sailed much, but been tossed long:
so he that lives long, and profits nothing in goodness, may not be said to
have lived a long life, but to have been here long.

If life is to be desired of a wise man, it should be for no other cause then
to effect some thing worthy of life, and that might profit himself and others,
which having done, he has lived enough, having fulfilled the office of an
honest man: Of which one thus instanceth it of Cicero; If thou respect the
applause of the people, whenever thou dyest, thou have lived but a little: if
what thou have done, thou have lived enough: if the injuries of Fortune, and
the present state, thou have lived too long: if the memory of thy works, thou
shall live for ever.

A good man thus having finished his course, may then say,

Sufficit Jehovah toll animam meam hospita terra vale.

Q. What is that, the more you take from it, the more it is increased, and the
more you add to it, the more it is diminished?
A. Many stick hereat, and deny that any such thing can be, but we find it
to be a hole in a Cloth.

Q. Whether did man's nature infect man's person, or man's person infect nature?
A. The first man did infect nature, but now nature infects mankind, the
whole lump being poisoned.

Q. What is the chiefest and greatest sin of all other?
A. There is no sin greater than the sin of Infidelity, to believe that any
truly repented of, is greater than can be forgiven, according to the Poet:

Non crimen maius, quam crimen dicere maius,
At solui possit, sanguine Christ tuo.
Englished:

No crime so great, whilst here on earth we live,
As to despair God cannot mercy give.
This was the despairing speech of Cain; but Saint Austine answers, Th^yest,
Cain; for the mercy of God is greater than all the sins in the world.

Q. On what day was Marriage instituted?
A. There are that do imagine on the eighth or ninth day from the Creation;
and so it appears by Saint Austin and Danaeus disputing thereupon: as whether
Adam knew his wife before his fall, and he answers affirmatively; but yet so
that Eve denies to have conceived at that time, or before his fall, that being
an effect of the punishment.

Q. What River was that in Palestina, that slowed all the six days, and on the
seventh was dry?
A. The River of Sambatia, from whence it took the name: Oadmirable of the
Law, which in ancient time it held; but now the Priesthood, and the Law being
changed, it keeps not his course.

This River flowed all the week with such violence, that his torrent would
carry with it mighty stones, yet on the Sabbath would be dry.

Q. Since all water sinkes downward, how does the water in fountains spring
upwards?
A. It is compelled by a fiery spirit that drives it upwards, but after it
falls into his own course.

Q. What water was that, that was the Index either of Innocence or offense?
A. The water that the woman suspected of Adultery, after certain Ceremonies
by the Priest done, should take and drink, and it should, if she were guilty,
turn into bitterness, with which her belly should swell, and her thigh rot,
Number. 5. 27.

Q. What is the figure of the water?
A. The figure of the water is round, and every drop affects rotundity, as you
may perceive: likewise water powered into a pot will be always highest in the
middle; and though removed, it will be so still; and that is the reason that if
you behold a ship from the shore, after a while you lose the sight.

Expound me this verse,

^St sera aquis constans, reserat quam lignea clavis,
Venator capitur, libera casse fera est.
I thus untwist this knot.

Sera was the red Sea, clavis lignea, Moses staff; Venator, or the hunter
Pharaoh, to whom the Sea opening, rashly entered in, when the waters closing
upon all his Army, drowned it: fera, or the wild beasts, were the people of
Israel, which went over dry foot.

To this miraculous overthrow may the Spanish Navy have some parallel; for
upon the Otian never floted such another, thinking, like Pharaoh, to have eaten
up our Israel: In number so many, in strength so powerful, in the year 1588.
the day of Saint James the patron for Spain, and styled for Assurance, the
Invincible Navy; and yet as this by this miraculous hand discomfited, and what
had the poor English done to deserve this? Quid meus Aeneas in te committere
tantum?

Q. What waters do we accou^ the best?
A. 1. Waters of Baptism, which are signs and seals of our justifying faith.

2. Waters of Tears that we shed for our sins.

3. From youth corrected, which promise amendment.

4. Water of the Mill whereby our bread is prepared.

But one to this merrily added, that is the most pleasant that is brought forth
to wash hands at dinner and supper.

Q. What is the Summum bonum, or chief felicity of the world?
A. Some of the Philosophers, and Heathens, thought it consisted in health,
some in wealth, some in strength, some in riches, some in beauty, and the like,
but these groped hood-winck'd: but we have better learned this Summum Bonum,
says Saint Bernard: Devote, O Lord, my soul to thee, let it be chained to thy
love, let it breath and gasp after thee, only desiring thee, let it have
nothing sweet but to speak of thee, to hear of thee, and thy memory and
glory, often to record and remember what my God would give me; let him take
them all away, so he give me himself. Whatsoever other opinions there are,
they are vain and frivolous; and he draws water into a sieve, and torments
himself with vain cogitations, that delights himself in the Creature, but
ascends not to the Creator, to whom all other Iucundity compared, is
bitterness; all sweet things, sour; all joy, grief; all mirth, sadness; all
pleasure, madness: therefore he is too covetous whom this chief good
suffices not.

Vt fugiam omne scaelus, et amem super omnia numen,
Da mihi frena timor, da mihi calcar amor.
Englished.

To drive me forward, and to pull me back,
To every virtue that I may adhere,
Give me thy spur of love, thy bit of fear.
Christ is our mouth by whom we speak to the father, our eye by whom we see
the father, our right hand by whom we offer to the father.

Q. There are some that are there where they are not yet, and live not where
they are: and who are those?
A. Saint Chrysostom affirms this of the Godly, that live upon the earth, but
have their conversation in heaven

In medio consistit virtus. It was truly said, when Christ was crucified
between two thieves, If ever goodness were in the midst of evil, then it
was: to which purpose is here inserted a rare and admirable picture of the
passion,

Ecce crucili affixum qui cuncta, mouente mouentur,
Cuius cuncta bibunt sontibus, ecce silit:
Qui fab^icat brutis, auibusque sedalia pendens,
Nil sua quo ceruix sustineatur habet.
Est nudus largitor opum, spetiosior astris,
Liuit et est justus victima pro scelere:
Qui dat sceptra gerit de sentibus ecce coronam;
Latrones inter gloria summa probro est:
Quique refrigerium est, ipse est solaminis expers,
Et vitae Dominus, mortuus ipse jacet:
Haec dixisse velim, sed tu memor esto totaque
Tanta, tui causa sustinuisse Deum,
Englished:

Behold the mover of all motion stayed,
The fount that all refreshed, stopped and decayed:
He that made beasts and birds to run and fly,
Has scarce a place where is weary head may lie:
The master of all wealth, and each man's store,
Himself is naked, and in all things poor:
He that gives Crowns and Scepters, nothing scorns
Himself to wear a piercing Crown of Thorns.
A certain Gentleman abroad at Supper, at the closure thereof, put an Apple
into his pocket; says another standing by, Sir, why are you careful for to
morrow, for of all the years that I have lived, I was never yet assured of a
morrow: so likewise said another invited to a morrowes feast, If you will any
thing with me now, I am ready; but of all my life long, I have not yet been
assured of a morrow: To the former question the first Gentleman answered,
therefore I put up this apple, that I may not care for to morrow, for nature is
content with little: O from how few shall you hear this confession, that of
all their life long they have not had a morrow.

Q. Whether death is more to be seared, the corporal, or the eternal?
A. The Eternal, Saint Austen shall answer thee: that death which men fear
most, is but the separation of the soul from the body, when it would willingly
stay in; but the second death, which men fear not, is the separation of the
soul from God: The first death takes the soul out of the body, when it would
willingly stay in; the second keeps the soul in the body, when it would
willingly depart.

Q. How many are the messengers of death?
A. Three: Casualty, Infirmity, and old Age: the first shows death lying in
ambush: the second, appearing: the last, present: we dye not, for the most
part, altogether, but by degrees; and as we increase in days, so our life
decreaseth: first, we lose Infancy, then childhood, then youth, even till we
have lost all the time that we have passed to yesterday, and the very time we
now live we spend on till death: we pass by the Temple of faith and piety, to
the Temple of glory and perpetual happiness, where those everlasting rewards
are so great they cannot be measured, so many they cannot be numbered, so
copious they cannot be terminated, so precious they cannot be valued.

Julius 2. Pope (as stories mention) being dead, came to heaven gates, and
there knocked with authority; Saint Peter being angry, asked who so
importunately knocked: this Pope answered, It is I, open quickly: Who art thou,
quoth Saint Peter? Julius the Pope, replied he: What have thou to do hear
with heaven, that have so often sold it? no man accounts that his own, which he
has sold: and so was he shut out, and worthily; for all they say they have
Navis, Terrae, and clavis Coeli.

One demanded of Eucritus the Philosopher, whether he had rather be S^crates
or Croesus? Quoth he, Croesus while I live, but Socrates when I dye.

Q. Whether is it better to envy, or to be envied?
A. To be envied: for he that is envied, is always the happier man.

Q. Whether is the shining of the Moon cold or hot?
A. It is cold, which does something allay the heat that the beams of the
Sun has made in his passed progress.

Q. It is vouched before in this discourse, that there is nothing so deformed
nor contemptible on earth, that has not in it some kind of good: to what use
serves the Scerpion, the Toad, the Serpent, and such like?
A. Of the Scorpion is made an excellent salve against all swellings, and of
Serpents and Toads is made an excellent powder against the stone, and to
provokeurine.

For naught sovile that on the earth does ltve,
But to the earth some special good does give. etc.
Platos counsel to young men which he would have to imitate the Ivy, being
weak of themselves, to get a prop to support them.

Q. Upon the birth of children, whether have parents more cause ofjoy, or
grief?
A. This is resolved upon, that with children a fountain of tears spring up
to the parents: for if you compare them to a nurserie, of some you shall late
gather fruit, of others never: If good, fear lest they continve not: if evil,
lasting sorrow, in the inte rim uncertain joys, but certain cares.

Q. What is the chief of all meats, and what the chief of all savces?
A. Bread of all meats: for whether we eat it by it self, or continually with
other meats, yet we are never weary of it, being the staff of life, and sign
in the Sacrament. And of all sauces, I say not hunger, but Salt is a
principal, a sauce that the diveil for his relish does abhor; for Salt is an
emblem of eternity and immortality, being not only able to preserve it self
from rottenness and corruption, but all other things; and therefore Salt by
the command of God himself was to have a principal place on the Table a^id the
sacrifices.

Q. What is the meaning of the phrase of Plantus M^ non unifid^ Antro, the
Mouse trusts not to one hole?
A. It admonishes us to have more friends than one, more strings to our bow
than one. He that fames himself to be a friend in words, and is not so
indeed; he that has Ave in his mouth, but has ve and Cave in his heart, is
worse than one that coins false money, worse than Ieabor, nay, worse than
Judas that kissed and killed.

Q. What is a mind full of cares resembled unto?
A. To worms and rottenness amongst the bones; and therefore Damacles, amid
all his dainties, could take no delight, because his mind was troubled at the
Sword that hung over his head by a slender hair.

Q. What is the only great security in the world, and means to prevent fear?
A. To fear nothing but God; for he that fears not him, fears every thing;
and he that fears him, needs to fear nothing else, for his fear excludes
all other.

Q. What is the most excellent action of the hands?
A. Their Elevation in prayer, Innocent hands and a pure heart.

Q. Spots of Infamy, can they be washed out?
A. They are scarce purged off with Niter, therefore take heed of their stamp:
guilty Pylate may wash his hands, but not clear his Conscience.

A certain workman had pictured Uenus sleeping, with this inscription, O
traveller, pass by and awake not the goddess; for if she open her windows,
shut up thine: For as the Poet advis^th,

Cum vultu pungit, cum verbis dulcitur vngit,
Affectum fingit, complexu pectora stringit;
Sires procedit, animam cum corpore ledit.
He that but looks, his journey does begin,
He that but likes, is stepped a stepped more in;
Who so inchaind his pace does forward bend,
He has enjoyed, and is at's journeyes end.
Q. Which of all Hercules labors was his hardest to overcome?
A. Love.

Q. How many sorts of creatures has Ged made?
A. Three: one not covered with flesh: the second, covered with flesh, but dies
not with the flesh: the third is covered with flesh, but dies with the flesh:
of these: the first are Angels; the second, men; the third, bruit beasts.

Sum decor in manibus, sustento senem rego gr^ssus,
Sum terror canibus, gest at pro duce f^ssus.
Englished.

I am the old man's leg, the weak man's stay,
I am his weapon, and his guide by the way.
Q What are the Countrymans prognostication of the Rainbow?
A. 1. It is observable that it changes to what color a man conceives; and
if it be red like to an Oak, or fire, or blood, it prognosticates a fruitful
Vintage; if of yellow color, like to the Corne-fields, it presageth a
plentiful harvest: thirdly, if it be of a green color, plenty of Oil: and
see the Bow, says the Wiseman, and bless him that made it so fair and
spacious, and in such variety, in that blessed Covenant: One says, the
Rainbow is to be reckoned among one of the great wonders of nature.

Q. Of what thing may the course of the Sun admonish us?
A. The course and progression os the Gospel, which came first out of the
East, that is, from Iudaea; from thence into the South, into Graecia; from
thence into the West, which is this last angle of the world, that is, Germany
and England, and so it has finished his course; and because the Evening is now
come, Lord stay with us. And this splendant rising of the Sun is not seen to
all Nations at one instant, but first to the Persians, then to the Greeks, and
Italians, and the more Eastern Countries; last to the Spaniards and English.

At the Passion, two Suns were ecclipsed at once; the Sun of the Element
was ecclipsed for the Son of heaven, the Rocks cleft for their Spiritual
Rock; the graves opened, and the dead rose, for him that was free among the
dead: God so shut up the eye of the Sun, that darkness was upon the earth
at middle of the day, against all natural causes, God commanded the Sun that
it should not shine, and it vaild him in darkness. Lucian the Martyr says,
he will bring the Sun for a witness against this wickedness. Hereupon the
Chaldean Astronomers amazed, after they had heard and seen such an unwonted
spectacle, as the Sun to go ten degrees back, came to Jerusalem to enquire
thereafter, as did the wise men at the birth of Christ, to know the reason of
the Star: the complaint of the Sun, according to our Po^t:

Heu mihi cum vasti peragro latissima mundi,
Maenia, quam sa^cti est portio parua gragis:
Tota Asia in tenebris versatur, et Africa caeca est;
Tot magnus olim qua paeperere viros:
Vix nunc extromis Europe infinibus haeret,
Grex pius et raram, sentit egenus opem, etc.
Alexan. Mag. said, the world was not capable of two Suns, nor one kingdom
of two Emperors.

Sol Angvis et Annius, et superaddita norma:
Quid usquam?
Est rerum his vitam tribuunt, a^gentque tributam.
Quidnam illud esse putas?
Res una in Pelago, et telluris omnibus oris,
Nascitur ac oriens est maxima deficiensque
In medio vita minimum quam porta vigore.
This is a shadow, which is longest at his beginning, shortest in his middle,
and longest at his end. Tunc Sol decedens crescentes duplicat vmbris.

Q. What is meant to measure our own shadow?
A. To measure our own shadow is to teach us no other thing then not to be
puffed up with prid^, with any success, or honor, seeing the shadow no more
honors the body, then before in his length.

Q. What is the fairest object to behold?
A. A certain King of the Egyptians, being asked what was the most beautiful
thing to look upon, answered, The Light; the companion, wife, and danghter of
the Sun: yea, it is true, that God is light, and darkness is irksome to all
men: and that appears by our own experience, as also by the words of old Toby
the blind, Pleasant is the light, and delectable, with our eyes to behold the
Sun, which though the swiftest of all things, yet no man can perceive his
motion, nor would so think, but that we fee it removed from the East unto the
West, about the earth, being yet bigger than the earth 166 times.

Q. In what part of the earth, if letters be written in the dust, do they
longest abide?
A. On the top of Olympus, a Mountain in Macedonia, where no wind blows, nor
rain falls, for it exceeds in height all this humid region of the Air where,
Birds live: and there be those year by year to go up to Sacrifice, and what
writing, or whatsoever they leave, they find it untoucht or unshaken; which
could not be if wind or rain fell or blew upon that place: rud yet this
Mountain, in the universal Deluge, was overflowed.

What is this,
Torqueo torquentes, sed nullum torqueo sponte,
Ladere nec quemquam volo, in prius ipse reatum,
Contrahat et veridem studeat decerpere caulam:
Fervi amor hominis, turgescunt membranocentis.
This is meant of a Nettle.

Q. Magnates and Magnetes, similitudes in names, what consonancie is between
them in nature?
A. Thus much: for as the one draws gold unto it, so does the other Iron,
according to the P^t

Cuncta trahunt ad s^ Magnates Aurea sicut:
Ad se Magnetes, ferria cuncta trahunt.
Englished:

The Rich man is a Loadstone that draws gold,
As the other Iron, but more stronglier hold.
Q. What now are these times termed?
A. Not the Iron-age, as some now mis-construe it, but the golden age, for new
all things are put to sale, according to the Poet:

Aur ea nunc vero sunt secula plurimis auro,
Uenit honos, auro conciliatur amor:
Omnia auro sunt venalia, auro fides, auro vis, auro leges.
The golden age this may be rightly told,
For every thing is set to sale for gold.
Q. What is a thing very strange in these times?
A. A closed hand and open Justice.

Q. What is the dearest loss of all other?
A. Time: according to the Poet, Art comes so slow, and life so fast does fly;
we learn so little, and forget so much: of which says one, we have not avery
short time, but we lose a great deal of it; we do not receive a very short
life, but we make it so: we are prodigals, as he that thus complained in his
more serious cogitation: of which says one,

Audivi Iuvenem premeret quem serior aetas,
Merentem tacitos, preteri^sse die^
Q. What says Saint Bernard of time?
A. He says, we should more remember to think on God, than to breath: and
he says further, that all time, wherein God has not been remembered in, is
lost.

To this further adds Tully,

Correct what is past, govern well the present, and provide for the future: If
thou sleep, awake: if thou stand, enter: if thou enter, run: if thou
runnest, fly.

Q. What is the best part of the day for stud?
A. Aurora Musis amica: and David himself teaches the same same thing, My
voice shall thou hear betimes in the day, early in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee.

Q. Why is the morning colder then the evening?
A. Because it more partakes of midnights cold, but the evening of mid-dayes
heat.

Q. What was Julius Caesar's distribution of time, Alex. magnus Iulianus, and
one Alphred a King of the Britains, being compelled to spend most part of the
day in warlike affairs, they divided the night into three parts; one part for
rest, the second for ordering of public affairs, and the third part for
study: but there are some that want time, and some others that have too much,
how may that be?
A. The industrious want time, and the idle are oppressed with time. these spur
a forward horse, whiles the other strive to rain him in.

Q. Whether is more clear the night or the day?
A. The night with the Moon and all her Stars, is far more dark then the
day with her one light, according as says the Poet:

Sit nox eentoculo quamvis oculatior Argo,
Plus vno cernit lumine, luscadies.
Though the night have many eyes yet all this light
Equals not day, nor the twentieth part so bright.
An aged man being asked how old he was, answered, the years I had, are gone,
therefore I am not far from my rising, nor my set: Istud patet, hoc latet,
the one is known, the other hid: take away what is past, and sever that
uncertain, that is to come, from thy life, and O how ltttle remains!

Temporibus in puncto, fugientis pe^deo nec nam,
Quod nondum est, nec quod iam fuit ante meum.
Q. What creature of all other is thought to be the wisest, and yet in many
things is more foolish than the bruit creatures?
A. Man: for the Fox being forewarned will come no more into the trap, the
Wolf no mo^ into the ditch, the Dog unto the staff, but man will run an
hundred times into the self same folly.

Q. Who is he that is set forth to us in holy Writ, of whose beginning nor
end, neither father nor mother, nor Ancestour is described, nor end?
A. Melchisedeck, that King, and Prophet, and type of God.

Q. Why did not God at one instant create all the men that ever should be in
the world, as he did the whole number of Angels?
A. It pleased his Wisdom, in succession of time, by course of generation,
mankind should be daily multiplied, and subjected under sin.

Anaxagoras the Philosopher being asked to what end he wa^ borne, answered, to
behold this goodly frame of the world, and all the wonders there of: but
withal he should have known this,

Quid mentem transisse polo, quid profuit altum
Erexisse caput, pecudum si more perirent,
Q. What riches are those that cannot be exhausted?
A. Good turns; for these, with bestowing, do increase; and by scattering
abroad, are gathered together: if thou keep them, thou have them not; if thou
distribute, thou losest them not.

One says, the pinch of poverty is great, but more the burden of riches ill
gotten, according as the Poet wittily writes:

Aeris scruus, eris site species trahat aeris ceri cur haeres, cras aeris non
eris haeres.

Q. If there were a voice given to wealth and riches, what do thou think
they would speak.
A. If Goods, of which thy house is full, could speak, they would answer thee,
As thou would have us to be goods to thee, so we would have a good master:
or they would whisper their chief Lord against thee, as thus: Behold, thou have
given our master so much wealth, and he is evil, what does it profit him to
have all, that has not thee.

Q. What four things were those that the ancient heathen were wont swear by,
because they found nothing more perfect then this number four, for there are
(say they) four elements, fire, air, water, and earth: four seasons of the
year, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter: four qualities of all things, Hot,
Cold, Moist, and Dry: four compasles of Heaven, East, West, North and South.

Q. Whether of these two is more foolish, Croesus that cast his money into the
Sea, in contempt, or Midas that out of covetousness wished all that he
touchtmight turn to gold, and so as the Poets feign, his meat was turned into
gold and choked him: but the mean is ever safest, as both these extremes
foolish.

Severus the Emperor being ready to dye, sight out, and said, I have been all
things, and now nothing profits me.

Another thus admonishes his worldly friend, saying, O vain man! why do
thou trouble thy self in seeking after goods of body or goods of mind, love
that one good, in whom are all goods.

Q. Who is the most industrious mam that Stories make mention of?
A. Hippias Eleus, who as he had a general insight in all learning, yet was
not there with so fully content, but he was seen in the more meaner sciences,
that not the ring on his finger but he made it himself, as also his own
clothes, and what ever he used, but he is accounted the true wise man that
learnes from every man, he the strong man that masters his own affections:
he the true rich man, that rejoices in his own store; which is the level
many miss, which makes their life miserable, according as a learned writer
thus delivers it:

The aged man that coffers up his gold,
Is plagued with cramps, and gouts, and painful fits,
And scarce has eyes his treasure to behold,
But like still pining Tantalus, he sits
Having no other pleasure of game,
Then torment that it cannot cure his pain.
So then he has it when he cannot use it,
And leaves it to be mastred by his young,
Who in their pride do presently abuse it:
Their Father was too weak and they too strong
To hold this blessed, cursed fortune long.
Q. Two fathers and two sons had been a hunting and caught three hairs, and
every one had one, and how could that be?
A. It is said of the grandfather, the father and the son, which are out two
seeming three, the father being both son and father.

Musica damnoru guomodo sehabet thus by which it is unpleasant, and so it
sounds.

Utinam montes nos obruerent
Repleta enim malis est anima nostra,
Miserabiles factisumus,
Faciem enim nostrum operuit caligo,
Sol autem justiti ae nunquam crietur nobis,
La Lassatis it aque nobis nulla datur requies.
Englished.

O would the hills might fall on us,
For we are filled with grief,
And miserable is our case,
Of sinners being chief:
For we of comfort are deprived,
And bard of all relief.
Q. Why do those that carry bur hens for the most part sing?
A. Because the sense being delighted with the mirth, is the less capable of
her sorrow.

Q. May it be that stolen pleasures should be thought more sweet then an
honest fruition in lawful marriage?
A. We desire forbidden things, and that is the preversenesse of our fiesh,
that will not be brideled with no lawful bounds, and we see by experience
that many men that have at home beautiful wives neglect their own better, and
pray upon others more deformed.

For Virtue as it never will be moved, though lewdness court it in the shape
of heaven; So Lust, though to a radiant Angel linckt, will sort it selfein a
terrestrial bed, and prey on garbige.

Q. Be there more faiths or Religions in the world than were of ancient?
A. To answer with Moses, here we may enter into a Cloud of darkness,
unless we follow the third of Christ to guide us out of our blind steps, we
lose our selves in this labyrinth: for according to our Author, Ie. Oudoneus,

Plurima apud veteres fidei, nec nulla fiderum,
Mentio, priscorum, nam fuit vna fides.
Of Faith, the Ancients knew no more than one:
Is any now has many, he has none,
But the world is now divided into four parts, and four faiths possess the
same: to wit,

Iudaisme, Christianity, Mahumatisme, and Paganism: and out of all these
generals, are sprung many new branches, but stand thou by the way side, and
ask of the old way, and walk in that, and thou shall find rest.

Q. Is it in man's power to make gods?
A. The ancient and vain Gentiles thought it lawful for them so to do, but
the more wise laughed at their folly: so likewise do now the more fond
Papists, which arrogantly profess, and proudly glory, Qui creauit me, dedit
mihi creare se, as says our pleasant Poet; the Priest is high^r than the King,
more happy than Angels: this is not to demand if the Potter can make a pot, but
to demand of the pot if it can make a Potter. As ridiculous was this, that
Alexander the Great should, denying his descent, call his mothers chastity into
question, and procure letters from the Graecians, that in their decretall they
should instile him god. So Herod would have his words rev^renced as the words
of God, but the success of this was miserable, for his belly was eaten out
with worms.

Q. How many were thought to be the Heathen gods?
A. The Poet will tell you:

Inno, Vesta, Minerua, Coeres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Iovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus Apollo.
Besides many other inferior gods, as Virtumnus, Pomanae, Flora, Cumina,
Priapus, with as many more as were crochets in Idle brains: an hundred gods
more than worlds

Q. What think of Fortune, that imputative goddess?
A. Fortune, as the chiefest, was adored of the Ancients, to whom was
attributed the ordering of all humane affairs, whose power the Poet thus
extols:

Fartunamultis, dat nulli satis;
Si Fortuna volat fies de Consule Rhetor,
Aut de Rhetore Consul.
No foe to Fortune, no friend to Faith,
No wealth to wit, the Wise man says.
Apelles being asked why he pictured Fortune sitting, answered, because she
knew not how to stand in any place: but we know this, Fortune and Chance are
all guided by the hand of providence

Q. What are the seven wonders of the world?
A. These are reckoned amongst ancient Writers, though some vary in their
relation: 1. The Pyramides of Nile, which were 50. cubits high, in thickness
40. the compass about twelve German miles. 2. The Tower of Pharaoh. 3. The
walls of Babylon. 4. The Temple of Diana of Ephesus. 5. The Tomb of Mausoll.
6. The Colossus of the Sun, 70. Cubits high. 7. The Image of the Olympian
Jupiter. To this has been added the golden Colossus, erected by the
Babylonians 60. Cubits high, and the breadth of 60. Cubits, the greatest that
ever was amongst the Pagans, and the most magnificent, and almost beyond
belief: Our fairest works and wonders, compared to the fabric of this
universe, are but like mole-hils, amid the work of Ants.

Q. When was the beginning of time?
A. Plato says, when the world was made, and at the end of the same it shall
cease to be: in the mean time it consists of four parts, as if it walked
upon four legs, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter: of which one writes,

Poma dat Autumnus formosa cst messibus estas,
Ver praebet flores, Igne levatu hiems.
Englished:

Autumn brings fruits, and Summer ripes the corn,
The Spring brings flowers, in winter cold is borne:
This with less sufferance we bear off all harm,
By keeping houses close and fires warm.
Q. What part of tbe year is it that more feeds the eye than the belly.
A. The Spring: but Summer and Autumn both.

Q. What dead thing is that buries the quick, so to keep it alive nd preserve
it.
A. Ashes, wherein fire is raked up.

Cauis Plin. Secundus the Writer of his natural History, prying too near to
see and find out the cause of the continual burning of the mountain
Veshnvius, was himself choked with fuliginous Ashes, and sulphurous vapors,
in the year of his age, 56. Anno Christi, 82.

Q. What Bird of all other is the hugest?
A. The Strutiocamelus, which are found in Africa of the bigness of a man on
horseback, and whose eggs are a Talent weight.

Q. What Bird of all other is the most just, and the most godly?
A. The Storke: for she brings up her young with some kind^ of Justice, and
she is said to off^r up the first of her young to God, by casting the first
out of her nest: she is a great destroyer of Serpents, and therefore in
Thessaly it is as much danger to kill one of these Birds, as to kill a man.

Q. May it be by any Art that a Chicken may be hatched without sitting upon?
A. There be some that have effected it by laying an egg in the sand, or
covering it over with warm dust in the Sun, as likewise this thing is
usually done in other Countries, by their skill; that is, by keeping always
to it a certain temperate heat.

Symonides being asked how long he had lived, answered, a little time, but many
years. Another being asked, answered, he had been borne but a year, but
that been oftentimes doubled.

Q. What is he that is said to till another man's ground, and leave his own
barren?
A. The Adulterer: Theoginis thus expounds it:

Est invisa mihi mulier vaga, inersque m. ritus;
Aiterius fundum quisque arare cupit.
That Husband is no husband, but a Drone,
That tills another ground, and not his own.
A Spiritual description of seedtime and baruest.
Says a Father, When we conceive good desires, we cast our seed into the
earth; when we begin good works, it springs up; when we come to the
perfection of good works, we come to ear; when we are accustomed therein,
then we are corn in the ear. I cannot yet make an end, for I have often wondered
that from the smallest seeds, for the most part, should spring the greatest
trees; where in that smalenesse, so great a wonder should lie hid, where the
root, where the bark, where the bows, where the fruit, did thou perceive
any thing in the seed when it was cast into the earth? Is it not then as
possible from the hand of that power, to reunite us again, being once
something, as to make this great Tree cut of almost nothing: Vnists Deus ambo
semel, Deus ambo reum, Hujus ego vivus, mortnus, huius ero.

Q. Were there Vines before the flood?
A. There were not, but immediately after: and the first Inventer and planter,
was Noah; and he was the first that tasted the strength thereof in the effect:
God in this creature, no doubt, ordaining a singular benefit for the comfort of
man: of whose first invention the Poets have fabled many things; the virtues of
it is to comfort drooping spirits, procure sleep, and cause forgetfulness of
evil: and therefore says Solomon, Give strong drink to him that is ready to
perish: It is the preserver of health, by comforting the natural heat: It
tempereth chollericke humors, and moderately taken, rejoices the spirits: and
it much commends the gooduesse of God, that out of such a dry and frail plant,
so many precious virtues should accrue to man; but by the abuse, all these
virtues are made vices: for God was the Author of the Wine, but the Devil of
drunkenness.

Q. What is the reason that in our Grandfathers days, and fathers likewise,
there were fewer Vineyards, as many yet living can testify, and yet Wine and
all things cheaper?
A. Because Drunkenness and Gluttony was less common in those days than now
in ours. Of Wine one thus further,

Vina parant animos, faciuntque coloribus aptis:
Cont.
Vina parant Asinos, faciuntque furoribus aptis.
Q. What is the greatest wonder in a man?
A. His Conscicnce, which cannot be removed; for his heart may be sooner
pulled out of his belly than his Conscience, being of it self a thousand
witnesses, as God himself a thousand Consciences, which at the last day will
be in every one of us, guilty, the Judge, the tortor, the prison, to judge, to
accuse, condemn, or acquit. An evil Conscience, says one, is like a short
bed, wherein let a man turn which way he will, he can find no ease. Nero
having slain his mother, was continually tormented in mind, and that the
first beginning of his tertor. Richard the third of England, had such
apparitions and terrors in his Conscience, after his murders, that he could not
find a minutes rest: A man may sooner sleep on the top of the mast in a
storm, than lodge in quiet with this unruly Chamber-fellow, it being to many
the Hell before Hell.

Says the Wiseman, A man's Conscience will tell him more then seven Watchmen
on the top of a Tower: and it is that from whence all the beams of Reason
flow. Erasmus says, as the Sun is to the world, that is reason in man: for
if the Sun be clouded, there is darkness; so if Reason be ecclipsed,
notwithstanding the other senses, we differ little from bruit beasts.

I remember I have heard thee speak before that the earth does wax old, does
it now work the same effect upon man's body, as in former ages? and so Virgil
describes men of his time long ago,

Qualianunc hominis prodierit corporatellus. And so likewise Homer, as often as
he recites this clause, says, Vt nunc homines sunt; remembering the former
times, their length of days, greatness of stature, and the like: as one to
that purpose seems to imply:

When as the Age was long, the size was great,
Man's growth consest, and recompensed his meat:
But now our longest times decay so soon,
We are scarce our fathersshadows cast at noone.
Q. What is the reason that in the holy toogue all the names of God end in the
plural termination, although they are joined in the singular verb?
A. This is a mystery, and so it is found every where, except in that one name
of his Essence, lehovah, and this is the reason that the Hebrews give, because
the Essence is one, though the persons three.

Certain Divine flowers of Saint Bernard.

Behold, Lord (says Saint Bernard) I do not give what thanks I should, but
what I can, which have given me an Essence; and above that, a vegetive life;
and above that, a sensitive; and above that, an intellectiue; and above that, a
saving faith, which is the soul of my soul, and the reason of my reason:
Lord, says Saint Bernard, that thou have made me, I owe my self to thy love,
I owe all me, and so much more then my self, by how much thou art greater
than I, for whom thou gave thy self.

The kingdom of God, conceditur, promittitur, ostenditur, precipitur;
conceditur in predestinatione, promittitur invocatione, ostenditur in
Iustificatione, precipitur in Glorificatione. The kingdom of God is yielded,
promised, shown perceived; it is yielded in predestination, promised in
Vocation, shown in Justification, received in Glorification.

Q: Whether are the positive, or the privative blessings of God more?
A. The privative blessing of God are no less, if not more; and yet there is
few that takes notice thereon, as that we are not blind, nor dumb, nor deaf,
that we live not in continual darkness, etc.

His positive blessings are life, clothing, health, and such like: of which
there is neither number nor end of either.

Q. The Sea is an Element of wonders, are there Sirens or Marmaids therein?
A. Sirens of ancient times were wont to be called the wonders of the Sea, and
the monsters therein; partly having a body of Fish, and the upper part flesh,
and faced like a Virgin, singing sweetly, but deceitfully, thereby to
circumvent and endanger the wandering passengers: By this deceit would our
Ancestors note unto us the danger of pleasure: and yet there are that earnestly
affirm, that there are such things in rerum natura. Saint Hierom moraliseth,
that hastening toward our Country, we must avoid this Siren in what kind
soever she allures passing by, with a settled resolution, that this enchantment
pierce not our stopped ears.

Says a Father, every Creature speaks unto us with three voices: 1 Voice
receive a benefit, 2. pay thy benevolence. 3. Avoid punishment. The heaven
says, I give thee lightin the day, that thou may work: says darkness, I
spread my Curtain in the night, that thou may rest. The Air says, I
nourish thee with breath: all kind of Fowls, I keep at thy command: the water
says, I give thee drink, I purge away all uncleanness, and I preserve all my
Elementary creatures to thy use, from the smallest minnum, to the mighty Whale.
The earth says, I bear thee, I nourish thee with bread and wine; I fill thy
Table with all sorts of Creatures, and fruits. The second is a voice of
admonition, in which the world says, See man how he loved thee, which made me
for thee; I serve thee as thou servest him which made both me and thee. The
third voice, the voice of threatening, where the fire says, thou shall be burnt
by me: the water says, thou shall be drowned by me: the earth says, thou
shall be swallowed by me, as some have been: and if thou lay by thy obedience
to him, we put off all subjection to thee.

Theresore, says Saint Gregory, all Creatures call upon man to serve him,
because he is the sum and epitome of all, and that do and pay thy due
homage, and all creatures shall willingly obey thee.

Q. What is the Soul?
A. It is a spiritual and real substance created by God to enliven the body;
and by how much the heaven is more glorious then the earth, by so much does the
beauty of the soul excel the body; the immediate descent being from God, and
not from the body: for the Wiseman says, Si cum corpore oritur, cum corpore
moritur: If it had his beginning from the body, then the bodies end would
determine that, but after the soul once lives, it never dies, it dwells in the
body, and governes it, as the Pylot in the Ship, directing it from haven to
haven: the Soul is all this while imprisoned in the body, and yet to it some
bodies are palaces to others straightened prisons: according as one writes one,

She who is saire body no such prison was,
But that a Soul might well be be pleased to pass
An age in her. And so further speaking of the freedom of the Soul in death,
says then,

Think that a rusty piece dischargd is flowne
In sunder, and the bullet is his own.
Q. Wherefore is the Soul of man called the Lantern of God?
A. For the Light that is infused into it by God, in whom all the Divine
faculties dwell, and therefore for the most part is put for the whole man: for,
men's cuiusque es est quisque.

Of secret writings.
The Ephesians, Act. 19. 19. had certain writing and magical notes, which
they used in every place, and always came away victors: It was the Ephesians
that used curious and unlawful Arts, which when Saint Paul heard of them, and
to that end wrote bitterly against them, they gathered their books together,
and in open view burned them, which in estimation were worth fifty thousand
pieces of silver.

Suetonius reports, in the lives of the twelve Coesars, Eoistles of his to be
so obscure and secret, that they could not be read but by former Intelligence,
for one letter went in the room of another, as D for A, and so of the rest.

Q. What is the most faithful messenger, and yet carries with it both reoson
and speech?
A. An Epistle or Letter: of which one writes,

Discere fit charum, quamvis primo sit amarum. But it Letters of secrecy shall
be intercepted, then to prevent that, Pliny writes of an herb called Goats
Lettuice, which with the milk thereof writing on any groundwork, or paper,
and dust strewed afterward on, and dried, may be perfectly read.

Likewise to write with new milk, is a safe way, and deceives the eyes,
putting but a little coledust upon it, and then what could not be seen before,
is apparently read.

Likewise to write with the juice of an Onion, being wet, may be perfectly
read, and not before discerned: and this was practiced by one of the
gunpowderTraytors out of the Tower, in a letter written to Garnet: the letter
was common, for the body of it that was ordinary complement, but the margents
contained the mystery so discover ed and found out.

Q. What is that, the more feet it has, the slower it goes; the fewer, the
more upright, and swist it walks about the world, and has twice ten horns?
A. A man not yet come to his Staff.

Q. Whether is it better to be sprung from good parents, or to be good in
enes self?
A. To be good, and not to live by another blood, or fame. according to the
Poet:

Miserum est aliena incumbere fama.
To live by others breath, I hold a sickly state,
And if I were to choose a wife, I such a choice would hate
As had not many living goods for me to taste and see,
But only such as now are dead in the ancient pedigree.
Q. What do we most love, and best esteem?
A. Those things we hardest atchieue: according to the Poet:

Quod venit exfacili, faciles segnesque tenemur:
Quod spes, quodque metu torsit habare juvat.
Englished:

But light we reckon that we slightly gain,
Valuing the subject as it costs us pain.
Q. What small garment is that which is made of cheap wool, and yet of most
incomparable price?
A. The Episcopal Robe, which was used to be given gratis from the Ancients,
and of it self is of small value, yet now with the enchanted Roses, the Agnus
Deies the Apostolical breves, the exorcises, swords, and wooden crosses, it
costs many thousands before it sits on the Popes back.

The Pope says, that for Layickes to read the Scriptures in a known tongue,
is to set pearls before Swine.

Q. What was the most monstrous Embassage that has been heard of?
A. An Embassage came to Rome by three Ambassadors, the one whereof was
troubled with the Gout, the other with wounds in his head, and the third with
tremor in the heart: which Cato observing, said to the Senate laughing, Here is
an Embassage come without head, or heart, or feet.

Q. Why has God given us two of all members of the body?
A. That if by any accident the one fail, it may be supplied by the others
help, and therefore we have two hands, two legs, two feet, two ears, two
eyes, but but one Soul, to show the incomparable value thereof, that it is
more worth then all the world: for what shall a man give for the ransom
thereof.

Q. Whether is the lighter plague, that of the Sword or of the tongue?
A. That of the Sword, for that only wounds the body, but this the soul: the
tongue is, many times, accessory to murder, stirs that fire, that naught but
blood can quench. Saint Bernard says, the detractors tongue is a threefold
lance, that at one blow wounds three, the speaker, hearer, and him that is
detracted: further he says, the Detractor has the Devil in his tongue, the
hearer in his ear, the consenter in his heart: it is said, between the heart
and the tongue there should be a marriage; for it is Uerbum in c^rde, before
it be Uerbum in ore: and those words that are spoken by the tongue, without
the consent of the heart, are said to be conceived in Adultery.

Q. Whether is our Country, or our parents to be more honored?
A. It is the answer of a Wiseman, that our Country; that our Country was
before our parents, and therefore first to be honored.

Q. May it be one Ship should compass the whole world?
A. That with wonder have our eyes beheld in our noble Countryman Drake: and so
has the sound of the Gospel gone over the whole world, so that now we believe
the end of the world not to be far off.

^he number of 40 is a time re^keable in holy Scriptures for penitency and
affliction: for 40 days Christ fasted for our sins, 40 years wandered the
people in the wilderness, 40 days had the Ninivites to repent, 40 days
continued the waters of the flood, etc.

Q. Does money make a rich man?
A. It does not, but the contrary; for that is never too little, that is
enough; and there is never enough where there is not content, though too much;
for our happiness or infelicity is of our own making.

Q. When do enemies profit us, and friends hurt us?
A. That is done so when as an enemy justly reprehends us, it profits; but when
a friend falsely praises us, it hurts us.

Q. Of what Nations consisted the four Empires?
Assirij primiregnarunt, postea P^
Post Persas Graeci, Germani (...) dominantur.
Englished:

The Assirian first, the Persian then began;
The Grecian next, the German now the man.
Q. Of what estates consists the Columns of the Roman Empire?
A. Of 4 Dukes, 4 Marquesses, 4 Landgraves, 4 Burgraves, 4 Earls, 4 Barons, 4
young Lords, 4 Knights, 4 Citizens, 4 Pages, 4 Clownes.

Q. What was the Answer of that cowardly fugitive?
A. That he had rather laugh in health after his flight, then be praised, being
dead, after the battle: one said, for his enemies flight he would make him a
silver bridege.

Q. Whether is it more easy to judge between enemies or friends?
A. Bias was used to say, that he had rather judge between Enemies; for
between friends he should get an enemy, but between enemies, a friend.

Q. Where is it that no man is counted evil, but be that does no evil?
A. In the company of the wicked, thieves, robbers, and the like.

Q. Who are those that live and speak after their death?
A. Learned and godly Writers, as the Poet will tell you:

Vivere post obitum doctos vis nosse viator,
Quod legis ecce loquor, vox tua namque mea est.
Know that our Learned Writers dead and gone,
They have two lives, where other have but one.
Q. What is the true use of all learning?
A. To make a ladder to mount thee up to heaven: for otherwise, if a man had
all Sciences, ad unguem, all Languages ad verbum; if a man had all the learning
in Plutarchs Volumnes, if these gifts and knowledges to himself did not teach
him to be more than a man, to reach nearer to heaven, all these were but
common benefits.

Aristotle being about to dye, certain of his Disciples standing about him,
thus commended his soul, Now he that receives the souls of all Philosophers,
receive thine. Severus the Emperor, about to dye, said, I have been all
things, and now shall be nothing.

Q. Who was he, that the same, moment he was buried, was again revived, and
came forth of his grave?
A. A certain man buried in that Tomb where the Prophet was, touched but his
bones, and was revived thereby, 2 King. 3. 21. Eccles. 48. 2.

A wonderful Epitaph set up, in Bononia apud Spingeides, or Spinx in which,
according to the opinion of learned men, there lies more wisdom then is
compiled in many books: and so it follows,

Aelia Lelia Crispis, neither man nor woman, nor Androgina neither maid, nor
young man, nor old woman, neither chaste nor harlot, but all, was taken away,
neither by hunger, nor sword, nor poison, nor fire, nor plague, but by all; and
he is neither in heaven, nor the waters, nor the earth, but every where.

Lucius Agatho Priscius, neither husband nor lover, neither necessary nor
deserving, neither laughing nor weeping, neither Mountain nor Pyramid, nor
Sepulcher, but all, knows and knows not who put her there: eos qui volet
consulat, for none but Oedipus can this interpret.

Q. Does. education alter nature, or not?
A. It does, as it was sufficiently experimented by Lycurgus two dogs, the
one sprung from a good breed, and hunters kind, the other from a worse race,
but better brought up and exercised in hunting, whilst the other was brought up
at home, and pampered in idleness: now after this, threre is a game set before
them out of the Forest, and a service of meat; this houshold-dogge he forsakes
the game, and falls to his porridge, the other, he bears all over to follow
the game: and herein is the difference of Education tried, as may well appear
to be a new nature: likewise this is found true in the practice upon better
subjects.

Cleanthes being asked the difference between Logic and Rhethoricke, first
he showed his clouched hand, and then by and by his open hand.

Stobeus says, Deliver not in many words a little, but in few words much.

Ernesius counsel to his sriend. Take heed thou requirest not great things in
thy suit, lest he to whom thou suest may do it, but with some vexation to
himself; or if he deny it with sorrow.

Q. What is that which though contained in a small circuit, yet with her
voracity, keeps, snatcheth, and devoures all things?
A. The stomach, which if it wants natural food, cuts sharper than a Razor,
will break stonewalls, will compel a man to eat Cats, Dogs, Leather, or the
most vildest things that are, as has been experienced in diverse siedges and
famines, where a mouse has been sold at weight of silver.

Q. Amongst Saint Paul's many and Divine Epictles, which do you account the
most excellent?
A. Holy, and lively, and heavenly are all; for he learned wisdom out of the
third heavens: but yet to me, of all the other, those which he wrote, being in
bonds, to the Ephesians, to Tim^thy, to the Col^ssians; like that Noble
Soldier that maintained Christ's cause the more valiant before his Enemies, and
in the midst of them, so did this Christian Champion: So he begat Onesimus in
bonds; for though he was captive, the word of God was free: for he reserved
both a liberal tongue, and a plentiful style.

Q. What is the most guilty part of Time?
A. Opportunity: which if neglected, makes the best thing unrespected,
according to the Poet:

Like to a poor man so befriended,
Or Summers Chimneys, Winter ended;
Or like to Soldiers, wars being done,
Or like to Dogs, their races run,
Or like to beauty wrinkled old,
Or like a secret known, and told,
So Time of all the dearest cost,
Not taken by the fore-top, lost.
And for the guilt, anotherthus,

O Opportunity, thy guilt is great,
It Is thou that executes the Traitors treason,
Thou setst the Wolf, where he the Lamb may get,
Whoeuer plots the finne, thou points the season:
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
Sits sin to seize the souls that wander by him.
Thou make the Vestal violate her oath,
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thawed,
Thou smotherest honesty, thou murderest truth,
Thou foul abettor, thou notorious band:
And to express thy nature here in brief,
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief.
When will thou be the humble suppliants friend,
And bring him where his cause may be obtained;
When will thou sort an hour great strife to end,
Or free the soul that wretchedness has chained,
Give Physic to the sick, ease to the pained?
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out to thee,
But they never meet with Opportunity, etc.
Q. Why is the earth barren of grass, where richest Mines of gold and silver
lie under buried?
A. Because wise Nature has locked up and covered deep those mettalls which
she foresaw should herafter trouble the world, and made the Carpet that
covers them, as barren as the breast of some of these unprofitable rich
Iaylors.

Q. What was Diogenes reason therefore he counseled his friend not to lend
money?
A. Because, says he, if thou lend, thou shall not receive again; if thou
do, not so soon; if so soon, not so good; if so good, then thou losest a
friend: To this purpose agrees the old saying,

I once had money and a friend,
And joy'd them both together,
I lent my money to my friend
At need to do him pleasure:
His need supplied, he slighted mine,
And did not back repay
The money at his pointed time,
And at my fixed day.
I sought my money of my friend
He paid it back in hate;
My money had I lost, my friend,
And now repent too late.
FINIS.

