CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To (...) Messengers, our Sheriffs, in that part
conjunctly and severally specially constitute greeting. For So Much as in our
Parliament holden at Edinburgh upon the Twenty eighth day of June, 1633. the
three Estates of our Kingdom of Scotland being assembled, having taken to
their consideration the many blessings which this nation does enjoy under our
most wise, happy, and peaceable government, whereof each Estate is most
sensible, our Royal zeal for propagating the Gospel of Jesus Christ, our care
for providing sufficient maintenance for the Clergy, our extraordinary pains
taken for uniting the dis-jointed members of this commonwealth, and extirping
of all roots of discords, relieving the oppressed, and with so even and
fatherly a hand curing the wounds of this commonwealth, as the wisest eye can
find no blemish in the temper of all our royal actions; and lastly, the great
comfort they have by enjoying of our presence, pains taken, and expenses
disburst by Us in this our journey, Have made one voluntary and free offer of
one taxation to be imposed, collected, and paid to Us in manner and at the six
terms following, That is to say, For the Barons and Freeholders parts of the
same taxation Thirty shillings money to be uplifted of every pound land of
old extent within this our kingdom pertaining to Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Vicounts, Lords, Barons, Freeholders and Fewars of our proper lands, holden by
them immediately of Us* and to be paid by them at every one of the six
several terms following, videlicet, The sowme of thirty shillings money
(...) feast and term of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1634. years. The sowme
of other thirty shillings money at the feast and (...) ^^^^inmasse in the year
of God, 1635. The sowme of other thirty shillings money at the feast and term
of Martinmasse in the (...) 1636. The sowme of other thirty shillings money at
the feast and term of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1637. The sow^^ ^^ other
thirty shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse in the year of
God, 1638. And the sowme of other thirty shillings money at the feast and
term of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1639. And for the spiritual men and
burrows, parts of the same taxation, that there shall be uplifted of every
Archbishopric, Bishopric, Abbacie, Priorie, and other inferior benefice, and
of every free burgh within this our said Kingdom at every one of the said
six several terms payment, The just taxation thereof as they have been
accustomed to be taxed unto in all time bygone whenever the temporal Lands
within this our said Kingdom were stented to thirty shillings the pound land
of old extent. And the same taxation to be paid at every one of the six
several terms above-written. And for inbringing of the (...) terms payment
of our burrowes, parts of the same taxation, Our other letters are direct,
charging the provest and bailiffs of each burgh to make payment of the taxt and
stent thereof To (...) Our Co^^^or general appointed by Us for receiving of
the same taxation, or to his deputes and officers in his name, having his power
(...) the same, at the feast and term of Martinmasse, in the year of God One
thousand six hundred thirty (...) years, (...) of rebellion, and putting of
them to our horn. For whose relief (...)

OUR WILL IS, and we charge you straightly and command, That incontinent these
our letters seen, ye pass, and in Our name and authority command and charge
the Council of that our burgh of (...) To conveene with you the said Provest
and Bailiffs, and elect certain persons to stent their neighbors, And the same
election being made, that ye charge the persons elected to accept the charge
upon them in setting of the said stent upon the inhabitants of that our said
burgh, and to conveene and set the same, and to make a stent roll thereupon as
effeiris, within twenty four hours next after they be charged by you
thereto, under the pain of rebellion and putting of them to our horn. And if
they failyie therein the said twenty four hours being bypast, that ye
incontinent* thereafter denounce the disobeyers our rebels, and put them to our
horn, and escheat and inbring all their moveable goods to our use for their
contemption. And likewise the said stent roll being made and set down as said
is, That ye in our name and authority command and charge the burgesses,
indwellers and inhabitants within that our burgh, To make payment of their said
stent to you our said Provest and Bailiffs conform to the taxt roll to be made
and given out thereupon within three days next after they be charged by you
thereto, under the pain of rebellion, and putting of them to our horn. And if
they failyie the said three days being bypast, that ye incontinent thereafter
denounce the disobeyers our rebels, and put them to our horn, and escheat and
inbring all their moveable goods to our use for their contemption. And if need
be, that ye our said Provest and Bailiffs poynd and distreinyie therefore, as
ye shall think most expedient, according to justice, as ye will answer to us
thereupon. The which to do we commit to you conjunctly and severally our full
power, By these our letters delivering them by you duly execute and indorsed
again to the Bearer.

Given under our signet at Edinburgh the twenty eight day of June, and of our
Reign the ninth year, 1633. Per actum Parliamenti.

