(...) royal coat of arms of the kingdom of Scotland, a lion rampant within a
double tressure flory counter-flory

A Brief Chronicle, of all the Kings of Scotland, since it was first
inhabited, until this present Year 1623.
I. FERGVS, The First KING of SCOTLAND, the Son of FERQVHARD, a Prince of
IRELAND, began to reign in the year of the World 3641: before the coming of
our Savior Jesus Christ 330 years: in the first year of the 112 Olympiade:
and in the 421 year of the building of Rome: about the beginning of the third
Monarchy of the Grecians, when Alexander the Great overthrew Darius
Codomannus, the last Monarch of Persia. He was a valiant Prince, and died
Ship-broken upon the Sea-coaste of Ireland, in the 25 year of his reign.

II. Feritharis, Brother to Fergus, began to reign in the year of the world
3666: in the year before the coming of Christ 305. He was a good Iustitiar:
in whose time there was a Law made, That if the sons of the King departed
were so young that they could not rule; then, in that case, the nearest in
blood should reign, being in age sufficient for Government: and then after
his death, the Kings Children should succeed. Which Law continued until
Kenneth the thirds days, almost 1025 years. He was slain by the means of
Ferlegus, Fergus his brothers son, in the fifteenth year of his reign.

III. Mainus, King Fergus son, succeeded to his fathers brother, in the year
of the world 3680: and in the year before the coming of Christ 291. He was
a wise and good King: and died peaceably in the twenty and ninth year of his
reign.

IIII. Dornadilla succeeded to his father Mainus, in the year of the world
3709: in the year before the coming of Christ 262. He was a good King, who
made the first Laws concerning Hunting: and died peaceably, in the twenty
and eight year of his reign.

V. Nothatus succeeded to his brother Dornadilla, in the year of the world
3738: and in the year before the coming of Jesus Christ 233. He was a
greedy and a cruel Tyrant: and was slain by Dovalus, one of his Nobles, in
the twentieth year of his reign.

VI. Reutherus, the son of Dornadilla, began to reign in the year of the
world 3758: in the year before the coming of Christ 213. He was a good
King, and died peaceably, in the twenty and sixth year of his reign.

VII. Reutha succeeded to his brother Reutherus, in the year of the world
3784: in the year before the coming of Christ 187. He was a good King: who
after he had ruled fourteen years, left the government of the Kingdom, even
of his own accord, and lived a private life.

VIII. Thereus, the son of Reutherus, began to reign in the year of the
world 3798: in the year before the coming of Christ 173. He was an unwise
and cruel Tyrant: who was expelled, and banished the Realm, by his own
Nobles, in the twelft year of his reign: and Conanus, a wise and grave
Senator, was made Governor of the Land. And Thereus died in exyle, in the
City of York.

IX. Iosina succeeded his brother Thereus, in the year of the world 3810. In
the year before Christ 161. He was a quiet and good Prince. A good medicinar
and Herbister. He died in peace in the twenty four year of his reign.

X. Finnanus, Iosina his son, began to reign in the year of the world
3834. In the year before Christ 137. A good King. He was much given to the
superstitious religion of the Druydes. He died in peace in the 30 year of his
reign.

XI. Durstus, Finnanus son, succeeded to his Father in the year of the world
3864. In the year before Christ 107. A cruel and a Traitorous Tyrant, slain
by his Nobles in Battle, in the 9 Year of his reign

XII. Evenus 1. succeeded to his brother Durstus, in the year of the world
three thousand, eight hundred, seventie three. In the year before the cumming
of Christ, 98 years. A wise, just, and virtuous prince: He died peaceably in
the 19 year of his reign.

XIII. Gillus, Evenus bastard son, succeeded to his father, in the year of
the world 3892. In the year before Christ 79. A crafty tyrant, slame in
battle by Cadallus, in the 2 year of his reign.

XIIII. Euenus 2. Dovallus son, King Finnanus brother, began to reign in the
year of the world 3894. In the year before the coming of Christ 77. A good
and civil King. He died in peace in the seventeen year of his reign.

XV. Ederus, Dochamus son, Durstus son, began to reign in the year of the
World 3911. In the year before the coming of Christ 60. A wise, Valiant and
good Prince. He died in the 48. year of his reign.

XVI. Evenus 3. succeeded to his Father Ederus in the year of the world, three
thousand, nine hundred 59. In the year before the coming of Christ 12. A
luxurious and Covetous wicked King. He was taken by his Nobles, and
Imprisoned, and died in prison, in the seventh year of his reign.

XVII. Metellanus, Ederus brothers son, began to reign in the year of the
world 3966. Four years before Christ's Incarnation. A very modest and good
King. He died in the 39 year of his reign.

XVIII. Caractacus, Cadallarius and Eropeia Metellanus sisters son, began to
reign in the year of the world 4005. In the year of Christ 35. He was a
wise and valiant King, and reigned 20 years.

XIX. Corbredus 1. succeeded to his brother Caractacus, In the year of the
world 4025. In the year of Christ 55. A wise King, and a good Institiar. He
died in peace in the 18. year of his reign.

XX. Dardannus, Nephew to Metellanus, began to reign, In the veare of the
world 4042. In the year of Christ 72. A cruel tyrant. He was taken in
battle, and beheaded by his own Subjectes, in the fourth year of his reign.

XXI. Corbredus 2. sur-named Galius, Corbrodus son, began to reign in they
care of the world 4046. In the year of Christ 76. A valiant and worthy King:
for he had many wars with the Romans, and was often victorious over them. He
died in peace in the 35. year of his reign.

XXII. Lugthacus, succeeded to his father Corbredus 2. In the year of the
world 4080. In the year of Christ 110. A lecherous bloody tyrant. He was
slain by his Nobles in the 3. year of his reign.

XXIII. Mogallus, Corbredus 2. sisters son. He began to reign in the year
of the world 4083. In the year of Christ 113. A good King, and victorious, in
the beginning of his reign, But in the end of his life, became inclyned to
tyranny, leachery and covetousness, and was slain by his Nobles in the 36
year of his reign.

XXIIII. Conarus, succeeded to his father Mogallus, In the year of the world
4119. In the year of Christ 149. A leacherous tyrant. He was imprisoned by his
Nobles, and died in prison in the 14. year of his reign: and Argadus, a Noble
man, was made Governor.

XXV. Ethodius 1. Mogallus sisters son, began to reign in the year of the
world 4133. In the year of Christ 163. He was a good prince. He was slain by
an Harper, in the 33. year of his reign.

XXVI. Satraell, succeeded to his brother Ethodius 1. In the year of the world
4165. In the year of Christ 195. A cruel tyrant. He was slain by his own
Courteours, in the 4. year of his reign.

XXVII. Donald 1. the first Christian King of Scotland, succeeded to his
brother Satraell in the year of the world 4169. In the year of Christ 199. A
good and religious King. He was the first of the Kings of Scotland that coined
money of gold and silver. He died in the eighteenth year of his reign.

XXVIII. Ethodius 2. Ethodius 1. son, began to reign in the year of the
world 4186. In the year of Christ 216. An unwise and base minded King,
governed by his Nobles. He was slain by his own Guarde, in the 16. year of
his Reign.

XXIX. Athirco, succeeded to his father Ethodius 2. in the year of the world
4201. In the year of Christ 231. A valiant prince in the beginning, but he
degenerated and became vicious, and being hardly persued by his Nobles for his
wicked life, slew himself in the 12 year. of his Reign.

XXX. Nathalocus, brother son (as some write) to Athirco, began to reign in
the year of the world 4212. In the year of Christ 242. A cruel tyrant, slain
by his Nobles, and cast away into a privy, in the 11. year of his Reign.

XXXI. Findocus, Athirco his son, began to reign in the year of the world
4223. In the year of Christ 253. A good King and valiant, Slain by feigned
Hunters, at the instigation of Donald, Lord of the Isles his brother, in the 11.
year of his reign.

XXXII. Donald 2. succeeded to his brother Findocus, in the year of the world
4234. In the year of Christ 264. A good prince. He was wounded in battle,
and being overcome, died of displeasure in the first year of his Reign.

XXXIII. Donald 3. Lord of Isles, brother to Findocus, began to reign in the
year of world 4235. In the year of Christ 265. A cruel tyrant, slain by
Crathilinthus, his successor, in the 12. year of his Reign.

XXXIIII. Crathilinthus, Findocus son, began to reign in the year of the
world 4247. In the year of Christ 277. A valiant and a godly King, he purged
the land from the Idolatrous superstition of the Druydes, and planted the
sincere Christian religion. He died in peace in the 24. year of his reign.

XXXV. Fincormachus, father brother son to Crathilinthus, began his reign in
the year of the world 4271. In the year of Christ 301. A godly King and
valiant. He was a worthy promover of the Kingdom of Christ in Scotland. He
died in peace in the 47. year of his reign.

XXXVI. Romachus brothers son to Crathilinthus began to reign in the year
of the world 4318. In the year of Christ 348. A cruel tyrant, slain by his
Nobles, and his head stricken off, in the third year of his reign.

XXXVII. Angusianus, Crathilinthus brothers son, succeeded to Romachus in the
year of the world 4321. In the year of Christ 351. A good King, slain in
battle by the Pictes, in the 3. year of his reign.

XXXVIII. Fethelmachus, another brothers son, of Crathilinthus, he began to
reign in the year of the world 4324. In the year of Christ 354. He was a
valiant King, for he overcame the Pictes, and slew their King. He was betrayed
to the Pictes by an Harper, and slain by them in his own Chamber in the 3.
Year of his reign.

XXXIX. Eugenius 1. Fincormachus son, began to reign in the year of the world
4327. In the year of Christ 357. A valiant, just, and good King. He was
slain in battle by the Pictes and Romans in the 3. year of his reign. And
the whole Scottish Nation was utterly expelled the I Will by the Pictes and
Romans, and remained in exile, about the space of 44. years.

XL. Fergus 2. Erthus sons, son to Ethodius, Eugenius the first his
brother, returning into Scotland, with the help of the Danes and Gotthes, and
his own Countrymen, who were gathered to him out of all the countries where
they were dispersed, conquered his kingdom of Scotland again out of the
Romans and Pictes hands. He began his reign, In the the year of the world
4374. In the year of Christ 404. He was a wise, valiant and good King. He was
slain by the Romans in the 16. year of his reign.

XLI. Eugenius 2. Fergus 2. son succeeded to his father, In the year of the
world 4390. In the year of Christ 420. He was a valiant and a good prince.
He subdued the Britones, and died in the thirtie-two year of his reign.

XLII. Dongardus succeeded to his brother Eugenius 2. In the year of the
world 4421. In the year of Christ 451. A godly, wise and valiant prince. He
died in the 5. year of his reign.

XLIII. Constantine 1. succeeded to his brother Dongardus, In the year of the
world 4427. In the year of Christ 457. A wicked prince. He was slain by a
Noble man in the Isles, whose daughter he had desiled, in the 22. year of his
Reign.

XLIIII. Congallus 1. Dongardus son, began to reign in the year of the
world 4449: In the year of Christ 479. He was a good and quyer Prince: and
died in great peace, in the twenty and two year of his reign.

XLV. Goranus, or Conranus, succeeded to his Brother Congallus the first, in
the year of the world 4471: and in the year of Christ 501. A good and wise
Prince. He died even in the thirty and fourth year of his reign.

XLVI. Eugenius the third, the son of Congallus, succeeded to his Father, in
the year of the world 4505: and in the year of Christ 535. He was a wise
King, and a good Iustitiar: and died in the twenty and third year of his
reign.

XLVII. Congallus the second, or Convallus, succeeded to his Brother Eugenius
the third, in the year of the world 4528: and in the year of Christ 558. A
very good Prince: and died in peace in the eleventh year of his Reign.

XLVIII. Kinnatillus succeeded to his brother Congallus the second, in the
year of the world 4539: and in the year of Christ 569. He was a good
Prince: and died (alace) in the first year of his Reign.

XLIX. Aidanus, the son of Conranus, began his Reign in the Year of the
world 4540: and in the Year of Christ 570. A very godly and good Prince: who
reigned thirty and five Years, and deceassed in great peace.

L. Kennethus the first, sur-named Keir, the son of Congallus the second,
began to reign in the Year of the world 4575: and in the Year of Christ
605. A very peaceable Prince: and departed this life in the first Year of his
Reign.

LI. Eugenius the fourth, the son of Aidanus, began his Reign in the Year
of the world 4576: and in the Year of our Savior 606. A valiant and good
King: and died in the sixteenth Year of his happy Reign.

LII. Ferquhard the first succeeded to his Father Eugenius the fourth, in the
Year of the world 4591: and in the Year of our Redeemer 621. He was a
bloody Tyrant: and being imprisoned, he slew himself in the twelft year of
his reign.

LIII. Donald the fourth, succeeded to his brother Ferqubard the first, in the
Year of the world 4602: and in the Year of Christ 632. He was a good and
Religious King: he was drowned in the Water of Tay, while he was a-fishing, in
the foureteenth Year of his Reign.

LIIII. Ferquhard the second, succeeded to his Brother Donald the fourth, in
the Year of the World 4616: And in the Year of Christ 646. A very Wicked
man. He was bitten by a Wolf in hunting: of the which ensued a Fever, whereof
he died in the eighteenth Year of his Reign.

LV. Maldvine, Donald the fourth his Son, began to Reign in the Year of
the World 4634: and in the Year of Christ 664. A good Prince, strangled by
his Wife, who suspected him of Adultery, in the twenty Year of his Reign.

LVI. Eugemus the fifth, Maldvine his brothers son, began to Reign in the
year of the World 4654: and in the year of Christ 684. A false Prince,
slain by the Pictes in Battle in the fourth year of his Reign.

LVII. Eugenius the sixth, Ferquhard the second his son, began to Reign in
the Year of the world 4658: and in the Year of Christ 688. A good Prince: he
died in Peace in the tenth Year of his Reign.

LVIII. Ambirkelethus, Findanus son, Eugenius the fifth son, began to
reign in the Year of the world 4667: and in the Year of Christ 697. He was
slain by the shot of an Arrow: by whom it was shot, it is unknown, (a
vicious Prince) in the Second year of his Reign.

LIX. Eugenius the seventh, succeeded to his brother Ambirkelethus, in the
year of the World 4669: and in the year of Christ 699. He died in peace in
the seventeenth year of his Reign. A good Prince.

LX. Mordacus, Ambirkelethus son, began to reign in the year of the
world 4685: and in the year of Christ 715. A good Prince. He died in the
sixteenth year of his Reign.

LXI. Etsinus, Eugenius the seventh his son, began to reign in the year
of the World 4700: And in the year of Christ 730. He died in Peace in the
thirteenth year of his Reign.

LXII. Eugenius the eight, Mordacus son, began to reign in the year of
the World 4771: And in the year of Christ 761. A good Prince in the beginning
of his reign: but there-after degenerating from his good Life, he was slain
by his Nobles, in the third year of his Reign.

LXIII. Fergus the third, Etsinus son, began to reign in the year of the
world 4734: and in the Year of Christ 764. A leacherous Prince, poisoned by
his Wise in the third year of his Reign.

LXIIII. Solvathius Engenius the eight son, began to reign in the year of
the World 4737: and in the Year of Christ 767. A good Prince, he died in
peace in the twenty Year of his Reign.

LXV. Achaius, Etsinus son, began to reign in the year of the world
four thousand 757: and in the year of Christ 787. A peaceable, good and
godly prince. He made a league with Charles le Maigne, Emperor, and King of
France, which remains inviolablie kept to this day. He died in the thirty
and two year of his reign.

LXVI. Congallus, or Convallus, Achaius fathers brothers son, began to
reign in the year of the world 4789: and in the year of Christ 819. A good
prince, he died in the fifth year of his reign.

LXVII. Dongallus, Solvathius son, succeeded in the year of the World 4794:
and in the year of Christ 824. A valiant and good Prince. He was drowned
coming over the river of Spey, o war against the Pictes, in the seventh
year of his Reign.

LXVIII. Alpinus Achaius son, began to reign in the Year of the world
4801: and in the Year of Christ 831. A good Prince. He was taken in Battle,
and beheaded by the Pictes, in the third year of his reign.

LXIX. Kenneth the second, surnamed the Great, succeeded to his father Alpinus,
In the year of the World 4804: and in the year of Christ 834. A good and a
Valiant Prince. He utterly euerthrew the Pictes in diverse Battelles, expelled
them out of the Land, and joined the kingdom of the Pictes to the Crown of
Scotland. He died in peace in twenty year of his reign.

LXX. Donald the fifth, succeeded to his brother Kenneth the second, in the
year of the world 4824: and in the year of Christ 854. A wicked Prince: he
slew himself in the fifth year of his reign.

LXXI. Constantine the second, Kenneth the second his son, began to reign
in the year of the world 4829: and in the year of Christ 859. A valiant
Prince. He was slain by the Danes in a cruel battle stricken at Carraill in
Fife, in the sixeteenth year of his reign.

LXXII. Ethus, surnamed Alipes, Constantine the second his son, succeeded to
his Father, in the year of the World 4844: and in the year of Christ 874. A
vicious Prince: he was imprisoned by his Nobles, where he died in the second
year of his Reign.

LXXIII. Gregory, surnamed the Great, Dongallus son the second, began to
reign in the year of the world 4846: and in the year of Christ 876. A
valiant, victorious and renowned prince through the world in his time: he
died in peace in the eighteenth year of his reign.

LXXIIII. Donald the sixth, Constantine the second his son, began to reign
in the year of the World 4863: and in the year of Christ 893. A valiant
Prince. He died in peace, being beloved of his Subjectes, in the eleventh
Year of his Reign.

LXXV. Constanthie the third, Ethus Alipes son, began to reign in the
year of the world 4874: and in the year of Christ 904. He was a valiant
King, yet he prospered not in his Wars against England: and therefore,
being weary of his Life, he became a Monk, and died after he had, reigned
forty years as King.

LXXVI. Malcolme the first, Donald the sixth his son, began to reign in the
year of the world 4913: and in the year of Christ 943. A valiant prince, and
a good Iustitiar: He was slain in Murray by a conspiracy of his own
Subjectes, in the ninth year of his reign.

LXXVII. Indulfus, Constantine the third his son, began to reign in the
year of the world 4922: and in the year of Christ 952. A valiant, and a good
prince. He had many battles with the Danes, whom he overcame: but in the
end he was slain by them in a stratageme of War, in the ninth year of his
reign.

LXXVIII. Duffus, Malcolme the first his son, began to reign in the year
of the World 4931: and in the year of Christ 961. A good Prince, and a severe
Iustitiar. He was slain by one Donald, at Forres in Murray, and was buried
secretly under the Brig of a River beside Kinlosse: but the matter was
revealed, and the murderer and his wife, that consented thereto were severely
punished. He reigned five years.

LXXIX. Culenus, Indulfus son, began to reign in the year of the world
4936: and in the year of Christ 966. An vicious and an effeminate prince. He
was slain at Methwen; by Radardus, a Noble man, whose Daughter he had
defiled, in the fourth year of his Reign.

LXXX. Kenneth the third, Duffus Brother, began to reign in the year of the
World 4940: and in the year of Christ 970. A valiant, and a Wise prince: But
in the end he became Cruel, and slew Malcolme his Brothers Son: and in
GODS Judgment, who suffers not Innocent blood to be unpunished, he was
slain by a strange engine, an Image fixed in a Wall, at Fetticarne, by the
means of a Noble woman there, called Fenella, in the twenty four year of
his reign.

LXXXI. Constantine the fourth, surnamed Calvus, Culenus Son, began to
reign in the year of the world 4964: and in the year of Christ 994. An
usurper of the Crown. He was slain in Battle at the Town of Crawmond, in
Louthian, in the second year of his reign.

LXXXII. Grimus, Duffus Son, began to reign in the year of the world
4966: and in the year of Christ 996. A vicious prince: he was slain in
Battle by Malcolme the second, his successor, in the eight year of his reign.

LXXXIII. Malcolme the second, Kenneth the third his Son, began to reign
in the year of the World 4974: And in the year of Christ 1004. A Valiant and
a wise prince: who made many good Laws, of the which a few are yet extant.
He was Slain by a Conspiracy of his Nobles, at the Castle of Glammes: who
after the slaughter, thinking to escape, were drowned in the Loch of Forfar,
for it being Winter, and the Loch frozen, and covered with Snow, the Ye brake,
and they fell in, showing even the Righteous Judgment of GOD. He reigned
thirty years.

LXXXIIII. Duncane the first, Beatrix, Malcolme the Second his Daughters Son,
began to reign in the year of the world 5004: and in the year of Christ
1034. A good and a modest Prince. He was slain by Mackbeth traiterouslie, in
the sixth year of his Reign.

LXXXV. Mackbeth, Dovada Malcolme the second his daughters son, began to
Reign in the year of the world 5010: and in the year of Christ 1040. In the
beginning of his reign he behaved himself as a good and just Prince: but
thereafter he degenerated into a Cruel Tyrant. He (...) slain by his
Successor Malcolme the third, in battle, in the seaventeenth year of his
reign.

LXXXVI. Malcolme the third, surnamed Cammoir, Duncane the first his son,
began to reign in the year of the world 5027: and in the year of Christ
1057. A very Religious and valiant Prince: He married Margaret, daughter to
Edward, surnamed the OVT-LAW, son unto Edward, sur-named YRON-SIDE, King of
ENGLAND; a very good and religious Woman, according unto those times: who
bare unto him six Sons, and two Daughters. The Sons were, Edward the
Prince, Edmond, Etheldred, Edgar, Alexander, and David. The Daughters were,
Mathildis, or Maude, sur-named BONA, Wife unto Henry the first, sur-named
BEAVCLERKE, King of ENGLAND: of whose Virtues is yet extant amongst us this
old EPIGRAMME:

Prospera non laetam fecere, nee aspera tristem,
Prospera terror ei, aspera risus crant,
Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam,
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
That is to say in English:

Prosperity rejoiced her not:
To her Grief was no pain.
Prosperity affrayde her eke:
Affliction was her gain.
Her Beauty was no cause of fall:
In Royal State not proud.
Humble alone in Dignity:
In Beauty only good.
She founded the Kirk of Carleill. Now the other daughter was Marie, wife
unto Eustathius, Earl of Boloigne. King Malcolme builded the Kirkes of
Durehame, and Dumfermeling. He, with his son Prince Edward, were both
slain, at the siedge of Anwicke, in the thirty and sixth year of his reign,
by Robert Mowbray, sur-named Pierce-eye. He was first buried at Tinmouth: but
afterward his corpse was removed to Dumfermeling, and buried there.

LXXXVII. Donald the leanenth, sur-named Bane, usurped the Crown, after the
death of his brother: in the year of the World 5063: and in the year of
Christ 1093. But he was expelled in the very first year that he began to
reign, by Duncane the second, King Malcolmes third bastard son.

LXXXVIII. The said Duncane the second usurped the Crown, in the year of the
world 5064: and in the year of Christ 1094. A rash and foolish Prince: and
by the procurement of Donald the seventh he was slain in the Thane of the
Meirnes, by Macke-pendir, when he had reigned a little more than one year.

Then Donald the seventh was made king again, in the year of the world
5065: and in the year of Christ 1095. He gave the West and North Yles to the
king of Norway, for to assist him to attain unto the Crown of Scotland. But
within three years he was taken captive, by Edgar: his Eyes were both put
out: and after much misery, he died most odiouslie, even lying in Prison.

LXXXIX. Edgar, Malcolme the third his son, began his reign in the year
of the World 5068: and in the year of our Savior 1098. He builded the
Priorie of Coldinghame. He reigned nine years, and was a good and loving
Prince. But he died without succession, at Dundie, and was buried at
Dumfermeling.

XC. Alexander the first, sur-named The Fearce, succeeded unto his brother, in
the year of the World 5077: and in the year of Christ 1107. A very good and
valiant Prince indeed. He builded the Abbacies of Scone, and of Saint
Colmes-Inch. And he took to wife Sibylla, Daughter unto William, the good
Duke of Normandy, etc. (...) at Striviling: from whence his dead corpse was
solemnlie transported unto Aber-brothocke, and buried there.

XCIIII. Alexander the second, succeeded to his Father William, In the year of
the world 5184: and in the year of Christ 1214. A good Prince: He married
Ieane, daughter to John King of England, by whom he had no Succession. After
her death, he married Marie, daughter to Ingelrame, Earl of Coucey in France,
by whom he had Alexander the third. He died at Kernerie, in the West Isles,
and was buried at Mel-rosse, in the thirty and five year of his reign.

XCV. Alexander the third, succeeded to his father, in the year of the world
5219: and in the year of Christ 1249. A good Prince. He married first
Margaret, daughter to Henry the third, King of England: by whom he had
Alexander the Prince: who married the Earl of Flanders daughter: David, and
Margaret, who married Hangonanus, or as some call him, Ericus, son to Magnus
the fourth, King of Norway: who bare to him a daughter, commonly called the
Maiden of Norway: in whom King William his whole posterity failed, and the
Crown of Scotland returned to the posterity of David, Earl of Huntingdoun,
King Malcolme the fourth, and King William his brother. After his sons death,
(for they died before himself, without Succession) in hope of Posterity, he
married Ioleta, Daughter to the Earl of Dreux in France, by whom he had no
Succession. He builded the cross Kirk of Peibles. He died of a fall off his
Horse upon the Sands betwixt Easter and Wester King-borne, in the thirty and
seven year of his reign: And was buried at Dumfermeling.

After the death of Alexander the third, which was in the year of the World
5255, and in the year of Christ 1285, there were Six Regentes appointed to
rule Scotland. For the South Side of Forth, were appointed Robert, the
Arche-Bishop of Glasgowe, John Cummin, and John the great Steward of Scotland.
For the Northside of Forth, Mak-duffe, Earl of Fife; John Cummin, Earl of
Buchan; and William Fraser, Archbishop of Sainct-Andrewes: who ruled the Land
about the space of seven years, until the Controversy was decided betwixt
John Ballioll, and Robert Bruyse, Grandfather to Robert Bruyse, the King of
Scotland, come of the two eldest daughters of David Earl of Huntingdoun: for
Henry Hastings, who married the youngest daughter, put not in his suit with
the rest: and therefore there is little spoken of him.

XCV. John Ballioll was preferred to Robert Bruyse, to be King of Scotland, by
Edward the first, sur-named Lang-shankes, King of ENGLAND, who was chosen to
be Judge of the controversy, upon a Condition, That he should acknowledge
him as Superior: which condition (like an unworthy man) he received. He
began his reign in the year of the world 5263: and in the year of Christ
1293. He was a vainglorious man, little respecting the Weal of his
Country. He had not reigned fully four Years, when he was expelled by the
said Edward: and leaving Scotland, departed into the parts of France, where
he died long thereafter in exile. And so Scotland was without a King, and
Government, the space of nine years: during which space, the said Edward the
first, Lang-shankes, cruelly oppressed the Land, destroyed the whole ancient
Monuments of the Kingdom, and shed much innocent blood.

XCVI. Robert Bruyse, began to reign in the year of the world 5276: and in
the year of Christ 1306. A valiant, good and wise King. In the beginning of
his reign, he was subject to great misery and affliction, being oppressed
by England: but at length, having overcome and vanquished Edward the second,
of Carnarvan, at the Field of Bannocke-burne, by the help of GOD, he
delivered his own Country of Scotland from the slavery of England: yea, and
set it at full liberty, expelling even by force of Arms, the English Nation
quite out of the Land.

He married first Isabell, daughter unto the Earl of Mar: who bare unto him
a comely daughter, called Marjorie, wife unto Walter, the Great Steward of
Scotland: of whose happy Race is ruling this day not only in Scotland, but
also over whole Britane, Ireland, etc. as ye shall hear, GOD willing, anon,
in the own place.

Now after the death of King Robert the Bruyce his first wife, Isabell, the
Earl of Mar his Daughter, as said is, he married another of the same name,
Isabell, who was the only Daughter, and Heretrixe, unto Haymerus de Burc,
Earl of Hultonia, or Hulster, in Ireland: and she bare unto him one goodly
Son, and two Daughters, to wit, David the second, Margaret, the Countess of
Sootherland, and her youngest Daughter Maude, who died in her childhood. This
good King, after he had reigned twenty and four years, he ended his
toylsome days at Cardrosse, and was honorably buried at Dumfermeling, with
great solemnity.

XCVIII. David, the second Bruyce, succeeded unto his father, in the year of
the World five thousand, and three hundredth: and in the year of our
Redemption, one thousand, three hundredth, and thirty. He was a good prince,
and subject unto very much affliction in his youth: for first after the death
of Thomas Ranulph his Regent, he was forced to flee into France, even for
safeguarde of his life. And after certain years returning homewardes to
Scotland, was taken prisoner at the Battle of Durhame, by the Englishmen, and
holden almost twelve years captive in England. But at length, as GOD would,
he was restored to his free liberty: and he married first Ieane, Daughter
unto Edward the second, King of fair England: and after her death he married
Margaret Logie, Daughter unto Sir John Logie, Knight. And yet he died without
any succession, in the fourtieth year of his reign, at Edinburgh, and was
buried at Holie-Roode-house.

XCIX. Edward Ballioll, son to John Ballioll, usurped the Crown of Scotland,
being assisted by Edward the third, King of ENGLAND, in the Year of the
World 5302: and in the Year of Christ 1332. But he was expelled at length by
David the second his Regents, and David the second established King.

C. Robert the second, surnamed Bleareye, the first of the Stewardes, son to
Walter Steward, and Marjorie Bruyse, King Robert Bruyse his Daughter, succeeded
to his Mothers Brother, In the year of the World 5341: and in the year of
Christ 1371. A good and a Peaceable Prince. He married first Eufeme, Daughter
to Hugh, Earl of Rosse: who bare unto him David, Earl of Stratherne; Walter;
Earl of Athol, and Alexander, Earl of Buchan, Lord Banneynoch. And after her
deceasse, (even for the affection which he bare unto his children which he
had begotten before he was first married) he married Elizabeth Mure, Daughter
unto Sir Adam Mure, a worthy Knight: who (afore-times) had borne unto him
John, who there-after was called Robert the third, Earl of Carricke: Robert,
Earl of Fyffe and Menteith: and Eufeme, wife to James, Earl of Douglas. But
at length this good Prince behoved to go the way of all flesh: and when he
had reigned happily about nineteen years, he departed this life in peace, at
Dun-Donalde, and was solemnlie buried at Scone.

CI. Robert the third, sur-named John Farne-yeare, succeeded unto his father,
in the year of the World, five thousand, three hundredth, and threescore:
and in the year of our blessed Savior, Christ Jesus, one thousand, three
hundredth, foure-score, and ten. He was a quiet and peaceable Prince: and took
to wife Annabell Drummond, daughter unto the Lord of Stob-hall: who bare unto
him David the Prince, Duke of Rothesay, that died in prison of very extreme
famine, at Falkland: and James the first, taken captive in his voyage to
France, and detained a captive, against all equity, almost the space of
eighteen Years in England. He died of displeasure at Rothesay, when he
heard of the death of his one son, and captivity of the other. He was
buried at Paisley, in the sixteenth year of his reign.

Then Robert, Earl of Fyffe and Menteith, began to govern the Kingdom of
Scotland, in the year of the World, five thousand, three hundredth,
threescore, and sixteen: and in the year of Christ, one thousand, four
hundredth, and six. And he died in the fourteenth year of his government:
James the first being yet holden captive in England.

Murdo Steward succeeded to his father, Robert Earl of Fyffe, in the
Government of Scotland, in the year of the World, five thousand, three
hundredth, foure-score, and ten: and in the year of our blessed Redeemer, one
thousand, four hundredth, and twenty: and ruled four years: James the first
still continuing a captive in England. But the father, and his son Walter,
there-after, were both executed, even by the said James the first, for
oppression of the Subjectes.

CII. JAMES the first, began for to reign in the year of the World, 5394:
and in the year of CHRIST, 1424. He was a good, learned, virtuous, and a just
King. He married Ieane, Daughter unto John, Duke of Summer-set, and Marquis
Dorcet, son to John of Ghendt, the third son to the victorious King of
England, Edward the third: And she bare to him only one son, and six
daughters; to wit, James the second; Margaret, wife to Jews, the eleventh of
that name, the Dolphine of France, and there-after King: Elizabeth, the Duches
of Britain: Ieane, Countess of Huntley: Eleonor, Duches of Austria: Marie,
wife to the Lord of Campe-Veere: and Annabella, who was yet but young.

This good Prince was slain trayterouslie, (alace) at Perth, by Walter, Earl
of Athole, and Robert Grahame, together with their pactious Confederates, in
the thirty and one year of his Reign, if we count from the death of his
Father: and in the thirteenth year of his Reign, if we count from his happy
deliverance out of ENGLAND. He was buried at the Charter House of Perth, the
which he indeed had builded.

CIII. JAMES the second, succeeded to his Father, in the year of the World,
5407: and in the year of CHRIST, 1437. A Prince greatly subject to troubles
in his youth. He married Marie, Daughter to Arnolde, Duke of Geldre, Sisters
daughter to Charles, sur-named Audax, the last Duke of Burgundy, etc. And she
bare unto him three Sons, to wit, James the third: John, Earl of Mar: and
Alexander, Duke of Albanie. More over, she bare a daughter unto him, called
Marie, who was first married unto Thomas Boyde, Earl of Arrane: and after his
decourting, unto James Hammiltoun, of Cadsow. And the King was slain at the
siedge of Roxburgh, in the twenty and fourth year of his Reign.

CIIII. JAMES the third, succeeded unto his Father, in the year of the World,
5430: and in the year of our Redemption, 1460. A Prince corrupted by wicked
Courteours, God wots. He married Margaret, daughter unto Christianus the
first, sur-named Dives, (that is to say, Rich) King of Denmark, Norway, and
Sweden. And when he had reigned twenty and nine years, he was slain at the
Field and Battle of Bannocke-Burne, and Princely buried at Cambus-Kenneth.

CV. JAMES the fourth, succeeded to his Father, in the year of the World,
five thousand, four hundredth, fifty, and nine: and in the year of JESUS
CHRIST, one thousand, four hundredth, foure-score, and nine. A very Noble and
Courageous King. He married first Margaret, eldest daughter to Henry the
seventh, Earl of Ritchmond, and there-after King of fair England. And after
her deecasse, he married Elizabeth, daughter unto Edward the fourth, King of
England. In whose two persons, the two Houses of Lancaster and York were
united, and the Bloody Civil Wars of England finished. This good Prince was
slain at Flowdon, by England, in the twenty and fifth year of his Reign.

CVI. JAMES the fifth, succeeded to his father, in the year of the World, five
thousand, four hundredth, foure-score, and four: and in the year of CHRIST,
one thousand, five hundredth, and fourteen. A just Prince, and severe. First
he married Magdalene, daughter to Francis the first, King of France: but she
died very shortly there-after, without any succession. Then he married
Marie of Lorayne, Duches of Longe-Ville, daughter unto Claude, Duke of Guise.
He died at Falke-land, in the twenty and ninth year of his Reign, and was
buried at Holie-Roode-House.

CVII. MARIE succeeded unto her Father, JAMES the fifth, in the year of the
World, five thousand, five hundredth, and thirteen: and in the year of our
blessed LORD, one thousand, five hundredth, forty, and three. A Princess
virtuously inclined. She first married Frauncis the second, Dolphine of
France, and there-after King. And after his deceasse, returning home to
Scotland a Widow, she married Henry Steward, Duke of Albanie, etc. Lord
Darley, Son to Matthew, Earl of Lennox: a comely prince. and Pro-nephew to
Henry the seventh, King of ENGLAND: unto whom she bare JAMES the Sixth. But
(alace) after eighteen years captivity, she was put to death in ENGLAND: in
the year of CHRIST 1586: the eight day of February: and lies now entombed
at WEST-MVNSTER.

CVIII. JAMES the Sixth, succeeded unto his Mother, in the year of the World,
Five thousand, five hundredth, thirty, and seven: and in the year of JESUS
CHRIST, One thousand, five hundredth, threescore, and seven. A very good,
Godly, peaceable, wise, and learned Prince, as indeed his sundry Works
which are already gone forth in Print, in sundry Languages, even to the view
of the whole World; to the great comfort of us, his loving Subjectes, and all
others, who truly profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and to the terror of
all Heretics, Athists, and Papists, can testify.

He married Anna, Daughter to Frederick the second, King of Denmark, etc.
and to Sophia, Vlricus the Duke of Mechelenburgh his daughter: who bare unto
him Henry Frederick the Prince, who died in the prime of his youth:
Elizabeth, wife to Prince Palatine of the Rhene, etc. and Charles, our hopeful
Prince, now about the age of 23 years.

The said JAMES the sixth, even through GODS providence, and righteous
Succession, is now presently King of Great BRITANE, FRANCE, and IRELAND: whom
we beseech even the GOD of Heaven, upon the knees of our loyal hearts, to
continue his days longer than long amongst us: yea, that his happy posterity
remain still to govern over ours, to the farther advancement of GODS Glory,
and the comfort of His Elect, even for ever and ever, Amen. *

FINIS.
From Aberdene, 1623. Ian. 30.


