THE ORDOVR AND DOCTRINE OF THE GENERAL FAST, APPOINTED be the General
Assembly of the Kirkes of Scotland, halden at Edinburgh the 25. day of
December. 1565.



Joel. 2. Therefore also now the Lord says, Turn you unto me with all your
heart, and with Fasting, and with weaping, and with murning. IMPRINTED AT
EDINBVRGH BE ROBERT LEK PREVIK ANNO. DOM. 1566.

THE SVPERINTENDENTES, MINISTERS AND COMMISSIoners of Kirkes Reformed within
the Realm of Scotland, conuened in the General Assembly at Edinburgh the 25.
day of D^cember. 1565. To all that trewly profess^ the Lord Jesus within the
same Realm, or else where, wish grace and mercy from God the Father, and from
his only Sone our Lord Jesus Christ, with the perpetual con^ort of the holy
Spirit.
THE Present troubles being somewhat co^siddered (but greater feared shortly to
follow) it was thought expedient (dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus) that the
whole Faithful Within this Realm, should together, and at one time prostrat
them selves before their God, craving of him pardone and mercy for the great
abuse of his former benefits, and the assistance of his holy Spirit, by whose
mighty operation we may yet so convert to our God, that we provoke him not to
take from us the light of his Euangle, which he of his mercy has caused so
clearly of laite days to shine within this realm. But because that such
publicte Supplicationes require always Fasting to be joined therewith, And
publict Fasting craves a certane time and certane exercises of godlynes then
to be used with greater streatnes then at other times. The whole Assembly
after deliberation has appointed y^ last Sunday of February, and the first
Sunday of March nixt following the date of the said assembly, to that most
necessare exercise (as time now stands) of publict Fasting. And further, did
require the same to be signified be all Ministers to their people the Sunday
preceading the said last Sunday of February. But lest that the Papists shall
think that now we begine to authorize and praise that which some times we have
reproved and dampened in them. Or else that the ignorant who know not the
commodity of this most godly exercise shall contempne ye same. We have
thought expedient somewhat to speak to the one and to the other. And unto the
Papists first we say, that as in purity of conscience, we have refused their
whole abhominationes, and amongst the rest, that their supersticious and
Pharisaicall manner of Fasting: So even unto this day do we continue in the same
purpose, boldly affirming that their Fasting is no Fasting that ever God
approved, but that it is a deceauing of the people, and a meare mocking of God,
which most evidently will appear. If in the Scriptures we search what is
the right end of Fasting, what Fasting pleased God, and which is it that his
soul abhoreth. Of Fasting in the Scriptures we find two sorts, the one
private, the other publicte. The private is that which man or woman does in
secret, and before their God, for such causes as their owen conscience bears
record unto them. As David during the time that his Sone which was begotten in
adultery, was struken with mortal seicknes, fasted, weap^, and lay upon the
ground, because that in the seicknes of the Child he did considder Gods
displeasure agains him self for the removing, whereof he fasted, murned, and
prayed, unto such time as he saw Gods will fulfilled by the awaytaking of the
Child Priuatlie fasted Anna, wise to Alcana, even in the verray Solemn
Feasts, during the time of her barrennes. For she weapt and eat nothing, 1.
Sam. ^.
but in the bitterness of her heart she prayed unto the Lord, nether ceased she
from sorrow and murning, unto such time as Eli the hie Priest concurred with
her in prayers, by whose mouth after that he had hard her petifull complaint,
she received conforte. Of this Fasting speaks our M^^ister Jesus Christ in
these words, when ye Fast, be not sour as the Hypocretes, for they disfigure
their faces, Math. 6.
that they may some unto men to Fast. But thou when thou Fastest, anoint thy
head, and wash thy face, that thou seame not unto men to Fast, but unto thy
Father which sees in secret, and will reward the opinly. Of the same no dout
speaks y^ Apostle when that he says, defraude not one another, 1. Cor. 7.
except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to Fasting
and prayer. To this private Fasting which stands chiefly in a temperat, diet,
and in pouring furthe of our secret thoughts and necessities before God, can
be prescriued no certane rule, certane time, nor certane ceremonies, but as the
causes and occasiones why that exercise is used are diverse (yea so diverse that
seldom it is that many at ones are moved with one cause) so are diet, time,
together with all other circumstances required to such Fasting, put in the
liberty of them that use it. To this Fasting we have been faithfully and
earnestly exhorted by our Preachers, as often as the Scriptures which they
entreated offered unto them occasion. And we dout not but the godly within
this Realm have used the same as necessity craved, albeit with the Papists
we blew no Trumpetes, to appoint thereto certane days.

The other kind of Fasting is publict so called, because that it is openly
awowed, some times of a Realm, some times of a multitude, some times of a
cietie, and some times of a meaner company, yea, some times of particulare
persons, and yet publictlie used, and that for the wealth of a multitude. The
causes thereof are also diverse, Causes that ought to move men to publict^
Fasting.
for sometimes the fear of ennimies, sometimes the angry face of God
punishing, sometimes his threatening to distroy, some times iniquity
deprehended that ryghtlie before was not considered, and sometimes the earnest
zeal that some bear for preservation of Gods people, for adua^cing of his
glory, and performing of his work, according to his promise, move men to
publict Fasting, confession of their sins, and solempned prayers, for defense
against their ennimies, recovering of Gods favors, removing of his plagues,
preservation of his people, and setting fordwarde of that work^, which he has
of his merce promised to finishe, as in the subsequent probationes evidently
shall appear. When Messingers came to Iosaphat saying, there comes a great
multitude against thee from beyond the sea, out of Aram (that is Syria) etc.
Iosaphat feared, 2. Parali. 20
and set him self to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah.
And Judah gathered them selves together, to ask counsall of the Lord, they come
even out of all the cieties of Judah to inquire of the Lord. And Iosaphat stood
in the Congregario^ of Judah, and Jerusalem in the hou; of the Lord, before the
new court, And all Judah stood before the Lord with their young ones, their
wyfes and their Children. And Iosaphat said, o Lord God of our Fathers, are
not thou God in heaven, and reignest not thou in all Kingdoms of the Heathen?
And in thy hand is power and might, The prayer of Iosaphat
and none is able to withstand thee. Haste not thou our God cast out the
inhabitants of this Land, before thy people Israel, and haste given it to the
s^^d of Abraham thy freand for ever. etc. But now the Ammorytes, and Moabytes,
and the Mont Seir ar come to castvs out of thy possession? O Lord our God shall
thou not judge them? In us there is no strengh to stand against this great
multitude that comes against us, nether know we what to do, but unto thee
are our eyes bent. etc. Of this History we have the first cause of publict
Fasting, and the solempnitie thereof sufficiently prowen. For the fear of
ennimies compelled Iosaphat to seik the Lord, he knowing him self burdened
with the care of the people, exhorted them to do the same. They fra all cieties
and quarters repared to Jerusalem, whereupone a statute day the King and the
people, yea, wives and Childrene presented them selves before the Lord in his
holy Temple, The ceremo^i^ of publict^ fasting
exponed their necessity, implored his h^lpe against that enraged multitude,
that always was ennimie to Gods people, and gave open confession of their
owe^ weakness, leaning only to the promise and protection of the omnipotent.
Which exemple, we and every people likewise assaulted, may and ought to follow
in every point. This only excepted, that we are not bound to conuen^ at any
one appointed place, as they did at Jerusalem. For to no one certane and
several place is that promise made, that then was made to the Temple of
Jerusalem, The promeis made to the temple of Jerusalem is now to be soght in
Christ lesus.
which was that whatsoever men in their extremity should ask of God in it, God
should grant it from his holy habitation in the heaven. Jesus the Messiah then
looked for, Hebr. 7.
whose presence was sought in the merci^ seat, and betuix the Cherubinnes, is
now entered within the vale, that is in the heaven, and there abides only
Mediator for us, unto whom from all the coasts of the earth, we may lift up
pure hands, direct our prayers, ^ Time. ^
supplicationes, and complaints, and be assured that they shall be received, in
whatsoever place we conuene. And yet in time of such publict exercyses, we
would wish that all men and women should repare to such places as their
conscience may be best instructed, their Faith most edified, repentance most
lively sturred up in them, and they by Gods word may be most assured that
their just peticions shall not be repelled. Which things ca^ not be done so
lively in secret and private meditati^, as that they are in publict Assembly,
where Christ Jesus is trewly preached, and this much shortly for the first
head. Of the second, to wit, that the angry face of God punishing, aught to
drive us to publicte Fasting, and humiliation of our souls before our God, we
have two notable exemples, the one written in Joshua, who hearing and
understanding, that Israel had turned the back before the Cananite* and the
Elders of Israel rent their clothes, Joshua. 7.
fell vpone their faces before the Ark of the Lord unto the night, and cast
dust vpone their heads, in sign of their humiliation and deiection. The other
is expressed in the book of the Judges, where Israel being commanded by God
to fight against Benjamin, Iudi. 20.
because that they menteaned wicked men that deserved death, lost the first
day twenty two thousand of their army, and the second day eightene thousand.
At the first lose they were ^^ghtlie touched, and asked counsall if they
should rene^, the battle, but at the second overthrow, the whole people
repared unto the house of the Lord, sat there, weapt before the Lord, and Fasted
that day unto the night, for then began they to considder Gods angry face
against them.

In this last history their appears just cause why the people should have
rune to the only refuge of God, because that there first army of forty
thousand men was utterly distroyed. But what just occasion had Joshua so
lamentably to complain, Let his complaint be noted.
yea, so boldly as it were to accuse God, that he had deceived him in that,
that against his promeis he had suffered Israel to fall before their ennimies.
Was the lose of thrette men (no mo sell that day in the edge of the sword) so
great a matter that he should dispare of any better success, that he should
accuse God that he had brought them over Iordane, and that he should fear that
the whole army of the Lord should be inueroned about, and consumed in the rage
of their ennimies, yea, if Israel had only looked no further then to the lose
of the forty thousand men, they had been but feable Soldioures, for they had
sufficient strenth remaning behind, for what were forty thousand, in respect
of all the trybes of Israel? Nay, nay (dear brethren) it was an other thing
then the present lose that terrified and effrayed their consciences, and made
them so effeminatlie (so would flesh judge) to complain, weap, and owl before
God, to wit, they saw his angry face against them, they saw his hand fortify
their ennimies, and to fight against them, whom both he had commanded to
fight, and had promised to give them victory. Eue^ie commandment of god to do
any thing, hes the sccrete promise of his assistance.
For every commandment of God to do any thing against his ennimies, has
included within it a secret promise of his godly assistance, which they fand
not in the beginning of their interpryses, and therefore they did considder the
fearcenes of his displeasure, and did tremble before his angry Face, whose
myghtie hand they fand to fight against them, and that was the cause of their
dolorous complaints and fearful crying before their God. What was the cause
that God dealt so framedly with the one, and with the other? we may perchance
somewhat speak, when that we shall entreat of the fruits of Fasting, and of
those things that may hold back from us the assistance of God, even when we
prepare us to put his commandment in execution. The thride cause of publict
Fasting, is Gods threatninges pronounced, either against a multitude, or
against a person in particulare. Of the former the exemple is Niuiue, unto the
which Jonas cried, yet forty days, and Niniue shall be distroyed, which
unpleasing tydinges cu^ming to the ears of the King, he proclaimed a Fast, he
humbled his owen soul, yea, eue^ to Sackcloth, and sitting in the duste, he
straightly commanded reformation of manners in all estates, yea, and that signs
of repentance, of terrors, and fear should appear, not only in men and
women, but also in the brute beasts, what shall become of the hardness of our
hear^^^ in those days.
from whom was all kind of nurishement commanded to be withdrowen, to witness
that they feared as well Gods judgments to fall vpone the creatures that
served them in their impiety, as vpo^e them selves that had provoked God to
that hot displeasure. Of the other the exemple is most notable (most notable
we say) because that it fell in a wicked man, to wit, in Achab, who by
instigation of his wicked wife lesebell, saulde him self to do all iniquity.
And yet when that he hard the fearful threatninges of God pronounced by the
Prophet Elias against him, ^. R^g. 21.
against his wyf^ and house, he rent his royal garments, put on Sackcloth,
sleipt therein, fasted and yead baire footed, what ensewed the one and the
other, of these we shall after hear.

The fourt cause of publict Fasting and murning (for they two must ever be
joined) is iniquitio deprehended, that before was not ryghtly considdered. The
testimony whereof we have in Esdras, after the reduction of the captivity, and
that the temple and the work of the Lords house was stayed. It was shawen unto
Esdras that the people of Israel, 1. Esdr. ^.
the Preistes and the Levites were not seperat from the people of the Nation^,
but that they did according to their abominations, for they married unto them
selves, and unto their Sons, the daughters of the Cananites, the Pherisites,
Hithetes, Iebusites, Ammorites, Moabites, and Egiptiens, so that the holy sead
was mixed with Profane Idolateris, which thing being understand, and more
deaply considdered, then it was before, for then Esdras saw just cause why the
work of the Lord prospered not in their hands. This considdered, we say
Esdras taking vpone him the sin and offense of the whole people, rent his
clothes, and pulled forth the hears of his head and beard, sat as a man
desolate of all conforte, till the evening Sacrifice, and then rising he bowed
his kneis, and streached forth his hand, before the Lord, and made a most
semple and humble confession of all the enormities that were committed be the
people, as well before the captivity as after their returning, and ceased not
his lamentable complaint, unto such time as a great multitude o^ men, women
and childrene moved by his exemple, O that Scotland would follow this obedience.
weapt vehemently, and promised redres of that present disordour and impiety.

Of the last cause of publict Fasting* to wit, the zeal that certane persons
bear for preservation of Gods people, for adu^^cing of his glory, and
performing of his work according to his promise.

We have exemples in Mardochous, Ester. 4.
Daniell, Dani^^. 9.
and in the faithful assembled at Antioche, Acts. 13.
for when that Mardocheus hard of that cruel sentence, which by the
procurement of Human, was pronounced against his Nation. To wit, that vpone a
day statute and affixed, should the Jews in all the provinces of the King
Artaxarses be destroyed, So intend the Papists this day.
oulde and young, men and women, and that their substance should be exp^ned in
pray. This bloody sentence we say being hard, Mardoche^s rent his clothes, put
on Sackcloth and Ashes, past ^urth in the midst of the cietie, and cried with
a great and bitter cry, and coming to the Kings gate, gave knoweledge to
Ester what cruelty was decreed against the Nation of the I^wes, willing her to
make intercession to the King, in the co^trare, who after certane excuses said.
Go and gather all the Jews that are in Susan, Esdr. 4.
and fast for me, ^at not, nor drink not, three days and three nyghtes, and I
also, and my ha^dmades shall likewise fast, and then shall I enter unto the
King, although that I should perish.

In this we may clearly se that the zeal that Mardocheus had to preserve the
people of God, moved not only him self to publict Fasting, but also Ester the
Queen, her maids and the whole Jews that hard of the murder intended, and
moved Ester also to hasart her life in going unto the King without his
commandment.

Of the uther, to wit, that the earnest desire that Gods seruandes have that
God will perform his promise, and manteane the work that he has begune.
Exemple we have in Daniell, (...)
and in the Acts of the Apostles. For Daniell understanding the number of the
years forespoken by the Prophet Jeremy, that Jerusalem should ly waist, to
have been completit in the first year of the Reign of D^rius, turned him self
unto God, fasted, humbled him self in Sackcloth and Ashes, and with vnf^aned
confession of his owen sins, and of the sins of the people, he vehemently
prayed. That according to the promises sometimes made be Moses, and after
rehearsed by the Prophet I say and Jeremy, D^ut. 10.
he would suddingly send them deliverance, Ier^m. 11.
and that he would not delay it for his owen Names sake.

When the Gentiles began to be illuminated, A^tes. 11.
and that Anteochia had so boldly received the Euangle of Jesus Christ, that
the Disciples in it first of all took vpone them the name of Christianes.

The principal men of the same Church, thrusting no dout that the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ should further be enlarged, and that the multitude of the gentiles
should be instructed in the right way of Salvation, Act. 1^.
Fasted and prayed, and whill that they were so exercised, charge was given,
that Paul and Barnabas should be separated from the rest, to the work
whereunto God had called them. etc. Of these former Histories and Scriptures,
we may clearly se for what causes publict Fasting, and general supplicationes
have been made in the Church of God, and ought to be made when that ever the
like necessities appear, or occasions are offered. Now let us shortly hear
what conforte and fruit ensewed the same. For the ennimie, yea, the murderer
of all godly exercise is disperation, for with what courage can any man with
continuance call vpone God? If he shall disperatly dout: whether God shall
accept his prayer or not? How shall he humble him self before his Throne? Or to
what end shall he confess his offense? If he be not persuaded, that there is
mercy and good will in God to pardone his sins, to accept him in favor, and
to grant unto him more then his owen heart, in the midst of his dolor can
require or ymagine.

True it is, that this vennome of disperation, is never thoroughly purged from
our hearts, so long as we carry this mortal Carcass.

But yet the constant promises of our God, and the many fold docu mentes of
his mercy and help, show en unto men in their greatest extremity, ought to
animat us to sollow their exemple, and to hope for the same success that they
have gotten abufe man's expectation. Iosaphat after his humiliation and
prayer, The (...) of true Fastiug, and un feaned inuo catio^ of god
obtened the victory, with out the lose of any of his Soldioures, for the Lord
reased Ammon and Moab, against the inhabitants of Mont Seir, who being utterly
destroyed, (...) so thy ^nnimies perish o lord.
every one of the ennimies of Gods people lift his sword against another,
till that, of that godles mul^itude, there was not one left alive, Joshua and
the Israelites after their deiection, were comforted again. Niniue was
preserved, albeit that Jonas had cried destruction, yea, Achab not withstanding
all his ungodliness, (...) humiliation temporally profits the verrary repro^^^.
lost not the fruit of his humiliation, but was r^compensed with delay of the
vttermoste of the plagues, during his lyfetyme. The murni^g of Esdras was
turned in joy, when that he saw the people willing to obey God, and the work
of the house of the Lord to go fordwart.

The bitter crying of Mardocheus, and the painful Fasting of Ester were
abundantly rewarded, when not only was the people of God preserved, but Haman
their mortal ennimie, was hanged upon the same gallous that he had prepared
For Mardocheus.

Daniell after his Fasting, confession and prayer, gat most notable
reuelationes and assurance, that his people should be delivered, yea, that in
all extremities, they should be preserved, till that the Messiah promised unto
them should come, and manifestly show him self.

And the godly of Anteochea were not frustrate of their conforte, when that they
hard how potently God had wrought amongst the Gentiles by the ministry, of
Barnabas and Paul, so that we may boldly conclude, that as God has never
dispysed the petitions of such as with vnfeaned hearts have soght his comfort
in their necessities, so will he not se^d us away empty and void, if with true
repe^ta^ce we seak his face

If any would ask in what extremity we find our selves now to be, that
hertosore we have not seen. And what are the occasiones that should move us now
to humble our selves before our Go by publict Fasting, more then tha we did in
the beginning? When this Euangile was now last offered unto us, for then by all
apperance, we and it in our persons stood in greater danger, then we do yet,.

We answer, that the causes are mo then for grief of haert we can express.
First, because that in the beginning we had not refused gods graces, but
contrariwyse with such feruencie we received them, Causes that now move us to
fast that moved us not before
that we could bear with no kind of impiety: but for the suppressing of the
same, we nether had respect to friend, possession, land or life, but all we put
in hasard, that good; treuth might be aduansed, and Idolatry might be
suppressed.

And therefore did our God by the mouth of his Messingers, in all our
adversities, assure us that our ennimies should not preuale against us, Let the
fath full call to mind.
but that they should be subdewed under us, that our God should be glorified in
our semple and vpryght dealing. But now sense that carnal wisdom has
persuaded us to bear with manifest Idolatry, and to suffer this realm that
God had ones purged, to be polluted again with that abhominatio^, yea, allace,
sense yt some of us that God made so^e times instruments to suppress that
impiety, have been the chief me^ to conduct and conuoy that Idol throughout
all the quarters of this Realm, yea, to the houses of them that sometimes
detested the mass as the Devil and his service. Sense that time we say, have
we funde the face of our God, angry against us, his threatninges have been
sharp in the mouths of his Messingers, which albeit for the time, we dispysed
and mocked, yet the just experience conuicteth us, that we were wicked, and
that they in threatening us, God grant that me^ may yet consider
did nothing but the dewtie of Gods true Messingers.

And this is the second cause that move us to this publict humiliatio^, rather
now then in the beginning, to wit, that then we followed god, and not carnal
wisdom, and therefore made he few in number, fear full to many, fools before
the world to confound the wise, and such as before never had experience in
arms, made God so bold and so prosperous in all their interpryses, that the
expertest Souldioures feared the poor plowmen, yea, our God faught for us by
sea, and by land, he moved the hearts of strangers to supporte us, and to
spend their lives for our releif.

But now allace we se no sign of his former favor, for wisdom and ma^head,
strength and freindes, honor and blood joined with godlynes, are fallen before
our eyes, to let us understand what shall be our destruction, if in time we
turn not to our God, before that his wrath be further kindled. But this is
not the end. For esperance, (or at least some opinion) had men before, that God
should move the Quenis Majesty's heart, to hear y^ blissed euangle of Jesus
Christ trewlie preached, and so co^sequentlie that she should abandone all
Idolatry and falls Religion. But now she has given answer in plain words,
that that Religion in which she has been nourished (and that is meare
abomination) she will manteane and defend. And in declaration thereof, of
laite days there is erected a displayed baner against Jesus Christ, for
corrupted Hypocrites, and such as have been known deceauers of the people,
are now authorized, to spew out their vennome against Jesus Christ his eternal
truth, and true Messingers of the same. That Idol the Mass is now again in
diverse places erected. And what hereof may ensew, yea, or what we may look,
shall be the end of such unhappy beginninges, we desire the godly deaply to
considder. But let it be granted, that we had not fallen back from our former
ferue^cie, that we saw not Gods angry face, threatening us with more fear full
plagues to follow, that the best part of our nobility were not exiled this
Realm, nether yet that our Souerane were ennimie to our Religion, and that she
bare no greater favor to flattering freres, and to corrupted Papists, the^
that she does to our poor Preachers.

Supponing we say that none of these foresaid causes we had to move us (as that
we have them all, and mo, if that we list to recompt them) yet is there one
which if it move us not to humiliation, we show our selves more then
insensible. For now is Satan so enraged against Jesus Christ, The suppressing
of christ's holy Euangle was dec^ied in the last cou^sall of Trent
and so odius is the light of his Euangile unto that Roman Antichrist, that
to suppress it in one province, Realm or Nation, he thinks it nothing,
unless that in all Europe the godly, and such as abhor the Papisticall
impiety, be therewith also utterly distroyed, and so rased from the face of
the earth, that no memory of them shall after remain.

If any think that such cruelty can not fall in the hearts of men, we send
them to be resolved of those Fathers of the last counsall of Trent, who in one
of their Sessions have thus concluded. All Lutheriens, The Counsall of trent.
Caluenistes and such as are of the new Religion, shall utterly be
exterminate, the beginning shall be in France, by conducting of the Catholic
King, Philip of Spain, and by some of the Nobility of France, which matter
(say they) put to some stay the whole force of both, together with the Popes
Army, and force of the Dukes of Sauoy, and farrar shall assault Geneua, and
shall not leave it, till that they have put it to sack, saving in it no leuing
creature. And with the same mercy shall so many of France, (...)
as have t^isted of the new Religion be (...). Fr^me thence expednion shall be
made against the Ge^maine, to reduce them to the obedi^nce of the (...) seat.
And so shall they proce^d to other Realms and Nationes, never ceasing till that
all be ext^^minate, that will not make homag^ to that Roman Idol. Ho^
fearful a beginning this conclusion and determination had, France (...)
remember mo ages then one. For how many abuse a hundredth thousand men, women,
babes Virgins, Matrones, and aged Fathers suffered, some by s^ orde some by
water, some by fire, and other torments. The verray ennimies them felues are
compelled to acknogeledge. And albeit that God of his mercy in a part;
disapoynted there cruel interpryses, yet let us not think that their will is
changed, or their malice assuaged. No let us be assured that they abide but
opportunity to sinishe the work that cr^ellie against God, against his treuth,
and the true prosessoures of the same, they have begune. The whisperinges
whereof are not secret, nether yet the tokenes obscure. For the trafique of
that dragone, now with the princes of the earth, his promyses and flattering
entysementes tend to none other end, but to inflambe them against Jesus Christ,
and against the true professoures of his Euangle. For who can think that the
Pope, Cardinals, and horned Bishopes, will offer the greatest portion of
their Rentes for susteaning of a war, whereof no commodity should redound (as
they suppose) to them selves. If any think that we accuse them without cause,
let them hear their owen words, The wor^ies of the counsall of trent.
for this they wrate near the end of the same decre.

And to the end that the holy fathers on their part, appear not ^o be
negligent, or unwilling to give their aid and supporte unto so holy a war,
or to spaire their owen rentes and money, have added that the Cardinals shall
content them selves of the yearly Rent of 5. or 6. thousand Ducates, These are
the s^cces soures of the Apostles.
and the rychest Bishope of 2. or 3. thousand at the most. And to give
fra^ckly y^ rest of their Reueneues to the intertenement of the war, No man
needs to dout of the (...) of those ^athers, so that Christ (...) may (...),
^cified, and his Eua^gle exiled.
which is made for the extirpation of the Lutheriens and Caluinistes sect. And
for reestablishing of the Roman Church, till such time as the matter be
conducted to a good and happy end. If these be not open declarationes, in what
danger all faithful stand, if they can bring their cruelty to pass, let
verray Idiotes judge, but let us hear their conclusion. France and Germany
(say they) being by these means so chastised, abased and conducted to the
obedience of the holy Roman Church, the Fathers dout not, but time shall
provide both counsal and commodity, that the rest of the Realms about may be
reduced to one flok, Let Scotland adu^rt.
and one Apostolic governor and Pastor. etc. By this conclusion we think
that the verray blind may see what is purposed against the Saints of God, in
all Realms and Nationes, to wit, destruction with cruelty, or else to make
them to worship that blasphemous beast who being an Idol, usurps to him
self the Name of universal Pastoure, and being known to be the man of sin
and perdition, will be holden for an Apostolic Governor. But some shall say
they are yet fare from the end of their purpose, and therefore we neid not to
be so fearful, nor so sollist. We answer, the danger may be nerar, then we
beleaue, yea, perchance a part of it has been neirar to our necks then we
have considdered. But how so ever it be, seeing that God of his mercy has
brought forth to light their cruel and bloody counsall, in the which we nead
not to dout, but still they continue. It becomes us not to be negligent nor
sleuthfull, but we ought to follow the exemple of Ezechias, the King of Judah,
who receiving not only the dispytefull answer, Isa. 36. and 27
but also the blasphemus and threatening letter of Sennaherib, first send unto
the Prophet Isayas, and pietifully com pleaned of the instant troubles, willing
him to make intercession unto God, for the remanent that were left. Unto whom
albei^ that the Prophet answered, confortablie ass^ring the King that the
enni^ie should not cume so neir as to shoot D^rte or Arrow within Jerusalem.
Yet ce^sed not the godly King to present him self in the Temple of the Lord.
And as a man dispared of all worldely conforte, sored abrod the letters that
proud Sennah^rib had sent unto him and made unto God his most fe^^ent prayer,
as in the (...). Chapter of the Prophet I say as we may read.

The ennimie had turned back, Isay. 37.
and God had put a Br^die in his nosethirles, and so men might have thought
that the King neded not to have been so sollicte. But the Spirit of God
instructed the heart of his seru^nd, to seak help where it was only to be
found, and from the, hands of God, who only was able to put (...) end to that
tyra^nie. The exemple (we say) of this approved seruand of God, we ought to
follow now when the like d^^truction is intended against us, yea, not against
one Realm only, but against all that profess the Lord Jesus, as before we
have heard. Albei^ that God of his mercy has stayed the fury of the Papists
for a time, we ought not to think that their malice is changed, nether that
such as trewly profess the Lord Jesus, can be in security, so long as that
Babiloniane hoore has power to enchant the Princes of the earth. Let us
therefore understanding that she being dronken with the blood of the Saints,
can never repent of cruelty and murder, use against her the spiritual
weapones, to wit, what veapons weshall use against the cruelty of the papists.
earnest invocation of Gods Name, by the which we find the proud tyrannes of
the earth, in times past, to have been overthrown. Abuse all these causes
foresaid, we have yet one that ought not to be omitted, to wit, the body of
this Realm has long enjoyed quietness, whill that other nations about us have
been seueirly plagued. What thousa^des dyed in the east cuntreyes, and in
England of the pest^anno 1563. 1564. Their owen confessions bear record.

What cruelty has been executed in France? what towns spoiled, and murder
committed, somewhat before we have declared, and more we might if that we had
not respect to brSuitie and time. And what trouble is presently, and long has
been betuix Denmark and Swaden, the posterity of that euntrie will after
understand. And in all this time now sex years, and more has God spared us,
so that the publict estate has always remaned quiet, except within these few
months. Ought not the deap consideration of this move us now to stoop before
our God?

For have we been spared because that our Rebellion to God is les, then is the
Rebellion of those nations that we have seen punished? If so we think, we are
far deceived. For in so great light of the Euangle, we think that greater
inobedience was never showen unto God, nor greater ingratitude unto his
Messingers, sense the days of the Apostles, then of laite years has been
(and yet is) within this Realm. Idolatry is obstinatly menteaned, Huredome
and adultery are but pastyme of the flesh, slaugther and murder is esteamed
small sin, if any man have friend in court, crafty dealing with the semple,
disceat and oppression is co^pted good conques, (yea allace almost
universally) Parcialitie in judgment, is but interpretation of Laws* yea,
del^ying of Justice, what matter is that? what reverence is had to Go^es
Messingers, and what r^spe^t (...) the poor that now so multiplies within this
Realm (that the like has seldom b^ne seen) thought we will cease, the stones
will cry, and condempn^ us, and yet what supe^^luitie? wha^ vanity? what
^easting? Ryotous (...)? has been (and yet is) vse^ in court, country and
towns, alth^ought the tounges of men (...) speak, yet we think the p^r^es
(...) ^ome do feal, and in their man^ plain. If these be not sins that crave
plagues from God, we humbly desire men to considder what are the sins that
were laid to the charge of Sodom and Gomorha, by the Prophet Ezechiell.
Ezechi. ^^


Now say we, God before our eyes has punished vthers, and can he spaire us?
Being more cryminall then they were? Nay he can not. And therefore there restes
nothing unto us but utter exterminion, O that we sh^ld hear^ before God plages
more
if we vnfeanedly turn not unto our God before that his wraithe be further
kindled against us. Judgment is begune in his owen house, for if within
Scotland among me^ of their estate, there was to be fu^d equetie, justice,
temperance, compassion vpone the poor and vpryght conscience, they did most
clearly shine in them, whom God before our eyes has first dejected.
Therefore (yet agane) we say that only repentance can save us from plagues
more grievous then they have felt, or that we have seen of many years within
this Realm.

But now we know, that such as nether lufe God, nor trewly fear his
Judgments (for mo Atheistes we have, That is men without god
nor consumate Papists within this Realm) shall grudge and cry, what new
ceremone is this that now we here of? Wherefore shall we Fast? and who has
power to command us so to do? A Feg for their Fasting, we will fill and farse
our bellies vpo^e the oulde fassion. etc. Let not the godly be offended at the
brocardes and lardons of such godles people, but let us tremble before our God,
and considder that such has been the proud contempt of the wicked in all
ages before us, as in the Prophets we may read. For I say compleaneth, saying,
I say. (...).
when the Lord calls to Sackclothe and ashes, there is nothing heard, but let
us eat and drink kill the fat, and make Banquet, let us bring wine in
abundance, I say. 5^.
and more, and if we must dye, let us de part in joy, for so they meant, when
that they said, let us eat and drink, the morrow we shall dye.

But let us considder, what answer they receive. As I live says the Lord, I
say. 22.
this your iniquity shall not be forgiven unto the death, I shall take from
you the mirth of wine and oil, I say. 5. 6. 9.
your young men shall fall by the sword, I say. 20.
your aged men shall be led captives, your delicate Da^mes shall trote vpone
their fete over the river (meaning Euphrates) their buttockes shall be naked,
Ierem. 13.
and their shame shall not be hid. etc.

Jeremy the Prophet preached and cried even to the King, Ierem. 13.
and to the Queen, and commanded them to walk in lowlynes, to do justice. to
repress impiety, and so he promised that they should sit still vpone their
Throne in joy and quyetnes. But if they would not, he boldly pronounced that
their Carcasses shall be cast to the heit of the Son^ and to the frost, (...). 16
and 19.
and cold of the night. Ezech. 21.
Ezechiel in his age uses the same ordour, and in his owen body shows unto
them signs of humiliation, and of the plagues that should apprehend the^ for
their Rebellion.

All their admonitions were dispysed we conf^sse, but thereto we should not
look, but unto that which ensewed such proud contempt.

If we would that our Palices should be so distroyed, that they should remain
desolate, and be de^nes to Dragones.

If we would that our land should be laid waist and be a pray to our ennimies,
^euit. 26.
and if we would that the rest of the plagues, threatened by the Prophets, and
which have apprehended the disobedient before us, should come vpone us in full
perfection. Then we need nether to fast nor pray, repent nor turn to God. But
and if we desire either to find mercy in this life, or joy and consort in the
life to come, we must show our selves ^nf^^nedly, sorry for the abominations
that now universally Reign, If we will not perish with the wor^de, we must be
unlike unto it.
we must be like Loathe in Sod^me and Noha, in that Catholic def^ction from
God, which was into the first age. And by their exemples, and notable
deliverances, Genesis 6. and^ 9
ought we to be encoraged, to show our selves sorry for this present
corruption, and to oppone our selves thereto, to the vttermoste of our powers,
unless that we would have portion ^ith the wicked. N^ther ought w^ to be
discoraged, because that the contemners, godles people, and mockers of all
godlyn^s, shall preuale us in multitude. Their number (dear brethren) shall not
hurt our innocence, if that we with vnfeaned hearts turn unto our God, for
the promise of his mercy is not bound unto the multitude, so that he will not
hear but where the greatest part is godly. The pro^es of gods mercy, and
deliverance, is not bound to the multitude.
No dear brethrene, where soever two or three be gathered in his name, there is
he in the midst of them, Math. 18.
and again, whosoever incalleth the name of the Lord, he shall be saved, yea,
Joel. 2.
even when in Gods displeasure the whole world shall be plagued. And therefore
let us not follow the multitude in evil doing, Ex^d. 23.
but let us declyne from the ways of their vanity, and by vnfeaned
humiliation of our selves. Let us purches favor before that Gods vengeance
brust out like a fire.

THE power that we have to proclaim this Fasting, is not of man, but of God,
who by the mouth of his Prophet Ezechiell, pronounces this sentence. Ezech.
(...).
If the watcheman se the sword, or any other plague coming vpone the land, if
he blow not the trumpet, and plainly warn them to turn to God: and if the
sword come and take any away, The power that the Church h^th to command p^^lict
Fast^ ng.
the wicked shall perish in their iniquity: but their blood shall be required
from the hands of the watcheman. Now so it is, that God of his mercy has
rased up among us mo watheme^ then one or two, of whose mouths we can not
deny, but we have hard fearful threatninges of plagues, to follow vpone this
proud contempt of all Gods graces.

And therefore we in the fear of our God. willing to avoid the vttermoste of
the Plague^, have with one consent concluded this godly exercise to be used
among us, in sign of our vnfeane ^ h^miliation, which albeit the godles
shall mock yet are we assured, that he who ones pronounced this sentence.

The soul that shall not be asflicted that same day, (...). 21.
to wit, the day appointed to publict humili^tion, shall perish from among
his people, yea, every soul that shall do any work that day I shall distroye
such a soul from the midst of his people. The ceremony and the certane
statute day we know to be abolished, at the coming of Christ Jesus, together
with the rest of the figurall ceremonies, but the effect thereof shall abide so
long as their abides an true Church upon the face of the earth, into the which
repentance and remission of sins are publictly preached. And therefore albeit
we have no corporal punishment, to inflict vpone the contemners of that Godly
exercise, yet have we the spiritual sword, which ones will stricke sorer then
any material sword can or may.

The Judgments and justice of our God are immutable, Malach. 3.
he abides the some and one God that drowned the world by water, Gene. 7.
that consumed Sodom and Gomorha, Gene. 19.
with sire from heaven, Exodus s. 9. 10. and ^ 14.
that plagued Pharo, distroyed Jerusalem, and has executed his fearce
judgments in all ages, yea, and even before our eyes. It is the same God (we
say) that this day by his faithful seruandes calls us to repentance, whose
voces if we contompne, we declare our selves P. ebellious to our God, mockers
of his threatninges, Isay. 2 ^.
and such as sometimes in dispyte cried, Iere. 2. 5. 5.
we will walk according to the lust of our owen hearts, and let the counsal of
the holy one of Israel cum as it list. etc.

And if so we do, then woe, yea, woe and double damnation unto us for then even
as assuredly as God lives, L^^ Scutla^l yet be (...)
so assuredly shall the plagues that our ears have of heard, be poured surth
vpone us, even in the eyes of this same peruerst g^ne ^itio^, with whom we
contempne God, and before whom we are ^ether feared nor eshamed, stub^arnlye
to procead from sin to contempt. Our hope is better of you (dear brethrene)
that have professed the Lord Jesus with us, within this Realm, (...) that this
we speak to let you understand, what Rebellion has been in flesh before us,
and how it has ben^ punished, that we may learn to stoop before our God, by
vnfeaned repentance, and then we shall be assured, that according to the promise
made by the mouth of Iec^. Our God shall leave unto us ^ benediction, albeit
that the vehement fire of his (...) shall consume the inobedient.

But now least that we should think that the observation of the ceremony is
yneugh to please god ^e must understand what things m^^t be joined with
fruetfull Fasting, and what things they are that may m^ke our Fasting odi^us
to our God. And first we have to ^ndersta^d, that Fasting by it sel^^
considdered, i^ no such thing ^ the (...) gined, to wit, that it is a work
me^ritorious, The opini^ of (...) lasting.
and a satisfaction for the sins before committed, no all they that Fast
with that intent, renounceth the merits of Christ's death and passion, in so
far as they ascriue to Fasting (which is but an exercise used by man) that
which is only proper to les^s Christ, which is, that he by offering up him
self ones for all, has m^de perfyte for ever, Hebr ^ and 10.
those that shall be sancti^ied, we m^st f^rther understand, that as the Kingdom
of God is nether ^eat n^r drink, so is nether Fasting by it self s^^plie
considdered. Romans 14.
The cause why that Kingdom is granted to the chosen, nether yet eating
(moderat we mean) any ca^se why the reprobate are frustr^t thereof. But unto
Fasting there must be somewhat joined, ^^sting by ie self is but a dead and
impro^i^able ceremony
if that God shall look vpone it at any time in his favor. The Prophet ^oel
is witness hereof, who in the person of God, said unto such as he had seueirly
threatened, Turn unto me in your whole heart, Toel. 2.
in Fasting and murning, in which words the holy Ghost first requires the
conversion of the heart unto God, and thereto io^eth Fasting and murning ^s
witnesses of the sorrow that we have for our former offenses, and fear that we
have of his seueir judgments, the releif whereof we publictly profess, we
can obteane by no other means, but by Gods fre mercy, from whom we have
before declyned. So that the ver ray exercise of Fasting and the murning, (...)
and prayer therewith annexed, do solempnedly protest, that by our Fasting we
merit not, for he that still confesses his offense, and in bitterness of heart
cries for mercy, does not brage of his merits, if the Papists* ^ply, yet
god looks to the Fasting, and hears the prayers of such as ryghtly humble
them selves before him, we deny not, Tre^ humiliation depedeth vpone mercy, and
now vpone works.
but thereto we add, that rightly did nouer man humble him self before God,
that trusted or glorified in the merits of his owe^ works, for without Faith
it is vnpos sible to please God, and faith depends vpone the promise of gods
fre mercy through lesus Christ, and not vpone the merits of any works. The
Pharise in braging was rejected, but the Publican in denying him self, Luc. 18.
and calling for mercy, was justified, not by his works which he had not, but
by grace and mercy, for the which he sobbed. Daniel Fasted, confessed his
sins, and the sins of the people, and thereto he added most earnest and
fervent prayers. But does he allege any of them as a cause why God should ather
be merciful to him, or to the people, nay we find no such thing, but the
plain contrary, for thus he concludes. Dani^^. 8.
Now therefore our god ^eare the supplication and prayer of thy seruand, and
show thy pleasing visage unto thy Sanctuary, that lies waiste for the Lords
saik. O my God give thy ear that thou mais^e hear, and open thyen eyes, that
thou maiste see the waist places of the cietie which bears thy name, for we
allege not our ryghteousnes in our prayers, that we pour furthe before thee:
but thy most abounding mercy. Lord hear, Lord be merciful, Lord take head,
and help, and delay not for thy owen self my God.

We may plainly se whereupon this excellent serua^d of God grounded him self
to purches Gods favor, to wit, vpone the Lord, that is vpone the Savior and
Mediator promised, vpone the most abound (...) mercy of God, and vpone God
him self, for he understood what God had promised, as well by the mouth of
Moses as by the Prophet Isaias saying Behold (...), yea, even I am the Lord,
and there is no God but I. I kill and I give life again. I give the wound, and
I shall heal. Deuteronomy. ^
For my owen names saike will I do it, says the Eternal.

Apone these and the like promises we say, did all the Saints of God in all
there extremities, depend and did look to receo^ue c^ferte, without all
respect to their owen works, they dampened the best of their owen works, and
called them nothing but ^ilthynes before God. (...)
And therefore yet as of before, we boldly affirm, that the papisticall
Fasting was not only vain (for what Fasting is it? to ^bsteane from flesh,
and to fill the ^ellie with ^ishe, wine, spyce, and there delicates) but also it
was odi^as unto God, (...)
and blasphemous (...) the death of Jesus Christ, for the causes forewritten.
And this ^uche shortly for those things ^^at must be joined with fr^tefull
^^sting.

Now we have to consider, what things may make our Fasting odious, besides
this proud opinion of merit, whereof we have spoken. It is no dout but that
infidelity makes all the works of the reprob^^ odious before God,
Infideliti^ ^uaketh all the works of the reprobate odious before God.
yea, even when that they do the verray works that God has commanded, as we
may read in Math. 5. 6. and 7. Isai. ^. and 66. etc. And diverse other places,
but because that inside liti^ lurketh often in the heart, and can not well be
espied, but by the bitter and rotten fruits that spring thereof. The Spirit of
God has painted furthe unto us in plain words, what vices may make us and
all our works odious before our God, so that nether will he hear our prayers,
nor regard our Fasting. Solomon says, he that ditteth his e^re from the cry
of the poor, (...)
his prayer shall be abominable before God. And Isai in the person of God
says. Albeit that ye shall str^tche out your hands, and multiply your
prayers, yet will I not hear you, I say. 1.
for your hands are full of blood. But most plainly to our purpose speaks
the same Prophet, saying. The house of Jacob daily seaketh me, I say. 58.
and they would know my ways as a Nation that wrought justice, and that had
not left the judgment of their God. They ask me judgments of justice (that
is they querrell with me) and they desire that God shall drowe near. Why have
we fasted (say they) and thou beholdest not? We have afflicted our souls, and
thou ^n if know it. The Prophet answers in the person of God, and says.
Behold in the day of your Fast, ye will seak your will, and require ^ll your
d^ttes, behold ye Fast: ^o strife, and debaite, and to smite ^ith the ^ist of
wickedness, Ye shall ^ot Fast as they do to day, to ^ake your voice be heard
above, that is to oppress vthers, so that they are compelled to cry unto God.
Is it such a Fas^e that I have chosen? That a man should afflict his soul for
a day, and to bow down his head, as a bull ra^h, and to ly down in S^ckcloth
and ashes. Wilt thou ^ call this a Fasting, or an acceptable day unto the Lord?
Is not this the Fasting that I have chosen, to louse the b^des of wickedness, O
that S^^t ^and shul^e understand and follow.
to take of the heavy burdinges, and to let the oppressed go fre, and that ye
break ^ueri^ Yock? Is it not to deal thy bread unto the hongrie? And that thou
bring the poor that wandreth unto thy house? When thou ^eest the Nacked, that
thou cover him? And hyde not thy self from thy owen ^leshe. Then shall thy
light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall grow speedily, thy
righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrase
thee. etc.

In these most notable sentences, and in such as follow in the some place, we
have to marck, what things may make our Fasting to be re^i^ted of God, what he
crau^th of s^che as Fast frute^ullie, and what promise he makes to such as
obey him. This people externallie professed God, they daily sought his face,
by reparing to the Temple, hearing of the Law, and exercising of the
Sacrifices, yet did God plague them in mo sorts then one, as in the bookis of
the Kings and Cornickles we may read. In their extremity they ran (as to them
appeared) to the vttermoste ref^ge, they Fasted, and vnfeanedly humbled their
bodies, for that the Prophet means, when that he says, that they Fasted
till that their necks were weakened and made faint as a bull rash, for verray
lack of corporal ^oode. They laid of their gorgious garments, and put on
S^ckcloth. etc. And yet were their troubles nothing releued.

And that was the cause why they querrelled with God, and said.

Why have we Fasted, and tho^ have not seen? etc. And in verray dead to the
natural man it was strange, for god had promised that he would conforte his
people, whensoever they should humble them selves before him, Deuteronomy. 3. 1. Reg. 8.
notwithstanding their former iniquity.

In the external ceremonies, nor in the corporal exercises, there could no
fault be espied. Why then does not God hear them? complain they. God
answers that their outward profession was but Hypocrisy, their Fasting was
but mocking of God, and their prayers could do nothing but provoke him to
further displeasure. Because that albeit they reteaned the Name of God, and
albeit that they appeared in his Temple, yet had they forsaken both his
judgments, statutes, and holy ordinances. Albeit the body stouped, and was
afflicted by Fasting, yet remaned the heart proud and rebellious against God,
Let every man examine his owen conscience.
for they followed their owen corrupted ways, they oppressed such as were
subject unto them, their heavy Yo^k lay vpone the necks of such as could not
rid them selves from their bondage. Among them were strife, debaite,
whisperinges of malice, yea, open contention, and manifest violence, which all
were evident declaratio^s of proud hearts, and impenitent Soulles.

And therefore God gives unto them open defyance, in the time when they think
that they seak his peace most earnestly. And here to ought we this day that
profess the Lord Jesus, and have renounced abominations of Papistrie within
the Realm of Scotland, give deligent head. For it is not the semple knoweledge
of the truth only, nor yet the external profession of the same, that is
acceptable before God. Nay nay dear brethrene, 1 salm. 34.
he requires the fruits of repentance, and they are* to declyne from evil, 1.
Pet.
and to do good, as we may read in many places of the Scripture, Thing we it a
thing aggreable with the nature of the Eternal our God, that he shall receive
us in favor, after that we have offended? And we will not for his saike remit
the injuries that are done to us. Can we think to be at peace with him? When
that we stubburnelie will continue in strife among our selves. Shall he
releive our grief, bondage, or Yock? And we will not relei^e the burdinges that
unjustly we lay vpone our brethrene. Shall ^e bestow his undeserved mercy
vpone us? And we can show no bowels of mercy, to such as we se in misery
before our eyes. (...) us not be deceived, God can not deny him self, murder,
malice, (...) trent, cruelty, oppression, strife, thift, The works that may
make our fasting odiou^.
deceat, iniust dealing, covetousness, auaritiousnes, and unmercifulness unto the
poor, besides pride, horedome, adultery, v^^tones, and the rest of the works
of the flesh, are so odious before god, that whill that any of them reigns in
the heart of man, he and his whole works are detestable before God. And
therefore if we desire that Gods fearful judgments shall be stayed, let us
(that know the truth and say that we profess the same) vn^eanedlie return
unto our God. Let us not be inferioures to the King of Ni^iue, who commanded
every (...) to turn from his wicked (...), and from the iniquity that was in
his hands. Let us considder what our God craves of us, but espec^^^^ let
Earls, Lords, Barrons, Burgesses, and Artificers considder by what means
their substances are increassed.

It is not yneugh to iustisie us before God, Christian (...) era (...) more
th^n ^iuile (...).
that civil ^awes can not accuse us. Nay brethrene, the eyes of our God
pearseth deaper, then man's Law can streache.

The Law of man can not conui^t the Earl, the Lord, the Barrone, or Gentilman,
for oppressing of the poor laborers of the ground, for his defense is ready.

I may do with my owen as best pleases me. The Merchand is just yneugh in his
owen conceat. If before men he can not be convict of thist and deceat. The
Ar^ificer and Craftisman, thinks him self fre before God, albeit that he
nether work sufficient stuff, nor yet sell for reasonable price.

The world is evil (says he) and how can men live, if they do not as other
do. And thus does eueri^ man lean vpone the iniquity of another, and
thinks him self sufficiently excused, when that he meitteth Craft with
Craft, and repul seth back violence, either with deceat, or else with open
injury. Let us be assured dear brethrene, that these be the sins which
heretofore have provoked God, not only to plague, Consult^ with the 22.
Chapter of the Prophet Ezech^ell.
but also to distroy, and utterly overthrow strong Realms, and flourishing
common wealths.

Now seeing that the justice, and Judgments of our God abide for ever, and
that he has solempnedlie pronounced* that eue^ri^ Realm, Nation or Ci^tie,
that sins as did Judah and Ierasalem, Iere. 7.
shall be like wise punished. ^et that fearful destruction, that came vpone
them, into the which aster honger and pest, the sword deuo red without
discretion, 2. Paral. 26.
the rich and poor, ^. Reg. 25.
the Noble, and those, that were of basse degree, the young, and old, the
Preistes, and Prophets, yea, the Matrones, and Virgins, eschaped not the day
of that sharp visitation. Let their punishment (we say) provoke us to
repentance, and so no dout, we shall find favor in the eyes of our God,
albeit that he has begune to show unto us ^uident signs of his displeasure,
2. Paral. 36
justly conceived against us. But (as God forbide) if we mock his Messingers,
and dispyse his words, till that th^^r be no remeadie as they did. Then can we
(whom God has rased up to instruct and forewarne you) do nothing but take
witness of heaven and earth, yea, and of your owen conscience, that we have
faithfully instructed you in the right way of God, as well as concerning his
true worshipping, as in doing of your duties one to another.

And also that we have fore warned you of the plague^ to come, ^irste by our
tounges, and now by our pen, for a perpetual memorial to the posterity that
shall follow.

Who shall glorify God, either for your conversion, or else for your just
condemnation, and seueire punishementes, if ye continue inobedient.

To prescriue to every man his dewtie in particul^re, we can not, because we
know not whereintill every man, and every ^state particularly offends,
but we must remit every estate, and every man in his vocation, to the
examination of his owen conscience. And that according as God commands in his
hole Law, an I as Christ Jesus requires, that such as shall possess the
Kingdom, with him shall do.

Which is, whatsoever (says he) that ye would men should do unto you, Math. 7.
do ye the like unto them. By this reule which the Author of all equity,
justice, and policy h^th established. Send we the Earls, Lords, Barrons, and
gentilmen, to try their owen consciences, whether that they would be content
that they should be ^ntreated (if God had made them huseband men, and laubowrers
of the ground) as they have entreated, and presently (...) entreat, such as
some times had a moderate and reasonable life under their pred^cessours.

Whether we say that they would be content that their steadinges and malinges
should be rased from male to ferme, from one ferme to two, and so going upward,
till that for poverty, the Ancient ^aubourers are compelled to leave the
ground in the hands of the Lord. If with this entreatment they would be
content, we appeal their owen conscience. And if they think that they would
not, then in Gods Name we require them to begin to reform them selucs, and to
remember that it is not we, but that it is Christ Jesus that so ^raueth of
them. And unto the same reule we send Judges, Lawers, Merchandes, Artisicers,
and ^^nallie, even the verray laubourers of the ground them selves That every
one in his vocation may try how justly, vprightlie, and mercyfullie he
deals with his Nighboure. And if he ^inde his conscience accused by the
former sentence of our Master, let him call for grace, that he may not onclic
repent for the bypast, but also amend in times to cume, and so shall their
Fasting, and prayers be acceptable unto God.

If men think that we require the thing that is un possible. For what were this
else? But to reform the face of the who^e earth? Which never was, nor vet
shall be, till that the righteous King and Judge appear, for the restoration of
all things. We answer, that we speak not to the godles multitude, nether yet
to such as are mockers of Gods Judgments, whose portion is in this life,
and for whom the fire of hell (which now they mock) is assuredli^ prepared.
Math. ^5.
But we speak to such as have professed the Lord Jesus with us, who have
communicated with his blissed Sacraments, have renounced Idolatry, and have
awowed them selves to be new creatures in Jesus Christ, in whom they are
ingrafted as liuclie branches, (...). 15.
apt to bringfurth good fruit. Now why it should be thought impossible, that
these men (of what vocation that ever they be) should begin to express in
their lives, that which in word they have publictlie professed. We se no good
reasone, unless that we would say that it is impossible that God shall now work
in men of this age, as we read that he has wrought in men before us, and that
were blasphemy.

Seeing that the hand of our God is no more shortened toward us, I say. 50.
th^n that it has been toward those that have past before us.

At Gods semple comm^ndement Abraham left his Fathers house and native
country. C^n^. 12.
Moses pre^erred the condition of the people of Israel, Exodus 2.
even in their greatest afliction, to the riches and glory of Pharose Court.
David upon the unction of Samuel, 1. Samu. (...)
did pacientlie abide the persecution of Saul many years. Zacheus at an dennar
with Christ Jesus, Luc. 19.
was not only content to restore whatsoever he had before defrauded, but also
to give the half of all his substance to the sustentation of the poor. And the
faithful in the days of the Apostles, sold their possessions, and ministrat
unto the indigent. Act. ^.
None of these excellent works crave we of the faithful in our age, but only
those, without the which the Spirit of Sanctification can not be known to be
in man, to wit, that every man speak the truth with his brother, Ephesians. 4.
that none oppress nor defraude another in any busynes, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
that the bowels of mercy may appear amongs such as God has called to his
knoweledge, and finally, that we altogether that profess the Lord Jesus, and
do abhor Idolatry, abhor also all kind of impiety, Colloss. ^.
studying to habound in all good works, and to shine as lyghtes in the midst
of this wicked generation.

Which if we do not, we declare no dout that Christ Jesus dwells not within
us, but that wear they that hear and know the will of our Lord but do not the
same. And unto what curse and malidiction such persons are subject, the
parable of the Fegge tree which we^ thr^atned to be cut down, if it brought
not forth ^rute, Math. 21.and 25.
the curse given to it, upon the which Christ Jesus being hongrie fand no
fruit: and his last sentence against the reprobate, do sufficiently witness.

In the which we have to observe, that the reprobate are adjudged to the fire,
that never shall be quenched, not only because they committed iniquity, ^^erie
tree that brings ^ot forth ^ood frut^, shall be cut to down and cast in the
fire.
but also because they were not found fruitful in good works* Let every man
therefore that will avoyde plagues temporal and perpetual, vn^eanedlie study
to accomplish in work, that which in word, and outward profession he does
awowe, and vpone such no dout shall the benediction of God rest, when the
manifest contempners, and cloked Hypocrites shall be rased from the face of the
earth, and shall be cast in vttermoste darkness, where there shall be weaping and
g^asheing of teith without end, which shall be the reward of all their wicked
works.

Mo things we would have written, such as the notes vpone the disconsiture of
Joshua at Hay, and of the Israelites ^ighting against Ben^amin, together with
the foolish opinion of the Papists, who think them selves oblished to fast
forty days (^ which they call their Lent) because that Christ Jesus fasted
forty days, immediately after his Baptism* But these we are compelled for
this present to pretermit, be reason that the time appointed to this present
exercise of Fasting approaches so ^ye.

If God of his mercy shall pleas^ to continue the light of his Euangle among
us, this argument will be enlarged and set forth with gr^ter circumstances
from time to time.

Now to the ordour* exercise, and abstinence that is to be kept into this
publict Fasting. First it is to be observed, that the two days before
expressed, to wit, the last Sunday of February instant, and the first Sunday
of March immediately thereafter following, The reason of the time.
are not appointed for any Religion of time, nether yet that those precised
days shall be observed every year following, but because that shortly
thereafter are the Estates of this Realm appointed to conuene in Parliament.
Therefore the whole Assembly thought those days for the present necessity
most mei^, leaving in the liberty of the Church, what time they will appoint
to that exercise in all times to cum.

The Sondayes are appointed not of superstition, The reason of the Sondayes.
nether yet to bring in any Schysme within the Church, but because that vpone
the Sunday the people (especially that dwell a landwart) may best attend vpone
prayer, and the rest of the exercises that ought to be joined with publict
Fa^^^^g.

The abstinence is commanded to be from Setterday at eight hours at night,
till Sunday after the exercise at after none that is after (...) hours. And
then only bread and drinck to be used, (...)
and that with great sobriety, that the body c^auing necessary food, the soul
may be provoked earnestly to crave of God that which it most neadeth, that is
mercy for our former vnthanckfulnes, and the assistance of his holy Spirit in
times to cum.

Men that will observe this exercise, may not any of the two days use any
kind of gammes, No gammes may be used vpone the days of abstinence.
but exercise them selves after the publict Assemblies in preuie meditation
with their God.

Gorgious apparel would be absteaned fra, Gorgious apparel is to be left.
during the whole time of our humiliation. Which is from the one Sunday in the
morning, till the nixt Sunday at night.

Albeit that the straitnes of abstistence is to be kept, but the two days
only.

We do not bind the conscience of persons that be unable to the extremity of
the abstinence, The ^eicke and weak are not bound to this exercise.
and yet do we exhort the^ to use their libe^tie (if any they tak) in secret,
least that vthers ather follow their evil exemple, or else judge them to be
dispysers of so necessary an exercise.

The time that shall be spent, as well before none as after, must be left to the
wisdom of the discrete Ministers, who best ca^ judge both what the auditore
may bear, and what them selves are able to sustene. But because that this
exercise is extraordinary, the time thereof would be somewhat longer then it
used to be in the accustomed Assemblies. And yet we would not have it so
tedious, what hours before none and what after none.
that it should be noisome to the people. And therefore we think that three
hours and les, before noune, and two hours at after noune, shall be sufficient
for the whole exercise publict. The rest to be spent in preuie meditation,
every family aparte.

The Sunday preceading the last Sunday of February as before is said, shall
every minister give advertisement to his flock, of such things as are to be
done the nixt Sunday following, and of the causes of the same, with such
exhortation as God shall put into their mouths, to make the people to embrase
the just commandment of the Church with more glaide minds.

In towns we think expedient that the exercise of the doctrine begine vpone
the Setterday at after noune, In towns the do^^rine shall beg^^e vpone the
Setterday.
immediately p^eceading the first Sunday of abstinence, that the people may be
the better prepared Religiously to use the observations of the nixt day. But in
landwart we think good that the doctrine begine the Sonstay before. The
argument of the Sermon^ and exhortation to be taken from some proper place of
the Prophets, Places proper for the (...) sermon of ^asting.
as of Joel the first, where he says. loel. 1.
Sanc^ifie a Fast, appoint the Assemble. etc. Or of Jonas the thride, where
Jonas cried, (...) yet forty days, Jonas. 3.
and Niniue shall be distroyed. etc. Or of Jeremy the s^iu^nt. Where that he
says, Hear the word of the Lord all Judah, and ye that enter in by these
gates. etc. Or of the threttene of Lucas, Luc. 13.
vpone the declaration of them that show to our Master the cruelty of
Pylate, and vpone his answer. Or vpone any other proper place within y^
Scripture, that entreteth of repentance, of publict humiliation, of the causes,
and of the fruits of the (...). This ended, as it were for preparation, the
beginning shall be vpone Sunday, from the Law of God, because that all that
offends Gods Majesty* proceadeth form the tra^sgression thereof, and
therefore after a short prayer, That God will please to make his holy word to
fructify among us, this confession shall be made.

The Confession that shall go b^for^ the reading of the Law, and before every
exercise.

IT IS of thy mercy o Lord, and not of our merits, that it has pleased thee
to show thy sel^ unto the world, ever from the beginning, and unto us now in
this last and most (...), yea, Lord we further con^esse, that nether Law, nor
Euangle, can profit us to Salvation, except that thou of thy me^r^ grace work
into us abu^e all power that is in this our nature. For albeit thou teach, we
shall remain ignorant, alb^it thou threaten, Hebe. 8.
we shall co^tempne. And albeit thou promise mercy and grace, Psalm. 51.
yet shall we despair and remain i^ in^id^litie: Onles that thou creat in us
new hearts, write thy Law into the same, Iere. 31.
and ^eale into us remission of our sins, and the sense and ^ealing of thy
^atherlie mercy, by the power of thy holy Spirit. To the original ^orld tho^
spak by Noha. Gene. ^
To Pharo and his people, by thy (...) Moses. Exodus 2. 3. 4.
To all Israel by the fearful Trumpet of thy Law. Exodus 20.
To the Cietie of Jerusalem, M^t. 20. etc. Joan. 12.
by thy owen wisdom, our Lord Jesus Christ. And to y^ multitude, Act. 3. 4. 14
and 16.
as well of Jews as Gentiles, by the preaching of thy holy Apostles. But who
gave obedience? Who trembled, and constantly feared thy hot displeasure? Who
did rightly acknowledge the time of their visitatio^? And who did embrase and
keep to the end, thy fatherly promises?

Only they o Lord, to whom thy Spirit was the in ward teacher, whose
hearts thou opened* and from whom thou removed Rebellion and in^idelitie,
Joan. 6.
the rest were externally called, but obeyed not, they heard as well mercy
offered, as threatninges pronounsed, but nether with the one nor with the other
were they aff^ctu^lly moved. We ackno^ledge o Lord that the same corruption
^^rcketh in us, that budded ^urth in them to their destruction, and just
condemnation. And therefore we most humbly be^eak th^e o Father of (...), for
Christ Jesus thy s^nes (...), that as thou have caused the light of thy word
clearly to shine amongs us, and as thou have plainly instr^cted us by the
external ministry, in the right way of Salvation. So it will please thee
inwardly to move our dulle ^eartes, and by the power of thy holy Spirit, that
thou will write and (...) into them that holy fear and (...), which thou
crau^st of thy chosen child^ene, and that faith^ull of edi^nce to thy holy
will, together with the sealing and s^nse that our sins are fully purged and
fr^ly r^mitted by that only (...) Sacri^ice* which only by it self is
acceptable unto thee, to wit, the (...), death and mediation of ^hy ^n^ly S^ne
our Souerane Lord* (...) Mediator, and (...), our Lord Jesus Christ.

To whom with thee, and with the holy Ghost, be all honor and glore, world
without end.

This Confession ended, the Minister or Render (...) read the 27. an^ 28* of
(...), which e^ded* the Minister shall wish (...) m^n to descend s^cretly into
him self, to ex^mine his owen co^^cie^ce, whereinto he finds him self guilty
before God. The Minister him self with the people shall prostrate them selves,
and rem^i^e in private medi^ation a reason^ble space, as the quarter of an
hour or more. Thereafter shall the Minister e^horte the people to confess with
him their sins and offenses as ^olloweth.

JUST and r^ghteous (...) thou o Lord God* Father e^erlasting, holy is thy Law,
and most iu^t are thy judgments, yea, even when thou do punish in
greatest severity, we do confess as the treuth is, that we have transgressed
thy whole Law, and have offended thy godly Majesty, in breaking and violating
every precept of the same. And so most justly may thou pour ^urth vpone us
all plagues that are threatened: and that we ^inde powered forth vpone the
disobedient at any time from the beginning. And so much the rather o Lord,
because that so long we have been called, by thy holy word to vn^e^ned
repentance, and ne^nes of life: and yet have we still remaned in our former
Rebelli^n* and therefore if thou wilt enter in judgment with us, we ca^ ^^ther
es^^ape confusion in this l^fe, nor just condempnatio^ in the ly^e to cum. But
Lord thy mercy is without meas^re, and the tre^th of thy promises abides for
ever. (...) are we that thou should (...) look vpone us, but Lord thou have
promised that thou wilt show mercy to the most grievous offe^d^rs, whenever
that they repent, And further, thou by the mouth of thy dear Sone our Lord
Jesus Christ, have promised that thou wilt give thy holy Spirit to such as
humbly (...) unto thee. In boldness of the which promise, we most humbly
beseak thee o Father of mercies* that it would please thy godly Majesty, to
work into our stubburne hea^tes, an vn^eane^ (...) for our former off^nces,
with some sense and ^ealing of thy grace and mercy, together with an earnest
desire of Justice and righteousness, in the which we are boun^ continually to
walk.

But because that nether we nor our prayers can stand before thee, be reason of
that imperfectione which still rem^neth in this our corrupted nature. We (...)
to the o^edience and per^ite Justice of Jesus Christ, o^r only Me^iator, in
whom, and by whom, we call not only for remission of our sins, and for
assistance of thy holy Spirit, but also for all things that thy godly wisdom
knows to be expedient for us, and for thy Church universal. Praying as he
has taught us saying.

Our Father that art. etc.

This ended, the Minister shall read the Text whereupone he will ground his
sermon.

FIRST he shall expone the dignity and equity of Gods law. Secondly, The
heads of the (...).
the plagues and punishments that ensew the contempt thereof, together with
the blessings promised to the obedient obseruers of it. Thridly, he ^all
teach Christ Jesus to be the end and perfection of the Law, Romans 3.
who has per^itely accomplished that which was impossible to the Law to do.

And so shall he exhort every man to vn^eaned repentance, to steadfast faith
in Christ Jesus, and to show fruits of the same.

The Sermon ended, the commone prayer shall be used that is conteaned in the
Psalm book, the 46. page thereof, beginning thus. God almyghtie and heavenly
Father etc. Which ended, the 51. Psalm shall be soung whole, and so with the
benediction, the Assemble is to be demitted for that exercise.

At after noune.
AFTER invocation of Gods Name publictly by the Minister, and secretly by
every man for a reasonable space. The Minister may take the argument of his
Sermon from the beginning of 119. Psalm, where the deligent Reader shall
observe the properties and conditions of such, as in whose hearts God writes
his Law. Or if that be thought over hard, then may ye take the Text of Iohne.

God is light, and into him there is no da^cknes, 1. Io^n. 1.
if we say we have fellowshipe with him. etc. The prayer is referred unto the
Minister, the 6. Psalm shall be soung.

The benediction and exhortation, to call to mind where^ore that exercise is
used, being ended. The publict e^ercise shall be put to end for that day.

A^B^IT that to (...) wart the people can not well con^ene every day betuix
the two Sunday (...)* yet in B^oug^es and ^ownes we think they ought to
conuene, an hour before none, and an hour and more at after none. The hour
before none, to be the hour accustomed to the commone prayers. The hour at
after none to be at 3. hours or after.

The exercise of the whole weke.
THE beginning ever to be with Confession of our sins, and imploring of Gods
graces. Then certane Psalms, and certane Histories to be distinctly re^,
exhortation to be conceived thereupo^, and prayers like wise, as God shall
instruct and inspyre the Minister or Reader.

Mononday before none.
Psalm. 2. 3. and 10. History. 2. of the Judges.
After none.
Psalm. the 12. 1^. and 17. History the 16. of the Judges.
Teusday before none.
Psalm. the 25. and 28. History the 7. of the Judges.
After none.
Psalm. the 36. and 40. History the 4. of the Judges.
Wednesday before none.
Psalm. the 14. and 55. History the 19. of the Judges.
After none.
Psalm. the 44. and 56. History the 20. of the Judges.
Thurisday before none.
Psalm. the 49. and 57. History. Ester the 3. and 4.
After none.
Psalm. the 37. History. Ester the 5. 6. and 7.
Friday before none.
Psalm. the 59. 61. and 64. History. the 2. of Paralip. 20.
After none.
Psalm. the 69. Histo^ie. the 36. of Isai.
Setterday before none.
Psalm. the 68. and 70. History. the 37. of Isai.
After none.
Psalm. the 74. and 77. History. the 9. and 10. of Esd.
Sunday the last day of this pub^ict exercise for this time, before none shall be
used in all things as the former Sunday, except that the 26. of Leuiticus may
be red for the 28. of Deute ronomie, and for the prayer shall be used that which
is to be found in the Psalm book, the 165. page, beginning. Eternal and
everlasting. etc.

Sunday at after none.
Psalm. 78. History. the 9. of Daniel.
THE exhortation and prayers ended, for the conclusion shall be distinctly red
the 80. Psalm. and so with exhortation to every man to considder to what end the
whole exercise tends. With benediction the Assembly shall be demitted.

THE exhortations and prayers of eue^i^ several exe^cise, we have r^mitted to
be gathe^ed by the discrete Ministers, for time preassed us so, that we could
not ^^ame them in such ordour as was convenient, nether yet thought we it so
expedient to pen, prayers unto men, as to teach them with what heart, and
affection, and for what causes we should pray in this great calamity*
appearing shortly to ouerwhelme this whole Rea^m, unless god of his great mercy
abuse man's expect^tion find the reme^dy. Before whom it is that we have
(and presently do) prostrate our selves, for obteaning of those things,
without which the light of his Euangle, can not long co^tinew with us. And
therefore yet ones again we e^horte, and by the power co^mitte^ unto us by God,
charge all that profess the Lord Jesus, and the sincer^tie of his Eua^gle,
within this Re^^me, that even as they love the q^yetnes o^ their common wealth,
the continuance of Christ Jesus his holy Euangle within the same, and their
owen Salvation, together with the Salvation of their posterity, that
vnfeanedly they pr^strate them selves before the Throne of Gods Majesty, and
in bitterness of heart pray with ^s.

Arise o Lord, and let thine en^imies be confounded. Let them (...) thy
presence, that (...) thy godly n^me. Let the g^ones of thy a^^^icted enter in
before thee. And preserve thou by thy owen power s^che as be appointed to
death. Let no^ thy en^^^^es thus triumph to the end: but let them understand
that against thee they ^ight. Preserve the wine which thy right hand has
planted. Opp^ne thy po^^r to the power of that Roman Antichrist, and let the
glory of thine anointed jesus Christ our Lord shyn^ before all Nations. So be
it.

Hasten Lord and ^ary not.

THE SVPER INTENDENTES, MINISTERS, AND COMMISSIoners of Kirkes, Reformed within
the Realm o^ Scotland, Assembled in Edinburgh the 25. day of December. 1565.
To the Ministers of Jesus Christ, within the ^ame Realm, desire grace and
peace from God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the perpetual
conforte of the holy Spirit.
THE present misery, and greater troubles appearing shortly to follow, crave
(dear brethrene) that every one of us exhort and admonish another, that we
recule not back in the beginning of this battle, which is cum upon us, unlooked
for of many. And therefore it is that we your brethrene, partakers with you of
the afflictions of Jesus Christ, understanding the extremity, wherein the
whole Ministers within this Realm now stand, for lake of reasonable provision,
to them selves and poor families.

Have thought expedient to communicate with you our minds by this our letter.
Which is, that first we shall deligently mark those words of the Apostle
saying, No man shall be crouned, onles he strive laughfully, 2. Timet. 2.
and also that fearful sentence of our Master Jesus Christ saying. No man
putting his hand to the plough, and looking back, (...). 9.
is apt to the Kingdom of God. We have ones professed our selves warriors
against Satan, and laubourers in the husbandry of the Lord our God, who of
his mercy has opened our mouths to exhort vthers to co^tempe this wicked
world, and to contend to enter into that heavenly Jerusalem. God has honored
us so, that men has judged us the Messingers of the everlasting, by us has he
disclosed Idolatry, by us are the wicked of the world rebuked, and by us has
our God comforted the consciences of many that were oppressed with ignorance
and impiety. Considder then dear brethrene what sclander and offense shall we
give to the weak? What occasion of rejoicing shall the ennimies have? And to
what ignominy shall we expone the glorious Euangle of Jesus Christ? If that we
for any occasion shall desist and cease from publict preaching of the same.

We that admonish you are not ignorant, nether yet altogether without
experience, how vehement a dart poverty is, and what troublesome cogitations
it is able to raze, yea, even in men of greatest constancy. But yet dear^
brethrene, we ought earnestly to considder with what conditiones we are
entered, into this most honorable vocation, and what we chiefly seake in the
preaching of the Eu^ngle. For if we lay before us other conditions, then Jesus
Christ laid before his Apostles, M^th. 10.
when he send them fu^th first to preach the glaide tydinges of his Kingdom,
and if we seake and ym^^gine to our s^lu^s, better entreatment of this wicked
generation, then we find the derrest seruands of God have gotten in the world,
we ^ther (...) our selves, or else declaire us not to be true succ^ssours of
those, whose doctrine we propone to the people. They were (...) as sheape,
amongs the (...) Wolfes, to them it was pronounced. That they should be h^ted,
they sh^l^ be mocked, men shul^^ (...) and persecute them for the ^^^^imonie of
the treuth, Io^n. 16.
which threat^ings we find not to have been vain, but to have fallen vpone the
chie^est members of Jesus Christ, as the Acts of the Apostles bear
testimony. And think we that the same Euangle which they preached, can have
an^ other success in our Ministry, then it had in theires? In gifts we
m^ste confess o^^e selves ^arre. In^erioure to those lyghtes of the ^o^lde, in
deligence and paine^^ll travel we can not be compared* and yet we look to be
partakers of the Kingdom, which god has prepared for such as patiently abide
the g^^^^comming of the Lord Jesus. And shall we in nothing communicate with
them?. They were some times whipped, some times stoned, o^t cast in preason,
and the blood of many ^e^led up their doctrine.

And shall we for pouerti^ leave the ^lock of Jesus Christ, before that it
utterly refuse us? God forbid dear brethrene, for wh^t shall discern us from
the Mercenaries and Hyrelings? If our constancy in adversity shall not do it
The Hyrelings in time of quietues, teach the treuth as we do, in gifts and
utterance they commo^lie excead us, in life and conversation, they may for a
season be irreprehensible. What is it then that makes them Hyrelings?

Our master and Savior Jesus Christ answers saying. The mercenarie se^th,
the Wolf coming, and ^leeth, because he is a Mercenarie. (...). 10.
Then the leaving of the ^lock, when Wolfes come to innade it, proves such as
were holden Pastors, to be nothing but Hyrelings, we deny not, but if in one
Cietie we be persecuted, we may laughfully ^lee unto another, yea, if one
Realm cast us forth, we may receive the benefit of another. But ever still
with this condition, that we cast not from us the pr^fes^ion that publictly we
have made, nether yet that we cease to fead the flock of Jesus Christ, and to
gainestand the teachers of falls doctrine, so far forth as in us lies. But
hereinto stands the question, whether may we whom God has called to this
honor, that he has made us Ambassadoures of his good will, unto this
unthankful generation, desist from our vocations? Because that we can not be
provided to Reasonable liuinges, as God has Commanded, and our trauelles
deserve.

The Spirit of God vniformlie through the Scriptures will answer us. That
Helias was send to be fed by the Ravens. 1. Reg. 1^.
Elizeus and his Scollers were compelled to gather Herbs to make pottage. 2.
Reg* 4.
Paul did o^t live by the work of his owen hands, but we never find that
they received dimission from their vocations. Seeing then dear brethrene, that
God as yet hath^ tempted none of us with the extremity that w^ find vthers
before us, have suffered and overcome, let us be ashamed so suddenly to faint,
even in the brunt of the battle The price of Christ Jesus his death and
passion is committed to our Charge, the eyes of men are bent upon us, and we
must answer before that Judge, who will not admit every excuse that pleases
us, but will Judge vpryghtly, as in his word he has before pronounced. Let us
therefore stand fast, which we can not do, if we cease from our publict
vocations. Let us dear brethren stand fast in the ^^^re, and commit our bodies
to the care of him who feadeth the souls of the air, and has promised that
(...) whereof we have (...). He preserved us in the darkness of our Mothers
bosom, i.e. (...) our food in (...), and instructed us to use the same, when
we knew him not he has nourished us in the time o^ blyndnes and of impi^tie,
and will he now d^^pyse us? When we call vpone him, and preach the glorious
gospel of his de^re Sone our Lord Jesus. Nay dear brethrene, he nether will
nor can, unless that in^ide^itie cut us of from his merciful providence. Let us
considder that the whole earth is the Lords, and all the f^lnes of the same,
that he is able to move the hearts of men, as best pleases him. He is able to
bl^ss^ and multiply things that are nothing in the eyes of carnal men. 2.
Reg. 4.
It is but poverty that as yet does thre^ten us, Io^n. 6.
which if we be not able to contempne: Math. 14.
how shall we abide the ^urie and terroure of death? Which many thousand^s
before us have su^^ered for the testimony o^ the same treuth, which we
profess and te^che, an^ dispysed all worldly redemption, as the Apos^le
speak^^^. H^b. 11.
This is but gentill trial which our Father takes of our obedience, which if
we willingly offer unto him, the bowels of his Fatherly compassion, will rather
cause the heavens, yea, the Rocks and Rivers to Minister unto us things
necess^rie to the body, then that he shall suffer us to perish, if we
dedicate our whole lives unto him. Let us be frequent in reading (which allace
over many despise e^rnest in prayer, delige^t in watcheing over the flock,
committed to our charge, and let our ^obrietie and temperate life, (...) the
wicked, and be exemple to the godly. And the^ there is no dout, but the
Eternal our God shall reme^dy this extrem^tie, he shall confound our ennimies,
and shall shortly convert our tears and murning, in joy and mirth, to the
glory of his owen Name, and to the conforte of the posteriti^ to cum. Through
the merits and ^^^tercession of Jesus Christ our Lord, whose holy Spirit
conforte you and us to the end. Of Edinburgh in our general Assembly, the
last Session thereof. ANNO. 1565.

To the faithful Reader.
ALbeit that nether such as did first command, nether yet those that have
traveled to set furthe this ordour of publict Fasting, and admonitions to the
Ministers, have impyre above the bodies of such as unto whom they write: yet
have they no dout power from God to rebuke sin, and to crave repentance,
especially of such as God has called to his knowledge, in the midst of this
most obstinate and corrupt generation. And therefore in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, we require all men to ponder and wey, what is the estate of this Realm
at this present, and if they se not clearly just causes why that God should
punish in his hot displeas^re, the^ we can be content that men live at their
owen quyetnes. But if that i^stice be universally* oppressed, and iniquity so
menteaned, that it ouerfloweth this whole realm, then dare we be bol^e to cry
with the Prophet Ezechiell, Ezech. 9.
that such as murne not for the abominations that now habound, shall peri^he
in the iniquity of this most stubb^rne generation. Whill that such as
semplie obey God, spe^king by his most dispysed Mi^isters, shall avoyd^
vengeance both temporal and eternal, we do^t not but such as think them
sel^es more wise, then they declaire them selves godly, shall ask wherefore
shall we be subject to the ordinances of men? Have we not the Spirit of God to
teach us in all things? We answer, that if we as men command any thing, let
it not be obeyed, but if we in this age command the same things which God in
the ages b^^ore us has commanded by his ^^r^ands, let them be ware, least that
in difpysing of us, they dispyse not also the Eternal God ^ whose holy word
is to us assurance of every pr^cept that we have given. And further, we fear
not to say that such as murn^ not with I^cob in his affliction, shall not
rejoyse with him in the day of his deliverance, but they shall be compelled to
murne and quaike with Pharo without end.

Many things we have omitted to further opportunity, and better occasion. God
grant that things semplie spoken, and uprightly me^t, may be interpret
according to the reule of charity, and obedientlie followed as God requires.

Iohne Knox at the command of the publict Assembly.



Math. 2^ Watch and pray, for the days are evil, Hebr. 10.
and the ryghteous Judge is in readynes to cum. Hasten Lord and tarry not.


