THE DECLINATOVR AND PROTESTATION Of the some sometimes pretended Bishops,
PRESENTED IN FACE OF THE LAST ASSEMBLY.

REFUTED AND FOUND FUTILE, BUT FVLL OF INSOLENT Reproaches, and bold Assertions.

EDINBURGH, Printed by JAMES BRYSON, ANNO DOM. 1639.

BEfore the conveening of the national Assembly, indicted by his Majesty to
be holden at Glasgow in Novem. 1638. The some-time pretended Bishops and
Archbishops of this Kirk were cited publicly, throughout the Kirk of this
Kingdom, to compeare before the said Assembly, for answering to a complaint
given in against them to several Presbyteries, and by the presbyteries,
according to the order of the Kirk, referred to the general Assembly. When the
Assembly was conveened some of these sometime pretended Prelates, to wit, Mr.
Io. Spotswod, Mr. Pa. Lyndsay, Mr. Da. Lyndsay, Mr. Io. Maxwell, Mr. Wall.
Whitefurd, Mr. Tho. Sydserfe; in stead of their compearance, gave in a
Declinatour and Protestation; which was presented by Mr. Robert Hammiltoun
Minister at Glasfurde; and was urged to be read in face of the Assembly. This
their Declinatour and Protestation was made in name of all the Archbishops and
Bishops within this Kingdom: as if it had been done with the knowledge and
consent of all the rest: which is known to be false, and in name of others
their adherents, whom yet we have found to be very few; and these either
corrupted with bribes, terrified by threatenings, or circumveened with false
informations, as diverse of them with tears have acknowledged; and therefore
have passed from their Declinatour. They appoint it to be given in to his
Majesty's Commissioner, whom they do not decline; and crave it to be read in
presence of the Assembly; whom they do decline as Judges, not directing their
speech to the Assembly it self, with respect and reverence, as legal forms
require: Coram vobis excipiendo and opponendo, cum debita reverentia, or the
like. They compeare not personally, but appoint a Procurator. Howbeit some of
them were in the town where the Assembly conveened; or within few miles, when
their Declinatour and Protestation was given in. They might have presented
themselves to sustain the reasons of their Declinatour, or to clear
themselves some way of the offenses laid to their charge in the libell, with
Protestation that they adhered to their Declinatour, notwithstanding of their
compearance. Protestants in principio, medio, and fine praesentis
comparitionis and oppositionis: quod per praesentem actum vel comparitionem,
seu aliquem alium vel aliam quem vel quam facere contigerit in futurum, non
intendimus nec volumus in vos tanquam in judicem competentem aliqualiter
consentiri. Practica Papiensis per Petrum de Ferrariis in forma declinationis
alicujus judicis. But he that does evil hates the light.

The Assembly, having considered the Declinatour and Protestation, found
themselves Judges, notwithstanding any thing was aleadged: which was then
briefly answered; and now more amply for the justification of their proceedings.

They acknowledged that a general Assembly, lawfully called, is a most
necessare and effectual mean, for removing distractions, and settling peace in
the Kirk; and yet have they been the chief instruments to bereave the Kirk of
this liberty: first by prorogations from time to time, at last by prorogation
to no certain time; that so the impediment of their advancement might be
removed out of the way.

They acknowledge that his Majesty has authority by his prerogative royal to
call Assemblies: as is acknowledged by the Assembly holden at Glasgow 1610. and
Parliament 1612. But withal they profess, that it is not lawful to conveen,
without his Royal consent and approbation, unless we will put ourselves in
question to be called for sedition. Here, they flatter for their own private
ends, or rather betray the cause of CHRIST. We acknowledge that the Prince,
when he sees cause, may convocat a general Assembly; but we deny, that it is
sedition to hold Assembly without his consent. The Christians for the space of
300. years held their Councels and Assemblies under the persecuting Emperors;
and yet were not in so doing guilty of sedition. But it will be aledged, that
the case is different, where there is a Christian Magistrate professing the
same Religion. It is true, his consent should be sought earnestly: but if he be
negligent or wilfully refuse, the Kirk may hold her Assemblies, if they find
necessity. For in this case he differs not from the unbeleever. Paria sunt
non apparere and non esse. The Papists, standing for the Pops right to call
general Councels, yet mantaine, that if he does not, nor will not convocate,
they may conveen without him, or although he should oppose. See that professor
of both the laws Antonius de Rosellis in his Monarchiae Part. 2. cap. 30. And
in the third Part cap. 3. when the Pops Apostasy or Heresy is notorious, any
faithful man or sound Christian may convocate the Council per
viamrequisitionis, vel monitionis; non per viam citationis, vel
authorizationis: by way of warning and requisition, not by way of citation or
authorizing. But when they are conveened, quicunque ipsos vocasset, talem
vocationem authoriz are possunt: whosoever called them together, they may
authorize that calling. For it is not requisite to the substance, that a
superior should call them together. This Professor lived under the Emperor
Frederik the third, and ended his days in the year 1467. The Bishop of Spalato
in his second book de Repub. Ecclesi. cap. 7. Number. 18. aledgeth to this purpose
a passage out of Iacobus Almaynus; where he says, that the eye seeing the
body in danger may give warning to the rest of the members, that the body may
defend and preserve it self. So any particulare Kirk, seeing the necessity of
convocating a Council may make manifest the necessity to other Kirks; and sic
denunciative congregare, non autem praeceptive; and so convocate, not by
precept or command, but by way of denunciation or warning. As after a Physician
has showed to a man, what is necessary for his preservation, he is bound to
do it, not by virtue of the Physicians precept, but of the precept of the
divine and natural law. This Iacobus Almain was a Sorbonist Professor, about
the year 1510. The ground of the Kirks right is laid down by the Council of
Constance. Concilium generale potestatem a Christo immediate habet. The
general Council has power immediately from Christ. See Antonius de Rosellis
in the part above cited. What we have aledged for general Councels holds
more firmly for national and provincial: seeing they are more necessary then
the general. In former times, Primats convocated national, and Metropolitans
provincial Councels, without seeking a particular grant from Princes to every
meeting. For the Canons of Councels appointed such meetings to be kept. A tacit
consent of Princes was sufficient. And this tacit consent was collected by
their grant of liberty to profess Religion, and submitting their scepters to
the scepter of CHRIST. In granting liberty of Religion they granted liberty to
hold Synods, no less then weekly meetings of congregations to divine service.
That French Catholic who wrote that treatise delibertate ecclesiastica in
defense of the Venetians writes to the same sense. Imperatores cum libertatem
Religionis edictis suis Ecclesiae concesserunt, simul jus libere cogendi
synodos illis attribuisse. Nam cultus Christiani haec pars est prorsus
necessaria and (...). So it was answered in the Assembly holden in December
anno 1561. to some Courteours. Take from us the freedom of Assemblies, and
take from us the Evangel. For without Assemblies how shall good order and
unity in doctrine be kept. Seeing then Assemblies are so necessare, and
CHRIST has provided for all necessaries to his Kirk, and promised his presence
where but few are conveened in his name, the Christian Prince cannot deprive
the Kirk of this liberty. Neither is this Kirk deprived of liberty to hold her
Assemblies by any law or act of Parliament, incase the Prince will not indict
time and place. Our Kirk had liberty to hold Assemblies, and to appoint time
and place till the year 1592. and yet were not the Assemblies called in
question for sedition. The Assemblies were frequented by men of credit in
Court about the King and his Regents. Some were authorized with commission from
them from time to time to repair to the same. Commissioners have been directed
from the Parliament to confer with the Commissioners appointed by the Assembly,
concerning Ecclesiastical affairs. Appellations of laick patrons were ordained
by act of Parliament to end and take decision at the general Assembly.
Superintendents and titulars of prelacies were ordained by act of Parliament,
to be called before the general Assembly, and to be deprived, incase they were
found Heretical in doctrine. The acts ratifying the jurisdiction of the Kirk,
namely the act James 6. Par. 6. cap. 69. Ratifieth consequently the general
Assemblies, where all jurisdiction is ordered, and censures sometimes exerced.
The Parliament holden anno 1592. did not grant liberty to hold Assemblies, as
if the Kirk had not had such liberty before, but ratified her former liberty to
hold Assemblies yearly, or oftener pro re nata, and to appoint time and place
for the next Assembly by themselves, incase his Majesty or his Commissioner
were not present in the town. But if any of them were present, it was provided,
that they should appoint time and place. This provision gave not a privative
power to his Majesty to refuse a general Assembly, so long as he pleased,
(for then the liberty of holding general Assemblies could not be said to have
been ratified) but only a privilege or prerogative to appoint time and place
for the yearly Assembly. The act of Parliament 1612. which they aledge in their
Declinatour, acknowledges the indiction of time and place to appertain to his
Majesty, but does not give a privative power to frustrate the Kirk of her
yearly Assemblies if he please; which were ratified before, but that being
presupposed, binds him to appoint time and place. If they will infer, that it
is sedition to conveen an Assembly a any time, if the Prince will not indict
time and place, in respect of that act of Parliament, they must remember that
the act 1612. was only a ratification of the act of their pretended and null
Assembly holden at Glasgow 1610. the nullity whereof has been made evident at
the last Assembly: and so they bewray their treachery against CHRIST and his
Kirk, and for consenting to the ratification of such a Declaration in
Parliament ought to be severly punished, suppose there were no other offense to
be laid to their charge. The yearly Assemblies were a great impediment to their
course: therefore that liberty must not endure any longer. But for reverence of
the honorable Estates, we make the best construction we can. Howsoever, the
Kirk may lawfully hold her Assemblies, howbeit there were no act of Parliament,
and the Prince (we speak in the general) refusing to indict time and place, the
necessity of the Kirk being urgent is to be suspected of disaffection to
Religion notwithstanding of his external profession. Error, cui non
resistitur, approbatur, and veritas cum minime defensatur, opprimitur.
Negligere, quippe, cum possis, deturbare perversos, nihil aliud est quam
fovere. Did. 83. Can. Error. The Reader may find more to our purpose in the
reasons already printed for holding general Assemblies.

Howbeit the Assembly holden at Glasgow in November 1638. was indicted by his
Majesty, and they acknowledge that it was indicted by lawful authorite, yet
they hold the Assembly it self most unlawful and unorderly, in sundry
respects, and their proceedings void and null in law, for the causes and
reasons following: which we trust shall prove frivolous.

Their first exception is taken from the time of election of the Commissioners
to the Assembly. That they were chosen by the Presbyteries before the
Presbyteries were authorized to make election, in respect his Majesty's
warrant, to indict the Assembly was not published, till the 22. of September
following. The election of Commissioners is ever in the liberty of the
Presbyteries, when there is apparent occasion of an Assembly, as at this time
they were put in full expectation both of a Parliament and Assembly: And there
was need of timous election, that the Commissioners might have the longer time
to prepare themselves for the matters of importance, which were to be treated.
The Barrons and freeholders make choice of their Commissioners to voice in
Parliament yearly, howbeit no Parliament be indicted. They themselves procured
Commissioners to be chosen in sundry parts Anno 1617. before the Assembly was
indicted upon the fourth of November to be holden at St. Andrews the 25 of that
infant; upon a report that his Majesty would have a general Assembly, and the
five articles considered: but would not appoint the time or place, till the
Commissioners were chosen. Their drift was to hold or not hold Assembly, as
they should find the Commissioners which were chosen, would for the most part
serve their turn. But what need we to insist upon this point, seeing there was
no Commissions produced at the last Assembly, which were of date before the 22.
of September the time of indiction. The Table, say they, by their usurped
authority did give order, and direction for all Presbyteries to elect
Commissioners, and to keep a fast upon the 16 of September. These whom they
miscall, the Table did not command or charge the presbyteries to elect or fast;
but because of the expectation we had of an Assembly, invited them to seek Gods
blessing with fasting, both to the election of Commissioners, and proceedings
of the Assembly: and because we had been out of use these many years of
Assemblies rightly constitute, sent to them their best informations and caveats.

They except next against the Commissioners themselves: for if the Assembly be
not constitute of such members as are requisite to make up such a body, it
cannot be acknowledged for a lawful and free Assembly. But how prove they
Commissioners admitted to be members of this Assembly, not to be such as are
requisite to make up such a body.

First, they allege that the most part, at least of the Clergy, conveened at
this Assembly, are ipso facto deprived, and their places void, as if they were
naturally dead; because they have never in presence of the Archbishop, Bishop,
Superintendent, or Commissioner of the Province or Dyocie, subscribed the
articles of Religion extant in the acts of Parliament, nor given their oath for
acknowledging our Sovereign Lords Authority, nor have read their testimonial
thereupon, and the confession in their parosh Kirks after their return; as
they are bound by act of Parliament, Anno 1572. that whereas they be bound by
act of Parliament, Anno 1606. to maintain the Kings honor, dignity, and
prerogative Royal, to with stand all persons, power, or estates, that shall
impugn or impair the same, and at their admission were obliged to perform
this duty of their allegiance, and to testify in their conscience that the
King is suppreme governor as well in matters spiritual, and ecclesiastical,
as temporal, according to the act of Parliament 1612. Yet notwithstanding his
Majesty having ordained by act of Council and Proclamation following
thereupon, that all the Liedges should swear and subscribe the said Confession,
together with a general Band for defending his Majesty's Person and
Authority, against all enemies within or without the Realm, they have not
only refused to subscribe the said Band and Confession, but in their Sermons
and other speeches dissuaded, deterred, and hindered, others to subscribe the
same; and have publicly protested against the subscription thereof.

The answer is easy: The act of Parliament 1572. was never put in practice
conform to the tennour of it, and order there set down: or if put in practice,
the practice, could not endure long: For Archbishops, Bishops, and
Superindentents continued not long after. If there were any force in this
reason, all the Assemblies of our Kirk since the abolition of Bishops, and
Superintendents might be called in question; and we have had no lawful
ministers. Yea, their own pretended Assemblies did consist of many, who could
not produce a testimonial of their oath and confession conform to the tenor
of that act. Lastly, the substance of that act has been kept conform to the
later acts made thereanent, and none of the Ministers conveened at the last
Assembly, but have subscribed both the confession of Faith, and Band for
maintenance of the Kings authority, either of late, when the Covenant was
subscribed, or before when they past their degrees in Schools, or upon some
other occasion. But what suppose that act were yet in force that they had
neglected to take their oath, and were therefore deprived ipso facto of their
benefice and ecclesiastical living, yet it follows not that they are
deprived of their office, or can be, unless they wilfully refuse to subscribe,
and take their oath to acknowledge the Kings authority. It is to be observed,
that that act was made when some stood for the Kings Mother, and would not
acknowledge the King for Sovereign during her life. As for the promise made in
Parliament by the Estates, Anno 1606. have they failed in performance, or the
Subjects whom they represented? Have they not in the last Parliament ratified
that act. As to the act for the oath of supremacy An. 1612. it concerns only
such as were to be presented to any benefice, and not every Minister. That act
was a ratification of the act of Glasgow are altered in the act of Parliament,
and in place of these words, Conservation and purgation of Religion, are put
in, Supreme governor as well in matters spiritual and ecclesiastical as
temporal, which words were avoided in the same oath, when the conclusions were
agreed upon at Leeth, Anno 1572. Howbeit they then drew up a plate-forme of
policy near to the English, and put in the words, Conservation and purgation
of Religion, which are used in the confession of Faith extant in the acts of
parliament. So they have abused their own pretended Assembly holden at Glasgow.
But what have the Commissioners done contrare to these acts, oaths, or
promises? They have refused to subscribe the confession of Faith, and band
enjoined by the King and Council, hindered others, and protested against the
Proclamation. Might they not do that, and not violate these acts? Does the
acts of the Kings prerogative bind them to subscribe any confession or band in
whatsoever sense it shall please his Majesty to make? Or is it the meaning of
the oath of supremacy? The Estates, I am sure, never intended such a meaning.
Both must be interpreted by the first confession of Faith, the act for the
Kings oath at his Coronation, the declaration made in Parliament 1592. and
second book of discipline Notwithstanding of the ratification of the former act
concerning the Kings prerogative, and the act for the oath of imsupremacie, his
Majesty behoved to have a grant of posing habits upon Kirk-men at the last
Parliament which needed not, if he might have done it by virtue of these acts
of Parliament, Anno 1606 and 1612. and yet that is a matter of less importance
then to enjoyne subscription to a confession in another sense, then was
received at the first, and second universal subscription. For now in the
interpretation of the authority enjoining subscription, the confession is made
to consist with Episcopacie and other novations introduced since the fame was
first received. Was there not reason then to refuse, to diswade others, and to
protest against it? More reasons are to be found in the protestation it felf.
Some Ministers were urged with subscription, and of those, some yielded, who
notwithstanding had place in the last Assembly. But what suppose all had
protested and refused to subscribe as they were enjoined by the Council; that
could not have disabled them to fit and voice in the Assembly, unless they had
been legally convict before of offense in so doing, and remained obstinate. But
let the Reader here observe the decliners legerdemaine: They would seem to be
foreward for subscription of that confession which was enjoined by the King and
Council, but challenge men for not subscribing the said Confession, that is the
Confession extant in the acts of parliament: for of no other have they made
mention before in their declinatour. They have vilipended the later confession
and covenant in former times, and we doubt, notwithstanding of this taxing of
others, that they will subscribe this confession themselves, without their own
limitations and acceptions; as the Doctors of Aberdene have done: but that
perfidious men will subscribe any thing. And yet so impudent are they, that
they will have other troubled for not subscribing contrar to the true sense,
and meaning of the confession to make a party, and new rent in this Kirk.

They allege, that the Commissioners directed to this Assembly have
forefaulted his Majesty's favor, in granting this Assembly and the liberty to
be members thereof, and were in the same estate and condition they were in
before his Majesty's proclamation and royal pardon, because they are supposed
to be of the number of these, that adhered to the last protestation, that it be
lawful for them, as at other times, so at this to hold Assembly,
notwithstanding any impediment or prorogation in the contrare, they continue
their meetings and tables discharged by authority, refuse to subscribe the
Band according to his Majesty's and Councels command, for maintaining the Kings
Person and authority, and protested against it, and insisted with the Liedges
to subscribe the Band of mutual defense against all persons whatsoever, that
in their protestation they declared Bishops and Archbishops to have no warrant
for their office, to have no place or voice in Assembly, notwithstanding his
Majesty had declared by proclamation, that they had voice in the Assembly to
that effect, as they have constantly been in use in all Assemblies where they
were present, and therefore that it is a fearful thing to conveen with these
at this Assembly, in respect of sundry acts of Parliment, ordaining that none
impugn the authority and diganitie of any of the three Estates, or procure
innovation, or diminution of their power and authority, under the pain of
treason: and they arrogat to their meetings a Sovereign authority to
determine all questions and doubts that can arise contrare to the freedom of
the Assembly, whither in the constitution and members thereof, or in the matters
to be treated or manner of proceeding.

We answer first in general, They forfaulted not his Majesty's favor in
granting an Assembly, for his Majesty did not recall the indiction of the time
and place, for holding the Assembly, notwithstanding of all that is here
alleged, and therefore they might still conveen to the place at the time
appointed. As for the particular points alleged, we answer: Pardon was offered
upon condition of acquiescing in the Kings declaration and offers. But pardon
imports offense, which is denied: Therefore the condition of acquiescing
could not be admitted, and the offers in the declaration were not
satisfactorie to their former protestations, complaints, supplications. The
Assembly was granted absolutely without any condition, least his Majesty
should leave in his subjects minds the least scruple, and for settling a certain
peace. They protested that it should be lawful for them, being authorized with
lawful commission, as at other times, when the urgent necessity of the Kirk
requires, so in this exigence to assemble themselves at the diet appointed for
the Assembly, notwithstanding of any impediment or prorogation in the contrary.
Of the lawfulness to conveen in Assembly, when there is urgent necessity, we
have set down some reasons already, and more are extant in print, concerning
that purpose. They had need to fear the danger of prorogation, both because the
present case could not suffer delay, and doolefull experience have taught us,
that prorogations from diet to diet ended at last in no diet, whereby the Kirk
was bereft of her liberty to hold yearly Assemblies which they would now
recover by this indiction, taking it for a re-entrie.

Their meetings or tables, as the adversaries call them, continued, because the
cause continued, preferring supplications, giving in complaints, attendance
upon gracious and satisfactory answers, and performance of the same, making
Protestations when there was need; and yet in peaceable manner not in great
companies, as at the beginning, for giving satisfaction to the Lords of
Council. They have offered to clear the necessity of their meeting, and their
carriage before the Parliament to whom they have appealed. They have refused to
subscribe the confession of faith again at the King and Councels command, after
their late subscription, for the reasons already mentioned; and the band for
mantainance of the Kings person and authority; because it is not the same in
tennor with the old general band subscribed anno 1590. The narrative is
changed, some lines, designing the Papists and their adherents to be the party
threatening danger to Religion and the Kings person, are omitted, and no other
party designed in particular. So that the band may be used against the
Covenanters themselves, who have been taxed for disorders, disturbers of the
peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, to the danger of Religion, and prejudice of
his Majesty's authority, as they have complained in their Protestation. They
continued in seeking subscriptions to the Covenant till the holding of the
Assembly, because of references to the Assembly. His Majesty's Commissioner
acquiesced in their explanation of the clause of mutual defense, where they
declared their mutual defense of each of other was not for their own private
quarrels, but only in defense of the true Religion, of the laws and liberties
of this Kingdom, and of his Majesty's person and authority in preservation of
the same. What further can be justly craved of them? Such as were pretended
Bishops had no warrant for voice in the general Assembly, unless they be
authorized with lawful commission. The Superintendents and Bishops presence of
old was required more for their trial, then any need of their voice. But the
Assemblies were wearied with complaints made upon them, and after many
conferences and much disputation found their office unlawful: which was never
since approved by any pretended, let be lawful Assembly. So the custom of old
does not serve such as only pretend or usurp the same office. Nor are they
capable, as Ministers, of any commission from any Presbytery, because they
have deserted their flocks, and have no particular charge. For loppen
Ministers, and usurping Prelates should have no place in the general Assembly.
The act of Parliament discharging the impugning of any of the three Estates, or
procuring the innovation or diminution of their power, was made in a
troublesome time in the year 1584. was protested against when it was
proclaimed, with other acts. That third Estate of Prelates, suffered innovation
and diminution of their Estat within three years after by the act of annexation
anno 1587. and in consideration of the great decay of the Ecclesiastical
Estate, these are the words of the 113. act following, the Commissioners of
small Barrons and freeholders were declared to be members of the Parliament to
sit upon the articles, and vote in public to supply that decay. So there may
be three Estates without the Ecclesiastical, or Bishops. And the acts of
Parliament following, were made by the Estates howbeit there were then no
Bishops. Yea acts were made against Bishops as anno 1592. Howbeit Ministers
were not Prelates, yet others who had the Prelacies voted as the third Estate.
For it is in respect of their Barronies that such as have Prelacies, vote in
Parliament, whither they be Ministers or not. By the act of Parliament 1597.
Ministers provided to Bishoprics, Abbacies, Priories, were declared to have
vote in Parliament, but without the knowledge of the Kirk. When it came to
their knowledge, much opposition was made, none consented but upon conditions,
which should have been insert in the act of Parliament: which was to be made
for Ministers vote in Parliament. It is true that anno 1606. there was an act
for restitution of the state of Bishops, but the Kirk repining: because the
conditions were not insert in the act. And many Ministers subscribed a
Protestation against the said act; yet was not the act 1584. renewed, nor
Bishops restored to their spiritual estate, nor were there then any Bishops
having any spiritual estate whereunto they could be restored, nor was the
whole third estate restored which before was empaired. For that third Estate
consists of Abbots and Pryours, as well as Bishops. But how does it follow,
that because such as were provided to Bishoprics were restored to vote in
Parliament, they were thereby restored to vote in the general Assembly; who
were not then, nor yet to this hour restored to the spiritual office of a
Bishop. Or how is the third Estate impugned by calling them to censure or
trial, seeing they consented to the act of their own pretended Assembly holden
at Glasgow, whereby they are made liable to the trial of the general Assembly
in their life and conversation, office, and benefice; as also by the tennour of
the Kings Proclamation, and his Majesty's Commissioners Declaration given in to
the last Assembly; bearing expressly that all and every one of the Bishops and
their successors shall be answerable to, and from time to time censurable by
the general Assembly. Their consenting to that same act of restitution is
censurable, and a point of the libell given in against them. Can they not
distinguish betwixt the state and the persons? Yea may not the general
Assembly or any particulare Minister impugn an Estate erected or restored in
name of the Kirk without her consent, and to the prejudice of her liberties? It
is a calumny, that the meetings in Edinburgh, which they call the tables,
arrogat to themselves sovereign authority to determine all questions and
doubts, that can arise contraire to the freedom of the Assembly: for they give
only their best advice and opinion when it is asked, and call instantly for a
rightly constitute and free Assembly to determine doubts, and settle this Kirk
in peace.

They allege, the Presbyteries have losed their right, if they had any, to
direct Commissioners to the general Assembly in so far, as they have deposed
their Moderators appointed by their Bishops in their Synods to govern them,
and elected others in their place contraire to the act of Glasgow 1610* and act
of Parliament 1612. It is the hight of impudency to call in question the right
of Presbyteries to choose their own Commissioners, which they have ever had
since their erection. The Assembly holden at Glasgow was a pretended Assembly
and therefore any Presbytery might from the beginning suspended obedience to
the acts thereof, till it were declared null in a free general Assembly, as it
was at this last. The act of Parliament was only an act ratifying the act of
that same pretended Assembly, and by their own procurement, or rather another
act, adding, omitting, altering the words and clauses of that act, and that
with their knowledge and consent, if not by their device and procurement. And
therefore are censured in this last Assembly for transgressing the caveats in
this point as in many other. Put case no just exception might be taken against
the constitutions and proceedings of that Assembly: they fore-falted their
right of appointing Moderators to Presbyteries at their Synods, because
whatsoever power was granted to them was upon assurance, that we should have
yearly, or at set times general Assemblies, and that they should be liable to
their trial which was not performed. And therefore Presbyteries have rather
failled in that they returned not sooner to their former liberty. Beside this,
the sometime pretended Prelates deserted the Synods, and appointed substituts,
who had not the same power to appoint Moderators. Many Moderators dimitted
their office of their own accord, and then the Presbyteries according to the
act of Glasgow it self, had power to choose their own Moderator. Many
Moderators remained still unchanged till the last Assembly. But put the case
the Presbyteries had faulted in displaceing their Moderators, the Bishops
substituts, does it follow that they have fore-faulted their liberty of
choosing Commissioners to the general Assembly. Every transgression deserves
censure or reproof, but not deprivation from liberties.

They allege next that the Ministers choosen Commissoners to this Assembly had
not a lawful commission because the Ministers did associat to themselves a
ruling Elder out of every Pariosh, who being ordinarily the Lord of the pariosh
or man of greatest authority in the bounds, does overruled them both by their
authority and number, being more then the Ministers: of whom some being
ordinarily absent, and five or six, or so many of them put on the leit and
removed, there remain but a few Ministers to voice to the election, the
Presbyteries formerly never associating to themselves lay elders in election of
Commissioners to the general Assembly, but only for their assistance in
discipline and correction of manners, calling for them at such occasions as
they stood in need of their Godly concurrence; whereas it was expressly provided
by act of Assembly 1582. that they should be fewer in number then the Pastors.
Likeas these 40. years and upwards they have not been called at all to
Presbyteries, and by the act at Dundie 1597. whereby it is pretended, that
Presbyteries have authority to send these lay-Commissioners, the only act
authorizing Presbyteries to send Commissioners to the general Assembly, it
does no way appear that lay elders had any hand in choosing of Commissioners.
It is no new thing that Noblemen and Barrons have been choosen Elders. We find
that they have been Elders in the Elderships of particular congregations soon
after the reformation. It were absurd to see the Nobility and gentry best
skilled for government set aside, and the meaner sort not so well educat and
able, to rule over them. The like may be said for Presbyteries. It is a
needless fear, that they will overruled the Presbytery by their authority,
Ministers moderating the meeting, and going before them in reasoning and
voicing. Nor can any such thing be laid to their charge in electing of
Commissioners to this last Assembly. They can not overswey their Ministers by
their number, if they will not be deficient to themselves. If some Ministers be
ordinarily absent, so may some Elders, and it has fallen forth so usually, and
does so at the same time. That five or six Ministers being put on the leat and
removed few will remain, so five or six Elders being removed there will be more
Ministers to choose the elder. But what hinders either the one or the other
to voice to the election of others (howbeit they be put on the leits) either
before, or after their removell. The number of Ministers is to be considered
according to the number of the Pariosh's, not according to their absence or
presence which is casual, and for the most part there are more Ministers in a
Presbytery, then can be of elders, taking but one out of a Pariosh. For in
some burghes there are two or three, or four, or eight Ministers. As for the
answer to the doubt proponed in the Assembly holden in April 1583. In the book
of Policy agreed upon after reasoning and deliberation in many Assemblies: It
was concluded there shall resort some Elders out of every parosh to the
Presbyteries, which imports that more then one out of a Parosh may resort.
Ministers were ordained to subscribe the book by acts of the Assembly Anno
1590. and 1591. And consequently after 1582. Next that act provideth that the
proportion be kept in the fewer number; but there was never such a
proportion determined, and till it be determined, it is as good, as no act. For
otherwise it should be left to the Ministers of ever Presbytery, to appoint
what number they please. Thirdly, there is more reason for the conclusion of
the book of Policy made before, and ratified after that act: that as there is
one Minister sent from every particular Kirk, so there should be likewise one
ruling Elder at the least; for one Kirk has no more privilege than another.
It was ordained in the general Assembly holden at Middleburgh Anno 1581. that
every Eldership of the particular Kirkes send to the Classes (which we call
the Presbytery) a Minister and an Elder, and from every Classes to the Synod,
two Ministers and two Elders; So that the number was made equal, not only in
presbyteries, but in Synods also. And Bucerus in his book De gubernatione
ecclesiae page 101. says likewise, That there is a like number of Pastors and
Elders sent to their provincial Synods. It is false, that the ruling Elders
were called to the Presbyteries only at such occasions as the Ministers stood
in need of their godly concurrance. For it was ordained by the book of Policy,
that the common Eldership, that is the Presbytery, should consist of Pastors,
Doctors, and ruling Elders, and so they were constitute at their first
erection. By act of that same Assembly. April 1582. the Ministers are bound to
exhort them to resort to the Presbyteries at all times, but for matters of
weight to urge them strictly. And who doubts but the election of
Commissioners to the general Assembly entrusted with the common affairs of the
whole Kirk, is a matter of weight. That the act made at Dundie Anno 1597. is
the only act authorizing Presbyteries to send Commissioners to the general
Assembly, is as false. It has been the continual practice of our Kirk since
the erection of Presbyteries, that Presbyteries direct Commissioners to the
general Assembly. In April 1582. We have this direction. It is not thought
expedient that the Presbytery be astricted to direct their Moderatour to the
Assembly, but that they have liberty to choose such as they shall think
meetest for the comfort of the Kirk. Whereby appears that order was
established before, that Presbyteries direct their Commissioners. The act 1597.
then, did not first, or only authorize Presbyteries with this power, but only
circumscribed the number: Meetest it was that Presbyteries should have this
power, because they were ordinare Assemblies, had their power of ordinary
jurisdiction, admitting, deposing, excommunicating, and therefore had their
meetings weekly, and were upon all occasions ready to direct Commissioners.
Neither is that act 1597. the only act authorizing Presbyteries to direct
ruling Elders, or as they call them Lay-commissioners to the general Assembly:
For seeing Presbyteries directed Ministers in Commission, the ruling Elders
could be directed by none other after the erection of Presbyteries. It was
ordained in June 1563. that every Superintendent cause warn the Shyres,
Towns, and Parosh-kirks within his jurisdiction, to send their Commissioners
to the general Assembly. In July 1568. it was ordained that Ministers and
Commissioners of Shyres should be chosen by the Ministers and Gentlemen at the
Synod. After the erection of Presbyteries, we find them in the register books
of the Assemblies to have been directed from Presbyteries, and specially Anno
1592. When the act of Parliament was made for ratification of the liberties of
Assemblies, Synods, Presbyteries, etc. And July 1595. March 1595. And Anno
1596. For proof likewise see in the Presbytery books of Edinburgh, gentlemen
directed in Commission with Ministers Anno 1593. and 1596. That the ruling
Elders had hand in the election of Commissioners when they sat in the
Presbyteries appears evidently: For in the Assembly holden in July 1568.
Where order was set down for choosing of Commissioners to the general Assembly
with power to vote, it was ordained, that Ministers and Commissioners of Shyrs
be chosen at the Synodall convention with consent of the rest of the Ministers
and Gentlemen, meaning ruling Elders. And therefore when the Presbyteries were
created, and had the power to direct Commissioners, Ministers, and Elders,
could not be chosen, but in like manner by Ministers and Elders common
consent. Such like when the act 1597. ordained that every Presbytery direct no
more Ministers than three, and but one in name of the Barons: It is presupposed,
that Presbyteries directed them before, but only defines the number. It cannot
be meant that Ministers shall choose Ministers, and the Gentlemen Elders one
in name of the Barons, or that Ministers shall choose both Ministers and
Barons, nor were it reasonble. But it is said of both alike, that they shall
be directed from the Presbytery. By the book of Policy the ruling Elders
office and power, is to hold all sorts of Assemblies, Presbyterial, Synodall,
national, with the Pastors and Doctors, for establishing good order and
execution of discipline, to treat of things concerning the Kirk, to choose a
Moderatour with common consent, to send forth visitours for the bounds within
their jurisdiction, in the Presbyteriall meetings, to make constitutions for
decent order in their particular Kirks without prejudice of the rules set down
by provincial or general Assemblies, to excommunicat, to elect and depose
ecclesiastical office-bearers: For these are granted to Pastors, Doctors,
and Elders conjunctly; and as Ambrose writes upon 1. Tim. 5. of the Elders in
the primitive times, nothing was done without them. Vnde and Synagoga and
postea ecclesia, seniores habuit sine quorum consilio nihil agebatur in
ecclesia. If they may have an hand in excommunication, election and deposition
of office-bearers choosing the Moderatour, making constitutions, establish good
order, and generally to treat of all things which concern the Kirk, ought
they not to have an hand in election of Commissioners to the general Assembly?
Nay, rather in this than in any thing else. For Commissioners to the general
Assembly are entrusted with the common affairs of the whole Kirk, as has been
already said. They are called ruling Elders and governors, not half or in
part, but whole, and does not the choosing of Commissioners belong to ruling
and government: Ministers themselves do not direct Commissioners, but as
rulers. They allege that ruling Elders sat not in Presbyteries these forty
years and upwards: But the aspirers to prelacies began the rent in our Kirk
forty years since and upwards. No wonder then suppose that, with many other
things went out of frame; so long as unity and integrity continued, they
continued. The times of division cannot prescribe against the good order
established, and yet even after the act 1597. which was made in the year after
division entered, we find in the Presbytery books of Edinburgh February
1600. Commission given to some Ministers and gentlemen to the Assembly. And in
the Catalogue of the Commissioners to the Assembly holden Anno 1601. Barons
directed from Presbyteries. Ambrose complains in the place above cited, that
the conjunct government of Elders, which was first in the Jewish Kirk, and
after in the Christian, was worn out of use, whither through sloughtfulnesse,
or pride of the teachers, he cannot tell. Quod qua negligentia absoleverit,
nescio; nisi forte doctorum desidia aut magis superbia, dum soli aliquid videri
volunt. The causes of our Elders forebearing to resort to the Presbyteries may
be diverse; partly, the pride of some Ministers, who would not encourage and
countenance them, as they ought, and were directed by the Assembly; that
governing by themselves alone, they might seem somewhat: partly, the
unwillingnesse of others, loath that gentlemen should be made privy to the
trials of their offenses, as we have heard there by some of both sort, and fear
there be some at this present of the same disposition; and partly the division
and rent, which have vexed this Kirk these many years. But seeing there was
never an ordinance to exclud them, and there can be no prescription against the
word of God, whereunto this order is declared to be consonant by act of
Assembly holden in October 1582. And the book of policy, the imminent danger
to Religion, constrained them to take their own place again: By the way I
would demand these ministers, who are content they sit with them in the lowest
and suppreme judicatorie, the Session and general Assembly, why they repine at
their association in Presbyteries and Synods: there can be no sufficient reason
rendered; It was the order set down at the concluding the constant policy, and
is the order observed in other Kirks. The elders exercise not their office
fully but in the presbytery, where ordinare jurisdiction is exercised, the
power of excommunication, deposition, admission, etc.

They except yet against the Ecclesiastical persons, meaning, Ministers
directed Commissioners to this Assembly, that they may be justly thought
unworthie and incapable of commission to a free and lawful Assembly for their
behavior in times bypast. First, for that by their sedicious and railing
Sermons and Pamphlets, they have wounded the Kings honor, and Sovereign
authority, and animate his Lieges to rebellion.

This is imputed to all, but not verified of any of the number, nor have they
designed any person in particulare. It is sufficient that neither the
Presbyteries sending, nor the Assembly admitting, does know any such.

Next, they allege they are known to be such as have been either
schismatically refractarie, and opposite to good order settled in Kirk or State,
or having promised, subscribed, and sworn obedience to their ordinar, have
never made conscience of their oath, or contrar to promise and practice, have
resieled to the contempt of Authority, and disturbance of the Kirk, or such
as are under the censure of the Kirk of Ireland, for their disobedience to
order, or under censures of this Kirk or conveened, at least deserving to be
conveened before their ordinar, or a lawful general Assembly: for
transgressions, deserving deprivation. We know none schismatically opposite to
good order, unless they mean such as have opposed to their encroaching upon
the liberties of the Kirk; and their shameless usurpation. An oath should not
bind a man to iniquity or impiety. The intrants did not understand what was
the established order, from which we have declined, nor foresee the intent of
the Prelates, to bring in so many novations in Religion. The oath to the
ordinar was exacted by virtue of an act of a null and pretended Assembly, and
that ordinare was no lawful ordinare, but an usurper. These ordinaries have
exacted also oath and subscription to articles of their own devising, and
maintenance of their usurped authority, which is a point laid to their charge
in their lybell. The censures inflicted (if there were any) upon three or four
Ministers, Scots-men, returning from Ireland to Scotland, were infflicted for
adhering to our confession of Faith, which manifests them to be faithful and
constant members of this Kirk, and therefore fit to voice in her Assemblies.
They gave satisfaction to the Assembly by their answers to the interrogatories
proponed to them. Some of them were thrust out by themselves, before they went
to Ireland. As for such as were under censure in this Kirk, we know none, but
such as were censured by the then pretended Bishops in the court of high
Commission, a judicatorie erected without consent of our Kirk, or of the
Estates in Parliament, and discharged by Proclamation before they were chosen
Commissioners. This is also a point of their lybell, the holding of such
courts, and tyrannical domination in the same. Nor do we know any conveened
before the pretended ordinare, for any offense which might make them incapable
of commission. If any deserved to be conveened before them, or a lawful
general Assembly, they should have been processed before, or warned to
compeare before this Assembly: seeing a full and free Assembly was indicted.
But we know none that has deserved to be conveened for any transgression
deserving reproof, far less deprivation. The transgressions imputed are
either falsely imputed to them, as the uttering of rash and unreverent speeches
in their sermons against his Majesty's Council and their proceedings, reproving
his Majesty's laws and ordinances, using application in their sermons; not
tending to edification, intruding themselves in other men's charges and pulpits
without calling and authority, pressing the people to subscribe their
Covenant, or are no transgressions, as to proceed against Ministers to the
censure of suspension or deprivation in their Presbyteries, opponing to the
subscribing of a Covenant offered by his Majesty, and allowed by the Council,
or holding of conventions, without his Majesty's knowledge and consent; seeing
the end was for supplications to his Majesty, complaints, and informations,
and to prevent the great alterations in Religion, which were intended. They
pretend that in charity they forebeare to express the personal faults, of
which too many of these who were directed Commissioners to this Assembly are
guilty. They have learned to calumniate boldly, upon hope that somewhat will
stick in men's minds. This general imputation is more uncharitable, then if
they had designed the persons and expressed the faults in particular. But they
cannot otherwise ease their own vindictive spirits. In the mean time the
Commissions are valide, suppose afterward they should prove them to be such as
they allege: and we will not be too credulous, namely when men declared
infamous do calumniate. They except next against laymens decisive voices. It
stands not with reason, Scripture nor antiquity, say they, that laymen
should be authorized by Ministers to have decisive voices in a general
Assembly. That in the act of Dundie 1597. whereby those Elders pretend to have
this place, there is no warrant expressed for them to deliberat and determine.
So by laymen, they mean our ruling Elders, who are not mere laymen but office
bearers in the Kirk, and are called in the book of Policy Ecclesiastical
persons. Next, observe, that they except not only against the Assembly holden
last at Glasgow, but also against all the Assemblies holden since the
reformation. For the Elders have had power to voice in Assemblies from the
beginning. And the order of choosing Commissioners with power to voice was set
down first anno 1568. among which are the Gentlemen Commissioners from shyres.
There was no need therefore to express the act 1597. which was concluded
before anno 1568. the 7. chap. of the book of Policy, and continually
practiced since the reformation. The general Assembly is called in the book of
Policy, the general Eldership of the Kirk. If their reason were good,
Ministers have no warrant by that act 1597. to voice in the general Assembly.
For there is no express mention in that act of Ministers power to deliberate
and determine. The truth is, that act does not touch but presupposes the power
of both, and only defines the number both of the Ministers and Barrons to be
directed Commissioners from the Presbytery to the Assembly. So you see, they
profess plainly, they do not acknowledge any of our former Assemblies in the
purest times, nor any other in time to come constitute after the like manner,
nor the national Councels in other reformed Kirks, for lawful Assemblies. It
is sufficient for answer that this Assembly was constitute according to the
acts of our Kirk, to which they ought to be subject: if there were no more,
this one passage in their Declinatour deserves condign punishment to be
inflicted upon them, that they dare so malapertly impunge the established order
of our Kirk, because they are not able to answer to an Assembly rightly
constitute. Yet howbeit they will not grant decisive voice to laymen, they
allow them presence and assistance. So will the Papists* But they will have
them to be allowed and authorized by the prince, which condition is not
required by the Papists. They allow that his Majesty in person or by his
delegats, may see good order kept, have a cheef hand in all deliberations and
determinations, and may delegat by his sovereign authority such laymen as he
pleases to have definitive and decisive voice, without which delegation it is
presumptuous intrusion upon the Pastoral charge. By the act 1597. which was
made by their own procurement to restrain the great number of Ministers
directed from Presbyteries, to oppose to their corrupted courses, it was
ordained that Barons or gentlemen should be nominat by the Presbytery, and
not by his Majesty, and have had after that decisive voice in Assemblies. How
many noblemen and Barons, only called for by the kings letter and not delegat
as Commissioners, have voiced at their own pretended Assemblies, and helped to
carry matters by plurality of voices? But now it appears that after they had
served their turn with them to set them up they were to bide them a due
hereafter.

Ite for as Laici, non est vobis Locus Icy.

Yea, they entreat the kings commissioners in the words uttered by the fathers
at the council of Chalcedo^. Mitte for as superfluos. Send forth the
superflous. That which was spoken to Clerks, and Monks, who came to trouble the
Council, because they had embraced the error of Eutyches, they apply to the
ruling Elders, noblemen, and gentlemen, chosen lawfully Commissioners to this
Assembly. For such insolent and contumelious speeches, they ought to be severly
censured, howbeit there had been no libell given in against them. To the same
purpose they allege the direction given by Pulcheria, the Empress to
Strategus Commander or Captain of Bythinia, to drive by force out of the
Council of Chalcedon, such Monks, Clerks, and Ley-men, as did but pester the
Council, and suffer none but such as the Bishops brought with them. This also
was for avoiding of disturbance. In the mean time you see that Laymen not
appointed by the Prince, but brought by the Bishops were allowed to be present
at the Council of Chalcedon. But how agrees that saying of Theodosius the
younger, that it is unlawful for him, that is not in the rank of the most
holy Bishops to meddle with Ecclesiastical treaties and affairs? It seems
to cross that, which they granted before to his Majesty and his delegats. For
how can he or they, if this be true, have a chief hand in all deliberations and
determinations, or a decisive voice. Yea by this saying Ministers, or preaching
Presbyters ought not to meddle with Ecclesiastical affairs, for they are not
set in the rank of Bishops. This saying of Theodosius is alleged by the
Papists against the definitive voices of Emperors and Princes themselves. And
therefore we may conjecture whereunto their course does tend, notwithstanding
of the fair show they made a little before. But as for that saying of
Theodosius extant in the Council of Ephesus, Whittaker de conciliis proves it
to be forged, quia non habetur in antiquis exemplaribus, It is not extant in
the old copies, and it is false in it self. For he did meddle. And howbeit
Theodosius was not present himself at the Council, yet he sent Candidianus,
who informed him of their proceedings. Thirdly, the words are not rightly
translated, for the words are not, the order or rank of Bishops, but, the
catalogue of Bishops: meaning that none should meddle with the affairs and
questions to be treated in the Council, but such as were sent from their
Kirks, and were written up in the catalogue which their Bishops brought with
them. This is observed by Iunius. For the same respect which Theodosius had,
Martinus was moved, say they, to say at the Council of Chalcedon, non esse
suumsed Episcoporum tantum subscribere, that it was not his part, but the
Bishops only to subscribe. How could they urge him to subscribe, if it belonged
only to Bishops? This famous man Martine was an Abbot, or the father of many
Monks. He refused to subscribe, because he favored not the cause, but the
error of Eutyches another Monkish father. Always we see what Assemblies they
intended to have had, even just like the Popish; Bishops only having decisive
voices, and no other Assembly shall we have, if they can attain to their
intent. But to return to the point. We let them understand our Assemblies are
not to be ordered according to the pattern of these Monkish times. The
question is, whither they will acknowledge this Assembly to be constitute
according to the constitutions and practice of our own Kirk. But lest the
Reader should conceive an error to be in this, that Laymen should have
decisive voice in Assemblies, we will by the way stay a little upon this
point. Their argument brought against it is Bellarmines, but it is naught. For
if it be intrusion upon the pastoral charge, the Prince can not authorize
Laymen to give decisive voice in Assemblies, which they granted before: for
that were to intrude them into the pastoral charge. And by the same reason
neither he nor his delegats can have decisive voice: but the truth is, it is no
intrusion into that pastoral charge, which is proper to the Pastor, which is
to preach the word publicly and minister the sacraments. But this is not the
end of meeting in Assemblies, but to root out Heresies, redress abuses, and
deliberate upon the common affairs, which is not the proper charge of Pastors,
but common also to others endued with knowledge of the Scriptures; or as Doctor
Willets says, this office to be performed in Councels; is common to the whole
Kirk. If to feed be taken more largely, and to open up the true sense of the
Scripture, or to refute Heresies, or mend abuses be to feed, then others then
Pastors may be said to feed in that large sense. Ministers in Assemblies do not
feed as Pastors, but as delegat from their Kirks they take heed that no
corruption in doctrine, nor abuse in manners creep in. But that mere laymen,
howbeit not ruling Elders or office-bearers in the Kirk, may have decisive
voice in Councels, providing they be endued with gifts sufficient and be freely
choosen by the Kirks of the bounds, where they are resident, is made evident by
Scripture, reason and antiquity. In the Council holden at Jerusalem act 15.
not only the Apostles and elders, but also other brethren had decisive voice.
There was much disputing v. 7. and the whole multitude kept silence v. 12.
whereby it appears that in the time of the disputation many beside the
Apostles and Elders spoke. The Apostles, Elders and Brethren sent choosen men
with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch to make known to them what was concluded and
agreed upon in the Council 23. and 25. And in common, the Apostles, Elders,
and Brethren, say, It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, which imports
a decisive voice. Whereupon the Cardinal Arelatensis at the council of
Basile, gathered that others then Bishops should have decisive voices in
Counsels, unde apparet alios quam Episcopos in conciliis habuisse vocem
decidentem. A Eneas Sylvius lib. 1. de concilio Basileensi. But the text
bears that others beside the Apostles and Elders wrote in their epistle, It
seems good to the holy Ghost and to us. It seems these brethren were such
as disputed and reasoned pro and contra upon the matter in hand' (...) and
placet were the words used in giving definitive sentence in Councels. Next,
there is reason for it. The national Council or general Assembly
represents the whole Kirk of the nation in a most solemn manner. Therefore
it should consist of men of all ranks, and not of Clergy men only. Bellarmine
compares general Councels to a Parliament. But persons of all sorts and
ranks, by the persons representing their Estate, have voice in the Parliament.
Natural equity requires the like to be observed in national Councels. Quod
omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari and approbari debet, That which concerns all
should be handled and approved by all. But matters of Faith and manners the
subject, whereupon national Assemblies do treat are common and concern all,
the Laity as well as the Clergy. It is against reason that Ministers should
lay a yock upon the people without their own consent and approbation. The
Scripture is the only supreme judge of all controversies in religion: the
Council does only interpret and point out the sense and meaning of the
Scripture, which gift Laymen may have. Yea the judgment of one Layman
agreeing with the Scripture is to be preferred before the judgment of a whole
Council contradicting the Scripture. And Gerson examinat. Doctr. Par. 1.
says, any learned man ought to oppose to a whole Council, if he perceive
them to err through malice or ignorance. Pastors are commonly chosen to sit in
Councels, because it is presumed that they have the greatest skill in
Ecclesiastical matters. But it may fall out otherwise: for the gifts of
knowledge and spiritual wisdom are not precisely tied to them. Nazianzen
detested the Synods where rude and ignorant Bishops, whereof there were many in
his time, did vote. Merito illas Synodos detestabatur, in quibus Episcopi
suffragia ferentes essent rustici, idiotae, illiterati, nulla sacrarum
literarum scientia praediti, nec in rebus sacris exercitati, qui utique aequum
judicium far non possunt. Spalatensis. Lib. 7. cap. 3. Number. 29. Marsilius
Patavinus in his Defensor pacis part. 2. cap. 20. takes GOD to witness, that
he knew many Priests and some Prelates who could not speak congruous latin: and
because the most part of the Bishops and Priests had small skill in the
Scriptures, he wishes or advises a general Council to be filled up with
others who were not Priests: generale Concilium etiam per non Sacerdotes
integrari. Sic enim fecerunt Apostolicum senioribus. Before Luthers time scarce
one Bishop of a thousand could read latin. Sibrandus de conciliis P. 44. It
were absurd to sendignorant Pastors and often times ungodly to a Council, and
exclude learned Godly and wisemen.

The Bishop of Spalato says, That it is not the title of a Bishop should give
him the right of suffrage, and if he be unfit, his placet is ridiculous. l. 7.
c. 3. number. 29. In his 7. book c. 3 number. 5. he proves that Laymen may vote in
council, for this reason because they may have the gift to expound or open up
the meaning of the Scripture. Paulus etiam Laicos fideles agnovit posse and
solere sacram Scripturam ex dono spiritus explicare prophetae duo aut tres,
etc: 1. Cor. 4. 29. As for practice in ancient times, notwithstanding of the
pride of the Clergy and superstition prevailing, we have proof sufficient.
Theodoretus Bishop of Cyrus, epist. 81. Required a Council, consisting not only
of Bishops, but also Magistrates, and others in dignity, that are learned in
divine things, and to declare plainly what is their judgment. Isidorus
Mercator, in his order of celebrating Councels, says, Deinde ingrediantur and
laici qui electione Concilij interesse meruerunt. Let laymen enter, who by the
choice of the Council, merit to be present. Marcilius Patavinus, in the
chapter above cited, alleged this place for our purpose; and adds, multo
magis igitur literati and in lege divina periti, quanquam non sacerdotes
existant. The decrees of the second Council of Orange were subscribed by
Laymen of great dignity, Laici etiam illustres and magnifici viri
subscripserunt, Magd. Cent. 5. cap. 9. And in the Synod holden at Cullen. Anno
887. There were present religious Laymen, with whose consent the decrees of
that Council were promulgat. At the Council of Metz holden under Arnulphus were
present many Earls, and other nobles, with other Laymen, fearing God. In the
beginning of the first chap. we have these words, Episcopi and Presbyteri and
fideles Laici qui ante nos fuerunt juxta sacram Canonum authoritatem saepius in
Christi nomine convenientes, justiciam Dei statuerunt, and idcirco suis diebus
pacem habuerunt. They tell us that therefore Fathers had peace in their days,
when Laymen conveened in Chists Name with the Clergy, and made righteous
decrees. These Councels are alleged for our purpose by the Bishop of Spalato
in the chapter abovementioned. The Author of the review of the Council of
Trent, a French Catholic, lib. 1. cap. 8. Maintains that from all antiquity
Laymen have had their place in Councels, not only to deliberat, but to
determine also, and alledgeeth for his purpose not only act. 15. 23. But also
examples, specially of councels holden in France and Spain. The French Synod
holden An. 742. has these words, By the advice of the Churchmen and Princes of
the Realm, We have ordained, decreed, etc. says Carloman, Duke and Prince of
the French Pepin, a French Duke and Prince called another Synod at Soissons
consisting of Churchmen and some chief Laymen of the Realm, with whom he
enacted some ecclesiastical laws, An. 744. The council of Meaux, holden under
Charles the second, An. 845. makes mention of some other councels that
consisted of clergy and laymen, so were Earls and other godly laym-en, at
the council holden at Pistis, a town upon the river of Seyn, Anno 963. Both
Clergy and laymen flocked in great troops to the council at Tribur in France
and at the end of that council, we have these words, This holy subscription was
confirmed and fairly approved by the reverend profession and worthy answers of
the Priests, Deacons, and Lay-nobilitie. At the famous council of Constance
were present 24. Dukes, 140. Earls, diverse delegat from cities and
corporations, diverse learned Lawyers, diverse Burgesses of Universities. At the
first council of Pisa there were the delegats of Universities, the Proctours of
cities, and some Doctors in law, to the number of 400. All of whom (says the
apology of that council) treating of points in divinity, when they had deposed
the two Antipopes that contended for the Popedom, and elected Alexander the
fifth, made many good ordinances in the Kirk of God. So at the second council
of Pisa, there were also the delegats of Universities `with sundry Doctors in
law, and other men in great abundance, well skilled in matters both divine and
humane. Many other Synods or councels are cited in that eight chapter,
whereunto we refer the Reader. As for the Popish distinction of consenting and
defining, or determining; that Laymen consented but did not define or
determine: the reader may find expressions in the contrare in the examples
above cited. Whittaker proves that the Bishops themselves subscribed as
consenting: How ridiculous it is to grant them power to debate upon or discuss
any question, and consent or dissent to the determination, either on the one
side, or other, and not to determine what is that less? For if the Clergy men
have determined, and the Laymen consent not, their determination is frustrat.
Right judgment cannot be given, but after the discussing of the cause, says
the Bishop of Spalato in the chapter above cited. Neither does he admit some of
the council to be judges, and others to be disputers only. Now seeing mere
Laymen orderly elected have had, and ought to have decisive voice in councels,
much more ruling Elders, seeing they are chosen out of the laity as fittest to
govern: And if the fittest be not chosen, it is an abuse or neglect which
should be amended. The Elders at the council of Jerusalem were not only
preachers, but rulers; for the name was common to both, and both are
comprehended, where the sense distinguishes not. If Bilson Page 180.
comprehend Deacons under the name of Elders; with greater reason may we the
ruling Elders: and so do our Divines, Iunius, Alstedius, and others disputing
upon this subject. Yea, Zwinglius in his Epistles, takes here Elders only for
the ruling Elders. Always seeing the constitutions of the Eldership was
directed from the Jewish kirk, the Kirk of Jerusalem was in this, as in many
other things, a pattern to the rest. This digression was necessary, howbeit
their acception touches not the point in question to wit, Whither this last
Assembly be constitute according to the acts, and established order of our Kirk.

They allege, That if the pretended Commissioners, both Lay and Ecclesiastic,
were for none other cause declinable, yet ought they to be declined, because
the most part, if not all the Commissioners directed to this meeting, have
precondemned episcopal government, have condemned, at least suspended
obedience to the acts of the general Assembly and Parliament: concerning the
five articles of Perth, have approved their Covenant, as most necessary to be
embraced of all in this Kingdom, and not only have given judgment of these
things before hand, but by most solemn oaths bound themselves to defend and
stand to the same, as does appear by their Covenant, petitions, potestations,
pamphlets, lybels, and sermons; for a judge probably suspect, may be declined:
and of all probabilities the most pregnant, is, when the judge before he come
to judgment, does give sentence of the things judged. Hitheretill they have
declined the Commissioners as incompetent judges, now they decline them as
suspect: which is recusatio judicis suspecti.

Suppose it were true, what is here alleged of all or the most part, yet can
they not be set, for as it was answered at the Synod of Dort, to the
Arminians, using the like exception, that by this reason Arrius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, and other like Heretics, could not have been condemned justly in the
councels of Nice, Ephesus, Chalcedon: because the orthodox teachers who had
impungned their doctrine before, sat as judges upon their doctrine, Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria impugned the heretical opinion of Arrius before the
Council of Nice was convocat, and yet sat as judge at the council of Nice upon
Arrius. Did not Cyrillus sit in the Council of Ephesus upon the Nestorians?
howbeit he had impugned their doctrine before. In Hassia when some defended the
Vbiquitars error, they were condemned in a general Synod by such as had
impugned their errors before, notwithstanding of the same exception. It is no
new thing, but accustomed in the Kirk of God at all times, that when any
error did spring up, faithful Pastors did timeously oppose both by word and
writ: least it should spread, and infect the whole body: and yet did not
therefore forefault their right in giving their voices in the Synods where
these errors were condemned. The Divins of Hassa defied the Ariminians to give
one example of a lawful Synod that ever did the like. Next, suppose they had
all precondemned episcopal government and the five articles of Perth, they had
condemned, but that which was condemned before by our Kirk, and never retreated
by any lawful Synod. Thirdly, the acknowledgement of episcopal government and
practice of the five articles were not absolutely condemned by the Covenant.
But the acknowledgement of the one, and practice of the other, was suspended
till the trial of a free and lawful general Assembly, whither they were
contrar to the confession of Faith and abjured by it, for the satisfaction of
some, who in other respects did not allow of them; and being found to be
abjured by the confession of Faith, as they are found and cleared to be at the
last Assembly, they are bound by oath to stand to the confession of Faith in
all the points of it. Fourthly, the Commissioners conveened, did not judicially
condemn before, but according to their several places and stations, they gave
warning of the novations entered, in, which hindered them not to alter their
mind, if they had heard any thing to convince them of the contrar at meeting
with others in the Assembly. The examples alleged are to small purpose. Our
reformers protested against the Council of Trent, not only because Pope Leo the
tenth had precondemned Luthers doctrine by his Bull dated the eight of June
1520. and Paul the third his successor, likewise by his Bull dated in August
1535. but also declared the intention of their appointing to convocat that
council was to root out that new sprung up heresy. And as it was answered to
the Arminians, that council was not a free council. The Prelates and other
members of that council were sworn slaves to the Pope, and had power to
determine nothing but what pleased him to approve by his Nuncioe. Our first
reformers would not be acknowledged for Doctors of the popish Kirk, and had
made separation from them before. Maximus patriarch of Constantinople, refused
to go to the council of Antioch, because he foresaw he would be constrained to
the deposition of Athanasius, Hosius of Corduba feared likewise their
determinations: but it is one thing to refuse presence, where they fear
ungodly determinations: another thing to decline the authority of a lawful
council, when they are cited to answer a foul libell. It becomes them to
side with persecutours rather then Hosius, with Pope, Leo rather then Luther
and other reformers, of whom some of them have spoken disdainfully. Next, there
is difference between an inferior Synod and the supreme. The council of
Antioch was not an oecumenicall council, which was the supreme. The general
Assembly whereunto our Prelates were cited, is with us the supreme: of which
more in the answer to the next section.

Next they allege, That all, if not the greatest part of the pretended
Commissioners, have declared themselves party to the Archbishops and Bishops
of this Kirk: for in that they declined the Bishops to be their judges as their
party, as their declinatours, petitions, declarations, and protestations do
bear, have they not simul and semel and ipso facto, declared themselves to be
their parties party, that is the Bishops? And have not only declined, but
persecuted them, by calumnies and reproaches, invaded their persons, opposed
and oppressed them by unlawful combination: for the subscribing and swearing
whereof they have by their own authority indicted fasts, have by the aid of the
multitude entered in the Kirks of worthy men, usurped upon their charges,
caused read the unlawful Covenant, threatened or compelled some, otherwise
unwilling to set their hand to it; processed, suspended, removed, obedient and
worthy Ministers by the usurped authorite of their Table and Presbyteries,
notwithstanding the defense of declinator and appellation was used by not a few
in their Presbyteries, intending by this means to disable them from being
Commissioners, and directly or indirectly caused their stipends to be kept
back, by which means not the least part of the subscribing Ministers hands has
been obtained to their Covenant. Seeing they have declared themselves party,
it can subsist with no law or reason that the same persons shall be both
parties and Judges.

We answer, they declined them as party, when they supplicated and complained
upon them before the Lords of secret Council. Was it reason that they should
judge upon the complainers, or complaints made upon themselves? When they
covenanted, they suspended only acknowledgement of their authority, till the
trial of a free general Assembly: Calumnies and unjust reproaches we deny.
None of the Commissioners have hithertils invaded their persons, nor have any
of them been invaded by any other, so far as we know; But Master David
Lyndsay by Boys and servant women, when he was come from his new Mattins and
evensong, and as we use to say flagranti crimine. Their conbination against
them was with reservation to trial. What fault was there in fasting and
seeking Gods blessing to the actions were in hands, all tending to reformation?
where fore should people be hindered from striking Covenant with God and amongst
themselves for the defense of Religion by the refusal of a perverse Minister?
These worthy Ministers processed, suspended, or removed were worthily censured
by their Presbyteries for their Arminian, and Popish doctrine, vented both in
private and public, to the endangering of many souls, or for their scandalous
lives. Were these men fit to be Commissioners to the general Assembly. To
decline the Presbytery as competent judges could not be admitted, nor to
appeall to any but to a free general Assembly. These men who declined the
Presbyteries have declined the Assembly, whereby we may see upon what intent
they did decline. That not the least part of the subscribing Ministers put to
their hand to the Covenant for fear of keeping back their stipends, is a mere
calumny. Others were postponed not for not subscribing, but for neglecting
their charge and wandering from their flocks. For all then that is here
aledged, the Commissioners to this Assembly might lawfully sit as judges to the
complaint, or lybell given in against them; seeing they were chosen and
authorized by their Presbyteries, with commission to deliberate and voice in
this Assembly. Next, they were not judges in any particular or proper cause of
their own, but in a cause concerned the whole Kirk.

Therefore in making the Commissioners their party, they make the whole Kirk
of Scotland their party. For they had a free commission from all the
Presbyteries, according to the order of our Kirk, to make up the representative
of the whole body. How shall discipline be exerced, if such as are guilty shall
reject Sessions, Presbyteries and Synods as party? but because there may be
some time partiality in inferior judicatories, they may be appealed from, but
the supreme judicatory of the Kirk, the general Assembly can not be declined
in a cause Ecclesiastical and competent as party, without making the Kirk of
Scotland party. The Arminians excepted against the Synod of Dort, that they
were both judge and party, and therefore would not submit to their trial. Our
decliners have borrowed this buckler from them. But the answer made to them by
the Divines at Dort may serve for answer to our decliners; to wit, that the
Synod did not consist of persons lying under any Ecclesiastical censure, that
they cannot be called a party, unless all the Belgic Kirks from whom the
Commissioners were directed be taken for party. Repraesentant enim illis
Ecclesias, quarum credentialibus instructi in hac Synodo comparuerunt. And if
the Belgic Kirks be their party, they can not be reputed members of their
Kirk, but must confess they have made separation from them, say the Divines of
Hassia. There can be no lawful exception taken against a Synod by the members
of these Kirks which do constitute the Synod. Pars minor pars nova, debent
stare judicio corporis repraesentati per Synodum, loquentem mandato, ore, and
ex sensutotius corporis, say the Divines of Geneve. Consideration is to be had
of times to come, least that such as are guilty shift the ordinary judicatories
of Presbyteries and Synods, and a door be opened to the entry of sects and
heresies, say the Divines of Breme. In their own proper and peculiar cause no
man can be both party and judge, but in a common and public cause it may be
say the Divines of Emden. In a word all the Divines at the Synod of Dort agreed
upon these answers. We answer in the same manner. And the decliners know very
well that the body of this Kirk which directed the Commissioners was sensible
of their usurpation and oppression.

They make a tragical outcry, that under pretense of summonds, the like
whereof was never used, nor in the like manner, against the most heinous
malefactor in the kingdom, they have devised, forged, invented and published a
most infamous and scurrill libell, full of impudent lies and malicious
calumnies, against the Archbishops and Bishops of this Kirk. Truly we hold
them the greatest malefactors among us. As for the lybell, the most part may be
gathered out of their own declinatour, and is as evidently known to all sorts
of people within the country, as that they are Bishops. So that it was
questioned at the last Assembly, whither it was needful to lead witnesses in
points notorious and as well known as that the Sun shines at noontide. Some
personal offenses were so well proven, that Commissioners of all ranks were
ashamed of their prophanity and lewdness. Time served not to stay upon the
trial of the rest, but if they be not silent, more will be verified to their
greater shame. If they had been innocent, no doubt they had compeared and
adhearing to their declinatour insulted: but, howbeit none more impudent, they
durst not face the Assembly. They complain that the table prescribed in
certain articles the order to be kept in the citation and public reading of
the lybell, according to which directions the lybell was read in sundry Kirks,
and in Edinburgh in all the Kirks, notwithstanding of my Lord Commissioners
command given to the Provest and Bailies to the contraire. None took upon them
to prescribe, but only to advise and inform what course should be kept for
citation in the surest and most legal manner. Seeing we have been these many
years out of use of ordinar Assemblies, the course to be kept could not be
found out by every one till they were informed. Neither were there informations
sent from the meetings at Edinburgh to any man, to the knowledge of the
Assembly, but were private directions sent from hand to hand. Public reading
of the lybell was needful, not to make their enormities known to the people,
for they were too well known before, but for the surest way of citation, seeing
my Lord Commissioner refused to take any sure course for citing them: which if
he had done, they had not been cited in so public a manner. Not but that they
deserved citation per proclama* to be summoned by Proclamation, yet that manner
was not resolved upon till other means were thought more difficile and not so
sure. As for my Lord Commissioners discharge to read the summonds in the Kirk
of Edinburgh, they were read in sundry Kirks before the discharge was presented
to the Magistrates. And what reason was there to stay citation of so heinous
offenders to compeare before their ordinary judge? His Majesty had declared
before, that no Subject should be exeemed from censure. But how shall they be
censured if they be not cited? Nor did the Commissioner offer to take another
course. So it was evidently seen, their intent was to frustrat all citation.

They challenge them for their proceedings in the citation. First, because they
proceeded against all charity, which delights not in the discovery of men's
nakedness, backbiteth not with the tongue, much less writes a book against a
brother. Justice requires that public sins be rebuked publicly; they
themselves labored to frustrat all other manner of citation. Should usurpers
oppressors, profane and lewd men pass uncensured through want of citation.
The welfare of the Kirk should be dearer to us then the reputation of seducers
and undermyners. Sold not the house of God be purged of filth and dirt? Next,
for breaking of order, in breaking the Apostles rule and act of Parliament. The
apostle it is true directs young Timothy not to rebuke sharply an Elder, but
to entreat him as a Father, meaning an elder in years, as appears by the
opposition of young men. The direction is for private reprehensions, but these
that sin publicly or scandalously should be rebuked openly, whether they be
elder or younger. The dregs of prophannesse are more sour and stinking in old
men then in young. But they have both elder and younger among them. So are
there of the complainers, some younger, some elder. Their third estate is not
impugned in all the lybell, howbeit their persons be made lyabell to public
citation and censure, and so the act of Parliament not violated thereby But of
that act we have spoken sufficiently already. Thirdly, for not proceeding
according to any lawful form, but specially against the order prescribed by
acts of the general Assemblies. March 1596. and April 1592. For the first it
is not transgressed. For the lybell contains special crimes sufficiently
instructed and notorious, ut nulla tergi versatione celari possunt. Other
crimes are subjoyned wherewith they were slandered, which were to be verified
by informations from the parts where the slander did first arise: of which some
were proven, the rest lay over for lake of time, wherein if they please, an
other Assembly will insist. It seems rather they think the lybell too
special. Hinc illae lachrymae. That Assembly was a corrupt Assembly and began
the rent of our Kirk. Yet their act bears no more, but that all summonds
contain a special cause and crime, and that none be summond super
inquirendis. The lybell contained special causes, and none of them were
summonded super inquirendis. As for the act 1582. ordaining that in process of
deprivation of Ministers there be a lybelled precept upon forty days warning,
if they be within the Realm, sixty, if without, to be directed by the Kirk,
and such Commissioners as elect and admit the persons complained upon,
summoning them to compeare and answer upon the complaint, and incase of their
absence at the first summonds, the second to be directed upon the like warning,
with certification if he fail, the lybell shall be admitted to probation, and
he shall be holden pro confesso. That form of proceeding was ordained for
inferior judicatories which sit at frequent diets. For it is ordained, that if
he compeare not at the first citation, he shall be summoned de novo with
certification. But the general Assembly sitting but once in the year could not
begin and end such a proceeding for the space of three year, if this order were
to be kept by them. Next, because that direction is for them who admit, but
the general Assembly does not admit Ministers. Yea the persons summoned were
never admitted to their great benefices according to the order set down by the
Assembly. Thirdly, that form of proceeding presumes that the person
complained upon may be out of the Realm or within, but in the remotest part,
and that they can not be cited by public Proclamation to compeare before
inferior judges. But the decliners were summoned by Proclamation in the most
eminent Kirks within the kingdom, to compeare before the general Assembly, so
that these who were within the country, or near the borders, could not be
ignorant of the citation. Fourthly, that form was for faults in the office or
lives of Ministers deserving deprivation, this for citation of such as usurped
jurisdiction and tyrannized over the whole Kirk, and were banded together in
one common course against the established order and policy of our Kirk.
Fifthly, the act it self permits appellation to the general Assembly, if
after the decreit he find himself wronged thereby. It is clear then, the act
concerns only citation before inferior judicatories. Sixthly, diligence was
used to publish the summonds, as soon as might be after the indiction of the
Assembly, and had been execute sooner if the Commissioner had taken another
course. Howsoever, there was time sufficient; as appeared, in that the citation
come to their knowledge, both those who were within, and those who were without
the country. Citatio contumaciam juducere potest, si scientia citationis
apprehenderit citatum, atque ita comperiatur malitiose aut dolose latitare.
That the citation come to their knowledge, as well of these without as at home,
is clear by subscriving the declinatour, and compearance of their procurator
before the Assembly, whereupon instruments were taken that their compearance
did justify the citation. The fourth challenge is, of proceeding against
common equity, which admits summonds only by the authority of that judge
before whom the delinquent is to compeare. But so it is that the summonds were
directed by the authority of pretended Presbyteries for compearance before the
general Assembly. See their malapertnesse in calling the weekly meetings of
Ministers pretended Presbyteries, slighting the order established with so great
deliberation by our Kirk, with consent and concurrence of the civil authority.
But for answer to the challenge. They know it has been the continual practice
of our Kirk, that inferior judicatories have cited delinquents to compeare
before the superior, and necessare it is so to do, because the general
Assembly sits not frequently, nor may not sit oftener according to the act of
Parliament then once in the year, except prore nata. If every citation began at
the Assembly for compearance at the next, delinquents might persist in their
offenses and perhaps escape all punishment. And as for the present case, there
was danger in delaying to the citation of the Assembly.

They complain, That reference of the complaint was made by the Presbyteries
to the general Assembly, the parties never being summoned to compeare before
the Presbytery, whereby either in presence of the party, or in case of
contumacie, the complaint might be referred to the general Assembly. The
complaint was made upon breach of the cautions for the most part, and could not
be well tried without the trial of pretended Assemblies, whereupon the parties
complained upon, would build most of their defenses. Therefore the Presbyteries
referred the trial of the complaint to the general Assembly, as the most able
and undoubtedly competent Judge, without citation before themselves: and as
matters stood for the present, they could do none otherwise, without great
disturbance and interruption to be made by their adherents, and assistance of
civil power. It was fit the complaint presented to the Presbyteries should be
registrat in their books, seeing it was the ground of their citation. Suppose
there had been no complaint made to the Presbyteries, not only some, but all
the Presbyteries in the Kingdom might have cited them to compeare before the
general Assembly: because they pretended they were Pastors of all the Kirks
within their pretended Dyocies, and Moderatours of every Presbytery within the
Dyocie, and beside did many things in common to the prejudice of all the Kirks
of the Realm by their voting in Parliament, sitting and tyrannizing in the
high Commission, overruling Assemblies, keeping conventions of their own, and
directing articles to Court, to the prejudice of the Kirk. What suppose then
they had been cited not only every one in their own pretended Dyocie, but all
of them in all the Kirks in the Kingdom? seeing there was a common cause, and
the persons complained upon, were a faction combined to the overthrow of the
whole Kirk.

The fifth is, That the proceeding was against all decency and respect due to
men in their place, the said Bishops being persons in dignity, and some of
them of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council, known to be of blameless
conversation, to have deserved well: that to be thus reviled and traduced,
redoundeth to the reproach of the Church and Estate, and Gospel, whereof they
are preachers.

So will notorious thieves standing in the pannell allege boldly they are
honest men. Their dignities are abominations. They are a reproach to the Kirk
and Estate: they are ashamed of the Gospel, and the Gospel ashamed of them. If
tyrants and oppressors may brag of their deserts, then may they also, that
they have deserved well. And yet howbeit the public citation has tended to
their disgrace, the disgrace was not intended by the citation, but trial:
howbeit disgrace followed upon the manner of the citation, because none other
sufficient mean could be had: nay disgrace and contempt preceeded the citation.

Lastly, they charge the Commissioners to the general Assembly their
consciences, in the sight of God, as they must answer before his great and
fearful tribunal, if they suspect, or know not certainly according to the
judgment of charity, these whom they thus accuse to be free of these crimes,
where with they were charged.

A bold and shameless outcry: for the Commissioners are so far from
suspecting them to be free, that they rather believe them to be guilty of the
crimes laid to their charge respective, some of more, some of fewer, and some
of the most odious. Their carriage is so profane, men of credit and account are
reporters, and sometime their own familiars, and some of the offenses laid to
their charge, are committed in the very sight of the people. They ground the
charge of their conscience upon this, That having lybelled the general, they
had to seek the specification theirof, as appears by their articles, and
instructions sent abroad. The most and great offenses were notorious and common
to them all. For other personal faults there was loud slander, and fama
clamosa. For these in respect of legal proceeding, witnesses behoved to be
cited, and inquisition to be made, which the Assembly since has found
sufficiently proven in sundry, and would have found more, if time had served:
for there was as loud slander for other crimes not yet brought in judgment.

They ask, If any man will think that the Commissioners at this Assembly, can
be judge in their own cause: They allege a reason out of the Canon law, that
if the Pope be at variance with any man, he ought not to be judge himself, but
choose arbitratours; and some examples, to wit of Ludovicus Bavarus and all the
estates of Germany with him, pleading this nullitie against the sentence, and
proceeding of John 22. and his Council; and of the Archbishop of Cullen, who in
the year 1546. did plead the nullitie of Pope Paul the third his Bull of
excommunication, because he protested so soon as a lawful Council was opened,
he would emplead the Pope as party, being guilty of many things censurable in
the Council.

Would not any man think our decliners to be great Readers, and well versed in
histories? And yet they have borrowed all this stuff out of the review of the
Council of Trent, concealing the book and chapter from whence. We know, that
inferior judges cannot be judges in their own cause. And therefore Gregory
upon this ground reproved justly Ianuarius Bishop, because he excommunicated a
nobleman Isidorus, for some injury done to him, 23. quest. 4. inter querelas.
And yet cap. Guillisarius. Silverius anathematized Guilisarius, because he
desired him to come peaceably to his Palace, to deal with him pro
ecclesiasticis quibusdam dispositionibus, for things disponed to the Kirk, but
took him captive, and banished him. And 2. quest. 7. Si quis erga. If any was
to complain upon a Bishop, he is ordained to deal friendly with himself before
he complain to the Primat or any other judge, or else to be excommunicat. The
gloss upon this last chapter distinguishes thus. If the injury concern the
Prelate only or specially, he may not excommunicat for that injury: but if it
concern the Kirk he may. And the gloss upon did. 63. cap. Salonitanae,
makes this clear: If injury concern principally the Prelate, then he must
forbear. But the general Assembly is the supreme judge in causes
ecclesiastical: neither does the Assembly judge in their own cause, but Christ
and his Churches, and concerning themselves, as members and persons
representing the collective body. But of this we have treated sufficiently
before. It makes nothing for them then, that if the Pope be at variance with
any man he must not be judge himself. Is there no more but variance betwixt
them, and the Assembly? and they a party, some difference standing betwixt them
and our Kirk, which must be taken up by arbitrators? intolerable presumption.
Are the liberties of Christ's Kingdom, but the subject of some variance betwixt
us and these usurpers? The gloss means, that the Pope himself may not take
men's possessions or goods upon a light opinion, that they belong to the Kirk,
till the matter be decided. Non debet ipse esse judex and rem occupare. Gloss
in Can. Consuetudo. 16. q. 6. Neither are their examples to the purpose. For
the Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus pleaded that nullity against the sentence and
proceeding of John 22. and of his Council, upon this ground; that the said John
pretended to have a plenitude of power over him and his Empire, even in
temporal matters, and did actually conspire against him and the laws of the
Empire, and caused him to be pursued as an enemy, as the Reader may see in the
review of the council of Trent. Hermannus Archbishop of Cullen being
excommunicat by pope Paul the third, because he was upon the work of
reformation of his Kirks, appealed from his sentence by writ, wherein he
sets down his reasons why he did not acknowledge him as judge, because he
had been a long time accused of heresy and idolatry. He appealed from his
sentence to a lawful Council of Germany, wherein he would prosecute his plea
against him as party. Our decliners make our national Council their party.
Non credo quod a sententia Concilij appelletur: quia concilium est loco
senatus. 16. quest. 1. c. eccles. habet Senatum A quorum Senatorum sententia
non appellatur ita nec a sententia Concilii, says Antonius de Rosellis par. 3.
cap. 21. The national Council is the supreme Senate of the Kirk, from which as
we may not appeal in a cause competent, so we may not cast or refuse the same.

They complain, that the Authors of the late Protestation were injurious to
their place and authority in the Assembly, because they will grant neither
Primat, Archbishop nor Bishop voice deliberative, nor decisive in the general
Assembly, unless they be elected by the Presbyteries. The act abovementioned
made Anno 1597. by their own procurement, ordained that Ministers and Barrons
should be directed with commission from presbyteries. We have had no other act
since for the choice of Commissioners to the general Assembly. In the Assembly
holden at Montrose anno 1600, when the cautions were concluded, It was statute
and ordained, that none of them that shall have vote in Parliament, shall come
as Commissioners to the General Assembly, or have vote in the same in any time
coming, unless he be authorized with commission from his own Presbytery to
that effect. This act was not annulled by their own pretended Assembly holden
at Glasgow; nor if it had, should it have been of any force: seeing it was a
null and pretended Assembly. As for Councels of old, where Primats,
Archbishops, and Bishops had place and voice, they are not the right pattern to
be followed by us, as we have already answered. Nor yet do they make any thing
for them. For these of old were Primats, Archbishops, and Bishops in office
after man's invention allowed for the time. We acknowledge none such in our
Kirk. Their consecration to the office was without the knowledge or consent of
our Kirk, and is laid to their charge in the complaint given in against them. A
knavish prat. And yet, forsooth, they talk as if they were Primats, Archbishops
and Bishops in office, like those of old. Risum teneatis amici? But what
suppose they were acknowledged to be such in office? should they disdain
commission from Presbyteries? Paul and Barnabas were sent from the brethren at
Antioch to the Council which was holden at Jerusalem act. ^5.

They allege, that this does enforce the nullity of an Assembly, if the
Moderator and Praesident for matters of doctrine and discipline shall be
neither the Primat, Archbishop nor Bishop, but who by plurality of Presbyters
and Laymens voices shall be elected, which happily may be one of the inferior
clergy, or a lay-person. For this their Presidentship, they allege canons of
ancient Councels, and custom of old, both in other nations and our own not yet
restrained by any municipall law. Acts of parliament either of late or of old
have not set down any order for moderation of general Assemblies or national
Councels. Nor do we allege the act of Parliament 1592. ratifying the liberty
of general Assemblies, provincial Synods, and Presbyteries for free election
of their Moderators. Yet there is nothing in that act against free election, or
for Presidentship of Bishops. We had no Ministers primats, or Bishops, either
in style or in office at that time. Yea the power granted before to Bishops in
that troublesome year 1584. and soon after quite abolished, was then granted by
that act to Presbyters, as the right spiritual office-bearers in the Kirk. And
as for acts of ancient Councels, we pass them as no paterns to us, nor
pertinent for them. For we have no such Bishops, primats or Metropolitans, as
were of old, as has been already answered. And as impertinent it is, to
allege that this presidentship is so intrinsecally inherent in them as they
are Bishops, that hoc ipso that they are Bishops, they are Presidents of all
Assemblies of the clergy: As the Chancelour of the kingdom has place in
Council and Session not by any act or statute, but hoc ipso that he is
Chancelour. For we know no difference betwixt the office of a Bishop and a
Presbyter to be made by the word of God. Neither do we acknowledge our fourteen
forloppen Ministers for Bishops in office, so much as by the constitutions of
our Kirk. Yea when we had Superintendents and Bishops, yet the Moderator of the
general Assembly was freely chosen, and never a Bishop chosen but once. It was
ordained in the book of policy chap. 7. that in all Assemblies a Moderator
shall be chosen by common consent of the whole brethren conveened.

This freedom our Assemblies ever had since the reformation, till Spotswod
sometime pretended primat began to usurp the place of the Moderator in their
pretended Assembly holden anno 1616. Suppose the act of Parliament 1592 did
restrain their authority, yet say they, the restraint is restored by act of
Parliament 1606. and 1609. and all acts prejudicial to their jurisdiction
abrogat. But that act of Parliament anno 1606. concerning the restitution of
the state of Bishops can not be understood to concern the spiritual office,
but only their temporal state, jurisdiction, privileges and preheminences
belonging thereto. For by the act of Parliament 1597. when vote in Parliament
was granted to Ministers provided to Prelacies, their office in the spiritual
policy and government of the Kirk was remitted to the Kings Majesty to be
advised, consulted, and agreed upon by his Majesty with the general Assembly,
at such times as his Majesty should think expedient to treat with them
thereupon. But there past no agreement before the act of Parliament 1606. but
rather cautions to restrain them from all pre-eminence or power in the
spiritual policy and government. And in the act of Parliament 1612. which
ratified the act of Glasgow 1610. the remit of the estats in the Parliament
1597. was mentioned, and it was declared, that all doubtful and controverted
points concerning the jurisdiction, discipline, and policy foresaid, was not
determined till that Assembly holden 1610. How then could the act of
restitution anno 1606. be understood of restitution to their old papal
pre-eminence and jurisdiction in the policy and government of the Kirk? Next,
if they were restored to all their old preeminences in the spiritual
jurisdiction and policy by the act 1606. what needed they any Assembly
afterward to grant them some pre-eminence in ordination and jurisdiction? Why
stepped not the pretended Primat to the place of Moderatorship at their own
pretended Assemblies holden anno 1606. 1608. 1610. without election? Thirdly,
how could the Parliament restore them to any spiritual jurisdiction or
pre-eminence, who never had it at any time before? For they had not been
Bishops in office at any time before, that they needed restitution. Will they
say, because they had the titles of the benefice or Bishopric, the Parliament
might put them in possession of the spiritual jurisdiction, and enter them
into the office; then the Papists may be moved more justly to call them
Parliamentarie Bishops, then the English in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, who because of some rites and customs omitted at their inauguration,
sought the ratification of the Parliament for supply, as Sanderus de schismate
Anglicano lib. 3. reports, and therefore were called parliamentary Bishops.
Hinc nomen illis impositum, ut parliamentarij episcopi dicerentur. In their
printed Declinatour they allege a little after in the same section, that they
have received their authority not from the Parliament, but from Christ, from
whom they have received the spiritual oversight of the clergy under their
charge. This clause is not to be found in the Declinatour presented before the
Assembly in writ, but instead thereof two lines bloted out. Now it seems they
are somewhat bolder after they have consulted with their brethren in England,
who now mantaine that their authority is not derived from the Prince. But
suppose the episcopal authority were institute by Christ, which is false; what
calling had they to exerce that authority? They had none from the Kirk. And if
not from the Parliament, then none at all. And yet before they said their
authority was restored to them by act of Parliament 1606. which seems to
import a contradiction: And suppose, from the Parliament, as good as not at
all. As for the act of Parliament 1609. concerning the Commissariats, it
reaches no further then the former. Their consent to both these acts in
Parliament and sundry other, is one of the points of the complaint given in
against them. Nay they procured them, and yet are not ashamed to allege them,
howbeit to small purpose. Being destitute of acts of Parliament or Assembly,
they argue from their presidentship in Synods, that one of them in absence of
the Metropolitan should preside in the general Assembly, rather then one of
the inferior clergy. It is true, by an act of Assembly holden at Glasgow anno
1610. those who were styled Bishops in respect of their benefices, were
constitute Moderators of the diocesan Synods, and that act was ratified in
Parliament anno 1612. But that ratification was upon supposition, that the
Assembly was free and lawful, and was desirous of that ratification: none of
which are they able to make good. Next when we had Bishops and Superintendents
Moderators of Synods, the general Assembly choosed others then Superintendents
or Bishops to moderat. By the cautions at Montrose it was provided, that the
Minister voter in Parliament should not arrogat to himself any further
pre-eminence or jurisdiction then any of the rest of their brethren, under the
pain of deprivation. Where it was alleged falsely in the falsified act of that
null and pretended Assembly holden in December anno 1606. that they should be
Moderators of Synods, yet to make men believe that they were moderat and sought
no further, it was provided in that same falsified act, That the Moderator of
the general Assembly be chosen by the voices of the said Assembly, certain
leets being first nominated and propounded freely, as use has been in times
bypast. So, by their own grant, it follows not that one of the Bishops
moderating the diocesan Synod should preside in the general Assembly in
absence of the Metropolitan himself, whose name was not so much as heard of in
their own pretended Assemblies.

They answer to that which is alleged against the office of a Bishop out of
the act of Assembly holden anno 1580. where it was declared, that it had no
ground or warrant out of the Scriptures: First, that if the corruption of the
time shall be regarded, the authority of this Assembly might be no less
regarded then that of Glasgow 1610. This is transcendent impudency. Were the
times corrupt? Were not all the heads of the book of discipline concluded after
free reasoning in many Assemblies preceding? Was not the election of
Commissioners free? Was not liberty granted to any man that was willing to
oppone? Was there any rent or division in our Kirk in those times? Was not the
same act ratified in the Assembly following? Was not the confession of Faith
subscrived by persons of all ranks soon after, and Presbyteries erected? did
not our kirk adhear to that act still after? So, if that time was corrupt, the
purest and best times following were corrupt. Was ever that act contradicted by
any other act since that time to this hour? But observe, whiles without all
shame they would empaire the authority of that Assembly, they suffer of their
own accord their own pretended Assembly holden at Glasgow 1610. to fall to the
ground. Next, they say, it is ordinare for prior acts of Assemblies and
Parliaments to give place to posterior. But we mantaine there was no act
followed to repeal the former. If they will allege the act of Glasgow 1610.
First, that Assembly is not to be numbered among the Assemblies of our Kirk, and
was declared null at this last Assembly upon grounds unanswerable. Next, that
same corrupt Assembly did not determine or declare the office of a Bishop to
have any warrant out of the word, nor did they restore that office as it was
brought in by man's invention, and used of old, but only made Synods and
Presbyteries obnoxious in ordination, deprivation, excommunication, and some
other points, to these who were then styled Bishops in respect of their
benefice, and not Bishops in office, yet not without limitations and upon
assurance, that they should be liable to the trial and censure of the general
Assembly. But they allege the Assembly holden anno 1586, where it was found
that the name of a Bishop has a special function annexed to it by the word of
God, that it was lawful to the general Assembly to admit a Bishop presented
to a benefice by the King with power to visit admit and deprive Ministers, to
be Moderators of Presbyteries, and to be subject only to the censure of the
general Assembly. Neither was the office of a diocesan Bishop declared by this
Assembly to have any ground or warrant in the word, or that any might be
consecrat thereafter to such an office invented by man. Yea that Assembly
declared in the sixth Session, that there are four ordinare office-bearers set
down to us in the Scriptures, to wit, Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, and
that the name of Bishop ought not to be taken as it has been in time of
Papistrie, but is common to all Pastors. In the tenth and eleventh Session,
they declare that by the name of Bishop they mean only such a Bishop, as is
described by the Apostle. They declare that the name of Bishop has a special
charge and function annexed to it by the word of God, the same that the Pastor
has. They declared then that Bishop and Pastor are all one, and that a divine
or apostolical Bishop is the Pastor of a particulare flock, and has not a
general charge over a whole diocie. It is true, they assented at that time
that it was lawful to admit a Pastor, Bishop or Minister presented to a
benefice by the Kings Majesty, with power to visit admit etc. as said is. But
then consider, this Assembly was the first which was holden after the
desolation made anno 1584. and 1585. and consisted not only of none subscribing
Ministers, but also of many who had subscribed in that hour of darkness as
Bishop Adamson afterward called these two years of desolation preceding: And
yet did not allow more to him who was admitted to the Bishopric then to any
other Minister to whom they gave the like power, and with the same restrictions
which were prescribed to others, and only till further order were taken: as
that in visitation of the bounds limited to him, he proceed by advise of the
Synod, and such as they shall appoint to him; that in receiving presentations
and giving collations he shall proceed by the advice and voice of the
Presbytery, and certain Assessors to be joined with him, at the least the
most part of the Presbytery and Assessors, till further order may be taken;
that if he admit or deprive without consent of the most part of the Presbytery
it shall be a sufficient cause of deprivation, and the deed shall be null. So
this power and pre-eminence was not in respect of any Episcopal office, but by
commission from the Assembly, as was granted to other Ministers, and during the
time prescribed by the Assembly, and only till further order were taken. And
indeed this shadow of pre-eminence granted first at a conference in
Haly-rude-house not long before, by some courting and chief subscribing
Ministers, and now again at this Assembly, endured not long. For in the
Assembly holden in June 1587. the admission of one to the Bishop-rick of
Glasgow by the brethren of the west, was declared unlawful, neither agreeing
with the word of God nor custom of the Kirk, howbeit it was only to the
temporality, and these brethren were enjoined with all possible diligence to
see that admission annulled, that slander may be removed from the Kirk, as they
would answer upon their obedience. At the same Assembly Mr. Robert Pont related
to the Assembly, that a presentation to the Bishopric of Cathnesse was offered
to him, for some loss he had sustained; and desired the judgment of the
Assembly, if he might enjoy the rent with a safe conscience, seeing he was
willing to serve at the Kirk of Dornoch, and to take the charge of visitation
at the pleasure and direction of the Assembly. But in the letter sent to his
Majesty the Assembly declared that Mr. Robert Pont was already a Bishop
according to the doctrine of St. Paul, and worthy of a competent living in that
regard. But as for that corrupt estate or office of those who were called
Bishops in former times, they find it not agreeable with the word of God, and
that it has been damned in diverse Assemblies; neither is the said Mr. Robert
willing to accept the Bishop-rick in that manner. In the same Assembly it was
ordained, that all Pastors of whatsoever sort shall be subject to the try all
and censure of their Presbyteries and Synods for their life and doctrine, as
well as of the general Assemblies; That such as pass degrees in schools
subscribe the confession of Faith. In the instructions for the Commissioners
appointed to attend upon the King and Parliament, they were enjoined to admit
nothing prejudicial to the discipline of the Kirk, as it was concluded
according to the word of God by the general Assemblies preceding the 1584.
year, so far as lay in their power. In the Parliament holden the month of July
following, the temporality of benefices was annexed to the crown, and it was
thought meet and expedient that his Highness shall have recourse to his own
patrimony, that is the proper rent of the crown disponed of old to the Clergy
and Monasteries. All and sundry lands, Lordships, Barronies, Castles, Towers,
etc. Pertaining to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Pryoresses or
whatsoever other Prelat were annexed and united to the crown. In the Assembly
holden anno 1588. Ministers were enjoined to deal with Noblemen and Gentlemen
for subscribing the confession of Faith. In a word the servants of God never
rested till the wound, which the Kirk had received anno 1584. and 1585. was
perfectly cured, and not so much remained as the skar thereof. Yea that any
Minister should be appointed a visitour at any time where Presbyteries were
constitute, was not thought expedient, as was declared by the Assembly 1590.

As for that act of Montrose, let them answer to it, say they, that have their
calling by that Commission. We profess that we have a lawful calling, by the
election of the Clergy, who are of the chapter of our Cathedrals, and
consecration of Bishops, with his Majesty's consent and approbation, according
to the lowable laws and ancient custom of this Kingdom and Kirk in ancient
times.

Because they see they are not able to answer for the breach of the cautions;
concluded with consent of his Majesty, and the Ministers aspiring to
Prelacies, they profess plainly they regard not these cautions, and that they
have not their calling by that commission at Montrose. The Minister
commissioner to vote in Parliament, was tied by the act at Montrose, not to
encroach upon the jurisdiction of the Kirk, but to behave himself as other
Ministers not voters in Parliament. The plotters for Episcopacie consented and
seemed willing he should be so bounded and restrained, glade of any beginning.
Now when they arrogat to themselves the power and office of a diocesan Bishop
and are catched in the snare, they refuse to stand to that act. So they bewrey
that they had even then a purpose to deceive and betray the Kirk of GOD. and
because they are not able to answer, let them answer, say they, that have their
calling by that commission. They said in the former section, that posterior act
derogat from the prior, now they make prior acts to derogat from the posterior.
For they profess that they have their calling by election of the chapter and
consecration of Bishpos according to the laws and customs of ancient times.
They can not deny, but chapters of Cathedrals and election of Bishops by
chapters were condemned by our Kirk as Popish, and the office of a diocesan
Bishop or consecration to the office to have been damned and detested by our
Kirk. They can not so much as allege a warrant of any of their own pretended
Assemblies for their election by chapters, or this their consecration. Three of
their own number went to England after their own pretended Assembly holden at
Glasgow, and without their knowledge or consent, were consecrated Bishops by
their brethren the English Bishops, returned and consecrated the rest of their
fellows. But for the breach of these cautions, manner of election, and the
usurpation of that office by consecration, that is, for their treacherous
dealing, they are cited to answer before the Assembly, and are worthy of
condign censures and punishment, deprivation, note of infamy, and
excommunication, the three punishments to be inflicted respective for
transgressing of the cautions. Have they not by their own profession in this
section confessed they are guilty of the most heinous offenses laid to their
charge in the lybell? We pass that which they add concerning their homage for
their temporalities, and acknowledging of the Kings supremacy, as not
pertinent to the present purpose, and the complaint taken out of Cyprian, as
not belonging to usurpers.

Lastly, they conclude, that it is manifest by the premises, how absurd it
is, and contrary to all reason and practice of the Christian Kirk, that
Archbishops and Bishops shall be judged by Presbyters, much more by a mixed
meeting of Presbyters and Laikes conveening without lawful authority from the
Kirk.

By the Kirk it seems they mean the Bishops. They cite some old Councels,
declaring and determining how and by whom Archbishops and Bishops are to be
judged. But it is manifest by our refutation of the premises, that this
Assembly consisted of Commissioners both Ministers and ruling Elders, whom they
call Laymen, chosen according to the order of our Kirk, and that meetings of
Clergy and Laymen have been not only in the Apostles times, but also in times
of Popery, and that we are not to be directed by the Canons of these Councels
which they cite, but by the established order and Canons of our own reformed
Kirk, which are agreeable with the practice of the Apostolical and best
reformed Kirks in our time. Semper petunt principium. They take that for
granted which is denied. That they are Archbishops and Bishops, It is not only
denied but they are summoned to answer for usurping such offices.

They pretend, that none of them will decline the lawful trial of any
competent judicatory in the kingdom, especially of a general Assembly
lawfully constitute, or his Majesty's Commissioner, or Laics having authority
and commission from sovereign authority.

They will be sure to have such a judge as shall acquit them or none at all;
An Assembly like to their own pretended Assemblies. Seeing the whole pack of
them are complained upon, and for crimes common to them all, where shall we
find other Bishops and Metropolitans to sit in judgment upon them? What
needs any further answer, but that it is manifest by sundry passages of this
their Declinator that they will not, and because guilty, dare not, stand to the
judgment of a general Assembly constitut as the last was according to the
established order and practice of our Kirks and therefore are justly cut off as
rotten members from the body.

After the reasons of their Declinator and refusal of the judgment of the
Assembly, they come to their protests.

First, for the reasons foresaid, and for discharge of their duty to God, to
his Kirk, and to our sacred Sovereign, least by their silence they betray the
Kirks right, and their own consciences, that they in their own names, and in
behalf of the kirk of Scotland, are forced to protest that this Assembly be
repute, and holden null in law, and that no Kirk-man be holden to apeare,
assist, aprove it. And therefore that no letter, petition, subscription,
interloquitor, certification, admonition, or other act whatsoever, proceeding
from the said Assembly, or any member thereof, shall be any way prejudicial to
the Religion and confession of Faith by act of Parliament established, nor to
the Kirk, or any member thereof, nor to the jurisdiction, liberties,
privileges rents, benefices, possessions of the same, acts of general
Assembly, Council or Parliament in favors thereof, nor to the three Estates
of the kingdom, or to any of them, nor to themselves or any of them in their
persons or Estats, authority, jurisdiction, dignity, rents, benefices;
reputation and good name, But that all such acts and deeds are, and shall be
repute unjust, illegal and null in themselves, with all that has followed or
may follow thereupon.

If their reasons alleged be found frivolous, as they were by the Assembly,
and are cleared so to be by this answer, their protest is not worth a fig. They
protest in name of the Kirk of Scotland, when as they will not acknowledge her
Commissioners freely chosen, nor her Assembly constitute according to the
established order, nor any other Assembly constitute according to the said
order, but will have this Assembly, and consequently this Kirk, to be their
party, and yet will protest, professed as they are, in name and behalf of this
Kirk. Affrayed are they that some thing should be done prejudicial to
Religion, and the confession of Faith established by Parliament, meaning that
which is extant in the acts of Parliament, but pass by the confession sworn
to, and subscribed by Subjects of all ranks throughout the whole Realm, and by
themselves. We acknowledge not acts of null and pretended Assemblies. We
interpret not every act of Council or Parliament procured, or assented to by
them, or made in their favors, to be made in favors of the Kirk. The Kirk her
self must be judge of the favors bestowed on her. If their authority,
jurisdiction, dignity, rents, benefices, reputation, good name etc. Be
prejudicial to the authority, jurisdiction, liberties, and the spiritual
welfaire of the Kirk, good reason the estate of the Kirk be preferred to the
estate of some few factious men. There may be three estates without the bastard
estate of Bishops, Abbots, Pryors erected in time of Popish darkness.

They protest next, if the Assembly call in question, discuss, and condemn
things, not only in themselves lawful and warrandable, but also defined and
determined by acts of general Assemblies and Parliaments, and in practice
accordingly, to the disgrace and prejudice of the reformed Religion, authority
of the laws and liberties of the Kirk and kingdom, weakening his Majesty's
authority, disgraceing the profession and practice he holds in the communion
of the Kirk where he lives, and branding of reformed Kirks with the foul
aspersion of Idolatry and superstition: that what shall be done in this kind,
may not redound to the disgrace or disadvantage of the reformed Religion, nor
be repute a deed of the Kirk of Scotland.

The Assembly has condemned nothing lawful and warrandably defined and
determined before in Assembly or Parliament and practiced accordingly, they
intended not to weaken his Majesty's authority, disgrace his practice and
profession, or brand any reformed Kirks with soul aspersions, but only to
reform the abuses and corruptions entered in their own Kirk, and to oppose to
what more was likely to have entered with the receiving the Service book and
book of Canons, without relation to any other Kirk. If any disgrace redound to
others, it is but per accidens, and it may be retorted, that their Canons, and
constitutions are intended for the disgrace of our Kirk, which we do not
affirm. Next, they must distinguish betwixt a free Kirkand a Kirk lying in
thraldom. But the decliners would have us to refuse nothing which is received
in any other reformed Kirk, if the same be imposed, lest they be disgraced by
our refusal: which were to make up a fine hotch-potch.

They protest, that they embrace and hold the Religion presently professed
according to the confession of Faith ratified in Parliament anno 1567. as the
true Religion, and detest all contrary errors.

But they make no account nor mention of that confession where contrary errous
are specified or designed, and it appears for no other cause, but that they
perceive the episcopal government and other innovations which they were to
introduce to be abjured by that confession, which is a tacit yielding to the
true meaning and sense delivered by the last Assembly in their Declaration.

They protest, that the Episcopal government is lawful and necessary, and
that the same is not opposed for any defect or fault in the government or
governors, but by the malice and craft of the devil envying the success of
that government these many years bypast.

It has been condemned by our Kirk as unlawful and hurtful, yet they dare
contradict and protest it to be lawful and necessary. That government which is
not warranded by the word, and overthrows the joint government of Pastors and
Elders, which is warranded by the word can not but be faulty. If the
government be faulty, the governors can not but be faulty in governing. The
devil could not envy the success of so faulty a government as has brought in
the Antichrist to sit in the temple of God. Suppose there were no fault in the
government but that it were lawful and necessary, but what means have they
come by it? Or what moderation have they kept after their usurping of it?
Intrarunt ut vulpes, regnarunt ut Leanes. But how prove they the success of
their government to have been such as the devil could not but envy it?

By the planting of Kirks with able and learned Mininisters, recovering of the
Kirk rents, helping of Ministers stipends, preventing jarres betwixt the King
and the Kirk which in former time did dangerously infest the same, keeping the
people in peace and obedience, and suppresing of Poprie, which was never at so
low an ebb as before the sturres.

They have planted many Kirks with unsufficient or scandalous Ministers, or
corrupters of Religion and perverters of the people. They have recovered great
rents to themselves, and would recover the rents of the rest of the Prelacies
to build up the crownests again. They have procured by the moyen they had,
augmentation of stipends to tie Ministers to dependence upon them, or to tie
them to their fat stipends, that no alteration in Religion should loose their
grip: and yet no Kirks worse provided then such as belong to their own
benefices they have hindered the augmentation of stipends to such Ministers as
would not dance to their pyping. They have raised jarres betwixt the King and
the Kirk, and in the Kirk it self, that they might obtain the more easily
their intent. But how they kept peace betwixt the King and the people may be
seen by their instructions sent up to court anno 1609. the many threatening
letters sent down from court, and proclamations from time to time, and most of
all by their dealing at this present. If there were no other to keep the people
in peace and obedience, there would be little peace or obedience in the
country. Their favor borne to Papists processed or to be processed, their
familiarity with them more then common, and employment of them may let us see,
that if Poprie be suppressed, it is not suppressed by them, but by other
means, as the powerful preaching of the word, or the clearing of
controversies wherewith our Kirk was troubled or by the authority of men in
place and credit in the country. But we doubt that Popry is at so low an ebb,
nor will it be seen till the light of this present reformation discover them.
Sure we are, to bring in Popry piece and piece, was not the mean to suppress
Poprie.

They protest, that seeing these who for scrouple of conscience did mislike the
service book, Canons or high Commission which were apprehended or given forth
to be the cause of the trouble of this Kirk, have now received satisfaction,
and his Majesty is graciously pleased to forget and forgive all offenses by
past in these sturres, that all the Subjects may live in peace and love; laying
aside envy, hatred and bitterness: and if any refuse so to do, that they
bear the blame, and be thought the cause of the troubles may ensue, and that
the same be not imputed to them or any of them, who desire nothing more nor to
live in peace and concord with all men, under his Majesty's obedience, who have
committed nothing against the laws of the Kingdom and Kirk, which may give
any just cause of offense, and who are so far from wishing any harm to
any man in his person or estate, notwithstanding all the injuries and
indignities they have suffered, that for quenching this present combustion;
they could be content after clearing their innocence, not only to lay down
their bishopric at this Majesty's feet, but also, if it so pleased God to lay
down their lives, and become a sacrifice for this atonement.

We answer, Others for scrouple of conscience mislike the service book, canons,
or high Commission. But they are not in the number of these who make any
scrouple: How can we who mislike, like them to be Ministers, far less
governors in our Kirk, who do not mislike them: what satisfaction can we
receive by the discharge of these books, seeing other books more corrupt may be
imposed afterward, seeing the matter is not condemned, but avouched to be a
mean to beat out idolatry and superstition, seeing they themselves were not
taken order with for their corrupt disposition, and intend to obtrud them, and
to raise persecution for them. They may do in and by the Council, as much as
may trouble Ministers and professors, howbeit they sit not in the Court of
high Commission. The books were but the isntrumental cause of the troubles and
sturres, but they were the principal cause, authors and procurers of the
troubles. The five articles, which have wrought much disquietnesse these
twenty years bypast, were not quit, but the practice left free whereby
division could not but be entertained. Can Religion be settled in peace, or
religion be preserved in purity their government continuing? they would be
loath to lay down their Bishoprics at his Majesty's feet, if they were not
confident to take them up again. Yet they will not do it, till their
innocence be cleared, that is, they will never do it: for their innocence
will never be cleared. If you will believe them, they could be content like
Jonas to be cast in the sea to procure a calm. They have lived like
Salamanders in the fire of combustion, and now on a sudden would quench the
fire with their blood. Will they lay down but their Bishoprics at the feet of
the Kirk, as they ought to do, and that will quench the combustion: But they
will lay them down only where they are sure to receive them again.

They protest deeply, that they use not this declinatour and protestation out
of fear of any guiltiness, whereof any of them is conscious to himself, but of
conscience of their duty to God and his Church, being most willing every one
of them to undergo the most lawful and exact trial of any competent
judicatorie in the Kingdom, or of his Majesty's Commissioner foresaid. But the
general Assembly cannot be denied to be the most competent judicatorie in the
Kingdom. They beseech my Lord Commissioner to interceed with his Majesty, for
appointing a free and lawful general Assembly, such as Gods word, the
practice of the primitive Kirk, and laws of the Kingdom does prescribe, with
all convenient speed, that they or any other of the Clergy may be heard to
answer all accusations, abide trial for clearing of their innocence, or
receiving condign punishment. But it is made evident already, that they mean
by the primitive Kirk, not the primitive that is Apostolical, as appears by
the Canons of some ancient councels, which are no rule to us. Nor can we have
any other Bishops to judge upon them, seeing we have none but such as are
complained upon and summoned. The laws of the Kingdom have not prescribed the
order and constitution of our general Assemblies, nor is it pertinent to them.
All the while they request not an Assembly to be appointed, as the Kirk within
this Kingdom has prescribed and observed from time to time: are these men to
be suffered in this Kirk, that will not submit themselves to the trial of the
supreme judicatorie constitute according to the acts and constitutions of our
Kirk? So it is not only this, but all other Assemblies constitute according to
the prescribed order of the Kirk that they shun.

They protest, That this protestation in respect of their lawful absence, may
be received in their own name, and in name of the Kirk of Scotland, that shall
adhere to the said protestation, at the hands of Doctor Robert Hammiltoun
Minister at Glasfurde, to whom they gave power and mandat to present the same
in or at the said Assembly etc. They say not to the said Assembly, or with
reverence to the said Assembly. The vanity of their protesting in name of the
Kirk of Scotland, and their adherents we have laid open before. What cause can
they pretend for lawful absence. Some of them were in Glasgow and Hammiltoun,
and might have presented their Declinatour and Protestation themselves, if
their hauty spirits would have suffered them to compeare before Presbyters, to
whom they were terrible in former times.

Least their deep Protestations should make men believe that they are the most
innocent men that may be, you shall have here subjoyned good Reader the crimes
and offenses which were laid to their charge, and were either so notorious
that they could not be denied, or clearly proven before the Assembly.

After that, such as were aspired to Prelacies had obtained in the general
Assembly by the Kings assistance, and not without great opposition of the
better and most judicious sort of the Ministry, that Ministers might vote in
Parliament, it was agreed unto by themselves, that they should be nominate and
recommended by the Kirk to his Majesty, who should have vote in Parliament,
and whom his Majesty should choose, they should be admitted by their Synods,
where they were resident. But they regarded neither the recommendation of the
general Assembly nor admission by their Synods. As for cautions to keep him
that shall have vote in Parliament from corruption, howbeeit they agreed unto
them for the present, yet afterward their actions bewrayed, they had no intent
to keep them. They voted in Parliament without lawful entry or admission, the
Kirk disassenting and repining, or without inserting of the cautions, which
were agreed upon to keep the Ministers voters in Parliament from corruption.
Whereas it was provided by the cautions that he shall not presume at any time
to propone in Parliament, Council or convention any thing in name of the Kirk,
without express warrant and direction of the Kirk, but such as he shall answer
to be for the well of the Kirk, under the pain of deposition from his office,
nor keep silence, or consent to any thing that may be prejudicial to the
liberty and well of the Kirk, under the same pain. And yet have they voted and
given assent to many acts in Parliament prejudicial to the liberties of the
Kirk, almost in every Parliament which has been holden since they began to
take the place to vote in Parliament. Whereas the Minister voter was bound at
every general Assembly to give an account anent the discharge of his
commission since the Assembly preceding, and to submit himself to their
censure, and stand to their determination without any appellation, and to seek
and obtain ratification of his doings at the said Assembly under the pain of
infamy and excommunication, yet since they began to vote in Parliament, the
liberty of holding general Assemblies yearly was taken from us, and when we
had any of their own framing, yet made they no account of their proceedings in
Parliament, nor sought ratification of their proceedings in Parliament,
Council or convention. Whereas he was bound to content himself with so much of
the benefice which shall be given him by his Majesty as might not prejudge any
other Minister within his benefice or without, yet they bestow waste the
emoluments of the Kirk to mantaine their riotousesse and ambition, which might
sustain many Pastors. Whereas he was bound not to delapidat his benefice set
or make any disposition thereof without special consent of his Majesty and
the general Assembly, yet it is found that they had delapidared their
benefices. Whereas he was bound by the cautions to attend faithfully upon his
own particular flock, and there anent to be subject to the trial and censure
of his own Presbytery and Provincial Assembly, as any other Minister nor
bearing commission to vote in Parliament, they have neglected all Ministerial
duty in any particular congregation, and deserted their particular flock.
Whereas it was provided that in administration of discipline, collation of
benefices, visitation and other points of Ecclesiastical government, he shall
not usurp nor acclaime to himself any power or jurisdiction farther then any of
the rest of the brethren, They notwithstanding have usurped power and
jurisdiction over their brethren of the Ministry, and the people in or out of
the high Commission, to admit, suspend, deprive, fine, confine, Pastors or
Professors at their pleasure. Whereas it was provided that in Presbyteries
Provincial and general Assemblies, he shall behave himself in all things, and
be subject to their censure as any other brother of the Ministry, they
notwithstanding over rule Synods and Presbyteries and general Assemblies when
they are convocat. Whereas it was ordained that none of these that shall have
vote in Parliament shall come as Commissioners to any general Assembly, or
have vote in the same in any time coming, except he be authorized with
commission from his own Presbytery to that effect, they have notwithstanding
taken place in their late pretended Assemblies, without commission from any
Presbytery, and have moderated and over ruled as they pleased. Whereas there
are certain constitutions and acts of our Kirk for the right constitution of
general Assemblies, yet have they holden these few Assemblies not constitute
according to the constitutions of our Kirk, but after their own device, and for
acts to be made for the advancement of their course, which Assemblies are found
and declared to be null in this last Assembly for such reasons as are expressed
in the acts of the last Assembly now extant in print. Whereas the office of
adiocesan Bishop has been condemned by our Kirk as having no warrant in the
word of God, and never since has been allowed to this hour, no not in their
own pretended Assembly holden at Glasgow: Three of their number notwithstanding
went to England without the direction, knowledge or consent of any Assembly,
lawful or pretended, received consecration to the office of a Bishop, returned
and consecrated the rest of their fellows to that office damned by the acts of
our Kirk. Whereas the court of high Commission was not errected by consent of
the estates or good liking of any Assembly, yet they accepted the power of that
court, and thereby have tyrrannized over Ministers and other Subjects. They
have also undertaken civil and temporal jurisdictions, titles, and dignities,
as to bear offices of estate, to sit in Council, Excequer, Session contrare
to the acts of our Kirk. They relaxe excommunicate Papists when they please.
They have interdyted morning and evening prayers, when they thought they were
injured by the people. They have falsified the acts of their own pretended
Synods They have vitiated interlyned or deleted acts and sentences of
Presbyteries, Synods and Assemblies. Incest and Adultery has fallen forth by
their license for private marriages. They have refused to admit Ministers
unless they first take on the order of deacons. They exacted unlawful oaths
of intrants, and thereupon debarred the most qualified and obtruded the most
scandalous upon congregations. They have taught Popery and Arminianisme, and
advanced such to the Ministry as were infected with the same Heretical and
erroneous doctrine. They brought in novations in the worship of God by a
pretended Assembly, and now at last intends to alter the whole frame of
Religion, of doctrine with error, or worship with superstition, or discipline
with tyranny by the service book, book of canons, book of ordination, without
so much as the color of any pretended Assembly. Beside they have detained or
interverted sowms of money dedicat to pious uses as colleges and relief of
captives. Beside all these offenses, notorious of themselves, or proven before
the Assembly, the lousenesse and prophanity of their lives was made known, how
they have been given to excessive drinking, filthy dancing, profane speeches,
open profanation, of the Sabbath by their journeys abroad, or drinking carding
or diceing at home, usual playing at cards and dice, excessive gaining,
contempt of all public ordinances and family exercises, briberie, simonie,
unhonest dealing, abusing of their vassals, sclandering of the Kirk, and
stirring up authority against the subjects with their lies and calumnies. They
are slandered also for other grosser crimes, but time served not for sufficient
trial. Because they were not able to abide the trial: they have declined, and
protested against the last Assembly. For which offense only they deserve
excommunication, according to the act of the general Assembly holden in April
1582.

Because they complain in their declinator, that obedient and worthy Ministers
have been removed from their places by the usurped authority of the table and
Presbyteries, notwithstanding they had declined and appealed from their
judgment, you shall see good Reader what worth was in these Ministers, and
what just reason there was for removing of them.

It has been sufficiently proven and made good against some of these deposed
Ministers, to wit, Mr. David Mitchell Minister in Edinburgh, Mr Alexander
Gladstones Minister in St. Andrews, commonly called the Archdean of St.
Andrews, Mr. William Wishart Minister at Leeth, Mr. John Crightoun Minister at
Pasley, Mr. Thomas Foster Minister at Melrose, Mr. Roberts Hammiltouns
Ministers at Lesmahago and Glasfurd; and others of their sort, that they have
taught points of Popery and Arminianisme, conditional election, the power of
free will, resistibility to effectual grace, the extent of Christ's death and
merit to the damned in hell as well as to the blessed in heaven, Christ
coming into the world clauso virginis utero, auricular confession, papal
absolution, That the Pope is not the Antichrist, That the Kirk of Rome is the
true Kirk, That reconciliation with the Kirk of Rome is easy, That the Kirk of
Rome erres not in fundamentalibus, nor differs from reformed Kirks in the
same, That there is no more difference betwixt us and them then betwixt the
green and blew colors of Justinians army, or that it was a mouthfull of
moonshine, that the formal cause of our justification stands in our
inherent righteousness, That Christ's body is present in the sacrament
circumscriptive and change the sacrament of the supper into a sacrifice, the
table into an altar, and Ministers into Priests, That GOD was the cause of
Isacks lie for not punishing his father Abraham, That there was possibility to
fulfill the law, That predestination was a doctrine newly hatched in hell
justly to be deleted out of Gods word, That the excrements of the Romish
religion, and Jesuits learning was better then the quintessence of our
Religion, although it were squeesed in a limbeck, That absolute active
obedience is to be given to all the commandments just or unjust of Princes,
That they have railed against our reformers and reformation, and affirmed that
the chief reformers of our Religion were but deformers, and had thrown out
better things then they had brought in, diminished the necessity and utility of
preaching, commended the service book and book of canons, and affirmed that by
the faith of the Kirk of Scotland, diverse parts of Gods true worship were
abjured; That they have cursed their own congregation and threatened to concur
to their destruction. They have called their people Iackanapes, Babbouns,
perjured Bitches, mad Dogs, and that it were more lawful to pray for such
as had lain 500. years in hell then for them. That they neglected the exercise
of discipline, hindered the delating or punishment of offenders, baptized
children of notorious Papists, defrauded the poor of their right and
mantenance allowed unto them, received bribes for saving scandalous persons
from public censure, baptized children in their beds without prayer before or
after, interverted and applied to their own use moneys collected for relief of
some Ministers in the Palatinat or some captives under the Turk. That they
deserted their flocks, profaned the Sabbath Day by all sorts of loose
carriage, That they were given to drinking, profane speeches and pastimes,
swearing, fighting, brawling with their Parishoners, that some of them went so
drunk to the Pulpet, that they forgote their Text: That some of them swore,
they would rather renounce God, than be Puritans; They judged the author of
the practice of piety to be damned in hell, because by his book he had made
many Puritan Ladies, That when they were delated for such offenses, they
contemned the authority of the Presbyteries, relying upon the favor of the
Prelates, and have declined this last Assembly.

Because in their Declinatour they allege that too many of the Commissioners
members of the last Assembly are guilty of many personal faults and
enormities, which in charity they forebeare to express in this their
Declinatour, you have here subjoyned good Reader, a Catalogue of the
Commissioners members of the last Assembly whereby you may perceive how
frequent the Assembly was, and of what sort of persons it did consist. We have
not read nor remembered a more solemn Assembly of our Kirk since the entry of
Christian Religion, let be since the reformation, nor more more able to clear
themselves of any faults or enormities can be laid to their charge.

Commissioner for the Kings MAJESTY.
James Marquis of Hamiltoun, Commissioners from the Presbyteries of Scotland,
both of the Ministry, and of the ruling Elders, and of Burgesses, as they are
within the Presbyteries.
Presbytery of Dunce.
Master Alexander Carse minister at Polwart, M. John Hume Min. at Eccles. M.
Thomas Suintoun min. at Saint Borthanes. Sir David Hume of Werderburne Knight
Elder.
Presb. of Chirnside.
M. George Roll minister at Mordingtoun. M. Thomas Ramsay min. at Foldoun. M.
Walter Swintoun min. at Swintoun. James Earl of Hume Elder.
Presb. of Kelso.
M. Richard Sympson min. at Sproustoun. M. William Penman min. at Morbuck.
Andrew Ker of Lintoun Elder.
Presb. of Iedburgh.
M. Robert Brounley min. at Kirktoun. M. James Wilkie minister at Creling. M.
Robert Cunninghame min. at Hawick. Sir William Douglas of Cavers Elder. Robert
Simpson burgess of Iedburgh.
Presb. of Assiltoun.
M. John Matland min. at Glenkirk. M. Harie Cockburne min. at Gingilkirk. John
Lord Cranstoun Elder. M. Alexander Hume Bailyie burgess of Lawder.
Presb. of Melrosse or Selkirke.
M. William Iameson min. at Langnewtoun. M. Robert Martin min. at the new-kirk
of Ettrick. M. John Knox min. at Bowdoun. Sir John Ker of Cavers Elder.
Presb. of Dumbar.
M. Patrick Hammiltoun min. at Innerweek. M. John Lawder min. at Tuninghame. M.
John Dalyel min. at Prestoun Kirk. Sir Patrick Hepburn of Waghtoun Knight
Elder. George Purves burgess of Dumbarre. M. Patrick Hume burgess of
Northberwick.
Presb. of Hadingtoun.
M. John Ker minister at Salt-prestoun. M. James Fleeming minister at Bathans.
M. John Oswald minister at Pencaitland. John Lord Hay of Yester Elder. M.
George Gray common Clerk burgess of Hadington.
Presb. of Dalkeith.
M. James Porteous minister at Lesswade. M. James Robertson minister at
Cranstoun. M. Olivhar Colt minister at Inneresk. William Earl of Louthian
Elder.
Presb. of Edinburgh.
M. Andrew Ramsay minister in Edinburgh. M. Harie Rollock minister in in
Edinburgh. M. William Colvinu minister at Crachmount. John Lord of Balmerino
Elder. James Cochran Dean of Gild in Edinburgh. Thomas Paterson burgess of
Edinburgh. M. John Adamson Principal of the University of Edinburgh.
Presb. of Linlithgow.
M. Richard Dickson minister at Kinneill. M. Andrew Keir minister at Carrin. M.
James Symson minister at Bathgate. George Dundas of that ilk Elder. James Glen
Provest of Linlithgow.
Presb. of Sterling.
M. James Edmistoun minister at Saint Ninians. M. William lustice minister at
Gargunnock. M. Edward Wright minister at Clackmannan. Sir William Murray of
Toughadame Elder. Thomas Bruce Provest of Stirling.
Presb. of Peebles.
M. John Bennet minister at Kirkurde. M. Robert Levingstoun min. at Skirling.
M. Hew Ker minister at Traquare. James William son Provest of Peebles.
Presb. of Middlebie.
M. Simeon Iohnstoun minister at Annan. M. John Hammiltoun minister at Wasters.
James Lord Iohnstoun Elder.
Presb. of Lochmaban.
M. Robert Henderson minister at Lochmaban M. David Roger minister at
Vndergarth. James Dowglasse of Moussell Elder.
Presb. of Penpont.
M. George Cleland minister at Durisdeir. M. Samuel Austine minister at
Penpont. William Ferguson of Craigdar rot Elder.
Presb. of Drumfreis.
M. James Hammiltoun minister at Drumfreis. M. William Makjore minister at
Carlaverock. M. Alexander Tran minister at Lochroytoun. John Charteris younger
of Empisfield Elder. John Irwing late Provest of Drumfreis.
Presb. of Kircubright.
M. Samuel Rutherford minister at Anweth. M. William Dalglish minister at
Kirkmabright. M. John Makleland minister at Kirkcudbright. Alexander Gordoun of
Earlstoun Elder. William Glendinning Provest of Kirkcubright. Robert Gordoun
of Knokbrox burgess of new-Galloway.
Presb. of Wigtoun.
M. Andrew Anderson minister at Kirkinner. M. Andrew Lawder minister at
whitherne. Andrew Agnew of Lochnaw Elder. Alexander Make ghie burgess of
VVigtoun.
Presb. of Stranrawer.
M. John Leving stoun minister at Stranrawer. M. James Blair minister at
Portmontgomerie. M. Alexander Turnbull minister at Kirmaden. Robert Adair of
Kinhilt Elder. James Glover Clerk of Stranrawer.
Presb. of Air.
M. James Bonar minister at Moyboll. M. John Fergushill minister at Vchiltrie.
M. Robert Blair minister at Air. John Earl of Cassils Elder. John Stewart late
Provest of Air.
Presb. of Irwing.
M. Rober Bailie minister at Kilwinning. M. William Russel minister at
Kilwinning. M. David Dickson minister at Irwing. John Lord Lowdoun Elder. M.
Robert Barclay Provest of Irwing. Matthew Spense Provest of Roysay.
Presb. of Argyle.
M. Donald Makilvorie min. at Inraay. M. Nicol Makcalman min. at Kilmow. M.
James Campbell minister at Kilsman. Archbald Campbell of Kilmun Elder.
Presb. of Dumbartane.
M. David Elphinstoun min. at Dumbartan. M. Robert Watson minister at
Cardrosse. M. John Stirling minister at Badernock. Walter Mackalley of
Ardincapill Elder. John Sempell Provest of Dumbartan.
Presb. of Paslay.
M. William Brisbane minister at Erskine. M. John Hammiltoun minist. at
Innerkip. M. Matthew Brisbane minister at Killellan. John Brisban of Bishoptoun
El. John Spreull burgess of Ranfrew.
Presb. of Glasgow.
M. John Bell elder minister at Glasgow. M. Zachary Boyd minister at the
Barrony Kirk there of. M. James Sharp minister at Goven. The Earl of
Eglingtoun Elder. Patrick Bell Provest of Glasgow. David Spence Clerk of
Rutherglane.
Presb. of Hammiltoun.
M. Patrick Hammiltoun minister at Cambuslang. M. James Iohnstoun minister at
Stenhouse. M. John Heriot minister at Blantyre. William Bailzie of Carphin
Elder.
Presb. of Lanerk.
M. William Livingstoun minister at Lanerk. M. Alexander Somervell minister at
Daulfingtoun. M. Richard Ingles minister at VVestoun. Sir William Bailzie of
Lammintoun Elder. Gideon lack Bailzie of Lanerk.
Presb. of S. Andrews.
M. Alexander Henderson minister at Luchers. M. Andrew Auchinleck minister at
Lergo. M. James Bruce minister at Kingsbarnes. John Lord Sinclar Eder. James
Sword burgess of Saint Andrews. Ninian Hamilton burgess of Caraill. Thomas
Symson Town Clerk of Kilrinnie. William Hamiltoun burgess of Anstruther
easter. John Tullous Clerk of Anstruther wester. James Airth Clerk of
Pittenweeme.
Presb. of Couper.
M. David Dalgleish minister at Cowper. M. John Moncreiffe minister at
Collessie. M. Walter Buchannan minister at Seres. John Lord Lindsay Elder.
George Iameson merchand burgess of Cowper.
Presb. of Kirkaldie.
M. Robert Dowglasse minister at Kirkaldie. M. Frederik Carmichaell minister at
Kennoway. M. Robert Cranstoun minister at Scoonie. John Earl of Rothes Elder.
John Williamson burgess of Kirkaldie. David Symson of Monturpie burgess of
Dysart. M. Robert Cunyghame burgess of Kinghorne. George Gairdine burgess of
Bruntiland.
Presb. of Dumfermline.
M. John Row min. at Carnok. M. John Duncan minister at Culrosse. M. James
Sibbald minister at Torrie. Robert Lord Burley Elder. James Reid Provest of
Dumfermline. Gilbert Gourley Bailie of Culrosse. John Bardie Burgess of
Innerkethin.
Presb. of Dumblane.
M. Harie Livinstoun minister at Kipping. M. Andrew Rind minister at
Tullicutrie. M. William Edmistoun minister at Kilmadock. Sir George Stirling of
Keir Knight Elder.
Presb. of Auchterardour.
M, George Muschet minister at Doning. M. James Row minister at Muthill. M.
John Grahame minister at Auchterardour. James Earl of Montrose Eld.
Presb. of Perth.
M. Robert Murray minister at Methven. M. John Robertson minister at Perth. M.
Alexander Petrieminister at Rind. John Earl of Weemes Elder. Thomas Durhame
Dean of Gild in Perth.
Presb. of Dunkeld.
M. William Menyies min. at Kenmure. M. John Anderson minister at Cargill.
Mungo Campbell fear of Lawers, Elder.
Presb. of Meggill.
M. George Symmer minister at Meggill. M. George Halyburtoun minister at
Glenylla. James Lord Cowper Elder.
Presb. of Dundie.
M. Andrew Wood minister at Monyfooth. M. John Robertson minister at
Achterhouse. David Grahame of Fentrie E. James Fletcherprov. of Dundie
Presb. of Forfar.
M. John Linde say minister at Aberlemno. M. Silvester Lammy minister at
Glames. M. Alexander Kynninmount minister at Killimure. James Lion of Aldbarre
Eld. David Hunter Provest of Forfar. John Grahame Baitie of Mont rose. Robert
Demster Bailie of Brechen.
Presb. of Merns.
M. James Sibbald minister at Benholme. M. Andrew Mill minister at Fetteresso.
M. Alexander Symson minister at Conveth. Sir Gilbert Ramsay of Balmam Elder.
Presb. of Aberdene.
M. David Lyndesay minister at Balhelvie. M. William Guild minister at
Aberdene. James Skien of that ilk Elder. M. John Lundie Humanist for the
University of Aberd.
Presb. of Deir.
M. Andrew Cant minister at Pitsligo. M. James Martine minister at Peterhead.
M. Alexander Martine minister at Deir. Alexander Fraser of Fillorth Elder.
Presb. of Aufurd.
M. John Young min. at Keig. M. John Ridfurd minister at Ki^bettock. M. Andrew
Strachan minister at Tillineshill. M. Michaell Elphinstoun of Balabeg Elder.
Presb. of Turreff.
M. Thomas Michell minister at Turreffe. M. William Dowglasse minister at Forg.
M. Geo. Sharp min. at Fyvie. Walter Barclay of Towie Eld.
Presb. of Kinkairne.
M. Alexander Robertson minister at Clunie.
Presb. of Garioch.
M. William Wedderburn minister at Bathelnie. Andrew Bairdburges of Bamfe
Presb. of Forresse.
M. William Falconer minister at Dyke. M. John Hay min. at Taffert. M. David
Dumbar minister at Edinkaylly. William Rosse of Clava Elder. M. John Dumbar
Bailie of Forresse.
Presb. of Innernesse.
M. John Howistoun minister at VVartlaw. M. Patrick Dumbar minister at Durris.
James Fraser of Bray Elder. Robert Bailie Bailie of Innernesse.
Presb. of Tain.
M. Gilbert Murray minister at Tain. M. William Mackeinyie minister at Tarbet.
M. Hector Monro minister in nether Taine. Sir John Mackeinzie of Tarbet Elder.
M. Thomas Mackculloch Bailie of Taine.
Presb. of Dingwall.
M. David Monro minister at Kiltairne. M. Murdoch Mackeinyie minister at
Contain. John Monro of Lumlair Eld.
Presb. of Dornoch in Sutherland.
M. Alexander Monro minister at Gospie. M. William Gray min at Clyne. George
Gordon brother to the Earl of Sutherland Eld.
Presb. of Thurso in Caithnes
M. George Lesly minister at Bower. M. John Smairt. John Murray of Pen-land
Eld.
Presb. of Kirkwal in Orkney.
M. David Watson minister at the Kirk of the Isle of VVastrey. M. Walter
Stewart minister at the Kirk of Sutherom-oldsay.
Revised according to the ordinance of the general Assembly, by me Mr. A.
Ihonstoun Clerk thereto:
Edinb. 12 of Feb. 1639.
FINIS.

