HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
To our Lovits (...)Heralds Messengers, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally specially constitute greeting.
Forsameikle as We are not ignorant of the great disorders, which have
happened of late within this our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, occasioned, as
is pretended, upon the introduction of the Service book, book of Canons, and
High Commission, thereby fearing innovation of Religion and Laws. For
satisfaction of which fears, we well hoped, that the two proclamations of the
eleventh of December, and nineteenth of February, had been abundantly
sufficient: Nevertheless, finding that disorders have daily so increased, that
a powerful rather then persuasive way, might have been justly expected from
Us: Yet We out of Our innative indulgence to our people, grieving to see them
run themselves so headlong into ruin, are graciously pleased to try, if by a
fair way We can reclaim them from their faults, rather then to let them
perish in the same. And therefore once for all We have thought fit to declare,
and hereby to assure all our good people, that We neither were, are, nor by the
Grace of God ever shall be stained with Popish superstition: But by the
contrary, are resolved to maintain the true Protestant Christian Religion
already professed within this our ancient Kingdom. And for farther clearing of
scruples, We do hereby assure all men, that We will neither now nor hereafter
press the practice of the foresaid Canons and Service book, nor any thing of
that nature, but in such a fair and legal way, as shall satisfy all our
loving subjects, that We neither intend innovation in Religion or Laws. And to
this effect have given order to discharge all Acts of Counsel made thereanent.
And for the high Commission, We shall so rectify it with the help of advice of
Our privy Counsel, that it shall never impugn the Laws, nor be a just
grievance to Our loyal Subjects. And what is farther fitting to be agitat in
general Assemblies and Parliament, for the good and peace of the Kirk, and
peaceable government of the same, in establishing of the Religion presently
professed, shall likewaies be taken into Our Royal consideration, in a free
Assembly and Parliament, which shall be indicted and called with Our best
conveniencie. And We hereby take God to witness, that Our true meaning and
intention is, not to admit of any innovations either in Religion or Laws, but
carefully to maintain the purity of Religion already professed and established,
and no ways to suffer our Laws to be infringed. And although We cannot be
ignorant, that there may be some disaffected persons who will strive to
possess the hearts of Our good subjects, that this Our gracious declaration is
not to be regarded: Yet We do expect that the behavior of all Our good and
loyal subjects will be such, as may give testimony of their obedience, and
how sensible they are of Our grace and favor, that thus passes over their
misdemeanors, and by their future carriage make appear, that it was only fear
of innovation, that has caused the disorders which have happened of late
within this Our ancient Kingdom. And are confident, that they will not suffer
themselves to be seduced and misled, to misconstrue Us or Our actions, but
rest heartily satisfied with Our pious and real intentions, for maintenance of
the true Religion and Laws of this Kingdom. Wherefore We require and heartily
wish all Our good people carefully to advert to these dangerous suggestions,
and not to permit themselves, blindely under pretext of Religion, to be led in
disobedience, and draw on infinitely to Our grief their own ruin, which We
have, and still shall strive to save them from, so long as We see not royal
Authority shaken off. And most unwillingly shall make use of that power which
God has endued Us with, for reclaiming of disobedient people.

OUR WILL is herefore, and We charge you straightly and command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, you pass to the market cross of Our Burgh
of Edinburgh, and all other places needful, and there by open proclamation
make publication hereof to all and sundry Our good subjects, where through none
pretend ignorance of the same. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly
and severally Our full power, by these Our Letters, delivering the same by you
duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given at Our Court of Greenwich the twenty eighth day of June, and of Our
Reign the thirteenth year. 1638. Per Regem.

