Reasons against the rendering of Our sworn and subscribed Confession of Faith.
1. IF we should render Our subscribed Covenant, we can not be free of the
great guiltiness of Perjurie before GOD: for as We were drawn by necessity to
enter into a mutual Union and Conjunction amongst Our selves. So are We bound
not only by the Laws of GOD and nature, but by Our solemn Oath and
Subscription, against all dangerous or divisive motions, by all lawful means
to promove and observe the same without violation, and not suffer our selves by
whatsoever suggestion, allurement, or terror, directly or indirectly to be
divided, or drawn from it: And it is too manifest, that no motion can be more
divisive upon the one side, nor can we upon the other part more directly give
way to division, then willingly, and with our own consent to render the band of
our union and conjunction to be destroyed, that no testimony thereof may be any
more extant.

2. We would distinguish (except we will deceave our selves) between Res
jurata, that which is sworn, and Jurati^ our sweareing thereof: for although
all the general and particular points contained in our subscribed Covenant
were to be insert in another Covenant, to be made by the express commandment
of authority; yet to rander our sworn Confession, were both to pass from our
swearing thereof, as si res esset integra, as if we had never sworn and
subscribed; and also to destroy that which we have been doing, as a thing
unlawful, and to be repented of. It were not only to make our oath to be no
oath, our subscription no subscription, and our testimony no testimony, but
really to acknowledge and Confess our selves in this to have been
transgressors; so that we can neither clame any right to the promise of GOD,
nor think our selves obliged in any duty to GOD by virtue of that oath. It
must ever be remembered that oaths and perjuries are multiplied, not only
according to the diversity of the things that are sworn, but according to the
sweareing of the same thing at diverse times; so often as we swear and subscribe
the same thing, by so many oaths and obligations are we bound unto GOD, and
consequently the rendering of our subscription, is the renunceing of that
individual band and obligation, although possibly by another we may stand
bound or sworn.

3. Our voluntary renewing of our Covenant with God, carries greater evidence
of a free service to God, then if it had been done by express commandment of
authority: Because the power of God making his people so willing, and the
readiness and sincerity of the people is so much the more manifest; like as
the LORD from heaven has testified his acceptance by the wonderful workings
of his Spirit in the hearts both of pastors and people, to their great comfort
and strengthening in every duty, above any measure that ever has been heard
of in this land; And therefore to give any token of recalling the same were
unthankfully to misregard the work of God, and to quite all the comforts and
corroborations that the people of God have to their great joy experienced at
this time.

4. We have declared before God and the world, that this our Covenant, as it
now stands sworn and subscribed, is lawful and necessary, that it is done in
obedience to the commandment of God, conform to the practice of the godly,
and according to the laudable example of our religious progenitors, who by the
like oath have obliged us to the substance and tenor of this: And therefore if
we should now by rendering our Covenant undo that which we have done, we should
deny the commandment of God, condemn the examples in scripture, and the
practices in this kirk; and precondemne all like commendable courses to be
taken by posterity in the like exigence.

5. No Covenant in things civil can be altered or rescinded without consent of
the parties with whom it is made; But Our Covenant is a religious Covenant made
with GOD and amongst Our selves, and therefore can not be rendered without the
express consent of the meanest of all the subscribers; who justly for their
comfort may crave of Us all the benefit and performance thereof.

6. There is no appearance that such as affect the prelates and their courses,
will be moved to swear and subscribe all the parts of this Covenant: As for
instance, To labor by all means to recover the former purity and liberty of
the Gospel, as it was established and professed, before the novations already
introduced, or to declare that they undoubtedly to believe, that the
innovations and evils contained in Our Supplications, Complaints, and
Protestations are abjured in the Confession of Faith, as other heads of Popery
expressly contained therein.

7. Although all the points of the subscribed Covenant were ratified by act of
Parliament, yet could we not render the subscribed Covenants: Because acts of
Parliament are changeable, and of the nature of a civil ratification: And it
is necessary, that this Our Oath being a religious and perpetual obligation,
should stand in vigor for the more firm establishing of religion in Our own
time, and in the generations following.

8. All the world may justly wonder at Our inconstancy, and Our enemies who in
their insolency are ready to insult upon Us at the least occasion, would not
cease to mock at Us, and traduce Us as perjured Covenant-breakers, and
troublers of the peace of the kirk and kingdom, without any necessary cause.

9. Although We do not compare the Scriptures of God with a written confession
of faith, yet as the rendering of the Bible was the sin of the Traditores of
old, and a sign of the denial of the truth contained therein: so the
rendering of Our Confession of faith, so solemnly sworn and subscribed, for
staying the course of defection, and for barring of popery, and all other
corruptions of religion, could be interpreted to be no less, then a real
denial of Our Faith before men, in a time when GOD calls for the Confession
thereof.

10. Many fair promises have been made, for not urging of articles already
concluded, and for not troubling us with any further novations, which being
believed, have ensnared many, and drawn them on to do that which otherwise
they would not have done, all which promises have been broken and denied, when
the performance was craved: And why shall We not expect the like in this case,
especially where the challenge will be found to be more hard and difficile.

Objections answered.
IT may be objected that the Confession of Faith being confirmed by the Kings
Authority were much to be preferred to this, which seems to have no express
commandment of authority.

1. Our Covenant wants not the warrant civil and ecclesiastical, which
authorized the former Covenant. 2. Although rash and unadvised oaths be
unlawful, yet voluntary covenanting with God is more free service to God (as
has been said before) then that which is commanded by Authority. 3. We ought
not to do ill that good may come of it, and must resolve to choose affliction
rather then iniquity.


The rendering of the whole copies of the subscribed Covenant were a ready
mean to remove all fears of the Kings wrath against the subscribers.

1. It is more fearful to fall in the hands of the living GOD. 2. They wrong
the King who threaten his good subjects with his wrath, for covenanting with
God, in defense of religion and of his Majesty's Person and Authority. 3. It
were more righteous with GOD to turn his Majesty's Heart and Hand against Us,
for dealing thus deceatfully in his Covenant.


If this be not granted his Majesty will grant neither Assembly nor
Parliament for establishing Religion, and settling the peace of the kirk and
kingdom.

1. The good providence of God so sensible in this whole work from the
beginning will incline the heart of so just and gracious a King, to deal more
kindly and benignely with his good subjects. 2. We have law, reason, and
custom for craving and expecting of those lawful remedies of the grievances
and fears of the whole kirk and country,


The end of the making of our Covenant was, that We might be delivered from the
innovations of religion, which being obtained, our Covenant should cease, as
having no further use.

1. As acts of Parliament against popery did not abolish our former Confession
of faith, wherein popery was abjured, So Acts of Parliament to be made against
these innovations can not make our Covenant to be unprofitable. 2. Although the
innovations of religion were the occasion of making this Covenant, yet our
intention was against those, and against all other innovations and corruptions
to establish religion by an everlasting Covenant never to be forgotten.



