CERTAIN REASONS AND ARGVMENTS OF POLICY, Why the King of ENGLAND should
hereafter give over all further Treaty, and enter into war with the Spaniard.

Printed M.DC.XXIV.

CERTAIN REASONS AND ARGVMENTS OF POLICY, WHY THE KING OF England should
hereafter give over all further Treaty, and enter into war with the Spaniard.
For the first, which is, Leaving off all treaty.
BEcause the English in all Treaties taken in hand with the Spaniard and the
house of Austria, and continued so many years with such labor and charges,
has not only bin unfortunate, but also scornfully abused by the Spaniard, who
is exceedingly disagreeing from the honest mind and meaning of the English. For
so many years while things stood stronger on the side of the English, nothing
has been effected by treaty: and who can presume that any thing will be
effected now, when things are brought into far worse case?

The King by seven diverse Treaties and Ambassages has effected just nothing in
this cause, which concerns the peace of Germany and the whole estate of his
Son in law. 1. In the year 1619. by the Earl of Carleil. 2. by Sir H.
Wotton at Vienna, 1620. 3. by Sir E. Conway and Sir R. Weston in the same
year. 4. by the Lord Digby, 1621. 5. by Sir R. Weston in the same 6. by the
Lord Chichester Baron of Belfast. 7. by the Prince in Spain, 1623. Besides,
how many Curriers have been sent? how many letters written? and what ado ha^h
been made by ordinary Ambassadors and Ministers?

2. The honor of the King and kingdom requires, that this tie of Treaties
which they have been entangled in all this while, should now be broken off. For
if they should continue that course which has brought no benefit to either
themselves or to others, or to the common cause, who can excuse them? Besides,
they should expose themselves to contempt and scorn, by stumbling so often
vnpardonably at the same stone; with their friends and subjects they should
bring themselves into suspicion and hate, by continuing a thing so dangerous;
and to strangers they should not only increase the ill opinion which the world
has conceived of their secure carriage, but also they should give all men good
cause to forsake them hereafter, if they should chance to have need of them

3. By Treaties the English have not only got and gained nothing; but farther,
all the businesses of themselves and their friends have ever gone backward to
the worse: the Spaniards going forward always with a high look and a brazen
face, and wisely making use of the fair forewind of fortune, turning their
countenance to the English, and their mind to their own advantage.

4. The meaning and s^ope of the Spaniard is directly opposite to that of the
English. For his endeavor is by Treaties to circumuent, to gain time, to undo
his enemies by delays, to advance his own profit and dominion, to despise
peace as perni^ious to him, and his great power to nourish war, especially in
Germany, where by the dissension of the Princes diversity of Religion, and
assistance of his friends, he may be sure not only to lose nothing, but to
gain, and to fish safely in troubled waters. But the intention of the English
is honest, viz. to give peace to Europe, and to every one his own: neither
does he intend to get benefit to himself, and rule over others. And how can
these contradictories be reconciled by Treaties?

5. The very adverse part does ill interpret and take these treaties of the
King, as if thereby he intended nothing else but to gain time, and to wait for
the revolution of fortune, or the occasion of change, with a mind altogether
estranged from any peaceable composition, and only pretending an intention of
treating; as the Archbishop of Mentz does in express words write of the King
to the Elector of Saxon. 7. October. 1623. The letters may be seen.

Reasons for the second: Of undertaking war with Spain.
The faith promised mutually to one another, which they have violated, the
breaking of the covenants confirmed by solemn stipulation, the injuries
offered, the deeds and Instruments of the covenants falsified, and such like as
these which follow: all or any one of these are esteemed of all Nations just
cause of entering into war.

Now then must we declare how faith has been violated, and the solemn
conditions of the League have been broken by them. The last year a surcease of
Arms for 15 months was propounded of the Spaniard, accepted of the English,
and upon certain Articles upon both parts agreed upon, was set down in
instruments, signed and sealed. But the Spaniard and their Accomplices, both at
the very time in which they sealed the Articles, and also afterward, did many
ways violate and pervert them, both by leaving out what was agreed upon, and
inserting what was not couenanted at all. That Instrument of truce was
exhibited and communicated in the Empire in the month of March, many weeks
before it was either concluded or signed in England. In the meeting at
Iutterbock, to the end that the warlike preparations of the Princes of Germany
might be hindered, and in Hungary to Gabor that he should not stir, it was
exhibited long before it was concluded, as if it had bin fully concluded and
sealed. And mark their cunning and false practice, by this exhibition of it,
and a false persuasion which they added to it, that all things should shortly
be accommodated, were the Princes of the Empire so moved and persuaded, that
they compelled the Duke of Brunswick to lay down arms, and to depart out of
the bounds of Germany, denying him all provision and passage. But the
Instruments of the Truce were not subscribed by the English, but in the 21 of
April old style, or the first of May new style, and after in the month of
August ratified by the Elector Palatine. Moreover in those instruments and
deeds given abroad there to Germany by the other party, these words in the
third Article ( Declaring them enemies of the Empire and of our Allies) were
left out, as words that might give just cause of offense to the Princes of the
Empire, when they should see such a hard declaration extorted and wrung out of
the English. But in the instruments signed in England, those words were
expressly set down, notwithstanding the exception made against them by the
Kings Son in law. 2. In the last Article in their deeds, it was left out,
That the King of England should send his Deputies for the interest of his Son
in law, when yet in that consisted the very hinge and controversy of the
business, and the foundation of the mind and will of the King of England, as
it is expressed in the English instruments.

There is also a falsehood to be noted in the subscription of the day. In the
English is expressed the 21 of April, English style; in theirs the first of
May. More things may be brought to show, that there was either falsehood or else
double deeds.

Furthermore, it was also expressly provided by way of caution, That all things
should abide in the Palatinate in the place and state as they then were during
the truce: that all acts of hostility should cease: that neither Allies nor
friends should be offended, but that both parts should enjoy the peace of the
League. But Spaniards and their Accomplices did and do still in the time of the
truce exercise all kinds of hostility, by confiscating of their goods who have
withdrawn themselves from the ruin of their country, by abolishing religion,
by dismembring and transferring unto others the better parts of the Palatinate,
as was done with the Lordship called the Bergstras, with the Diocesses of
Bleyensteine and Nevenhane, and others; by imposing continual seruitudes, and
by often extorting new contributions from the oppressed; by drawing out the
blood and soul of the afflicted, and by wasting and wearing out all the poor
subjects with their insolent tyranny. The very Spaniards alone have in that
part which they hold in the Palatinate imposed an exaction of above thirty
thousand Dollars a month over and above the ordinary impositions. Verdugo in
his proposition when he imposed this exaction, was not afraid to affirm, that
it was done with the knowledge and sufferance of the King of England, and that
he did to move the people. This extorsion has now continued diverse months,
and is yet still exercised, Lastly the Spaniards and their accomplices did never
for all the truce lay down arms in the Empire, but went on with victorious
war against the friends of the King of England and his Son in law: yea we
yet see them to proceed on still scorning and breaking this league of the
truce, making it a net to catch their enemies in.

2. The Spaniard has by force and arms possessed himself of the Patrimony of
the innocent infants the grand children of the King of England, has cast his
Daughter and Son in law out of all their estates and dominions, and does
detain the Palatinate against the hope he has given and promise which he
has so often made of restoring it: he has besieged the City of Frankendale the
Dowry of his Daughter, and invaded it in hostile manner; neither would he
vouchsafe to raise the siege at the most earnest entreaty of the King of
England* he compelled the forces of the king of England and his General sent
thither, to depart out of the Palatinate, scoffing and deriding the protection
of England, by which he had falsely persuaded him that the Palatinate should be
safe.

3. For So Much as the Spaniard does oppress the Allies and friends joined in
conferation and blood with the King, does cast them out of their dominions, and
does pursue them with hostility even against his faith given; there is no other
course left to help them but by arms: treaties in this case will prove
unprofitable.

4. The safety of the King and kingdom requires war. For it behoues us then
to look to our selves, when our next neighbors houses are on fire. Princes
lose both power and strength when their Allies do perish. The increase of a
potent neighbor whose friendship is unsafe, as it cannot be without just
suspision, so is it also dangerous and hurtful. The liberty of Germany now
ready to perish, is to be relieved; and the conservation of it does greatly
concern both the English and all the Princes of Europe. Germany is the heart
of Europe, for so Nature seems to have placed it; the Palatinate is the motion
in the heart, according to the laws. If German as the heart be possessed by
the Spaniard, who strives to get the dominion over all Europe, the rest of the
Princes shall not long draw or enjoy any vital life or spirits. The heart
therefore must be succored, if you would have the rest of the members or the
body to be safe. But by these weak remedies of treaties you shall do no good:
stronger things are to be applied, the disease still increasing.

5. Necessity requires war. Great preparations for war are made by the
Spaniard here near at hand; his mind and intentions are well enough known. A
potent Prince makes no reckoning of friends when he finds opportunity to
oppress them. The English are now brought into that extremity by their own
foresaid counsels, that unless they do prevent by war, they will shortly be
prevented. The Spaniard knows full well, that he may not trust them any longer,
and that it is the part of an unwise man to stay for the first blow, which is
commonly the Crisis of the future war, by which we may take a scantling of the
event of it, which is usually overcome by prevention and diuersio^, according
to the saying of that prudent King. Politicians say, that he which consults of
breaking and making war, has already broken; and that he is not well advised
or wary enough, who neglects to prevent his enemy. The Spaniard who is
naturally distrustful, does without question construe and take this
consultation and alteration of minds in England for a breach and a war, and
experience will shortly show it, if prudence take not place: but if he see the
English men remiss, he will say that they want not strength but courage, and
that it is base fear that keeps them back.

6. The King of England in the year 1621. the 12 of Nouemb. set down the
conditions of peace, and what he would have to be observed and kept by his Son
in law, and sent them to the Emperor for his final declaration; and did the^
withal protest of the effusion of blood that would follow, and of the war
which he should be compelled unto if the Emperor would not subscribe unto those
conditions. But the Emperor and the Spaniard have not only deluded the
conditions, but went boldly on with war against the innocent infants and the
Kings blood. And is he not now bound in honor to recover what he prescribed by
war which he threatened and denounced, that the conditions were not performed.

7. Suspension of arms was promised at Vienna to the Lord Digby, who brought
the Emperors lettets with him to Bruxels concerning that business: yet by
collusion was the contrary given in charge to the Infanta, and sent thither
either before or at the same instant insomuch that that suspe^sion was changed
into a most cruel war; which was executed with the more immanity, because the
King of England has undertaken the protection of the Palatinate, and was
pleased to strengthen and defend it with his own garrisons. And 1 when the Lord
Digby had in the Kings name long and exceedingly solicited, but in vain, the
raising of the siege at Franckendale; this answer was given him, That it was
against the honor of the Spaniards to leave a city which they had once
besieged without the express commandment of the King of Spain. 2. In the very
time of the treaty at Bruxels, was Hendelberg taken and spoiled. 3. If he could
not then obtain by treaties and entreaties, a thing uncertain and subject to
chance, and which was not in their hands, but only in hope, will restitution of
those things which they are possessed of, be now procured by those former means?
The Spaniards as they will do nothing for love, so will they also refuse
nothing when they are compelled by fear and force; as one of themselves has
confessed.

8. The Proscription which is the head of the evils which have followed, by
which the Kings son in law was declared infamous, and al his grandchildren
pronounced fallen from al right of succession, was most earnestly solicited by
the Archduke Albert, and was consulted of in the Spanish Ambassadors house.
And is there not then just cause that the Father should by war vindicate the
honor of his Son?

9. The restitution of the Palatinate cannot be procured by treaty: for this
course has bin often tried and used, even by the Prince himself, but ever in
vain. Therefore there is now no other mean to be used, save the way of war.

10. The honor of the King and kingdom requires, that now these wrongs be
fought to be righted by war, the last arrow in necessities quiver, and the
only mean now left of preserving reputation. He does but draw on new
injuries, who neglects to revenge the old, especially so intolerable as have
been offered to the English. But if now, after they have raised so good opinion
and hope of themselves in the world, they should grow faint, and fall back
into their former lethargy, they should lose all faith and reputation. I cease
to show how magnanimious Princes are more bound in honor to recover the
estates of their friends which they have taken into their protection, then
their own goods.

FINIS.

