HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our (...) Messengers, our Sheriffs, in that part, conjunctly and severally
specially constitute greeting.
For So Much as we and the Estates of our Parliament presently conveened,
remembering that at the first institution of the College of Justice, and diverse
times thereafter in Parliaments ratifying the same; Our royal Ancestors and
Estates of our Realm then assembled, found the erection of that honorable
consistory, which is a biding monument of the glory of their reigns, not
only to be useful for royal service, but also necessary and profitable for
the peace of this our Kingdom, and to the seen good and comfort of all our
Subjects; And considering that the provision allowed of before to the Lords of
Session was no ways sufficient for defraying of their charges; And that
through their continual attendance, their private affairs are neglected, and
great losses thereby sustained by them: Therefore, and to the effect, the said
Senators and Lords of our Session, present and to come, may be more encouraged
to go on, and to persist as they do, in their zeal, and affections to our
service, and in faithful ministration of Justice, to the general weal of
this our Realm and our Lieges; The said Estates, with our special
approbation, and gracious good-liking, have most freely condescended, statute,
and enacted, that a taxation be presently imposed upon their lands and means,
which with our consent foresaid, they ordain to be collected and paid to the
effect, in manner, and at the terms following: That is to say, The Duke,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Lords, and Commissioners of Shires for the
temporal Estate, have granted that there shall be vplifted of every pound
land of old extent within this our Kingdom pertaining to Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Vicounts, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, and Fewers of our proper lands,
the sum of ten shillings money at every one of the four terms following, viz.
The sum of ten shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse next to
come in this instant year of God, 1633. The sum of other ten shillings money
at the feast and term of Martinmasse, in anno 1634. The sum of other ten
shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse, 1635. And the sum of
other ten shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse, 1636. And for
the spiritual men and burrowes parts of the same taxation, that there shall be
uplifted of all Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, Abbacies, Pryories, and other
inferior benefices, and of every free burgh within this our Kingdom, at every
one of the four terms abouespecified; the just taxation thereof, as they have
been accustomed to be taxed in all time bygone, whenever the temporal Lands
of this our Kingdom were stented to ten shillings the pound land of old
extent. And for inbringing the (...) terms payment of the taxation of our
proper lands, our other letters are direct, charging all and sundry Our
Stewards, Bailiffs, Chamberlanes, and Receivers of our proper lands, and their
Deputs and Clerks, that they and every one of them, within the bounds of their
Offices, raise and uplift the said sum of ten shillings money of every pound
land of old extent within the bounds of their jurisdictions, for the said (...)
terms payment of the same taxation, And inbring and deliver the same to (...)
Collector general, appointed for receiving of the same taxation, or to his
Deputs and Officers in his name, having his power to receive the same, at the
said feast and term of Martinmas, in the year of God one thousand six hundred
thirty (...) years, under the pain of rebellion and putting of them to our
horn: For whose relief,

OUR WILL IS, and we charge you straightly and command, that incontinent these
our Letters seen, ye pass, and in our name and authority command and charge
all and sundry Fewers and Rentallers of that our (...) of (...) personally, or
at their dwelling places, and by open proclamation at the Market-crosse of the
head burgh of that our (...) if they be within our said Kingdom; And if they
be without the same, by open proclamation at the Market-crosse of Edinburgh,
Peir, and shore of Leith, upon threescore days warning, To make payment to you
our said (...) your Deputes and Clerks each one of them for their own parts
respective, of the said sum of ten shillings money for every pound land of
old extent pertaining to them, lying within that our said (...) As for their
parts of the said (...) terms payment of the same taxation within twenty
days next after they be charged by you thereto, under the pain of rebellion
and putting them to our horn: And if they fail therein, the said twenty
days being bypast, that ye incontinent thereafter denounce the disobeyers our
rebels, and put them to our horn, and escheat and inbring all their moveable
goods to our use, for their contemption. And if need be, that ye Our said (...)
your Deputes and Clerks pound and distrinyie the readiest goods and geir being
upon their said lands therefore, as ye shall think most expedient, according to
justice, as ye will answer to us thereupon. The which to do, We commit to you
conjunctly and severally, Our full power by these Our Letters, delivering them
by you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty eight day of June, and of Our
reign the ninth year. 1633. Per actum Parliamenti.

