APHORISMS OF STATE: OR Certain secret ARTICLES for the reedifying of the
ROMISH CHVRCH agreed upon, and approved in Council, by the College of
Cardinals in Rome, showed and delivered unto Pope Gregory the 15. a little
before his death. Whereunto is annexed a censure upon the chief points of that
which the Cardinals had concluded.

By THO. SCOTT.

Very needful and profitable for all those, who are desirous to understand the
event of the restitution of the PALATINATE: And of the state of the
Prince-Electors, of Saxon and Brandenburgh, in the behalf of the Clergy in
Rome. Fit for the British Nation, especially to take notice of, that they may
evidently see, the issue of all our Treaties, Ambassages, and Promises, with
other hopes depending: wherein we have been long held in suspense, and are
still like to be, to our unrecoverable loss.

Faithfully Translated according to the Latin, and Netherlandish Dutch, into
English.

Printed at Vtrech. 1624.

New unheard of, and strange Articles.
The first Article.
WHereas Maximilian the Duke of Bauaria, for the establishing the state of his
Prince-Electorship, has sought unto the authority of the Apostolical seat,
thereby has the Apostolical Church obtained opportunity, to recover their lost
obedience in the denied Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

The 2. Article.
SInce the Pope of Rome by means of the present Duke of Bauaria, as being the
most obedient son of the Church, may obtain again the Rights, which for
these two hundred years and more, have been lost in the constituting of
certain things, and orders in the Empire belonging to the Church, it will be
a very small labor, to pluck the possessions of the Church goods, which
depends upon the Ecclesiastical rights, out of the hands of the Heretics.

The 3. Article.
WHereas the Duke of Bauaria, according to the especial Oath, made unto the
Church, has an earnest desire, to restore again the Ecclesiastical State, as
it was before the time of Pope Gregory the eleventh, The Heretics (who are the
temporal Arm of the Empire) shall be bound to restore again those goods
which they have possessed since the passa wish trans-action.

The 4. Article.
SInce that it properly appertaiueth to the Church to discern and take notice
of the state and order of the Empire, therefore those Heretics which deny
this antiquity, and the rights of the Church in the state and order of the
Empire, which now by the Duke of Bauaria shall be reestablished in time to
come, are not to be tolerated.

The 5. Article.
SInce that Pope Leo the third, had that power in respect of the heresy, to
cut off, and separate the Eastern authority from the Western; and to pluck
that from the Grecians: wherefore shall not the Pope now have the same power,
to take the Prince Electorship from the Palsgraue, as being an Arch-hereticke,
and transport the same unto the Duke of Bauaria, the most obedient son of the
Church.

The 6. Article.
SInce that the divulsion of the Eastern Empire, from the Western, which was
performed by the most blessed Pope, Leo the third, has continued so firm and
sacred even to this very time: that although the Western Empire has often
times been void of a possessor, was never as yet united unto the Eastern
Empire, nor the laws of the one in the Provinces of the other were ever of
force: wherefore then shall not the divulsion of the Prince Electors dignities
of the Palsgraue that arch-hereticke, be maintained upon the most Catholic
Duke of Bauaria, in the like sanctity of perpetuity and stability, by the Pope
and the Holy league.

The 7. Article.
SInce that the transport of the Empire from the Grecians unto the French,
performed with such a free arm, and such an active power by Pope Leo. The
Grecian Emperors themselves, although they were the strongest, durst never
oppugn the same, nay have many times and often very significantly commended
and firmly kept the same, in like manner the ability not the opposition of the
arch Heretic, the Saxon who is yet remaining, may not hinder, much less make
opposition to the transport of the Prince Electors dignity, unto the most
Catholic Duke of Bauavia: in regard that he as being an Heretic, and not
knowing the sanctity, nor the antiquity of the rights original of the Empire,
and ignorant of the laws and privileges thereof, may not enjoy that right.

The 8. Article.
WHen as Frederick the first, according to the will and pleasure of Pope
Alexander the third, was detruded from the Imperial seat, then Emanuell
Comnennus presented both men and money unto the Pope against Frederick, to the
end the Grecian Church might be united to the Latins: by which undoubtedly he
confesses, that to establish and fortify the Popes cutting off, and
transport, and the uniting of one Kingdom with another, was forbidden, all men
whatsoever, save only the Pope, who had first separated them; so in like
manner these things like as they also be, so is it true that the Pope with the
Holy league, are bound to employ all their power against the Arch-Hereticke the
Saxon, and all those Rebels that depend upon him: that the Sanctity of the
Apostolical stool, and the Antiquity of the Romish Empire in the transport of
the Prince Electors dignity, might be preserved and maintained.

The 9. Article.
AFter Pope Leo have other Popes also, only by the authority of their Chair,
very often transported the said Western Empire from one Nation to another;
wherefore then may not the Pope by the same authority of the Chair of Rome,
pluck the Prince Electors dignities out of the hands of the Heretics, and
transport the same to the Catholic Princes, to the end that the sacred
Essence of the Romish Empire, by the extirpation of Heretics be again
established.

The 10. Article.
Whereas in all right, Pope Boniface the eight, unto whom the supreme
authority in the Church belonged, would not admit that Albert the first of that
name, Emperor of the Romans, by right of inheritance might come to the Empire,
like as he had sought both for himself and for his posterity and successors,
but only by election: In like manner may the Pope, the Emperor, and the holy
league, without violating the Apostolical seat, which always to be kept
sacred in her antiquity, must be defended, not to suffer the Saxon and the
Brandenburgher, that they should seek to draw the authority of the Antiquity
in the transport of the Electorship from the Chair of Rome, to bring the same
to the College of the Prince Electors.

The 11. Article.
PHilip King of the Francks, sent Ambassadors to Abignon unto Pope Clemens the
fifth: That they very humbly should entreat him, that he would restore the
Empire again to the French, under whom before it had bin. Then did the Pope
send Ambassadors unto the Prince Electors, by whom he commanded them, that
they should choose Henry of Lutzenburgh Emperor: And that if they did the
contrary, that they should incur great danger, and should forfait the
Empire, and the right of their Election unto others for ever; whereupon they
presently assembled, and elected Henry Emperor. From all this very plainly
appears, that the French assuredly knew, that it was in the Popes power to
establish the Imperial command in their Kingdom, and to transport from the
Germans the Empire and the right of the Election: and therefore may the Pope
according to the plenitude of his power, no longer use conniuence, when as
these Arch-Hereticks, the Saxon and the Brandenburgher, would throw down into
hell, the antiquity and order of the Empire.

The 12. Article.
IT is in the Popes hands, as in all Histories appears to renew the Emperor
in their Empire, to transport the authority of one Nation unto another, and
utterly to abolish the right of Election: how wickedly and ungodly then does
the Saxon, in laboring to pluck the said power from the Chair of Rome, and
to unite the same unto the College of the Prince Electors? By this means the
Pope of Rome and the Emperor may expect, that from this permission the rest of
the Arch-Hereticks, the Saxon and the Brandenburgher, may change the Essence of
the holy Church, and of the Empire, into an abominable and cursed monster.

The 13. Article.
SInce that Wenceslaus by reason of his follies, by the Prince-Electors, was
deposed from the Imperial seat, and contrarily Robert Palsgraue of the Rhine,
by the command and authority of Pope Boniface the 9. ascended to that high
dignity. In like manner also is the Palsgraue that Arch-hereticke, because he
had committed high treason, and had disturbed the Common-peace of the Emperor
and the Empire, detruded from his Prince-Electorship: And contrarily for the
recovering of the Antiquity, the Emperor with the sacred and true
Prince-Electors, as son obedient to the Church, and diligent in maintaining
Antiquity by Commission from the Pope, has promoted Maximilian Duke of Bauaria
in all right unto that high degree of Prince-Electorship.

The 14. Article.
SO that by the Authority of the Apostelicall seat, the power of Electing an
Emperor, and a Prince Elector: is drawn into the number of seven Princes:
yet whereas according to the Concession of Gregory the 5. it appertained unto
all the Princes of Germany: also by the same plenitude of power, it is lawful
for the Pope to cut off the Dignity of the Prince-electorshippe, from the
Palsgraue and his heirs, and to transport the same unto the Duke of Bauaria.

The 15. Article.
THe plenitude of the power of the Apostolical seat, is proved by the
public documents, as is the Election of Rudolph of Habsburgh, Adolph, Henry
the 7: Charles the 4. Wenceslaus, and Rupertus, who had no other stability, but
from the grant and consent of Nicholas the third, Boniface the 8. Clemens the
5. Clemens the 6. Gregory the 11. and Boniface the 9. which public documents
are kept with the Writings of the Apostolical seat.

The 16. Article.
TO the end that the Antiquity of the Empire may the better be manifested,
that the Pope and the Church has only the power to take notice, discern, and
to dispose of the affairs of the Empire: Therefore the Emperor is Crowned
with the Crown by the Pope, who therein has the highest authority, and this
work effected, then is he established in the Imperial seat: Therefore all
Doctors do agree herein, that he that is Crowned by the Pope, has the power
only to bear the title of Emperor and Augustus: To sign with the sign of
the golden Bull, and to take upon him the administration of the Empire: and
when the Prince is not crowned by the Pope, he is rightly forbidden to use the
same.

The 17. Article.
AT what time a great contention was risen between Charles the balde King of
the Francks, and his brother Lodowicke in the behalf of the Empire. Then
presently Charles posted unto Rome, and so with gifts and entreaties obtained
the Crown: And therefore Carelus Calvin.
according to the form of Antiquity, the Pope only has the power to take
notice of matters of the Empire: and therefore the Germane Heretics do very
ill in saying, That the same belongs to the College of the Prince Electors.

The 18. Article.
SInce that Frederick the first, by the Bishop of Bamberghen, required the
Crown of the Empire from Pope Adrian the 4. (where the words underwritten are
used and placed to express the same sense) from whence very plainly
appears, that he that receives not the Crown out of the Popes hand, is in
very deed no Emperor. Therefore most holy Father, fulfill without any longer
delay, that which Maximilion the Duke of Bauaria wants in the plenitude of
the Dignity of his Prince-Electorship, that the same may be accomplished by
your Holinesses liberality, to the end the Empire may be reduced and brought
into its old fashion again.

The 19. Article.
SInce that in the disposing and ordering of the affairs of the Empire, the
Popes respect only extends so far, that it now and then has been vexed,
suppressed, nay has been wholly and totally circumuented and defrauded; like as
many Histories do testify, what has passed between Pope Gregory the 7. and
the Emperor Henry the 4. between Pope Alexander, and the Emperor Frederick:
the first, between Pope Innocent the third, and the Emperor Ottaman the
fourth, between Pope Innocent the fourth, and the Emperor Frederick between
Pope John the 21. and the Emperor Lodowick the 4. between Pope Boniface the
9. and the Emperor Wenceslaus. By the same respect has the Pope that
undoubted right to take notice of the affairs of the Emperor, and to discern
thereof, and not the College of the prince Electors.

The 20. Article.
SInce that the power of the Electing the Emperor, was not purchased for money
by the prince Electors, nor obtained by force of Arms, nor enjoyed by right of
Inheritance, nor befalne unto them by the hands of the Emperors, but is
descended from the authority of the Apostolical seat: Therefore it is not
lawful for the Germane Arch-hereticks, now at this present to believe any
otherwise, thereby to molest the Antiquity and Sanctity of the Empire.

The 21. Article.
WHen as for a long time the custom of Electing the Emperor had been in use,
according to the constitution of Pope Gregory the 5. by the Intercession of all
the Chiefest and princes of Germany, and that many troubles and deuisions arose
by the great diversity of voices in their Election; The Empire is at last
become to naught; So that the Chiefes and Princes with one accord (according to
the decree and approbation of the apostolical seat) were agreed, that all the
power which was granted unto them, all of pope Gregory the 5. should descend
unto six Princes only; viz. to three spiritual and three temporal, unto
whom afterward the seventh was adjoined, and solemnly concluded, that of
these alone, without admitting any other thereunto (from henceforth the
Emperor should be chosen) although they were of the like faculty, power, and
authority.

The 22. Article.
LIke as in former time the Election was performed by virtue of the grant of
Pope Gregory the fifth. The same shall now at this present (by the same power
proceeding from the good pleasure of the Popes transport) be effected by the
seven. And like as in old time, the Popes commanded all the Chiefes and
Princes of Germany, that they should choose an Emperor, even so at this time
when need requires, it shall be lawful for the Pope to command the seven
Prince Electors, who do represent the Assembly of all the princes there. And
like as the seven Prince Electors do enjoy a like power that authority of
right, which in old time the Princes of Germany enjoyed: in like manner the
Pope do enjoy wholly that authority which they had in the time of that
Assembly, in regard that through process of years, or length of time, the
vigor of the Church deminisheth not, nor the rights of the Apostolical seat
do wax decrepit: How great then is the ignorance of those Doctors and
Councillors of the Germane Arch-heretickes, which neither know the antiquity
nor the Rights: But according to their malicious conceit, are not ashamed to
pervert the Antiquity and Sanctity of the Empire into nouelty, and to bring
order into confusion.

The 23. Article.
SInce then it has been very amply proved, and showed to his Holiness, that
the power as well of the new as of the old Prince Electors to Elect Emperors,
has been obtained by no other means, but from the most high Apostolical
seat, which may be approved by the Writings of the most famous Authors, as
Jacob Winphilingis, Krantzius, Naucleri, Carrion, Auentine, Cuspinianus, and
other Transmontanian Writings, omiting the Italian Doctors, because that they
in this point of controversy, might peradventure come in suspicion to be
corrupted, and by that means might be rejected, of the Germane Heretics.
Therefore it is, The rest that should follow, must be taken from the former.
etc.

The 24. Article.
SInce the seven Prince Electors, by the public proofs of writings,
subscribed with their own hands and Seals, do not deny that the faculty of
Electing Emperors, is descended unto them from the Apostolical seat, and if
the ignorant Councillors of Saxon and Brandenburgh, will not believe the same,
the Writings themselves shall be produced and laid open before them, which do
approve the same, dated in the year 1279. when Nicholas the third was Pope and
Rudolphus. Hubspurgensis was Emperor, which are whole and good, in parchment,
remaining with the Secretary of the Castle of Saint Angelo: where the seven
Prince Electors most of them use these words. The mother Church of Rome in
times past, as with a natural love embracing Germany, has as with a present
of temporal dignities honored the same, with that which is above all names,
only as temporally upon the earth, planting Princes therein, as godly Trees,
and watring the same with a singular grace, and has given unto them that
growth of worldly power; that they being supported by the authority of the same
Church, as a choice and famous plant, may cause to spring or grow up by their
Election, him who has the reins of the Roman Empire in his hand. Therefore
it is, Here lacks something which is to be conceived out of that which goes
before.
etc.

The 25. Article.
THe seven Prince Electors must confess to have this power from the
Apostolical seat, like as sufficiently is proved in the former Article. And
contrarily no man can take away the same; without the authority and consent of
the same Apostolical seat. If it be taken from any, as being robbed thereof, it
must not be esteemed as lawfully done, and that dignity which after that
manner is so taken from one, and transported to another without the Popes
consent and authority has no vigor, in regard the same is taken and given by
them, whom in all right it is forbidden. Therefore if it be bestowed upon any
man after this manner, in process of time, taking the right title, he shall
not keep the same.

The 26 Article.
SInce that the transport of the dignities of the Prince-Electorship unto this
present line of Saxon, is not established by the most holy Apostolical seat;
Therefore the Pope and the Emperor for the dealing of the transport of the
Electorship unto the Duke of Bauaria, shall not once be moved, but his
exception against the Transport, shall not be esteemed for no exception: for
that which is lawfully done, and simply is not done, is all one.

The 27. Article.
SInce that the transport of the dignities of the Prince-Electorship, is passed
unto Maximilian Duke of Bauaria, and is confirmed by the most holy Father,
Therefore it is no longer in the Emperor, nor in the King of Spaines power, to
place that Arch-Heritick the Palsgraue, or his heirs in that dignity and
dominion, out of which their Father is cast, nor to place him again in the
Electorship, in regard that these Controversies do belong to the most holy
Apostolical seat, and neither to the Emperor, nor the King of Spain.

The 28. Article.
SInce that the Pope hoth confirmed the transport of the Electorship: so is
that demand (which the King of England, the King of Denmark, the Saxon, and
the Brandenburgher, of the restitution of the Palsgraue into his dignities and
Electorship) which they seek of the Emperor very unreasonable: for the
requiring thereof is nothing else, but the detruding of the Apostolical seat
(from the right of her Majesty, and to attribute unto the Emperor the
fundamental original, contrary to the antiquity and Sanctity of the Church
and Empire: And therefore the holy Father shall be wary, that from such like
conniuence there arises not a greater discommodity to the farther ruin of the
Church.

The 29. Article.
TO the end then that the Essence of the Church may be preserved in her
Antiquity and Sanctity: The most illustrious Prelates, the Cardinals, with one
consent and accord have sworn, that the Holy Father having permitted the
confirmation, on Maximilian the Duke of Bavaria: may not revoke the same
without prejudice of the most holy Apostolical seat, and are bound by the
laws of God, simply to maintain the aforesaid Duke of Bauaria with one common
hand, with conjoined power of the whole Church, and with force of Arms, in the
dignities of the Prince-Electorship.

Here follows the Censure, or Consideration upon the aforesaid Articles.
HEre are presented unto us 29. Articles, from the Prelates of the Romish
Church, whose Elegancie is not much to be commended, and do tend to the
prejudice of Germany: for the better examination whereof, we will course
through all the members or particulars, and to the end that no man may be
bewitched therewith, we will administer unto the simple an Antidote against
this poison.

The beginning shall be of the three first Articles, wherein the Clergy of Rome
do imagine unto themselves a most excellent growth as well of the
Jurisdiction, as of the Temporal goods.

To speak in order of both these: I say the Pope for as much as he is Pope,
has no Jurisdiction at all, but for as much as he is enriched by the
liberality of Princes, he has also his own lands, and has a certain
Jurisdiction, which is well to be understood in his own lands: But in the
Empire where he has no place amongst the Princes of the Empire: no
Jurisdiction may be allowed him, without deminishing of the Imperial Majesty:
Let no man suffer himself once to be moved for that which has bin so long
said, that the Pope of Rome is in the place of Christ here upon earth. Christ
himself denied that his Kingdom was of this world. The Disciple is not
mightier then his Master, nor the servant greater then his Lord.

What is more evident and plain, then that which Christ himself says. Let
the Kings of the Nations bear rule, but with you it must not be so: neither is
that firmer that they hope for the victory, from the triumph, and other
proofs, wherewith they have always defended their cause, that Christ said,
All power is given me in heaven and in earth: Maldonatus refuteth this with
these words. Christ speaks not here of all power, but of that which he gave
to the Apostles: that is of the power to obtain and gather together his
spiritual Kingdom, for which business he sent out the Apostles; like as
temporal Princes are careful of their temporal goods, so are they also of
their Jurisdictions. Here avails that which the old Father Bernard wrote to
Pope Eugenius, in his first book of Observations, Your power is over offenses
or sins, and not over possessions. These base and earthly things have their
Judges, Kings and Princes of the earth; wherefore do thou enter upon other
men's jurisdictions? Wherefore do thou thrust thy Sickle or Sithe into
another man's Harvest? Moreover, he says in his eleventh book, Dominion was
forbiden the Apostles, dare thou then use it (A Lord) the Apostleship, or an
Apostolical person dominion, verily both these are forbiden you, if you will
enjoy both these at once. Therefore asks Hostiensis, what shall we say of
that which concerns the Pope in worldly or temporal affairs? whereunto he
makes answer, with his Lord Innocentius, that unto him, viz. the Pope, it
concerned nothing at all. The same also may de read by John Pariensis, in the
tenth Chapter of the power of Kings and Popes. This is long ago told unto
them, but they give it no audience, from hence arises the English complaint by
Matthew Paris, where he treats of Henry the third. That it is sufficiently
known and found, that the wrath of God is fallen upon the Romish Church,
because their Magistrate and Regent, do not diligently apply themselves for
the denotion of the people, nor for the gaining of souls; but to purchase
Revenues, and to scrape money together.

Other Nations used very grievously to complain thereof, and that with good
reason, especially Germany, whose Princes long ago seeking remedy hereof, were
not very acceptable, who could never satisfy the Romish Clergy, with riches
and dignities: from this insatiable gulf, also arises that they in the third
Article, desire to cut off the conditions for their advantage, which for the
common peace sake, were received above seauenty years since at Passow. But it
is not in the Popes power, not in the Clergy, to break that which was
concluded by a general Council of the States, where the Authority of Charles
entertained.

Here follows the Censure upon the second part, which extends it self
far larger then the first, in regard that it not only shows the
Cardinalish Prince, but that which lies next under. This aforesaid part
contains 20. Articles, in which they with the like proofs do proceed, as
yet seems: yet their object indeed is something else, more then in the
former. In which it seems to be sufficient to Michael Lonigus: That if the
Duke of Bauaria could but be persuaded, that he would seek for the consent of
the Pope, in those dignities where he was honored. In such manner the chiefest
Cardinals do take the reins of good reason too too long into their hands;
Nay, as Phacton upon the Wagon of their Avarice, to the great danger of the
world, and more especially of Germany, do ride out of the common rout of the
Popes: like as if it were a matter of no moment, to pronounce such an horrible
sentence of the Transport of the Electorship of the Palsgraue, and the occasion
thereof: whereof we will not now dispute, and so they fall aboard the
Prince-Electors of Saxon and Brandenburgh in the behalf of the Rights of the
Election: what is it else but with the like thunderbolt to dash the heads of
the sacred Empire? they say they are Heretics: It is now no time to enquire
after heresy, but rather soundly to dispute, whether that a Bishop like as he
has right to excommunicate a man for heresy; Whether therefore he has the
power also to rob and spoil a man of his dignities and means? verily therein
is great difference: Christ commanded that the excommunicated should be
counted as an Heathen or Publican: but in no place wills he that men should
rob the Heathens or Publicans of their Authority, or should spoil them of
their goods. Christ himself paid Tole unto the publicanes, and by his example,
has showed us the way what we should do. The Apostles lived under Heathenish
Emperors, and were obedient to their laws: in like manner also were all their
Successors: nay the Apostles being obedient, used to pray to God for them:
There says Tertullian in his Analogy, in the thirtieth Chapter, we inuoke
the eternal God for the prosperity of the Emperor, praying that he may have a
long life, a peaceful government, an established habitation, strong Armies,
faithful Councillors, and a peaceful world: When Julian left Christianity,
and betook himself to Heathenisme, did the Christians then detrude him forth
of his Empire? When they hear of this, then will they contend with later
examples, saying, Wherefore then may not the Pope, by the same right for
heresy, transport the dignity of the Prince-Electorship unto another, since
that Pope Leo the third, for the same occasion transported Empire from the
Grecians upon the Francks? This is that Achilles which so boasts in the
College of the Cardinals, but yet he is not strong enough to take in our
City of Elium. They abuse themselves exceedingly with this example; first from
the Act of the Pope, they conclude the justness of the Act, if we may so drive
our Arguments, there is no Act of any man, but it may be found fault withal:
they err also herein, that they affirm that to be done, which was never done.

We know it all of us, that the Empire was transported, but withal that it was
done by the council of Rome, as also all Italy consented thereunto, either
privately or publicly. Of the western people I will pass over in silence;
They say again that we have many Writers, which make repetition of that which
Leo did; who denies that: but they commend Leo, as being one of the chiefest
citizens, and so had the greatest respect of any man in the City: they commend
him also as being Bishop of Rome, who with his hands was to set up the crown,
as being a sign or representation of the Empire; Therefore these writers were
in no heresy, because they meant that either Leo did the same alone, or else
principally could have done it. Many other who are no less in number, nor in
respect then these, do relate unto us the clean contrary: they say expressly,
that the same was done and performed according to the decree and will, as is
aforesaid of the Council of Rome. Sigebertussaith in the year 801: The Romans
now, who long ago had withdrawn their affections from the Constantinopolitan
Emperor, as then finding very good opportunity, because that a woman, when
the Emperor Constantine was deprived of his sight, governed them by his Son:
then proclaimed they with one accord the Emperor Charles for their Emperor,
they crowned him by the hand of Pope Leo, they styled him Emperor and
Augustus. A popish writer Theodoricus de Niem, who afterward was Bishop of
Verden, says, about the very time of the Coronation the people of Rome made a
Law according to the old custom, but it was very troublesome to recollect all
things that happened so often: therefore the sentence, right and power of the
Empire, was left unto the Emperor as we find it written: then the people of
Rome transported all this unto Charles, and gave unto him all their right and
powor.

Blondus also in his first book, decad 2: and Aneas Siluius, or Pius 2. in
Blondus his short relation: also Iacobus Wymphelingies, in his short relation
of the people of Rome, in the xi. Chapter, do affirm that the Coronation by
Leo, was performed and done with the knowledge, and at the entreatie of the
people of Rome. These are the words of Onuphrius Panuimus in fastis: Leo by
the consent of the people of Rome, and at the entreatie of the clergy of Rome,
proclameth Charles Emperor. So that from these and others who affirm that it
was done by the Council, and the people of Rome; must those writers be
interpreted, that they do not confirm, nor yet deny the same?

How much more is it to believe that which is confirmed by witnesses, which is
denied by none: then not to believe those which do confirm the same, because
that all of them do not affirm, although there be no body that do deny the
same: for after this manner writes Michell Coccimmus very well, in his book
of the transport of the Empire, we must believe that the same transport was
performed, and had his power or operation from the consent and authority of
the Romans, and other people of Italy. That which Innocentius the 3. wrote unto
Bartold Duke of Zaringe, does not contradict the same: That the apostolical
seat of Rome, transported the Roman Empire unto the person of the famous
Charles from the Grecians unto the Germans, for in this we consent: That the
Apostolical seat upon no other meaning did transport the Empire, but that
they who did transport the Empire, did consent thereunto, or else made
declaration that they should transport the same. But such a transport has had
its power from the uniform consent of the people.

Hence may very plainly appear in what manner the transport which Leo
performed was done, and by this means that is very easily overthrown, which
they say: That the Empire was transported for Heresy: the occasion of the
transport is here formerly related out of Sigibertus: the true cause thereof
was, because the Emperors of the East did neglect, or were careless of the
Western Empire and authority: and so (as is aforesaid) did let it pass; this
we can confirm and approve with very firm testimony; Lupoldus says in his
fourth book of the rights of the authority of the Empire, in this manner. The
Grecian Emperor in the time of Carolas Magnus, nay before his time also, viz.
when his Father Pepin, and his Grandfather Carolus Martellus lived, governed
only with the name of the Western Empire: so that neither the Romish Church,
nor the other Christian Congregations, nor those of the Longobardes, who were
contrary to all law suppressed, could either by the Eastern Emperor, nor by
their authority obtain any right in the Western Empire: so that the
aforesaid Emperors made no account nor reckoning of the Western Empire, but
held it loosely as a derelict, only commanding therewith the name, as
appears in diverse Chronicles; Of the same opinion is Johannes Parisiensis, in
his 16. Chapter, writing of the Kingly and papal power. It was not done by the
Pope only, but that it was the peoples desire, who may subject themselves to
whom they will, without prejudice to any other: and therefore that was done for
a necessary reason, for to defend them against the Heathens and infidels,
because they could not be defended by any other: which right they might do:
for the people make the King, and the Army the Emperor. Aneas Syluius in his
book of the rising, and authority of the Roman Empire, says in the 9. Chap.
At the last when the Grecians were careless of Rome, and leaving the same to
be made a pray, and to be ransacked one while by the Barbarians, and also by
others: the people of Rome, who with their blood had got such great riches, who
by their valor had erected the Monarchy of the world, saluted by the name of
Emperor, Carolus Magnus then King of the Francks, being a German borne, who
delivered the City and the Holy place from the invasion of enemies: first
greeting him with this title, Patricius: and afterward Augustus: the Popes
good will and pleasure hereunto concurring. Also says Nauelerus in his 27.
generat, in the year 800, upon the day of the Birth of our Lord, good
deliberation proceeding: Leo the Pope of Rome, considering that the
Constantinopolitan Emperors did very carelessely defend that name, and held
the Western Empire as lost: he declared, with the consent of the people of
Rome, Charles Emperor of the Romans, and crowned him with the Crown; when the
commonaltie of the Romans three times cried out aloude, Carolo Augusto, etc.

Paulus Aemilius in his History of the Francks, says thus: The Majesty of
the Emperors was now at this time, and before very slight; and there after he
says: the principallest of the Romans being of another courage and audacitie,
gave their voices, that the seat of the Empire being (as it were void) and
possessed of none: as if it had been Gods will, and had been so ordained:
should be invested with the King of the Francks, because that he by his service
which he had done for the Church, had well deserved the same: and that they
were obligde and bound to him, etc.

Michaell Coccimus speaks yet more plain concerning the transport of the
Empire, saying: When the Romans, and almost all the people of Italy by process
of time, and the Invasion of many Nations and pillagings, as being subject to
the Goths, Vice-Gothes, Humes, and Longbardes, and being not able with their
own forces to defend themselves, and the Grecians taking no care at all of
them for the performance thereof: nay that which is more, they themselves
heaping evil upon evil, and using all diligence to suppress and spoil them,
using to great auariciousnesse and desire of authority over them; they marking
the excessive covetousness of the Grecians, and also their carelessness:
observing also the worthiness, capacity, and equity of the Germans: they
transported the Empire from the Grecians unto the Germans, and recommended the
same to Carolus Magnus; This transport of the Empire being effected by the
Romans, and other people of Italy, and that with the common consent and
authority of them all, out of all doubt had full power, and has remained
firm.

Hence appears plain enough, that they are either fools, or else are much
deceived, which think that the Empire was transported to the Francks for
heresy.

This also is worthy consideration, that although the Eastern Empire was
transported by Pope Leo to the Western, that the Pope has now the same right
to remove the Empire according to his will. In old time it was otherwise then
it is now. Let us grant that the Pope of Rome had some right, as the best
qualified citizen of the city; nay that the City (which never yet was done)
had transported all her power unto him, what does that concern these our
present times, since that the Pope has driven the Emperor out of the dominion
of the City. After what manner (say I) hereafter shall either Rome it self,
or the Pope of Rome pretend any right in the electing of an Emperor, since
they do not acknowledge the Emperor for their Lord; yea since it is
acknowledged that the prince Electors are to be ordained by the consent and
voices of the States, and this is by the approbation of Gregory the 5; has not
the Pope lost his right when he consented hereunto? so that hereby that
authority which the Pope ascribes to himself is quite overthrown. What a
number of proofs might be produced against this power of the Pope? yea also
the testimony of principal personages, who by reason of their learning, are
exceeding famous.

Here follows the third part, which falls very grievously both with tooth
and nail upon the bodies of all those that dislike the sentence of the Pope,
and that consists in the three last Articles.

And first that is touched which concerns the election, that is, the right of
voice is taken from the Prince Elector the Duke of Saxon; under this pretext,
because forsooth the Pope of Rome has not confirmed that dignity wherewith
that family for these many years has been invested, nor is it confirmed by
the Pope: as if that illustrious Family had not been so wise, as never to have
required the same of the Pope. It is but too well known unto them, that they
whom the Hope glories to have honored with the name of Empire or Authority,
that he takes away from them the majesty of authority: so that his
investing may well be called disrobing, and his crowning a dethroning or
deposing. For I pray you, of what consequence is the confirmation of the Pope
unto those whom he drives into a bodily fear, if he had no temporal power? It
is such as Origin long ago understood to be; which he taught, as appears by
his writings upon Matthew, on his twelfth Homily: Among you which are mine,
these things shall not be; to the end that those which have any power in the
Church, do not seem to domineere over their brethren, nor to use any
authority. For like as a necessity is imposed upon temporal matters, and not
left to the will; and spiritual matters in will, and not in necessity: so
shall the dominion of spiritual Princes be confirmed in love, and not in
bodily fear. If therefore the power of the prince Electors be from the Pope,
because that the Imperial power is from him, as our adversaries affirm: how
can they prove that the dignity of the prince Elector must proceed from the
Pope, if it be not needful that the Emperor be confirmed by the Pope? There
is a text that says, The Army makes an Emperor. The Gloss says thereby, He
is a right Emperor before he be confirmed by the Pope. This they of Basil
understood very well; who after the death of Lodowicke, where the Lord of
Bambergher chief President made this answer: That Emperor which the prince
Electors shall ordain for us, him will we accept of, although he have no
respect unto the Pope. This appears in supplemento Vrspergensi. Nay that
which is more; the Pope himself confesses, that not the Empire it self, but
the Imperial title rested only in him. Pope Adrian the fourth, in his Epistle
to the Archbishop of Ments, Tryer and Cullen, says: The name of the Emperor
is from the Pope, but the Empire and Authority comes from the prince
Electors. Hence then is confuted that which is said in the 27. Article, since
that the Pope has confirmed the Duke of Bavaria in the dignity of prince
Elector, that then not only the King of Spain (who is there mentioned) but
also the Emperor is bereaved of the power to restore again unto the Palsgraue
his hereditary possessions and the dignity of the prince electorship. For if
the Pope has no power in the affairs of the Empire, then shall the Emperor
by his doings not lose his right, much less any other Prince, if he before the
Popes deed had any right of suffrage.

I am forced to stop my ears by the reason of that extreme proud and
ambitious affront which is set down in the 28 Article: That although the two
most puissant Kings of Great Britain and Denmark, or the two illustrous
prince Electors of Saxon and Brandenburgh should require of the Emperor that
the Palsgraue of the Rhine might be restored again unto his hereditary
possessions and dignity of prince Elector, that they then robbed the Seat of
Rome of the right of its majesty, and did attribute the power of the prince
Electors dignity unto the Emperor. The Pope of Rome does very falsely
attribute that Majesty unto himself, which appertains to the Emperor, and
to the Princes of the Empire and the States. Very falsely is the Pope of Rome
called here, the Fountain and Sourse of the prince Electors dignities, because
that power is sprung out of the Council of the German Princes. Like as
Naucleius says, Generat. 34. The writer Theodoricus Niemus uses these words:
The Princes of Germany have ordained it so. The very same also do other
writers affirm. Neither do I deny that it was with the approbatio^ of Pope
Gregory the 5. Therefore the temporal dignity is not chiefly from the Pope,
for not the Pope, but the princes of the Empire do represent the whole body
and people of the Empire, in whom immediately, as in the subject the temporal
power consists.

Nicholas Cusanus in his third book of the catholic concordance, in the 4.
Chap. In my judgment judges very well thereof, writing in this manner, says:
The prince Electors, who elected in the place of others, were (in the time of
Pope Gregory the 5, being a German) ordained of the natural kindred of Otho
and therefore it is not tolerable that the prince Electors should have their
power of electing from the Pope of Rome; (so that now, unless he consented
these should not have it: or if he would, that he would take it from them.) I
ask, who has given the people of Rome power to elect an Emperor, but the Law
of God and nature; for by way of a voluntary subjection, and consent in
predecedencie, all sorts of governments are well and holy instituted: and
afterward there he sets down yet something else; the prince Electors that
were constituted by the general uniformity of voices, of all Germans and
others belonging to the Empire: in the time of Henry the 2. had their
fundamental power from the general consent of voices of all, who by the law
of nature might choose themselves an Emperor, not from the Pope of Rome
himself, in whose power it is not to give to every province a King or an
Emperor when it pleases him, and when it does not please him.

Lastly, the Articles were sealed up with this Oath. That the Pope himself,
without prejudice to his seat, may not revoke the Electorship from the Duke of
Bauaria, since that he has confirmed him in that dignity; nay, that all the
Prelates of the Romish Church, are bound with force of Arms to maintain the
Duke of Bauaria: and yet more, that all those that are of the Romish Church,
are bound to bring all their force together to maintain the same. So that the
Romish Clergy disdaining the prerogative of Kings and Princes, does very
boldly determine and decide these controversies which arise in the Empire, and
threatens to force them by war who are not content with the Popes sentence;
How ilsauourly these things do suit and agree with Pope and Clergy of Rome,
is showed unto us in that famous place of Peter Damianus, who lived in the
year 1060, his words in his Letter unto the Bishop Firminus are these.

Like as the Son of God himself did overcome all the obstacles of this
raging world, not by any proof of vengeance, but by constant patience, and
inuinceable Majesty: so sits it best that we rather suffer, and patiently
endure the worlds raging with humility: then either by taking Arms in hand,
or requiting wounds with wounds: especial since that between the Empire and
the Priesthood, the offices are several; The King shall use the temporal
Arms, the Priest shall put on a spiritual sword, which is the word of God;
Paul says of the princes of this world, that he bears not the sword in
vain, being a Minister of God, and his revenger in wrath, upon him that does
evil. King Azarias, because he took upon him the Priests office, was stricken
with Leprosy: so that Priests which shall take up Arms, (which is the work
of the Laity) what deserves he? If now any man would object, that Pope Leo
oftentimes thrust himself into wars, and yet for all that was a just Pope: I
tell you mine opinion. Peter never obtained the Apostle-ship because he
forsook his Master; Nor David the gift of prophesing, because he defiled
another man's bed. Here is not to be considered of good and evil things
according to the desert of the possessors, but they are to be judged according
to their own qualities. Do we read any where that Pope Gregory, who endured
so many roberies and pillages of the Longebeards, either did or wrote the like;
Do we read any where, that any of the holy and worthy Popes did ever take up
Arms to make a war: no never in no place; grant then that the Laws of the
civil Magistrate may narrowly fifth, pry, and determine any certain question
which arises in the Church: or else determine and judge of that which
concerns not the Judgment seat of the civil Magistrate, by an Edict of the
Council, or an assembly of Divines: to the end that either by the judgment of
the Magistrate, or the Iudicate of the Pope, there arise no war which might
be accounted to our shame.

The Clergy men of Rome are altogether of another oppinion, practicing and
endeavoring almost nothing else but war, not only with their Arms, but
also threatening others, and whilst they are doing this, they are not ashamed
to affirm, that they are bound thereunto by the Laws of God; Let them observe
what Christ commanded the Apostle Peter, to put up the sword into the sheath.
Where has ever God commanded the Clergy, that they should intermeddle in
matters of temporal dignities, or should undertake wars: much less that
they should blow the Trumpet, or beat Allarmes as they do now. (have I the
desire of Dominion their God) Observe diligently I pray you, that bloody Oath
intended by all the Prelates, to the end the fashion of the ancient and holy
Church might be maintained entire, like as if the fashion of their Church now
were, as it was wont to be in former times; Let us read that which Tertullian,
Ambrose, Augustine, and other Writers, who subject the Clergy under the power
of the Temporal; Pope Gregorius Magnus, writes himself unto the Emperor
Mauritius these words: I the unworthy servant of your piety: and a little
after he says yet farther, To this end authority is given to me from heaven
above all men, that belong to my Lords the Emperors for piety cause; When as
the said Mauritius, would have that Pope Gregory should publish a law which he
had made: and this Pope adiudging the same to be unreasonable, and opposing the
liberty of the Church: he therefore did not blaspheme against the Empire, but
was obedient unto the command of the Emperor his Master, not dissembling to
speak his mind and opinion of the Emperors Law: these are the Popes own
words: I being subject to authority, have sent these Laws into several
quarters of the world, and because they are not agreeable to almighty God, I
have communicated the same unto the Illustrouse Lords, by amissiue of my own
oppinion, so that I have fully discharged my duty on both sides: showing as I
am bound obedience to the Emperor: and not concealing my opinion in that which
concerns God.

Here ought we to observe, how cunningly and craftily the College of
Cardinals observe and aim at the example of the ancient holy Church, chiefly
in the time of Pope Gregory the 7: under which this lurketh, that this Pope
Gregory was the very first who durst ascribe and take unto himself the right
of the Empire; At what time (I pray you) lived this Pope? about the year 1100.
is the antiquity whereof they boast; I may affirm with Tertullian, that this
is novelty; what holiness was there in those days, when all manner of
fractious, cussennings, frauds, deceites, and villainies had their full swinge:
and to write much thereof would be to dangerous, and be no honor to
Christendom; Like as the Writer of those times affirms in the days of the
Emperor Henry the 4. It is very well known unto all men, what Cardinal Benno
has written and translated of that Pope: (although Cardinal Bellarmine
judges that the same was wrtten by a Lutheran;) In like manner, it is also but
to well known by other Writers, who have painted out in lively colors this
Pope Gregory even to the life. A certain man named Orthamus Gracious, very
much adicted to the Romish Church, was the first publisher thereof in a book,
wherein are contained very many remarkable observations: out of the actions of
this Pope Gregory, the College of Cardinals, in the 19. Articles do conclude
the Popes authority, and not out of these actiones only, but also of other
Popes who have dealt most tirannically with the Empire. One could also hit the
Cardinals in the teeth, with that which Cardinal Bellarmine in his second
Book of the Popes of Rome says, in the 29. Chap. upon the 4. Argument, viz.
That the Christian Emperors have oftentimes been Judges of the Popes:
whereunto very subtly he infers or answers; That these things have been
done, but how well they have done the same, and by what right, that they
themselves shall answer.

It is indeed much to be wondered at, that the Clergy men are grown to that
pass, that they so stoutly attempt that which all the world has in
abomination, and with such polluted hands to lay hold upon the most famous
state of the Empire. We observe also how shameless the College of Cardinals
are, willing that we (from the evil lives and wicked actions of deceased
Popes) should conclude how great the authority of the Pope is: at least they
need not to be so contumelious, and arrogant against those Emperors, which in
former times the Popes have acknowledged to be themselves servants of the
Emperors; The Pope also ought to have in consideration that he by means of
the Empire has obtained so great riches, and now by the greatness of his
power, and all manner of sensuallities, blinds the eyes of many temporal
princes.

How blind are the men of this age, when the Sun shines so bright, how
little do they know or think what will fall out in the end; he has got so
great treasures from those of the Empire, to the end that he wanting nothing,
might give the better luster unto his religion: now abuses he these gifts, by
driving the Empire into a great fear. He is enriched with earthly countries,
to the end he should enrich us with the heavenly, and now they serve him to
take away our earthly; He is enriched, to the end that by his religious care,
we might live in greater security in the Empire: now he cares not for that,
although there be trouble raised in the Empire, so he may live bravely and
laciuiously; This is the reward of perverted liberalty: so that for many ages
it has been very truly said: Religion brought forth riches, and the Daughter
has devoured the Mother.

You props and pillars of the Empire, (most Illustrious Emperor, Princes
Electors, Princes, and States) tolerate no longer this triumph and pride of
the Romish Clergy: you see how boldly they violate the laws of the Empire,
they limite your established law, and prefer unto you that which they do but
think and invent: leaving unto you the bare name of the empire, but have
drawn the majesty thereof long ago to themselves.

What will this work in the end, if you be content any longer with patience to
behold or look upon the same, never think that they will omit to increase
theirs, and decrease yours; You have heard how they threaten you, and what they
intend as enemies to prosecute: and you know that the abominable deeds which
the Popes have performed against the Emperors, do serve them now for very
fair examples.

Since then it is not yet to late, take council prouidently, that the Romish
Cardinals in the end may be glad to leave their affronts, and their proud
courage may quail, undertake firm and substantial courses, that their
dissolute and insolent desire of dominion may be restrained and bridled: then
shall the Majesty of the empire be preserved: whereunto Almighty God give you
his blessing in all your consultations. from whom you have received the
possession and government of the Empire.

FINIS:

