ANE SHORT AND GENERAL CONfession of the true Christian Faith and Religion,
according to Godis word and actis of our Parliamentis, Subscriued be the Kingis
Majesty and his household, with sindrie vtheries. To the glory of God and
good exemple of all men. At Edinburgh the Twenty eight day of January, The
year of God. Ane Thousand, Five Hundredth, Fourscore yeirs. And the fourtene
yeir of his Maiesteis Regne.
WE all and every one of us underwritten protest, that after long and dew
examination of our own Consciencis, in matters of true and falls Religion, are
now thoroughly resolved in the truth, by the word and spirit of God. And
therefore we believe with our heartis, confess with our mouths, Subscryue with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God and the whole world. That this
only is the true Christian Faith and Religion, pleasing God, and bringing
Salvation to man, quhilk is now by the mercy of God reveled to the world, by
the preaching of the blessed Euangell. And is received, believed, and defended
by many and sindrie notable Kirkis and Realms, but chiefly by the Kirk of
Scotland, The Kings Majesty and three Estates of this Realm, As Gods eternal
truth, and only ground of our Salvation, as more particularly is expressed
in the confession of our Faith, stablished and publicely confirmed by sindrie
actis of Parliamentis, and now of a long time has been opinly professed by the
Kings Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in burgh and land. To the
quhilk confession and form of Religion, we willingly agree in our consciencis
in all points, as unto Gods undoubted truth and verity, grounded only upon
his written word. And therefore we abhor and detest all contrary religion
and doctrine, but chiefly all kind of Papistrie in general and particular
headis, even as they are now damned and confuted by the word of God and kirk
of Scotland, but inspeciall we detest and refuse the usurped authority of
that Roman Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God. upon the Kirk the civil
magistrate and conscience of men. All his tyrannous Laws made upon indifferent
things, against our Christian liberty. His erroneous doctrine against the
sufficiency of the written word, the perfection of the law, the office of
Christ, and his blessed Euangell. His corrupted doctrine concerning original
sin, our natural inabilitie and rebellion to Gods law. Our justification by
Faith only. Our imperfect sanctification and obedience to the law* the
nature, number and use of the holy Sacraments. His five bastard Sacraments,
with all his rytis, ceremoneis, and falls doctrine added to the ministration of
the true Sacraments without the word of God. His cruel Judgment against
Infants departing without the Sacrament, his absolute necessity of Baptism,
his blasphemous opinion of transsubstantiation, or real presence of Christis
body in the elements, and receiving of the same by the wicked, or bodeis of
me^. His dispensations with solemnet oaths, Periureis, and degrees of marriage
forbidden in the word, his cruelty against the Innocent deuorced, His
diuilishe Mess, his blasphemous Priestheid, his profane sacrifice for the
sins of the dead and the quick. His Canonization of men, calling upon Angels,
or Sainctis departed, worshipping of Imagrie, relics, and croces, dedicating
of Kirks, Altars, Dayis, Vows to creatures. His Purgatory, prayers for the
deid, praying or speaking in a strange language, with his processiones and
blasphemous letanie, and multitude of Aduocats or Mediatouris. His manifold
ordouris, Auriculare confession, his despered and uncertain repentance, his
general and doutsome faith, his satisfactiones of men for their sins, his
Justification by works, Opus Operatum, works of supererogation, meritis,
pardones, peregrinationis and stationis, his holy watter, Baptissing of Bellis,
Coniuring of spiritis, Crossing, Saving, Anointing, Coniuring, Hallowing of
godis good Creatures, with the superstitious opinion joined therewith, his
warldly Monarchy, and wicked hierarchy, his three solemned vows, with all his
shawellingis of sindrie sorts. His erroneous and bloody decreis maid at Trent,
with all the subscryuers and approuers of that cruel and bloody band, coniured
against the Kirk of God. And finally we detest all his vain allegoreis, Ritis,
signs, and traditiones brought in the kirk without, or against the word of God
and doctrine of this true reformed Kirk. To the quhilk we join our selves
willingly, in doctrine, Faith, Religion, Discipline and use of the holy
Sacraments, as lyuelie members of the same in Christ our head, promising and
swearing by the great Name of the Lord our God, that we shall continue in the
dbedience of the doctrine and discipline of this Kirk, and shall defend the
same according to our vocation and power, all the days of our lives, under the
panes contened in the law, and danger both of body, and soul, in the day of
Gods fearful Judgment. And seeing that many are styrred up by Satan, and
that Roman Antichrist, to promise, swear, subscryue, and for a time use the
holy Sacraments in the Kirk deceatfully against their own conscience, minding
hereby, First under the external Cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subvert
secretly Gods true Religion within the Kirk, and afterward when time may
serve, to become open enemies and persecuters of the same, under vain hope of
the Popes dispensation devised against the word of God, to his greater
confusion, and their dowble condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus, We
therefore willing to take away all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of sic dowble
dealing with God and his Kirk, protest and call the searcher of all hearts for
witness, that our minds and heartis do fully agree with this our confession,
promise, oath, and Subscription. So that we are not moved for any worldly
respect, but are persuaded only in our conscience, through the knowledge and
love of Gods true Religion, prented in our hearts by the holy Spirit, as we
shall answer to him in the day when the secrets of all heartis shall be
disclosed. And because we perceive, that the quietness and stabilitie of our
Religion and Kirk does depend upon the sauetie and good behavior of the Kings
Majesty, as upon ane comfortable Instrument of Godis mercy, granted to this
Country, for the maintening of his kirk, and ministration of Justice amongs
us. We protest and promise with our heartis, under the same oath, hand writ, and
panes, that we sal defend his person and authority, with our geir, bodeis,
and lives, in the defense of Christis Euangel, Liberty of our Country,
ministration of Justice, and punishment of Iniquity against al enemies within
this Realm or without, as we desire our God to be a strong and merciful
defender to us, in the day of our death, and cumming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory
eternally. Amen.

The Kings Majesty's charge to all Commissioners and Ministers within this
Realm.
Seeing, that we and our Household have subscriued and given this publict
confession of our Faith, to the good exemple of our Subiectis. We command and
charge all Commissioners and Ministers, to crave the same confession of their
parochinars, and procead against the refusers, according to our Laws and order
of the Kirk, delyuering their names and lawful process to the Ministers of
our house, with all haste and diligence, under the pain of xl. pound, to be
taken from their stipend, that we with the adwise of our Counsel may take
ordour with sic proud contemners of God and our laws. Subscryued with our
hand. At Holyrudhons, (1580) the 2 day of March, the 14 yeir of our regne.

Imprented at Edinburgh be Robert Lekprewike.


