HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our (...) Messengers, our Sheriffs, in that part, conjunctly and severally
specially constitute greeting.
For So Much as we and the Estates of our Parliament presently conveened,
remembering that at the first institution of the College of Justice, and diverse
times thereafter in Parliaments ratifying the same; Our royal Ancestors and
Estates of our Realm then assembled, found the erection of that honorable
consistory, which is a biding monument of the glory of their reigns, not
only to be useful for royal service, but also necessary and profitable for
the peace of this our Kingdom, and to the seen good and comfort of all our
Subjects; And considering that the provision allowed of before to the Lords of
Session was no ways sufficient for defraying of their charges; And that
through their continual attendance, their private affairs are neglected, and
great losses thereby sustained by them: Therefore, and to the effect, the said
Senators and Lords of our Session, present and to come, may be more encouaged
to go on, and to persist as they do, in their zeal, and affections to our
service, and in faithful ministration of Justice, to the general weal of
this our Realm and our Lieges; The said Estates, with our special
approbation, and gracious good-liking, have most freely condescended, statute,
and enacted, that a taxation be presently imposed upon their lands and means,
which with our consent foresaid, they ordain to be collected and paid to the
effect, in manner, and at the terms following: That is to say, The Duke,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Lords, and Commissioners of Shires for the
temporal Estate, have granted that there shall be vplifted of every pound
land of old extent within this our Kingdom pertaining to Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Vicounts, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, and Fewers of our proper lands,
the sum of ten shillings money at every one of the four terms following,
viz. The sum of ten shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse
next to come in this instant year of God, 1633. The sum of other ten
shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse, in anno 1634. The sum
of other ten shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse, 1635. And
the sum of other ten shillings money at the feast and term of Martinmasse,
1636. And for the spiritual men and burrowes parts of the same taxation, that
there shall be uplifted of all Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, Abbacies,
Pryories, and other inferior benefices, and of every free burgh within this
our Kingdom, at every one of the four terms abouespecified; the just
taxation thereof, as they have been accustomed to be taxed in all time bygone,
whenever the temporal Lands of this our Kingdom were stented to ten
shillings the pound land of old extent. And for inbringing the (...) terms
payment of our burrowes parts of the same taxation, Our other letters are
direct, charging the Provest, and Bailiffs of each burgh to make payment of the
taxt and stent thereof to (...) Collector general, appointed for receiving of
the same taxation, or to his Deputs and Officers in his name, having his power
to receive the same, at the feast and term of Martinmas, in the year of God
one thousand six hundred thirty (...) years, under the pain of rebellion and
putting of them to our horn: For whose relief,

OUR WILL IS, and we charge you straightly and command, that incontinent these
our Letters seen, ye pass, and in our name and authority command and charge
the Council of that our burgh of (...) to conveene with you the said Provest
and Bailiffs, and elect certain persons to stent their neighbors; And the
same election being made, that ye charge the persons elected to accept the
charge upon them, in setting of the said stent upon the inhabitants of that our
said burgh: And to conveene and set the same, and to make a stent roll
thereupon as effeiris, within twenty four hours next after they be charged by
you thereto, under the pain of rebellion, and putting of them to our horn. And
if they failye, the said twenty four hours being bypast, that ye incontinent
thereafter denounce the disobeyers our rebels, and put them to our horn, and
escheat and inbring all their moveable goods to our use for their contemption.
And likewise the said stent roll being made and set down as said is, That ye
in our name and authority command and charge the Burgesses, Indwellers, and
Inhabitants within that our burgh, to make payment of their said stent to you
our said Provest and Bailiffs, Conform to the taxt roll to be made and given
out thereupon, within three days next after they be charged by you thereto,
under the pain of rebellion, and putting of them to our horn. And if they
failye therein, the said three days being bypast, that ye incontinent
thereafter denounce the disobeyers our rebels, and put them to our horn, and
escheat and inbring all their moveable goods to our use, for their contemption.
And if need be, that ye Our said Provest and Bailiffs poynd and distrenyie
therefore, as ye shall think most expedient, according to justice, as ye will
answer to us thereupon. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and
severally, Our full power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly
execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty eight day of June, and of Our
reign the ninth year. 1633. Per actum Parliamenti.

