THE BEAST IS WOVNDED. OR Information from Scotland, concerning their
Reformation. Wherein Is briefly declared, the true cause and ground of all the
late Troubles there; and the reasons why they have rejected the Bishops, with
their Courts, Canons, Ceremonies and Service-booke. Hereto Is added some
fruitful observations, upon the former declaration: by Io: Bastwicks younger
Brother.

JVDG. 5.31. So let thine Enemies perish, O Lord.

The first part.

Printed in the year that the Bishops had their downfall in SCOTLAND.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader; it is a note as the Wiseman, notes it, of a fool, to
believe every thing: I doubt not but thou have heard much of the Troubles in
Scotland; Now, that thou may not justify the wicked, and condemn the just,
which are both abomination to the Lord. I have thought fit, for thy good, to
publ sh this short relation: It came to me from such persons, as do well know
the proceedings of things there, from first to last; and therefore thou may
be confident that the same is true.

It seems by some notes which I find in the margent, that it was sent from a
Scotsman, to some good friend that he had in England: and in likelihood a
strict Nonconformist, who shows his good desire, that England might be reduced
unto Scotlands Reformamation, and not Stotland to Englands Deformation: But not
being willing to write of things whereof I have no cerraine knowledge, I will
therefore be silent, and leave thee to the reading of the discourse.

IT was the desire of King James (by whose instigation I know not It was some
Bish a thousand to one else. For what mischief is there, specially if done
against the true worship of God, but these Creatures of the Earth have their
hands chiefly in it. See Syons-plea; A Looking glass for the Prelates; the
Abreviate, etc.
that the Church of Scotland would admit, that such men as stood Ministers, to
those Churches, which in the time of Popery were called Bishoprics, might
have the Title of Lord-Bishops, and voices in Parliament. Parliaments will do
better without these men. For they well resemble, that filthy bird, which
caries this motto: contactu omnia faedat


To this the people consented, Better they had not; for they have smarted for
it ever since, as their own relation here manifests. As the Tro^ians in
consenting to take the Horse into their City, had their city spoiled by it:
So from the Hierarchy (as out of the Trojans Horses belly) has issued the
cause and ground of al their late troubles. Se Pro. 29 2.
and in the year 1602. it was by a Parliament confirmed; Yet so, as with
certain provisoes and conditions, then and there expressed: That is, that all
such as were then resident in such places; and all such as afterward should
happen to be presented to them, should by solemn Oath, and public
subscription, swear and be obliged, neither to propound nor give consent to
any thing propounded in Parliament, without a precedent Commission of a
general assembly. Moreover, that they should not pretend any authority or
jurisdiction above other Ministers, and that they should be as liable and
subject as any other Ministers to the Sentence and Censure of Presbyteries,
Provincial and National Synods: To be short, if they transgressed either
against those rules, or any other institution, which the Church tied them unto,
they might be (and should be) excommunicated by the Pres-bytery and Synod, and
deposed a beneficio and officio. Jf we had such Law with us in England, and
executed, we should not be troubled long with Bb nor any of that Brood downward
to the Parater. For their blasphemies; treaso^s, murders, etc are so obvious to
all men's eyes. As the severest punishments in any civil Court would be light
enought to be laid upon them. See Quench-Coale; Epist. Remonst. the last Parl.


Howsoever at the first thus they were sworn to do: And were admitted no
otherwise, neither upon other terms, but what is before expressed:
Notwithstanding they having gotten a footing, it was not long ere they brake
their Oath, and attempted many unlawful actions, to the great dishonor of Gods
name, the scandal of the Gospel, and to the likely dissipation of the whole
Church, had not the Lord prevented it, by a wonderful deliverance. Such a
deliverance God grant England; and when we see it, we will say; thy right hand,
O Lord, is become glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed in
pieces the enemies; and good cause too for this would prove to our Land a
greater blessing thenwas our deliverance from the Gunpowder treason. And
therefore we would nor fail to keep a day of thankesgiving in remembrance of
it; as did the Jews, after Hamon and his Sons were hanged.


It would required a large volume, to set down all the particular evils and
troubles, which those Lordly Prelates brought upon that Church; And more would
have brought, had not their horns By the Horns of the Beast, is meant the
Antichristian power, which they exercise over their brethren; By which (as a
Beast with horns, they push the godly sometime into prison, other-while to the
Pillary, many times into foreign Countries; so that until these horns be
cut off, there is no keeping house with them.
been cut off. Among other acts of their Lordly Government, they took upon
them to depose Ministers as they pleased, and when they pleased: And admitted
sundry scandalous persons The Prelates in Scotland never showed so much
prophanes this way, as ours have done; For whereas, idolaters, adulterers,
liars, forcerers, whoremonngers, thieves drunkards, and quid non, are allowed
and liked off; On the contrary, they suppress all them, who will not be their
Drudges, to serve the^, and their great Landlord the Pope; witness Wren the
Norridge Beast. See the unbish: of Timot. and Tit.
(like themselves) to the Ministry, and chardge of Souls; And kept back from
the Ministry all honest and able men, what they could. And not contented with
this, they procured from the King a warrant, under the show or pretense
whereof, they silenced the most Godly, learned and faithful Ministers in the
Kingdom: And also by the same authorities they brought into the Church many
Popish Ceremonies, to the general grief of the godly, both there, and in many
other places.

And these great abuses of theirs, they brough the sooner and easier to pass,
in regard there were some Courtiers and Counselors about his Majesty, that
were Popishly affected, and bore ill will to Sion: this is clear in the cause
of Melvin, Forbes, Bruce, and others Worthies of that Church who were exiled
Does the Church of Scotland reckon it for one of her greevances, that they have
unjustly banished some of her Ministers; How then would they have taken it, had
they seen them whipped in their streets: stood on Pillaries, burnd-marked (...)
about the time that the Earl of Northhamton and B. Bancroft had greatest
acceptance with K: James: So again when the 5. Articles were introduced by a
most illegal, injurious and violent way in the Assembly at Perth, who were
then present with the King, but Buckingam and B. Land, twosit instruments as
could be, to bring such an evil work to pass.

They having thus begun to spoil the Lords Vineard, afterward they caused
many idle pamphlets to be published, against that good old way, of Government
Our Bb. have a trick which the Scot. never used, that is to cast men into
prison, and there deprive them of all means of writing and then ser then
Parasites and Sycophants to rail against them; Now truly these are wise in
their generation, or they know had their opposites the liberty that they have,
they were better be ha^gd out of the way, then suffer the just shame which they
would do, for their filthy lies and blasphentiess.
of that Church; by which Government before their Lordships ruled, the corrupt
Doctrines, and ill lives of Preachers were severely corrected and suppressed;
But for their parts, they gave way and liberty, unto evil doers, and sought
only to curb and suppress the better sort.

Add hereunto their procuring from the K: a warrant for to exercise such a
jurisdiction in the civil Government Forgs (the Tipe of Bb.) are said to have 2
small threads hanging near their eyes, wherewith they make trapps, and lay them
in muddy places, for to devour the Fish; these tove threads signify the
civil and spiritual functions of Bb. wherewith (as the Frog with her two
threads) they take the godly and devour them.
as is inconsistent with the Laws of that Relame, the honor of the
Sovereign; and peace of that Country: Nay, not here withal are satisfied, but
seek further for a Commission from King Charles, and under show or color of
which warrant As the Scribes and Pharisees never left Pilate, till he had
passed sentence of death against Christ: So the Prelates are earnestly
importunate with the Kings of the Earth, to have Commission and vvarrant from
them, for to crucify Christ daily in his members.
they make many greevious acts of injustice, and greatly oppress many of his
Majesty's loyal and good subjects. If you complain of oppression, and think
you have just cause for it, to vvound the Beast; What may we say of our
oppressions, which are more for number, more heinous for nature, longer for
continuance, and more common and general. For what condition is there of men,
among us, but are horribly abused by them. See the Abbreviate.


These abuses are not all, for besides they have (vys and modis) used means to
gert another Commission from his Majesty, whereby to cover their unlawful
ways unto benefices, for themselves and their friends: and withal got a
color of an Act of Parliament, to bring the Surplusse into the Church, they
caused foam Popish Lords to sit upon the Articles of the Parliament An: 1633.
they were also the instruments that procured an act to be contrived, being a
racification of the Kings prerogative and power to impose such apparel upon
Churchmen in divine service, as he should think su; Yea and to bring this to
pass, they moved the King to press all men, either to consent or dissent to
the whole Act, as it was framed, thereby cunningly to draw all the
Parliament Men either to deny the K: prerogative, or else to consent to their
plott for the Surplusse.

More then this, they persuaded his Majesty to set down with his own hand,
the names of all the Noblemen that should descent from the aforesaid Act; and
that they should be taken as men disrespecting his Majesty and his Service, and
that he should not hear them to give any reason for their dislike of the
thing: And whereas there was found afterward with the Lord Balmerin: a
certain writing containing some reasons wherefore the Noblemen could not
ascent unto the said Act; And some other passages, expedient to vindicate their
persons and cariages from the reproach of being dis-affectionated to his
Majesty's Service, and this set down in a Potition, with an intent that it
should be presented to the King, by the Noblemen, but was not. The Bishops
getting a sight of this Copy, according to the rest of their doings, caused
this good Nobleman for having this Perition to be condemned of Legis
Majestatis; And it went near with his life. Our English Preates this way are
Nonesuch; For if they perceive a man to be an enemy to their unblessed
Kingdom, they will be sure to have his blood for it if they can: and this our
Noblitie know well enough, the which makes the^ the unwillinger, to power out
their vials upon the throne of the Beast.


Their Lordships having gone thus far, are not afraid to publish a Book of
most wicked Canons, Consider O England what cause thou have to free thy self,
out of the hands of these thieves and murderers, who have many years bound
thee, (as Tyrants and Turks do Gally-slaves to their oars;) I say bound thee
with their Canons, Articles, Injunctions (as so many irons and fetters) to row
for them, Romes Boat. So that Scotland bath nor the cause which thou have, to
putt those Amalekites to the sword.
among which, one is, that whosoever shall affirm that the Service-booke
(which was not yet out but in hatching) contains any thing erroneous, shall be
excommunicated, ipso facto. it was not long after this, ere they caused the
said Service-booke to be published. Which has in it, not only the Superstition
and Popery contained in the English Leiturgis, but some thing more; and that
they might bring the Church (nolens volens) to use this Jdol-booke, they
procured a Proclamation Quae: whether the Scotsmen did well, to refuse the
Service-booke, being commanded by the K. to use it; and quid sequitur.
to be published, wherein al his Majesty's (subjects were commanded, to
conform strictly thereunto, as to the only form of Gods public worship for
that Church.

Being thus swollen Nor like Ours: For their insolences are intolerable;
specially that little great Laud; but this gives me hope, that their shame and
fall is at hand; dross as soon as ever it has gotten up to the top, and
elevated it self above the pure metal, is then scummed off and cast away;
These like dross and scumme are risen up, above their betters; therefore etc.
See Psa. 119 199.
with a presumptuous conceit of their power, and thinking now that neither
great nor small, had either the courage or wisdom to stand in their way As the
Scots Bb. were deceived, so I trust will Ours be.
the Bishop of Ederb: in July 1637. gives order, to the Ministers of that
City, that they read the aforesaid Service-booke in their Congregatious: Which
would be such a Mass in Scotland as the Pope himself. Pope Pius 4 sent
Vincentio Parpatia Abbot of S. Saviors to Qu. Eliz: offering her to confirm
the English Leiturgy, if she would yield to him in some other things. Cambden
in An. 1560. L. Cook de jure div. Reg. Eccles. fol. 34.
I am sure, would willingly authorize and allow, provided that the King would
grant him such a Headship as must be granted him by such, as say their
Episcopal jurisdiction is Iure Divino, and derive their calling from the Pope.

And because this Bishop conceived, that all other towns in the Kingdom,
would follow the example of Edenb: he comes therefore himself into the
Cathedral Church, of purpose to have the said book there publiekly read: but
it fell not out according to his expectation: for the people not being for
merly tanght, that, that way and manner of Divine Worship, which they had ever
used from the reformaticn of that Church, was not fit nor lawful, neither it
structed by the BB: that the English. Popish service Book This all Reformed
Churches tax us for; viz. that the Servicebooke, is the Mass, translated into
English; and the Papist hit us for it in the teeth, saying that we are
behoulding to them, for mattens and Evening song; and this is known to our
people generally, which makes their cause theworse before God; in that they
offer him such a sacrifice, as their conscience tells them is an abomination.
was agreat deal better: nor being used to hear mattings and evening song,
and singing service: the Scotsmen I say not being used to such gear, could
not digest it: For they believed (and well they might,) that there was little
difference between this book worship and the Popes mass book The Scotsmen
say very true, as appears by the words of K. Edward the sixth; It seems to you
(says he in his Proclamation to the Rebels of the West) that you have a new
service, now indeed it is no other but the old, the selfsame words in
English which are in Latin etc If therefore the service of the Church, was
good in Lattin, it remains good in English for no thing is altered but to
speak with knowledge, that which was ignorantly before uttered. Act and
Monum. vol. 2, page 1497. 1498. Edit 5.
, saving that the one is in Latin the other in English. c Q uaer. Whether a
Papist saying the Mass in Latin, and not understanding how foolish, false, and
blasphemous it is, does not less offend, then he that speaks it in his own
tongue, and so knows what hotch potch and galle mawfry it is.


And howsoever the people generally, were greatly offended with the B. for this
his bold attempt: yet the women Let our Prelates look to it, least when
justice is not suffered to pass in an ordinary way, God raise not up other
means, to execute his wrath upon them. The Dukes death may be a warning for
them. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psa. 55,
23. Let that Blood-thirsty murderous Butcher Laud think of the place.
not so well able as the men to forbear open resistance and opposition, rose
up without any ceremony, and drove the B: and Deane out of the Church: I glad
to see them whipped out, by the K. and Parliam. se Psa. 69:25.
some what like to our Saviors whipping the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple.

The Bishop being vexed, that he was thus women beaten, and the rest of his
brethren being no less enrage thereat: what do they now? they do what they
can, to set more discord between the King and his good subjects: and specially
they seek to increase his wrath against the town of Eden: thinking that all
other towns in the land would be afliraid, to oppose any of the innovations,
which they sought to bring into that Church, if that city suffered some
disgrace at his Majesty's hands.

And to accomplish their wicked end this way, they procured 1: a recommendation
from his Majesly unto the town-councill, to choose for a Provest or Major (he
being dead that was before in place) one Hay, who had formerly served under
the Townclarke aman well acquainted with all the mercinarie ways, that could
be used for working upon that Community, and therefore the fitter man (as
their Lordships thought) to be chosen, for furthering the execution of their
deepeplots and designs: being Plots and designs, so contrary to, and against
their acts of Parliament, (Confession of faith, and the Public worship of God
in that Church: as they durst not discover the same, to any one man, that was
known to be honest or religious, or free from THAT CORRVPTION (you know what I
mean) which that Hay for these many years, in the whole course of his life
has been generally noted for. Novi Simonem and Simon me:

2. They procured a commandment from his Majesty, unto the Council and
Session and all civil Courts of instice, that they should depart from Eden:
and sit first at Lythgou afterward at Starling. If there were nothing else to
induce our King and State, to hunt those Vermins away; this were sufficient;
namely, their daily attempts, to set strife between them. Oh, that his
majesty did see, how ungrateful they are this way to him; As Screetch-Ovvles,
whiles they suck the Goats-milke do mar the Vdder, So these never draw any
benefit from Prin ces; But they will be fure (like unthankful Owls) to abuse
the^ for it if they can.


These unreasonable men growing thus worse and worse. the better sort at lenght
of every condition and quality in the Kingdom, began to take the matter (as
high time it was) home to heart: We have more cause a great deal: considering
what visiose and senceable miseries the Land lies under by their means;
Besides, there is now a fair apportunity, offered to his Majesty, to free his
three Kingdoms at once from the hurtfulst plagues that they have. If some
sormer Kings of this Land, had secne the way so clear, and the work so easy
as now it is, they would soon have taken off their corner Caps, and set a
Tyburn Tipper in the place there of.
and perceiving that unless there were some speedy course taken, to take
these little foxes Their Bb: may well be called Little Foxes, and ours the
great Foxes, for in respect of villainy and mischeife, to ours, theirs, are
no-bodies. Witness Laud, who is more Fox wise then all the Bb. in Scotland.
and cast them out head and tail from the Lords Vineard, Some may think that
such a work will be difficult here with us, but I am otherwise minded. For these
creatures are like nettles, which being softly handled do sting, but if they
are crust, the smart not, so these are least hurtful when they are most
crushed.
there would certainly come (and that soon) great prejudice to their religion,
to the honor of their King and to to themselves and their posterity, many
ways: They here upon perceiving I say (as men do the rain in a black cloud)
that senceable and visible dangers lay at their door, for prevention whereof,
made choice of one or two of the gravest Ministers in every Presbytery, and one
or two discreet gentlemen of every Shier, to present their complaints,
remonstrances and greviances to the Council, that by their mediation and
means, his Majesty might be acquanted with the same.

These Commisioners upon Sept. 23 Oct. 15. and December. 7. and 27. gave in unto
the Council, such supplications as were fit for his Majesty's information and
specially, that his subjects feared Our is more then a fear of innovation for
we have sundry innovations established among us, and the Prelates set their
jornymen on work, to defend them; as Heylen, Reed, Pocklington, and such like
Trencher Mates; Besides his ungracious graceles Speech in the Star Chamber.
an innovation in religion, whereby the common wealth was likely to suffer much.
They set us down a good pattern to follow; That is, to write up the wicked
works of the Prelates, and present them to his Majesty; and I verelie think,
if the King were rightly informed, what known Traitors they are, to God to
him, to the Land, and true Religion, and how detestable they are in the eyes of
his people, and how much it does alienate his subjects affections from his
Majesty, that such WORKERS OF INIQVITIE are suffered. I say if Majesty were
thoroughly possessed hereof, my mind gives me they should not tarry in his sight.


The Bishops perceiving that their works of darkenese w now coming to light
and, that the Commissioners taxed them, (and that to true) for many tresonable
assaults against their Religion established by law, and many years peaceable
professed, and also for seeking by crafty ways to bring into the Church, the
rags and dregs of the Babilonian whore: the Bb: I say perceiving this, use
means that the King, would refer all to the Council, whereof themselves
were a great part: and truly this was no small point of wisdom in their
Lordships, for they were not so blind, but they could see well enough, that
unless they themselves might be judges in their own Case, they would be
judged by others to be Vnsavery salt and hence forth good for nothing, but to
be cast out, and to be trodden under foot. What greater dishonor can it be to
our Nation, then to suffer such in high and eminent places, who in the esteem
of other Nations are fit only for the dunghill.


And that there ravenous wolves If the Church of Scotland do so Judge of them,
then let them beware that they do not upon any terms admit of them again.
For wolves being kept a while from their prey, do afterward fall a devouring
the more eagerly and greedily, so will those spiritual Wolves do, if they
can get again into their places.
, might escape the hands of such as were hunting after them, they procure (by
whose means I know not) a Proclamation to be published in Eden: sebr: 19.
1638. wherein all the aforesaid Commisioners (the hunters of the Fox) were
commanded under pain of treason to leave the towns of Eden: and Starling,
within six hours after the publication of the same: the words of the
Proclamation are as follows.

CHARLES etc. For so much as we out of our Princery care If Princes will take
care for Religion, they must do then what the Word of God directs the and
not what superstitious Prelates (for their case, profitt, pleasure, and such
worldly respects) persuade them to doc. See Psalm. 119.24 Gal. 4, 18.
of maintaining the true Religion all ready professed, and so beating down all
superstition: Having ordained a book of common prayer to be compiled for the
general and universal use and edification Hoccine credibile aut memorabile.
Will Satan cast out Satan: He were an unwise man, that would be persuaded,
that the way to get light into his house, were by shutting his doorers and
windows; They that should cast aside the true worship of Christ, and think to
edify themselves better by using the superstitions service-booke would show
themselves were foolish:
of our subjects within our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, the same being
accordingly don. In the framing whereof we took great care I believe the Bb.
took great care and pains to have it as full of superstition as they could,
but blessed be God, their labor was as vain as their work: and I hope the
great care and pains, that Laud and his Mates the Jesuits now take, to bring
in Popery, will prove so to, that is the contrivers either forced to fly into
other Countries, or hanged up at home for their treachery and villainy.
and pains, so that there is nothing past therein but was seen and approved by
us, before the same was divulgated or printed: assuring all our loving subjects
that not only our intention is, but even this very book a ready means to
maintain the true Religion already professed, and beat out all superstition,
of which in our own time we not doubt but in a fair course to satisfy the
judgments of our good subjects: But having seen and considered some petitions
and declarations given into our counsel against the said Book, and late
CANNONS of the book, find our regal authority much injured thereby, both in
the matter and the carrage, whereby we certify these of the Nobility, Gentry,
Barrons Ministers and others who have keept and assisted those meetings and
convocations for contriving and subscribing of the said petitions, to be liable
Better that men censured us for well doing, then that Christ in the last day,
should pass sentence of condemnation against us, for yielding unto their
unjust demands.
to our censure, in their persons and fortunes, they having conveyned
themselves without consent or authority: Yet because we believe that they have
done herein only out of a preposterous zeal, and without disloyalty or
disaffection in our Soveraingty: Our gracious pleasure (so far as concerns
those metings for consulting and subscription of the said petitions or
presenting of the same to any judges of this Kingdom) is to dispense therewith,
and with what may be the fault or error therein, to all such as upon
signfication or declaration of this our pleasure, shall retain themselves as
become good and dutiful subjects. As the 3 Nobles in Daniel were the Kings
good and dutiful subjects, albeit they bowed not before the image; So are the
Nobility, Gentry and Ministers in Scotland, good and dutiful subjects,
although they refuse the service-booke: Yea to say the truth they are better
subjects to his Majesty, then such as conform to it here in England.
To which purpose OUR WILL is henceforth, and we charge you straghtly and
command, that incontinetly these our letters seen, the particulers in our
name and authority proclamation thereof be made to all our liege subjects in all
places needful; that so none pretend ignorance hereof, and therewithal in
our name and authoroty It is no new thing for Princes, by the instigation of
wicked Prelates, to have their names and authority abused; I has was
Consiantines authority abused, when he authorized by the persuasion of Bb. the
Arrian Haeresie. So Theodesius when he established the Haeresie of Entiches; So
Arcedins when he banished Chrysostom.
that ye discharge charge all such convocations The way for his Majesty to
have such convocations and meetings discharged; is to discharge the Bb. of
their power and places, and in his name and authority, to call a Parliament,
and willingly to suffer a legal pro ceeding against the Prelates; and in this
God shall have glery, the King honor, the Land peace, and the enemies of the
Lord their due desert, and until this be, neither England nor Scotland will see
good days.
and meetings in time to come, under the penalty of Treason, and also that ye
command, charge and inhibit our leiges and subjects, that none of them on any
hand presume to resort or repair to the Borough of Starling, nor to any other
Borough, where our counsel and Session sits, till first they declare the
cause of their coming to our counsel, and declare their warrant to that
effect. And further that we command and charge all and Sundry Provosts,
Bayleives, and Magistrates within their Buroughs that they and every one of
them have a special care and regard, to see this our Royal will and pleasure
readily and dutifully observed in all points, and that no violence be suffered
within your bounds, under all the highest penalty, crime or offense that they
may commit against us in that behalf: And also that ye command and charge all
and sundry Noblemen Barrons and Burgesses who are not actually indwellers
within the Borough neither are of number of the privy counsel and Session,
and members thereof, and are already within this Borough: that they and every
one of them remove themselves, and depart and pass forth of the said Borough
(and not return again without the said warrant) within Six hours after the
publication hereof, under the said penalty of Treason: It is high time for the
Nobility both in Scotland and England to look about them, considering the
monstrous unparaled presumption of Bb. who are grown so impudent, as they are
not afraid to persuade Kings, to proclaim all the great Peers and Princes of
the Land, Traitors and Rebels, if they will not become the which used to bite
people, and howsoever he was spoken often unto of it, yethee reformed it not;
At last the curre wounded the man himself and his Children; at this he was
very angry and caused the curre to be hanged immediately. We poor men have
been a long time biten by the Prelaticall Dogs, and we have complained thereof
to your Honors but you (...)
And as concerning any petitions that shall hereafter be given to us upon this
or any otner Subject: we are likewise pleased to declare that we will not
shut our cares there from: So it be not prejudicial to our royal authority.
Given at Starling under our Signet the 19 of Febr: 1638.

Per actum Dominorum Consily.

For the safety of religion, the honor of the King, and the lawful liberties
and previledges of the subjects, the Nobility and Commissioners aforesaid, were
forced to publish a protestation against the Proclamation: and thus they say.

WE Noble men, It is a thing to be wished, that our Noblemen, Barens and
Ministers, would take to heart, the greevances of the time, and jointly seek by
a lawful way the redress thereof. We see in Worldly matters, what one cannot
do, many can; So in this case, howsoever some few single men, have not
prevailed with the King, to east out the bondwoman and her children, yet if
there be a general seeking by the whole Nation, there is no fear but he will
give a gracious answer.
Barrons and Ministers appointed to attend his Majesty's answer vnte our humble
petitions, and to present our gree uances and to do what else might lawfully
conduce to our humble desires. Did upon the 13. of September last, present one
supplication to your Lordships; and another upon October following: as also a
new relative to the former in December after the 19. day.

In all which we humbly remonstrated, our just exceptions against the Service
book, and book of Cannons, Archbishops and Biships of this Kingdom, as the
contrivers, They may well be called contrivers; for I know not, for what use
they are in all the world, unless it be to contrive ways, how to suppress
Christ's Kingdom, and to advance Antichrist.
meanteaners and urgers thereof; and against their sitting as our Judges When
will thieves, murderers, etc. be punished if none, but themselves may judge
their cause. Might the Bb. be brought to an impartial trial, no doubt but
they would be soon condemned, for notorious malefactors; But if their facts
may not be examined any where, but where they themselves are Judges, it will be
long enought before they suffer according to their merit.
until the causes between them and us be decided.

And withal we earnestly suplicated to beeridd and delivered from these
evils, If the Scotsmen have just cause,, to seek his Majesty, that they may
be rid of Bb. and their Tail. What cause have we then, to seek for it, having
been a thousand sold more basely abused by them, then ever they were; Truly
it is to be wondered that we are still; but it may be our Nation forbeares to
petition his (...) in earnest
and from all other innovations of that kind, introducted against the laudable
laws of this Kingdom: as namely that of the High Commission and other evils
particularly and generally mentioned in our lupplications and complaints: And
that these our Parties, delinquent against our religion and laws might be
taken order with, and these pressing greeuiances be redressed, according to
the Laws of this Realm, as in our supplications we have more largely
expressed, the which we gave unto your Lordships upon the 19. December
aforesaid, against the Archbishops and Bishops our parties, who by consequence
therefore neither could be, nor may be our Judges.

Whereupon your Lordships declared by your act given at Dealkieth the said 19
of December, that you would present our Petition to his Majesty Royal
consideration, and that without any prejudice to us the said Supplicants, and
moreover that we should be heard, It is a crying none of this Land, that the
poor man's cry is not heard; And this comes to pass, through the crast of
Prelates, who seek to have their causes justified in all Courts without any
trial or examination. If a Bat touch a Storkes egg, it becomes (they say)
addle after. I know not what the secret operation is, that Bb. have in their
touch: But this I know, by their touch they make many addle eggs, or rather
addle heads both in Church and Commonwealth.
in time and place convenient, and in the mean time we should receive no
prejudice as the said act it self testifies for us.

Now whereas we your supplicants (with long patitence and hope grounded upon
sundry promises) were exspecting an answer unto our fore named humble desires,
we understood of some direction from his Majesty, to your Lords of his
highness privy counsel, touching our complaints: and upon the same addmitted
the consulting and judging If the Nobility, Barons,' Ministers, and c. had
submitted their cause upon the Kings Commandment to the Bb. their Church had
not been so soon purged of Romish Superstition. And for our parts, unless
with the Noole Scots we refuse to admit them for our Judges, we shall never
shake them of with their spiritual whoredoms.
both, of our supplication, and the Kings answer there to, unto the
Archbishops and Bishops our direct par-ties: Contrary to our protestation
given at Dealkeeth, and since renewed at Starling: and contrary to your
Lordships foresaid act It much impeacheth the honor and reputation of
Statesmen, to comply with Prelates; For howsoever they hold up their heads,
look big upon the matter, and Bless themselves; yet, by good and bad, they
are hated all the Land over, and it is a received Maxim among the people, that
he cannot be honest, and be for the Bishopes. If a Horse chance to step in
the track of a Wolf, he is made lame by it. These Wolves have the like strange
operation, for whosoever comes into their way, he halts for ever (...).
made at Dealkeeth.

Least therefore our silence should be prejudicial to this so importunate a
cause, as concerns Gods Glory and worship, our Religion and Salvation, the
laws and Liberties of this Kingdom: or derogatory to our former supplications
and complaints: or in brief, not answerable to the trust of our commission:
we are forced out of our bounden duty to God, our King and native Country to
take instrument in the no taries and Clerks hands (seeing your Lordships
refuse to admit our Declimiter for remouall of these of our parties) and to
protest in manner following.

1. We protest that we may, and ought to have a immediate course to present
our just greeviances to our sacred Soverainge, and in a legal way and manner
to prosecute the same, before the ordinary competent judges, Civil or
Ecclesiastical: without any offense either offered by us, or taken by your
Lordships.

2. We protest that the Archbishops and Bishops the parties whom we
complain upon, cannot be reputed or esteemed lawful judges, to sit in
iudicatory within this Kingdom Civil or Ecclesiastical, upon any of us the
said supplicants: until they do by lawful trial iuditiously purge
themselves of such crimes as we have already laid to their Charge: offering
our selves to prove the same whenever his Majesty shall be pleased to give us
audience.

3. We protest that no act Our Land would be happy, if it were free from the
unjust acts and Censures of Orelates; For truly Israel never sighed more,
under the Egyptian bondage, the^ the better sort, everywhere cry out and
complain of their oppression and cruelty. It may be they think, that our
consciences (like Sampsons Shouldiers) are strong enought to bear all the
loads they lay upon us. But our State has learned now of Scot land, how to be
eased of their burden
or proclamation, whether pasd or here after shall pass, in the counsel, and
by the states of Archbishops and Bishops (our par-ties and whom we have
declyned to be our Judges) shall in no wise be preiudicall to us, that is,
either to our persons, or lawful meetings, proceedings and persuits.

4. We protest that neither our selves, nor any others, It is a sweet Harmony
when me^ join together in good actions; Certainly were there such an accord
among the Nobility, Barons, Ministers, and. her e in England. It would make
these proud Nimrods hearts to quake: For their hope of standing, is in regard of
the divisions in the Nobility, Ministers, and c. but my mind gives me, God
will put it into their hearts shortly, to show the^ a Scots trick
whose hearts the Lord shall move to join with us in our supplications against
the aforesaid innovations, shall incur any danger, either in life, lands, or
any political or Ecclesiastical penalty: For not observing such acts,
Books, Cannons, Writs, judicatories and proclamations introduced without, or
against the acts of Parliament, or statutes of this Kingdom. But it shall be
lawful for us and them to use our selves in matters of Religion, The Scots
Nation is worthy of honor above many Nations; For that in Religion, they have
not been the Servants of men, neither follovved their Kings, otherwise then
their Kings have followed Christ. Contrariwise it is the shame and blott of our
Nation, that in matters of Gods worship, we are as our Princes are, and ready
to turn and change as they do, and what does this argue, but that men serve
not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies.
or the external worship of God, and policy of the Church; according to the
word of God, and the laudable constitutions, of this Church and Kingdom.

5. Seeing all such as have taken these innovations to heart, have by a legal
and submissiue way of supplications sought redress, and been calm and quiet
in hope of reformation: We protest therefore that if inconvenience shall happen
to fall out (which we pray God to prevent) upon the pressing of the said
innouations or evils, generally and specially mentioned in our former
complaints, and upon your Lordships refusal, to take order for redress. That
the same shall not be imputed unto us, who most humbly desire to have all
things redressed by order.

6. We protest before God, the Heavens, and the Angles, that these our Request
(proceeding from conscience, and our due rerespect to his Majesty's honor) do
tend to no other end, but to the preservation of the true reformed religion,
the Laws and Liberties of his Majesty's most ancient Kingdom and the
satisfaction of our humble desires contained in our supplications, according to
his Majesty's goodness and justice; From whom we do certainly exspect, What
they exspect, appears by their petitions and complaints; viz. the exercise of
true Religion, the abolishing of all Popish superstitions, and a Parliament to
arraigne the Bb. upon the crime of Innovations. And I believe that these
things, his Majesty will grant them. The which if he do, then I doubt not,
but our Nobility, Barons, and Ministers will sue to his Majesty for the like
grant, that so this way, and not in Antichrists way, there may be a uniformity
between the two Kingdoms.
that his Maj. will proceed and grant remedy to our just petitions and
complaints, as may be exspected from so gracious a King toward his loyal and
dutiful Subjects, calling for redress of so oppressing greevances, praying
heartily that his Majesty may long and prosperously reign over us. AMEN

THis protestation being published, the Prelates hereat were so daunted, as
their courage began to fail So will the hearts fail of our Bb. if the State
deal roundly with them; For they may be well compared to the Crocodile, who is
feirce and terrible to such as fear her, and run from her; But of no courage
in standing out against strong oppostion. Or rather like the Ass, that wrapped
himself in the Lions skin, and marched a far of, to strike terror in the
hearts of the Beasts, but when the Fox drew near, he not only perceived his
long ears, but likewise discovered him, and made him a jest to all the Beasts
of the forest.
them, and what to do, they know not; for they perceive that their Kingdom of
Darkness, is now falling Mise perceiving that the House wherein they are, is
about to fall, do incontently leave the place; These Bb. showed the wit of a
Mouse, in running away in time, and for my part I cannot blame them much for
it, neither would be very sorry, if ours would do so too, considering they know
that their cause is so ill, as they cannot with comfort stay, and suffer for it.
and out they must. Hereupon some of them secretly fled away into England, and
these poor hearts, being full of grief, used sundry episcopal means, or
antidotes to expel the venomous desease, which they brought with them from
Scotland; and among other chose helps (as fitting best their place and
calling) two or three of them, made themselves stark drunk; and in one night,
brake 12: or 14: dozen of venice glasses, in drinking healths over and over, to
the confusion of their enemies.

Others of them in the mean time, employed themselves in the affairs of their
state, and craved his Majesty's aid and assistance, and to prevail this way,
they made greevious complaints against the Scotts, and persuaded the King to
take up arms against them, The Peast Duron perceiving her self almost taken,
avoyds a great deal of dung thinking by the noy somnes thereof, to hinder the
hunters from following her. This filthy shift dee the Bb. use, for when they
see that the State has almost eatch them, they seek to eseape, by avoiding
their dung; that is, secrerly reporting to the King, many lies and vile
slanders against the hunters of them.
for seeing fair means would not do it, fowl means might: moreover they
would persuade him, that it could not stand with his honor and I know not any
Honor or good Service, that ever his Majesty had by them; but rather Iosse and
prejudice; for as the ivy claspes the oak, only to suck out sap from it, for
her leaves and her ries; so these seek to be in Princes favor, only thereby
to raise themselves, and for nothing else.
safety to suffer The finer parts being severed from the grosser, there
follows clearenes, sweetness, pureness, etc. So when our Land is once purged
from the infection of the Prelacie, both King and Subjects will do the better
after.
that Kingdom to be without Bb.

Great joy The like cause of rejoicing the Lord send to England. For I am sure
they have occasioned sorrow and grief to her these many years.
there was in Scotland when they heard the Bitesheepes had left them: and the
saying every where was: The Lord has don great things for us. And now they
found that true in Prav. and that in the Poes-

Venit post multos vnaserenae dies. And because they resolved, to keep peace
Our Prelates are like Nahash the Ammonite, who would not be at peace with
Iabesh, Gilead, unless he might trust out all their right eyes; So they cannot
abide any man, neither will have accord with him, but persecute him to the
death; Who will not sin against knowedge and conscience in yielding to their
filthy baggage and trash.
with holiness among them, they took counsel what was best to be don for the
effecting hereof. If was at last by mutially consent agreed upon, to renew
their ancient Covenant with God, and one with another, the which band or
Covenant being composed, it was generally subscribed too, by all the better
sort in the Kingdom.

And as I have heard, one maine reason wherefore they were so careful to take
such a course as the Prelates should no more come among them, was in regard
they saw such cruelty and basenese, in the English Bb. Such is there baseness,
that they are spoken of everywhere; and in truth, sorraigne nations do admire,
that so generous a nation as the English can suffer such Dunghill Worms, to
exercise the cruelty that they do over them. But I believe England will
vindicate her Honor shortly this way, and like Scotland will drive away these
Locusts from her Coast; And then it will truly be said of both Kingdoms, what
is commonly said: Great Britain the most renown and famous I Will in the World.
for said they, howsoever hitherto, Ours have not don so wickedly as they: yet
who knows what they may do in time: therefore it is good to keep them out
whiles they are.

The Confession follows.

THis Covenant being made, and order given for subscription to it throughout
the Land; the Bb. hereat reged beyond measure. And like Athaliah cried out
Treason Treason: The Prelates are like him, who being only guilty of follome:
Yet in the persuru cries out as mainly as he can, stop the thief, stop the
thief, not caring who is apprehended, so himself may escape without danger:
So they, howl it the Arch traitors, to God and the King, notwithstaning are so
impudent, as to chardge others with such crimes, as themselves only are guilty
of.
And because they saw it was in vain for them to use the courses which they
had done before; viz. of silencing, banishing, imprisoning, fining, etc. (for
no man now would be so used by them We do much dishonor the Gospel to obey
any of the Bb. Articles, Canons, Censures, etc. the same being against Gods
Law and Acts of Parliament. Bur rather stand fast (as the brave Scots) in our
Christian Liberty, and say to those workers of iniquity, (as Christ will say
one day to them) depart ye cursed of the Lord, we know you not.
they be ganne to make ojbections against the Covenant, as thus. If the
Prelates could not help themselves mere by their Pursevants Iayles Pillaries,
etc. then they can by disputation: as no man now loves them, so then no body
woald fear them: For as soon may a man persuade ihem to hang themselves in
their Courts, as to reason by the Word of God, with any godly man that comes
before them. All their ability lies in this terrible argument: Take him away
Jailer.


1. They produce an Act of Parliament An. 1585. which prohibited all leagues
and bands made by subjects without the Kings consent, under pain as being
holden and punished as movers of Sedition, and such is this Covenant and
subscription.

to this it is answered. 1. Seeing the band and union is for the maintenance of
true Religion, the Kings Authority and Laws, and for the public welfaire and
peace of the whole Realm, against such as seek the ruin thereof; It cannot
be justly tear med such a league among subjects, as by the foresaid act is
prohibited.

2. Ours is no private band of some particular persons, but a public one, of
the collective body of the whole Land; Now, it may not be thought, that they
who made the Act, intended to prohibit themselves from entering into Covenant
with God, and for God and the King.

3. This is no band against Law, but a renewing only of a Confession of Faith,
which King lames authorized both by proclamation and his practice too.

But admit there were some inform alitie in it, in regard they craved not his
Majeties consent before they made the Covenant; Notwithstanding (rebus sic
stantibus) considering to what extreme miseries What Mariners a case either
they can not crane the masters aid, or if they crave it, cannot optaine it, I
say in such a case, what mariners will not endeavor, to preserve the vessel
from drowning, rather then sit still, and so master and men peerish together.
I leave the application to the wise reader
many ways the Bb. had brought them, it was as necessary and lawful for them
to do wnat they did, for the good of the Church; as was Hesters approaching to
King Assuerus, before he held out his goulden Scepter, made necessary and
lawful by reason of the eminent danger that they were in, through Hammous
suggestion to the King.

Another thing objected by the Adversary is, that all such as subscribe to
this Covenant, oblidge themselves to practice such things, as by the act of
Perth Assembly was appointed to be used.

To this they answer. 1. For Perth Assembly, they say as Ambrose said of the
Council he would at Ariminum, illud ago concilium exhorreo. That Convocation was
not Lawful: For the moderators and other members thereof, were not rightly
chosen. Again, the carriages of all businesses went by craft and guile, After
such a manner are their innovations brought into the English Church that is,
either by craft or violence, or both. For the Bb. know, that they are so well
beloved in England, that it is not possible that any thing should be don for
their meantenance, in a fair and legal way. As Wolves take the advantage of
the dark night, for to kill and devour the Sheep: so these Wolves, make use
of in justice and violence for to praey upon Christ poor lambs.
and not legallie and impartially, Besides, seeing their chief pretense for
the introduction of genu-cultus then ordained, was because the memory of
superstition was past. It must follow that they who forbear the practice, have
as good, or rather a better reason for it; Namely, because the practice of it
will revive thememory of superstition.

Lastly, it is well known, that sundry of the innovations concluded at Perth,
have not been by the Prelates themselves yet practiced; Howsoever the Prelates
do press conformity: yet it must not be thought that they do it of any
conscience: but they invent certain Ceremonies, Canons, Articles, etc. Unto
which they think no honest man will subscribe: and so hope, by keeping out all
able and faithful men from the ministry, and giving others just occasion to
leave their Churches, they hope (I say) in a little time, to bring the whole
nation to be Athests and Papists, and they (omnia samilia) as birds of a
feather, they will agree well enought.
Now, by the same reason and ground that they omit some of those innovations,
the subscribers may forbear the practice both of them and the others also; And
the rather seeing most Churches As the Lion (in the Greek fable) would needs
have the Ass, and fox to be of his Council: because he knew they would do
any thing that he should command them, so the Bb. place abroad in the parish
Churches of the Land, either Knaves or Fools: for they know, that such
fellows like (Foxes and Asses) will do any thing at their courmaund: I say
any thing, so that it be for advantage. As that lewd fellow professes in the
poet, Dorio the Baud: non pudet vanitatis: minime, dum ad rem: Had we such
in the Kingdom, have not to this day acknowledged, the things there
concluded, for the constitutions of a lawful assembly.

It is further objected, that Perth Assembly was ratified by an Act of
Parliament Ann. 1621. and therefore the Subscribers obleidge themselves to
forbear to practice that which by Parliament they are commanded to practice.

To answer it, 1. Parliamentarie Ratifications, can no way alter Church Canons,
concerning the worship of God; For it being but a Counsel, the Parliament
cannot turn it into a precept; No more then it can change precepts into
Counsels, For that were rather to make Laws and Canons in matters of Religion
then to confirm them.

2. There are no commanding words in the ratification, which can simply bind,
the greater and better sort of subjects, to a literal obedience of the
Articles made in that assimbly: the reason is, because there was a supplication
given to the members of that Parliament, before they sat, that they would be
pleased to hear such grounds and reasons, as should be exhibited to them
against the ratification of Perth Assembly. Moreover when the Supplicators were
suppresd, they made their protestation in due time and place according to order
of law. Besides his Majesty Commissioners in that Parliament solemnly promised,
never to press They have had more favor shown them, then we have had: for
Ceremonic here are so urged, as that the Omission of them; is more seve rely
punished, the the breach of any law of God: yea the truth is, so men we be,
Ceremonioush supestitious. It is a^ the religion the Bb care or and it is a^
much religion as the have themselves.
the execution of the act, no penalty should be exacted, and that there should
not be any further of conformity to the English Ceremenies: in short the a
foresaid Subscribers have protested against jurisdiction of Prelates, and
inparticular against their high Commission, The City of Alexandria in Egypt
nourished the great bird this to deno^ garbage and offall ^^ it, and to cleanse
the streets; but he left (...) his own fithines at beaslines more noisome
behind him the high Comissi^^ Court is allowed under a pretense cleanse the
hand the Offals of sin but the truth is, th^^ it does not: but b^^ther like
that b^ voyds so much du^^ and filthiness as (...) the whole Kingdom is annoyed
therewith our state therefore shall do well to (...) down this house of Baal,
and (as losiah did the house of the Sodomites) turn it to a la^ or
draught-house, and so it shall keep still its nature and kind.
and all other their Courts, Canons, Articles, and proceedings.

no doubt but these, and other such like objections, were suggested to his
Majesty, and seeing he heard not the ansers Princes should be like the sun,
which casts her shining beemes upon all a like his Majesty will be pleased to
receine ^our charges and proofs against the Bb. in as f^^ and favorable a
way: as he does their charges without preffe against us we doubt but to make it
clear, yea and his Majesty shall conseld it, that they are neither fit
Church or Common wealth.
d It has been the overthrow of maine brave princes, to take things upon the
(...) of the reporter: for by this means dissentions have fallen out between
them their best subjects, and here upon, treacherous men (as the Prelates are)
have taken (...) time and advantage to hurt both parnies.
it is possible he might be offended with his best subjects: specially
considering, that his Majesty has things presented to him, in such shapes and
lineaments as the Prelates conceive to to be most for their own ends and
advantages. notwill standing such was his Maisties wisdom and love to his
ancient Subjects, as that he refused to attempt the actions which some
persuaded him unto. What Prelates are, the Spun of God shows in Rev. 16.13.
viz. the unclean pirits which go unto the Kings of the hearth, together them
to battle against the Saints. Now, as Aliad being encouraged by his false
Prephers, to go against Raniath Gilead, was undone by it: So many in mking the
Bb. counsel to war against the Gespell, have been undone by the means, in
their state honor, posterity.
But sent the Mar: of Ham: down into Scotland, to hear what they could say for
themselves: and how they could justify the band they had made and So to
certify his Majesty how all things stood: And no doubt but his Majesty did
this the rather as conceaving in his royal breast, that it was not possible,
that so many of his best suband men of the greatest integrity and prudence,
would have agreed together in an action of such a nature without Some
considerable reason and cause.

The Marquis being come into Eden: much speech passed between him and the
commissioners for the Land: they craved the indiction of a free Aslembly and
Parliament, as the only remeady of their miseries: he required a rendering up
of the whole copies of the Subscribed Covenant telling them that this would be
a means to remove all fears of the Kings wrath against the subscribers and If
they refused to do so, the King: b The same remedy we crave here in England;
the which being granted, we feaoe not that but Church and Commonwealth, shall
be both the better for it. What Children seeing Serpents creeping in their
Fathers and Mothers bosom, will not kill them to preserve their Parents: Those
Bb. as so many venomous snakes, lie in the bosom (as it were) of our Abimelech
Father King and of the Church; Now, the Parliament Men as good Children will
kill those Serpents, that so both Father and Mother may live and prosper.
(it might by) would not grant them an affemblie or parliament, for
establishing religion, and settling the Peace of Kirk and Kingdom.

But they answered that thus they could not do, for if they should they should
not be free of the great guiltines of peruirie before God: Note the wickedness
of our Bb: it is their order to have infams in baptisine, to vow and promise by
their sureties to fight againct the devil and al his works. yet afterward,
they do what they can, to make them perinted and foresworne in requiring them,
to fight for the Devil and his works: that (...) for them and the Pope.
Again in this they should destroy what they had before built and confess
themselves to be trespassers, bfore they saw it besides they should show great
unthankefulnes unto God, for a work which by his good spirit they were moved
to do. Moreover the demand was more then the Commissioners could do, in
regard many thousands in the Land besides themselves had subscribed: To be
short, they said, and that truly, if they should grant this, all the World
would wonder at their inconstancy, and their enemies would mock at them, and
traduce them, as perjured Covenant-breakers, and Troublers of the peace of the
Kirk and Kingdom. And whereas there were many promises made of great matters
that the King would do for them: if they would render up the Copies to him.
Their answer was: that this was not the first time, It is the property of the
fox to come toward the sheep upon his belly, and to show him selfea far
off, as if he meant no harm; but being gotten with in them and where he would
be: then like a fox he kills and spares not so the Prelates, till they become
where they defire to be, they are very freindly and full of fair promises, but
having gotten what they seek for, then like soxes as they are they spoil ane
devour the Lords sheep.
that fair promises had been made them: for not urging of of Articles already
concluded, and for not trouble them with any further innovation the which
being credited, did ensnare many and drew them on to do that, which
otherwise they would not have don: all which promises have been broken and
denied, when the per formance was craved, and why may they not exspect the like
in this case, especially where the thing wilbee found more hard and difficult.

There being much time spent, and no conclusion made of any thing, at the last
there comes down a Proclamation from the King. The which was problished at the
Mercate Cross of Edinburg the 4 of July 1638. the effect whereof was this.
That his Majesty was not ignorant of their great desorders If there be
disorders among them, the greatest ault lies on the Proclates who have been the
chief Authors and causers of it. And therefore his Majesty shall do very
well, to se them severelie punished, who have by their attempts to bring
peoperie into that Church occasioned much trouble in that Kingdom we use to
blame such as set the house on syer, and not the good people which seek to
quench it: so etc.
here, occasioned as is pretended, upon the introduction of the Service-booke;
Book of Canons, etc. thereby fearing innovation of Religion and Laws. At this
his Majesty professes, to greeve to see them run headlong into ruin. Yet
out of his innative indulgence to his people, he desires to reclay me them from
their faults in a fair way: Rather then let them perish in the same. And for
further clearing of scruples he promises not hereafter to press the practice
of the said Service. book and Canons, but in a fair and legal way, That
which is against the c^omaundement of God cannot lawfully be urged in any way
what soever: now there is nothing more sure, then that the service book and
book of can: are accursed things, and therefore ought not to be rged or
received by any. He that drinks povsen out ofa goulden cup, kills himself
as soon as if he took it our of an Iron or Wodden Vessel: So Superstition
brought into the Church in a plausible and peaceable way, is as deadly a poison
unto the receivers of it, as if they were compelled and forced to take it.
etc. And for the High Commission he will rectify it It is as possible to wash
the Black-moore white. As by any rectifications to make the high commission a
lawful court. If his Majesty, do take the advice of his Council about it, I
am sure (if they be not Bb: or Athests or Papists.) they will Counsel him to
pull it all down, for there is not one stone in that building which God allows.
with the help and advile of the privy Counsel, etc. And for geuerall
Assemblies and Parliament it shall be indicted and called with his convenience.

In conclusion, he requires and heartily wishes all is good Subjects not to
suffer themselves to be seduced and misled under Religion into disobedience,
and draw on infinitely to his grief their own ruin. Which he has and still
shall strive to save them from so long as he sees not Royal authority shaken
off.

The Kings Proclamation being published, the Noblemen, Barrons, Gentlemen,
Burrowes, Ministers, and Commons made a Protestation against it to this effect:
1. That they will constantly adhere according to their vocation and power to
their Reformation at first. Notwithstanding of any innovations introduced
either of old or late.

2. That they will adhere to their supplications given in at Assemblies and
Parliaments, against the Service-booke, Book of Cannons the High Commission,
etc. 3. That they will adhere, with their hearts As I rejoice to see such
constancy in the Scotsmen, so it greeves me to the heart, to think what reeds
shaken with the wind our people generally are. As Ioab after he had fought many
battles bravely and stoutly; yet died himselse at last in shame and digrace;
Even so many Preachers and Professors, having a while refused conformity to
the Beast, have afterward basely yielded to the Bb. and so gone to their
graves, with shame and dishonor
to their Oath and subscription of the Confession of Faith. 4. That this
Proclamation or Act of Council or any other Act or Proclamation, etc. shall no
ways be prejudicial If it be held a base thing among men not to keep a man's
Word and Promise, it is much worse to break Covenant with the Lord, yet so do
all those, who promise to fear God, and do his work in his own way, and yet
do the commandments of the Prelates.
to the Confession of Faith. Laws and Liberties of their Kingdom, nor to
their supplications Lawful meetings, etc. 5. Seeing their Supplications, for
Reformation, are delayed and in effect refused, whatsoever trouble or
inconvenience fall out in the Land in the mean time, for want of those
ordinary remedies, not to be imputed to them.

In short, they protest that it shall be Lawfulll for them, to defend and
maintain that Religion, Laws, and Liberties of their Kingdom, the Kings
authority in defense thereof, and every one of them one another in that cause,
of meantaining the Religion and the Kings foresaid authority, according to
their power, vocation, and Covenant, with bodies, lives, means, etc. against
all persuits whatsoever, or against all external or internal invasions,
menaced in this Proclamation. 6. They protest, that their former Supplications,
meeting, and mutual defenses, are to be commended as real duties of faithful
subjects, Que. Whether England has not as much Previledge, to reject the
Service Book and Canons, High Commission, and all other such like Idolitries,
and to establish and maintain the true worship of God, as has Scotland.
and not to be styled great disorders, misdeamenours, blind disobedience,
under pretext of Religion and running headlong into ruin, etc.

In conclusion they exspect that his Majesty will presently indict these
ordinary remedies of a free Assembly and Parliament to their just
supplications, which may be exspected from so just and gracious a King. When
the men of Isreel were offended with their Brethren, for that they had brought
the K. his Household over and Jordan, Judah answered; the K. is near of Kin to
us. Wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? This may serve as a reason,
why the Scots are first in bringing the King home from his enemies the Bb. the
K. is near of kin to them. Now, for the State of England, if they have any
zeal of God, and love to the King, they will further this good work of Judah
so happily begun for the Kings safety and honor.


This don John Earl of Caffles etc, in the name of the Noblemen, Master
Alexander Gipson younger of Durie, in name of the Barrones, Master John Ker
Minister at Salt. Prestoun, in name of the Ministers, and Master Archbald
Iohnston, Reader hereof, in name of all who adheres to the Confession of Faith,
and Covenant lately renewed within this Kingdom, Took Instruments in the
Hands of three Notars present, at the said market cross in Edinburgh; being
environed with Numbers of the aforesaid Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Borrows,
Ministers and Commons, Before many Hundred witnesses; and craved the extract
thereof: And in token of their dutiful respect to his Majesty; confidence of
the equity of their cause and innocence of their carriage, and hope of his
Majesty's gracious acceptance, They offered in humility, with submise reverence,
a Copy thereof to the Herald.

These things being ended the Marquess leaves Eden; and goes back to London,
now what followed touching those afaires you shall-know in the next part

Rev. 18.9. Reward her even as she rewards you: and double unto her double
according to her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double:

FINIS.

