THE BELGIC SOVLDIER: WAR WAS A BLESSING.

2. CHRON. 33. 7. Be strong and courageous: fear not, neither be afraid for
the King of Ashur, neither for all the multitude that is with him: for there be
mo with us, then is with him. Printed 1624.

THE BELGIC SOVLDIER: War was a Blessing.
WHen Athanatius opposed the multitude of Arrian Bishops, it seemed so
dangerous to the established government of the Empire, that his castigation was
threatened by expulsion or fear; Yea Liberius that took his part, was checked
by the Emperors own letters for affecting the opinion of that wicked man; But
when again his fair demeanor and religious constancy drew away the veil of
superstition, ignorance, and heresy: whereby the Emperors eyes were opened to
rejoice in the sunny splendour of truth; Constantine admitted him within his
embraces: and all those adherents of Arrius were confounded by their own
wilfulnes.

Thus has it fared with all innouations; yea, Christ himself was subject to
traducing, for abolishing those ceremonies on which the Jews were besotted,
for prophesing against that Temple, about which the Priests were so pussled,
and for preaching the doctrine of salvation, against which the people were so
enraged; and yet in the end, they that were not credulous of his doctrine and
miracles when he was alive, believed a few Fisher-mens reports after he was
dead.

Thus must I needs incur the displeasure of time seruers, the scoffs and
dirision of Papists, and the repining of Hispanolised English, when I go about
to prove, that war has been better then peace, and the Commonwealth and
religion of England, have had their fame and propagation by opposing
Antichrist, and in plain terms, must recover her ecclipsed prosperity
reputing Spain our opposite. Concerning whom, let me remember what is reported
of Caesar, who hearing of the death of a Roman Soldier that had lived merrily
and securely, yet dyed greatly in debt and men's dangers: he desired to buy his
bed and pillow, deeming some rare virtue to be therein, whereon a man could
sleep so soundly that lived in so manifest trouble. So though I desire no
pillow nor bed from under the King of Spain: yet with Caesar I protest, there
is some wonder of nature belongs to him, that can sleep at all, having so many
encombrances to wrestle with, and intricate sedgy weeds of disturbances to
wind out of.

For ever since Phillip the seconds marriage with England, and that the
ambitious humor in being an Emperors son, swelled beyond the degrees of
comparison with other Princes: how has Spain bestird himself to the
affrighting of Europe, and moved of purpose out of his own fair and serend
element, to look on his neighbors with retrograde aspects in contrarious
orbs: so that other Kings may demand, what has Spain to do in most of the
Provinces of Europe: which at this instant touches France and England so
near, that they had need deal with him; as Henry the 8 did of famous memory.

At first by reason of consanguinity (yet personal marriages do not rule
Princes affairs,) he joined with the Emperor against France, and by his
anxiliary forces Charles the 5 not only expulsed the French out of Italy, but
at last sacked Rome, and took the Pope and his Cardinals prisoners; as he had
done the French King at the battle of Pauy; but as he was running away with
these advantages, King Henry looked about him, and entertained a kind of
jealousy against his greatness, as suspecting what an ambitious conqueror
might effect: whereupon by degrees he retracted, supposing it high time to
rebate his insolency, and lay as it were a cooling card upon his forwardness.
So not only the French King was releiued, but Pope Clement ransomed.

If it be thus, and that there is a kind of polliticall necessity among
Princes to watch the affairs of one another; I hope it is now time to look
upon Spaines intrusions, and not only provide for our selves, but relieve our
neighbors, least we have more dangerous neighbors, then we either desire, or
shall be able to prevent. But if we be sensible of present losses, wrongs,
disgraces, affronts, and intolerable indignities, let us rouse up our selves,
and redeem our lost time with quick and seasonable remedies: and if peace have
abused us, let war a Gods name repair our credits, and restore our decay.
There is no poison against nature, but may be countermanded by an antidote;
Yea, it is an axiom in Philosophy, that preventing Physic is better then
curing; and the law of preservation is incident to all creatures.

But here me thinks, some couetuous wretch, churlish Farmer, scurrulous
Lawyer, or temporising parasite may interiect these doubts. 1. Whether we have
sufficient occasion or no, to fall out with Spain. 2. How shall a war be
maintained. 3. Where the seat of this war shall be. 4. Who shall be called
to our assistance. 5. And last of all, Whether the Country be willing and able
to such a designement. To all which I answer directly, the State, or Council
of war must deside these things. For as it is in Martial affairs, let the
General be never so wise, and the Commanders never so valiant: yet when
proiects of consequence are proposed, a Martial Court is called, and an
orderly debating the matter concludes for the best. So I refer this business
to the directer of princes hearts, and the isntrumental cause of a countries
prosperity, and wise counselors. And I pray all true hearted Englishmen, let
this my discourse discover my good intents; as for other difficulties, I
refer them to good success. But because money is the sinews of the war, and
that hereat is our stop and repining, I answer the objector. Why should we be
more unfortunate now, then we have been? the war has brought us in
treasure: and why should we now despair, or terrefie one another with
suspicion, or dishartning questions. When the Scripture tells us, that if David
will be ruled by Ioab, and come to the taking of Rabbah, the Kings Crown shall
be set on his head, which weighed a tallent of gold, full of precious stones:
besides the spoil of the City, which was in exceeding great abundance. As
for the deceites of peace, and those bewitching flatteries of pollitick
insinnuation; let it be the Spaniard, or whom it will, we must not trust either
a reconciled enemy, or a dissembling friend.

But to come to the purpose, and some illustration in the defense of war; He
that pleaded for peace, Tully himself I mean, and cried out in an insulting
bravery: that the armed cassocks must give way to the Senators gowns, yet
says plainly: that wars may be undertaken either for the propulsing of
injuries, or procuring of peace, not so much to give way to revenge, as to
keep other princes in a good opinion, that we know what is wrong, and when it
is time to redress injuries. I could say, that war sometimes may be
undertaken for enlarging Dominions. As Solomon made all his neighbor Provinces
tributary unto him, and so he ruled from Euphrates to Sidon, and the
Mediterranean Sea. I could allege that all the famoussest Commonwealths in
the world, have augmented their territories by the active employment of Heroic
spirits, and received a fullness of wealth and renown from the raging Sea of
turbulency and war. I could produce examples of Scripture, to prove directly
that Daniels Monarchies succeeded one another by the prevailing of mighty
armies, and the stronger ever shouldred aside the weaker. I could add, that
the corruptions of peace in all ages, have like standing pooles increased dirt
and slime; that is, pleasures and impieties: which have grown to that
outragiousnesse, that men have forgot their first benefactor, and with a
luciferion rebellion continually defied God in his Majesty, living as if we
should never die, and dying as if there were no after account to be made; And
yet we dote on peace. And I am afraid, will rather lep on shore to be destroyed
by the incantations of the daughters of Achelous, then tie our selves to the
mast of Ulysses ship, to be secured from the temptation.

But I purpose no such discourses, only a small encheridion, to prove that
war was a blessing, and has been allowed from heaven: and that a corrupted
peace has increased sins, and sin brought Gods vengeance upon such tainted
Kingdoms. There was a war in Rebeccas womb between her children: and
Jacobs blessings proceeded from wrestling with God. There was a war in
delivering the Church out of bondage, or else Israel had been still moyling in
the brick-kills of Egypt, but at last Canaan was subjected, and Gods people
made glorious for ever. It was a war that charactered Solomon the Prince of
peace: or else why are David's worthies, and their actions set down by name. It
was a war that finished Octauius troubles, and surnamed him Augustus. And in
many places you shall read, that God did fight from heaven against his peoples
enemies; What shall war come from heaven, and shall we be afraid of it on
earth: God forbid. Considering that in the times of peace, when the wars had
set the people of Israel down in the chair of tranquillity, even then forgot
they both God and themselves, stretching out their limbs on beds of iuory,
carowsing in goblets of gold, and killing the fat lambs of the flock: but no
man remembered the affliction of Joseph; may I not well then conclude, that
war was a blessing. And thus much for war before Christ.

Now you shall see what war and peace have both done, since Christianity
took a fairer progress, and God had determined that his Church should flourish
through the dissension of the Nations; For although by the first persecutions
it had a fearful dishartning, and by the augmentation the pompous Papacy, a
more fearful suppression and martyrdom: yet such was the will of God. That
as Siria, Edom, Moab, Egypt, and the Island Gentiles, one were their own
enemies, and Gods instruments to destroy one another. So in the beginning of
Christianity, the barbarous nations that possessed Europe, although they made
themselves fortunate by the wars: yet in the end they consumed themselves;
and from their ruins the Popes of Rome became great, and from their
greatness, through the swelling prosperity of peace, the true Church of God by
little and little dispelled the clouds of their contempt, and dejected: and so
at last obtained that fair sunshine, which is now so translatent.

Some 300 year after Christ, or there about, you shall read that in Goteland,
and those northen regions now called Finmarck, Norway and Sweden, the peace had
so multiplied the people, and those remote healthful Countries affoorded them
so long lives, that they could not live one by another: so that the aged,
impotent, and beggars swarmed in every place; at which time one Stenio was the
principal Monarch, who called a council to redress these inconveniences, and
they concluded to take them all that were so unprofitable to the Commonwealth,
and tying them back to back, throw them into the sea. But when the Queen
whose name was Iuditha, heard of so cruel and unmerciful a doom, she could
not contain her self, but at the Kings return kneeled before him, desiring
to have it reuersed: for she had found a better way of prevention and effect of
cha^itie: which was to ship the people, and let them try their fortune in other
places: which was both nobly apprehended, and effectually practiced; and so in
process of time they possessed those Countries which you now call Seruia,
Bulgaria, Moldunia, Pedolia: and at last became famous Nations of Gotes and
Lombards, infesting Italy and Spain, and dispossessing the Emperors, who had
called them into their succors; thus the wars made them famous, till by the
wars of Christian Emperors they were dispelled and extirped again.
Afterward the Othoman family, coming out of that Country you once called
Scithia, augmented their reputation by the wars of Asia. So did Tamberlaine
conquer Persia, and claimed renown to his Actions by famous battle. So did
the Turks come into Europe. And all the beggarly Nations of the world became
rich and potent by raising of war, and were diminished and consumed to
nothing by the corruption of peace, and bewitching of pleasure.

Thus received the Papacy the fullness of her progression by the wars of the
Countries, especially after the German Eagle had affoorded her some feathers of
her wings: then took she a flight beyond reach, and at last stradles over
Rome, making Rome have room of precidency before other Kingdoms. So that I
may well say, the barren soil of their potency was watered and manured with the
blood of Soldiers, as the Provinces of Europe gathered together the scattered
bodies of Pelops, and made a more perfect body then the first. Thus did the
Popes flourish by foreign wars, and setting Emperors on work to destroy
one another.

But now what became of their own peace and established greatness? they fell
to pride, gurmundize, and riot, they supplanted one another, they proved
incendiaries to Christendom, they entertained newmantict spells, with devilish
and exoptick Arts: they practiced murder, whoredom and incests, they deposed
one another, they attempted the humiliation of Emperors, and made a sport at
the inauguration of Kings and Princes, as if it lay in their power with a
Prophets hand, to tumble aside their fastest Diadems. In a word, they grew
proud with peace and plenty, and as war had caused their greatness, they
caused their sins to be more great through the corruption of prosperity: so
that from mortified Preachers and Ministers of Gods word, they grow Statists,
and devilish Pollititians: then from Scholars, they proved proficients in
Villainy; raising Quarrels against Princes, and exciting Princes one against
another; So that I may well say according to their own computation, that war
was a blessing. And if the Nations had maintained their pristinate quietness
and idolatry, they had never flourished in such outward bravery, and visibility
as they now boast of. And thus you see how the wars have been beneficial to
the Papacy.

Now it remains to prove, how the true Church of God has received her best
florishes by wars; It is but superfluous to repeat what other men have
written in the defense of our Church, proving directly, that from the Primitive
Church to this hour, God ever had a remnant of people: and in most Countries
there were such as professed the truth in despite of fire. But I refer you
to the History of the Church, and other learned tractate composed by religious
men.

I come to the days of wickliffe, after whom followed the Bohemian wars:
whith were the first apparent wars for the Gospel that I read of. For the
great Zisea proved a conqueror; and although John Huss, and Hierome of Prague
sacrificed themselves, and were exposed to the fire for Christ's sake; which
might have deterred men from taking their parts, and professing the truth: yet
did the Gospel increase over Europe, and the wars taught thousands of people
a song of constancy: and a burning zeal made their hands fight for the liberty
of their consciences.

But when Luther came to act his part, the wars of Germany made way to the
peace of the Protestants; And as you read of many, that hearing Platos
discourse of the immortallity of the soul, longed for the same, and wished,
yea, procured to die. So whole multitudes exposed themselves to torture for
Christ's sake: and as the wars and persecutions augmented their punishments,
they augmented their joy for being so persecuted, and took a pleasure in the
displeasure of princes against them for Gods sake. France became a rare
president, and very quickly the Protestants multiplied so fast: that with the
Jews they forgot the ceremonies of the Saboth, and applied the Law of
preservation, whereby nature taught them to take up Arms in their own
defenses; then stood Geneua on their guard: then Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
England, Scotland, and diverse Islands and Towns from being slaves to the
conclaue of Cardinals, sent defiance to Rome, and break the yoakes of their
captivity: from impouerishing their Country, enriching their own treasures,
to the augmentation of the dignity of Commonwealths: from prostituting their
wives and daughters to the libidinous lusts of Priests cleansed themselves with
the water of chastety, and took a pleasure in undefiled beds: from the terror
of the Cardinals, and thundering of excommunication, they went with peace and
contrition of foul to Gods alter, obtaining so remission of sins, and
assurance of salvation. So that I may well say, the hand that stretched to pull
the Prophet by the throat, is whithered and dried up: yea, except the Prophet
pray to God, Iereboham shall not recover, not be able to lift it up again. If
it be thus, was not war a blessing? and has not Religion been propagated by
that means.

But because you look for more modern particulars, let us come nearer home,
and observe how Religion has prospered, and the Nations bin enriched by the
wars and contentions with Spain, Austria, and the Papacy, 1. in Germany, 2.
France, 3. the Low Countries, 4. and England it self: and how peace, or if you
will dissembling contracts of peace, have abused us at all times.

Concerning Germany and the Empire; when Carolus quintus perceived the sunny
splendour of Protestantisme to be more and more radiant, for all he had
interposed diverse clouds and misty vapors, and became suspicious of sundry
Princes greatness, after the Duke of Saxonies protecting of Luther, as
observing that the wars would not only make them factious, which appeared by
the imprisonment of the Lantsgraue of Hesse, but teach them a way both of
defense and opposition; he took another course to corroborate his own
greatness, and extenuate the strength of Religion, and this was by making a
peace, and withdrawing himself from the troublesomnesse of State: wherein, as
it often happens with cowardly polliticians, who by seeking to hide their
fear, discover more the same. So played this Emperor, after many famous
exploits and flatteries of fortune, he made the Germans believe he was so
indulgent over the Commonwealth, that he would affright or trouble them no
further, but leave them in peace and liberty of conscience: when yet they knew
he departed in a rage, as disappointed in his pretenses, that he could not
incorporate the Empire to his Family. Understand then, that in his latter times
he had some checks, and his peace showed not so beautiful a face as his
wars. So that he plainly saw, that if other blocks and hindrances were not
cast into the smoother walks, to hinder Religion from her handsome progress,
and debar the Protestant Princes from uniting, the Majesty of Austria would
be diminished, and their potencie frustrated; yea his own renown obscured
with malignitie of time, and cloudy threatenings of a fatal end; which though
it came not to such a misery as Pompeys losing his head: yet might prove as
bitter a receipt as Scipios confining himself to a country grange, who had in
his life obtained the surname of Africanus, and in his actions the renown of a
remarkable virtue. All which came to pass in the harvest of this Emperors
husbandry. So that now you shall have some particulars concerning his
discontents and observations, which he himself proposed for the establishing
the house of Austria in the Empire.

Touching his discontents; First, Though he kept correspondency with the Duke
of Saxons humors, yet he much repined at his audaciousnesse, that durst
maintain a Friar against the Pope and himself, as by Luthers coming to
Worms was apparent. Secondly, It amazed him to see a greater neglect of the
princes toward him (for all the uniting of Spain, Burgundy, and Austria) then
was before, and that the declaring himself an eneny to the Protestants,
declared them the firm friends of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Thirdly, He
thought there was no proceedings in the high projects of Germany. For
questionless King Henry of England would take the Protestants parts, and
provide that the Empire should be still Elective. Fourthly, That when the
Princes had denied the Diadem, and investure to Phillip his son, as
discovering that he went about to make it hereditary, and so kept all Europe in
awe by his treasure and dominions, he stomacked their repugnancy, and would
peradventure have threatened, if his power hand kept correspondency with his
willingness to revenge. Fifthly. That when the Pope and the conclaue of
Cardinals would by no means consent, to have him sit in such a chair of
greatness, as Spain, the Indies, the Empire, and the Low Countries; he
wreaked his rage from Rome; and Burbon in his behalf sacked the City,
imprisoned the Prelates, and set the Pope at a ransom; whereupon followed the
excommunication both of himself and Phillip his son, and the election of his
young brother Ferdinand Emperor; all which augmented his discontents. Sixthly,
That having heard of the loss of his Navy at Algier, he suspected a change of
fortune, and grew so disquieted and melancholy, that coming to Millaine, he
forgot the state of an Emperor, and they forgot the duty of observation; For
when the people perceived that he was careless to satisfy their expectation,
they were as careless to gratify or glorify him as a Magnificent prince; for
in the City they left him all alone in his black Spanish cape cloak, and
would not attend him down to his Galsies. Last of all, Coming into Spain, he
found the Clergy humorous against him for his ransomming Pope Clement, and
other contumaces against the Church: whereupon perceiuiug his peace to thrive
worse then his wars, he left all his honors to his son and brother, and
retired himself to the Monastrey of Saint Laurance, or Escuriall: where within
three years he finished his life: and yet he lived to say, that war was to
him a blessing, far beyond his peace.

2. Touching those fruits of policy, it is well known. First, That he not
only proiected himself, but instructed his son Phillip to make the Empire
hereditary to the house of Austria, and all Europe to depend upon Spaines
Monarchy; as by the subsequent actions of King Phillip was apparent. Secondly,
That Ferdinando Emperor, be especially careful to firm and contract unto
himself by one means or other (especially consanguinity) the King of Poland,
Saxony, and Bauaria: as within short time after came to pass. Thirdly, That of
all other things a peace be ratefied with the Gran Signeur, and correspondency
kept between them. Fourthly, That a jealous eye be had over Prague, Presburg,
and Glatz. For Prague was the absolute commander of Bohemia: and the Provinces
durst not start, if the other Cities were Garisond with Spaniards. Fifthly,
That the Jesuits be countenanced in their designs; For although the Pope and
conclaue of Cardinals might repine at their intrusion, and intermedling with
matters of State: yet by their means, and sanctified religious devotion, such
businesses might be effected, as should ever tend to the augmentation of
Spaines greatness. Sixthly, That an Imperial faction be ever nourished in
Lusatia, Silesia, and Morauia: especially that the Catholic Bishops be
maintained in the suppression of the Protestants: who else will follow the
former Bohemians, in taking up Arms against their Princes; and therefore the
safest way were, to disarme them by one means or other. Seventhly, That the
Governor of Millaine in his due time labor to get a footing in Swittzerland,
by building some fort or fortress to secure the passages: that so the Armies
in Italy might march in peace, or without prejudice over the Alps into
Germany. Last of all, That the Grizons escape not without visitation, although
it cost pentions, reward, and flattery; and if the protectors, which must be
either Imperial or French, name it an intrusion: means must be wrought, that
neither of both have leisure to prevent it.

Thus ended this great Proiector his days; but then began his Family: their
Phaetons flourish of mightiness, which questionless had run over the bancks
of Europe like an inundation, had not that miror of mankind, (I mean Queen
Elizabeth) with the States of Holland, kept King Phillip and his son play 50.
years at least; whereby they were hindered from either sending forces into
Germany; or growing to fast, like broad spredding burrs, which are not only
noisome in themselves, but spoil the sweeter grass which neighbors them.
Notwithstanding Ferdinando, Rodulphus, and Mathias, proceed in the affairs of
the Empire, with the former cautions, and outward lenatiue courses, laying
aside all forcible Arms, and imperious ouerruling the Princes: whereby by in
less then forty years many things are effected, tending to combustion of
government, and overthrow of true religion: which may be contracted to these
heads, and serve to prove, that War was a blessing: and peace a mere enemy
to their proceedings.

First, Certain marriages augment the incests of Spain, and reconcile Poland
and Saxony to the house of Austria. Secondly, Under the color of securing the
confines of Hungary and Poland, against the incursions of the Turk, Spanish
Garrisons are admitted into Rab, Camora, Presburge, Camisia, Glatz, Vienna, and
Prague it self. Thirdly, The free Cities of Germany put up a 100 grieuances
against the Papists, and never desisted, until they had obtained their own
manustions, to have the exercise of religion. Fourthly, The Protestants
increasing both in Prague and Vienna, a certain trick of the Popes is
discovered by admission of the Jesuits and Priests into Poland, Hungary, and
Germany: whereby Saxony was poisoned with the infections of Popery: as diverse
other Provinces. Last of all, The Inquisitors and Catholic Bishops grew so
presumptuous of their papal authority, and potent adherents, that they began
to tyrannizr over the Protestants. And when Mathias had overcome the jealousy
between his Brother and himself, whereby he was invested King of Hungary in
Rodulphus life time, and within a while after absolute Emperor; they fell from
threatenings to bloody executions, not sparing the lives of men, women and
children; nor desisting from opening the graves of the reverend defunct, and
burning their bones; yea the variety of tortures, and exasperating displeasures
was so forcible: that all sorts exclamed on their cossening peace and
prosperity: confessing, war was rather a blessing unto them.

Shall I follow now with Bohemias story their distastings of Mathias
government, the repinings at the inauguration of his cousin Ferdinand, now
Emperor; their resolution to reduct the government to elective Suffrages,
their apprehension of the Palsgraves worthiness, their presumption of Englands
coadjuteme^t, and at last their raising of several forces under the government
of the Protectors of Prague: in all which, War was a blessing indeed, and the
dissimuled peace of the Provinces with the confederate Princes tripped down
(as it were) the standing or rather staggering glory of Bohemias proceedings.
For while Englands embacies and slender preparations made Vienna smile at the
protraction, Bauaria enters the Palatinate on the East, Leopoldus of Elsac
Saueren on the South, and Spinola with Gonzales de Cordua on the North: yea
before the revolt and taking of Prague, the mystery of war was not searched,
and the hope of peace ouerclouded King Fredercks good parts with parcemonie and
neglect of execution of discipline, whereby the City of Prague grew factious,
and the inhabitants suspected themselves, yea were angry with their former
judgments, that had elected a man, who staggered in his opinion between peace
and war, and committed a great sollecisme in State, as leaving his country
unfurnished, and Heidelberg in a manner unfortified; when yet there was nothing
but war, either to support him standing still, or further him advancing
forward. But there is no reviving of fearful accidents, and unsavory
contingents to dejected Princes. Yet come to Mansfields coming into the
Palatinate, and Prince Fredericks return with Brunswicks heroike and noble
opposition: all the while the armies lay watching one another, there was hope
of recovery, and the enemy seemed so far from insulting, that he feared their
incursions into his own country of Bauaria. Yea Vienna knew not what to say
to the dangers threatening her triumphs: and although the soldiers played the
fiery meteors on every side with mischief and terror, with afflicting the
towns, with exacting disbursements, and other inconveniences of a cruel
misery, yet did the war keep Bauaria, Tilley, Leopoldus, and the Catholic
Bishops in awe, and might have procured a blessing to the much humbled Prince
Palatine, if the Fox had not brought the Lion into a trance, or if you will, a
labourinth. For no sooner were the armies recalled, and the Princes removed,
but Bauaria for himself, and Tilley for Bauaria ran in fury to extinguish
his brand of light, and put out the glory of the Palatine. So that I may well
conclude, War was a blessing; and the dissemblings of peace have with Jacobs
subtlety prevented Esau from Isacks benediction, who once thought it meet
that the first borne should have the pre-eminence of being fortunate. And thus
for Germany.

Shall we step into France, and that with easy paces, to take the better
survey of those times and actions. Believe it then, the cruelty of persecution
and variety of turmoiles have dragged Religion by the hair, and brought her
out as forlorn and contemptible before the people, of purpose to stone her, as
if Susanna had committed folly in Israel: but those eyes that burned with
revenge, upon her approved innocence were turned to compassion; those hearts
which murmured at her hypocrisy, were leniated with a more justifiable
triable; and those hands which had stones ready to dash out her brains,
returned them upon her accusers, and made them repent the wars, and curse
Spain, whose treachery and ambition only weakened France by intestine
combustions, that France might not weaken Spain by public hostility.

I will not deal with the French inventory, nor make the long shadows of
story make you believe, there is some ill luck behind you: but that you may
see how many worthy men have taken up perspectives, to show the true hearted
French man a far off, upon surmises of Spaines coadjutement, or augmentation of
his own territories. For the Spaniards would serve him, as they once did the
Duke of Calabria against Charles the fifth, to forsake him in his extremity.
And when Francis the first sent an army to recover Navarre, and Fonteraby upon
Spanish instigation, in the tumultuous times of diverse insurrections in Arragon
and Castile, the troubles were soon appeased, and the French driven out of the
Land.

But let us come to the tripping Pheries of all times, whereby Princes are
seduced to flattery and private respect; How has Spain dealt with all Kings
and their Minions, ever since the Duke of Guises tyrannous Massacree at Vasti,
and that unfortunate marriage of Navarre, and the cunning baits of the King of
Spaines Pensioners in the Court of France: which I am afraid are still so
venomous to all Nations, that they will corrupt the soundest hearts, let there
be never so great policy or convenience at their admission. What say you to
the house of Loraine, the Cardinal, and Dukes of Guise? What think you of the
Duke De Maine, and the Holy League? Shall I name Hespernon, and the advancing
of his Family? Shall I recount the fearful story of Birone? The life and
death of the Marquis De Ancre. The falls of Luisnes and Cadinet his Brother;
With diverse other, whose lives made France afraid: and actions were so many
tortures to the hearts of sollid Christians, and loyal Protestants. Were not
all these the instruments of Spaines, to keep France busied at home: though
fortune geered at the temerarious proceedings of the Princes against their own
subjects, and divert the several Kings from looking toward Navarre, Millane,
Naples, the succoring of the Switzers, Grizons, and those territories: yea if
you will, the patronizing of the Palatinate it self: which was once under the
covert of the French confedracy. Thus has the cannon battered their own
towns, and the misled Kings unsheathed their own swords of vengeance, to
sheath them in the bowels of natural and loyal subjects; wherein yet they
have prevailed no further, then to increase an internal hate and jealousy
against Rome, Spain, the Inquisition, Jesuits, Priests, and all the rablement
of Locusts, who like vermin in a standing stinking water, infect the air
with fulsome and ill vapors.

If you read the life of Henry the fourth, you shall see how famous were his
actions, and remarkable his renown all the while the wars lasted, insomuch
that the attribute of greatness was made a Trophe of his everlasting fame: and
yet stood like an impregnable rock, against which the waves did rush
impetuously, but to the breaking of themselves in pieces; but when peace was
contracted, his honor was distracted, his Country defiled, his Towns
vitiated, his faith violated, his Preachers shed tears, and Molines wept over
him for temporizing: his great officer Biron fell into the snare of
perfidiousnesse, the Protestants hung their heads for his luke-warmenesse, the
Papists gnashed their teeth for his pollices, the newters feared him, the
Atheists abhored him, his Wife dissembled, and an Italian vpstart contrived his
destruction: as for his Son and his unlimited youthfulness, that must needs
cast a chain over the necks of Rochell, Monpelier, Montalbon, Nismes, Chartres,
and other Protestants Provinces and towns; what did those attemps beget but
the fair birth of increase of religion, and firm opposition against
unprincely cruelty, and unnatural enforcement? and he went away affrighted at
his own handiworke, and cursing the motives and setters on of his presumption:
which abated his malice, and taught him to know there was a God above princes,
which could make the war as a blessing to propagate trve Religion, and
augment the glory of the Church. So that I may well say, that peace to France
proved like the Aspes of Ethiopea, who do not sting at all, but by licking and
tickling break their bladders of poison, which from itches grow to ranckle the
flesh, til at last it exaestuates and by burning heates proves incurable. Why
then should we be afraid of war; or for any cause temporize with Gods
enemies, and a dangerous Nation: for whose sake we have suffered the Palatinate
to be lost, and seen a Noble Prince dejected, as if we were glad, that by such
courses there should no envy be raised for his thriving in greatness, or going
to fast in his race of Soveraignitie and powerful Majesty. But I dare say that
the Angel did curse Meros for not assisting of Israel.

Concerning the Low Countries, I cannot compare them better, then to Camomile,
which the more it is trodden, the more it springs. For whether war has been
a blessing unto them, judge your selves, considering they have augmented their
fame and renown abroad, and increased their wealth and territories at home.
Abroad, the West Indies have been frequented with their Navies; and the storms
at seas are not so formidable to the mariners, as their approches to the
Spaniard; insomuch that his plate Fleets are many times detained in harbor
from their ordinary courses, to the disappointing of his Garrisons in Europe,
which has caused many mutinies and innouations amongst the soldiers. The East
Indies have been visited by them, and so visited, that they have planted
Colonies in the Islands in despite of opposition; they have dared the
Portingals, and ouertopped the English; their ships exceed in number, and their
Merchants in industry and husbandry: their labors have made way unto
continual thriuing; and the several Kings of the nations have reputed them
greater then the English. The Philippines and Molunes have been searched by
them, and neither Island nor harbor but rejoiced at their trade and traffic.
The South seas with the streights of Magellane have been adventured on, and
their voyages set the pens of learned Chronologers on work. Both the Guincies
and the coasts of Afrik are explored by them; and if there be no more in the
satisfaction of expectation, then knowledge, experience, and augmentation of
wealth: they attained to all by their nauall encounters and adventures. The
Leuant is stored with their ships, and the Streights of Gibraster are not so
straight, but in their defiances with Spain they rushed them open to give them
passage: so that both Turkey and Italy have admitted their factories, and
opened the lapps of their plenty, to bid them take the blessings by ships
full. If you step into France, you shall find, they not only stepped thither,
but visited every town of importance, yielding an honest account of their
traueles. What think you of the fishing in Newland, of Whales in Greeneland,
of the commodities of Island, Freezland, of the Herings of Scotland, Ireland,
and England, of the coasts of America, and all those Nations which are
accessable, yielding either pleasure or profit, they have every where sucked the
honey with the Be, and extended their travail with the Ant, so that the
summers labor has fed and clothed them in winter, and the winter it self
never had such fearful blasts, but the wind either breathed good upon them,
or drove them to seek it in all the corners of the earth. If you are not
afraid of the Eastern violence and mountanous ice of Russia, you shall find
that they are not afraid of winters snow, nor summers contagion: but visit
Norway, Sweden, Goteland, the sound of Denmark, the Haus Towns, Prussia,
Poland, Muscouia, and all maritime coasts; Insomuch, that like the honest
explorators of the land of Canaan, they not only return with clusters of
grapes, but continue undaunted. So that I may well say, war has been a
blessing unto them, and the God of all blessings has multiplied Israel even
under their grieuances.

But now if they kindly let you within their doors, you will be amazed at the
furniture of their houses: I mean the success of their affairs, and the
noble proceedings of the wars, which has made them famous in the success,
and left their honest defenses exemplary to all posterity. They have expulsed
the Spaniard out of Zealand, and Holland, and as it were exprobrated great
Princes for not being content to insult over the obedienc of their subjects,
but they must tyranize their souls, either by Inquisition or change of
religion; is it any other then the working of slumbring patience, which being
abused turns to fury and disobedience; They have not only preserved their
virgin provinces from the rauishings of Burgundy, but revenged the usurpation,
which challenged their captivity by hereditary birthright: yea, besides their
own ordinary walks to visit Vtreck, Gelderland, and many fortified Towns,
they have made larger steps upon their enemies Countries, and by maine force
shouldred open the Castillian gates, and thrown the Portcullis on the ground
which boasted of Austrias fasting, and the Popes Benediction; so they entered
Hamlers, and still keep Sluice and the adjacent places to depend upon their
garrisons; they possess Breda; diverse Bergens the fort of Lillo: and above 20
forts and fortresses in Brabant. What have they done in Cleue, Munster,
Westphalia, the Land of Luke, and those places of Freezland, wherein the
Spaniards are now politic intruders?

For what Papist or Hispanolized temporiser, can yield an account of any
thriuing action, or prevailing success against them these 50 years; yet the
Pope curses and excommunicateth, the Emperor threats, the Archdutches
proscribes them, Spain assembles armies, the Jesuits conjure, the Priests
imposture: and all the practices which policies, mightiness, treasure, or
friends have hatched and brought forth, was but to amaze them with some
monstrous birth of treason, and perfidious revenge; yea, those strange
hindrances of diverse reuolts and covert supplantations, have proved their own
shame.

Thus by the corruption of Spanish rewards, have diverse English themselves
proved traitors to Holland, and only abused their honors and loyalty by such
inconstancy: which yet ended with Spaines scorns, and their Countries eternal
hate and banishment. Yet for all this have the Low Countries thriued by such
exasperating difficulties, and the following wars have been a blessing unto
them: insomuch that the Spaniard has not only admired theirs, and Englands
happy estate: but blasphemed heaven, to suppose we had a pulling hook to bring
prosperity unto us.

In the time of Don Lewis Requescens, Commander and Captain General for the
King of Spain, by the exciting of diverse Priests, certain English revolted:
which added life to the Spanish affairs. After this Aegremont, Ratelife, Gray,
and some others, Gentlemen of Noble Families in England, went from the Low
Countries, and fell into the service of Spain, as if they had fallen into a
devouring grave. At the siege of Audenard, 600 English under Norris, Barney,
Cornish, and Gipson, proved traitors to the States, and violated their first
allegiance, to be afterward abused by them which set them on work. Alost was
betrayed to the King of Spain by a whole Regiment of English, over whom Pigot
commanded, who with the association of Dalton, Tailor, Vincent, Smith, and
We^sh, thought to pull away the stones of the high built walls of the Low
Countries bulwarks. In my Lord of Leicesters time, Deu^^ter and Zutphen were
delivered to Stanley and York in the Queens name, who in the devils name
redeliuered them to Spain. Grane was betrayed by Hermet the Governor. Venlo
sold by the Burghers, before the enemy approached. Newis lost by treachery.
Berck besieged, and so abandoned. And many other places and persons left the
service of the States, to state themselves in the King of Spaines
intertainment. Yea by perfidious practices another Regiment under Sir William
Stanley, whose Captains were Scurlock, Peter Winn, Heart, Guin, Salsbury,
Eaton, Reignolds, and Harison, forsook their first faith, and flattered
themselves with the hope of great treasu^es of Spaines Indies. I could also
name the failing and falling away from Englands love, and the Low Country
embraces of the Earl of Westmerland, Lord Paget, Charles Paget, Sir Francis
Englefield, Hugh Owen, Dakers, Tempest, Norton, Harman, Markenfield, Tremaine,
Stradling, Carew, Allen, Southwell, Fleming, Bulmer, with diverse others, whose
reuoults might have been great discouragments to the States. But for all this,
they proved like the women of Israel, strong and quick in their travel, and
do what Pharaoh could, they multiplied exceedingly: and God built the Midwiues
houses for being honest to his people.

I have not I protest cited these particulars by way of renouation of
displeasure, and distasting between the Dutch and us: but merely to show the
error of inconstancy, and the vanity of dispairing men, who by ouerprising
Spaines potency, distrusted the Low Countries weakness, or dazeled with a mist
cast before their eyes, or led on by wicked angels, mistook shadows for
substances, and thought to repair their decayed estates, by repairing to a
Prince, whose petty officers laughed them to scorn, and in their greatest
extremities saw them die in the streets without compassion: as for religion, it
was a poor shift, and idle motive to forsake the pure streams and clean
waters, by the reason of the coldness and asperous quickness, to fall into
the pudled dirt of Atheism, superstition, and corruption; what is this but
with Swines to wallow in the mire, and lie basking in filthy puddles, and
besmeering tromperies. But was it thus with Soldiers in those days, and men
of fiery spirits? I pray God it be not so still with with effaeminate
Courtiers, and temporizing officers, who to maintain their own greatness and
glory, wish Nehemiah to fly from his enemies, when they intended only his
shame and disgrace, and proiected their own supportation by taking part with
Sandolet and To^iah: by flattering and extolling the great King: by presuming
on pensions, honor, and glorification from the idolatrous Monarcks of Persia.

But to proceed, shall I recount the several tragedies of Antwerpe. First,
Under the Regency of Lady Marget, Duchess of Parma. Next, At the coming down
of the Duke of Alua, whose tyranous pride might have startled and amazed a
greater State, then the Government of the States. Thirdly, Afuerca Villacos by
the Spanish Soldiers for want of pay under Don Lewis de Requescens. Fourthly,
Another mutiny upon the death of Don Lewis during the authority of the Kings
Council. Fifthly, The invasion of the French, and the valiant resistance of the
inhabitants. Last of all, The tedious siege of Alexander Fernese Prince of
Parma, with the yielding of the Town by reason of famine, and wretched
extremity which they endured. Shall I conclude with other petty treasons, and
practices of murders upon the persons of William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange.
The innouations and rebellions of Leiden, Vtrech, and other Towns. The
murders of Counts Egmond and Horn; and at last the Prince of Orange himself;
the sundry conspiracies against Mauritius, and his Brother Grave Henry; the
Armenian sect; the policies of Barneuelt, and the proiects of his faction,
with his Children, to be revenged for their Fathers death; the still supplying
of the Archdutches Armey with discontented English and Irish, under pretense of
assi^ting friends: hope of extraordinary salu^y, affecting the Catholic
religion, diffidence of our Countries abillity, suppossition of Spaines
greatness: with other by causes: in all which, and through all which common
reason and enforcements of pol^icy, would affright the natural man; and make
the Low Countries stand amazed at there enemies threatenings, and prospering in
the peace of their neighbor kings; yea we in England that behold the menaces
and mightiness of Austrian Family, to mount like the billows of the ocean,
and with a kind of inundation, to keep so many Countries under water: may
tremble again to think how slender a Nation should bear a head against the
impetuous assaults of the wars.

Yet for all this, experience goes beyond precept, and examples overcome
positions. For if we may apply a sentence of divinity to worldly affairs; as
there is no coming to heaven with dry eyes, or with out the endurance of
afflicton in this world. So has the glory of the States been raised out of
difficulty; and as we see a radiant sun dispell misty vapors, and foggy
exhalations. So has the wars wiped away all those impediments of the Low
Countries: and their constancy in religion, made religion to flourish.

So that if the Mines of gold by the searches and industry of men, affood their
ore, and plenty through the vnbowelling of the earth, and making w^rres (as it
were) under ground; The Low Countries have raised their fame, and amassed their
treasure by opposition position to Spain, and war with Austria, telling him
to his face with the vision: there is no kicking against the prick; and that
goes about to graspe too much, will at last reserve nothing.

So that I may well say it, and I think none can deny it, that war was, and
is a blessing to the Low Countries.

In the remarkable greatness, and admirable reign of Queen Elizabeth: may I
not say, that War was a blessing, when all Nations were blessed by her; The
rebellions of Sweden appeased; The Protestants of Germany releiued; The pride
of Poland abated; The passages of Switzerland defended; The holy league in
France counter-checked; Henry the 4 assisted; The Low Countries in a manner made
high with honer; The Spanish Armado dissipated; The intrusions and rebellions
of Ireland annihilated; The rages of many treasons confounded: and the
practices of 23 murders upon her person frustrated; As if the Angel of the
Lord should stay Abraham's sword from killing of Isack. Yea a very Italian
writes of her: that she grew to such greatness, and was so guarded about with
the love and observation of her subjects, that all the world admired, and
exalted her.

Observe the noble Voyages and explorations of her time, by Ienkinson, Borog,
Forbisher, Haukins, Drake, Fenner, Grenuilde, Candish, Michelborn, Raleigh, and
diverse others: the brave actions and exploits of our Nation, the sollid and
pious renown of her government: did we not search all the harbors of the
world, and made English Merchants and Adventures deserve a character of
renown? did not our inferior ships scorn the Spanish galleys and galeons,
yea, thrust open the Streights to pass into the Arche? did not we visit India
without the trick of factory, or exportation of money? did we not search the
South seas, and passed the S^ieghts of Magellane? did not Michelborne and
others b^ing Spice out of India without paying for it; Candish Silks without
bleeding for it; Drake Bullion without digging for it? did not our English
surprise the Town of Santus, and Saint Sebastian in Brazile? did not Raleigh
begin a plantation iu Guiana, and made his very name odious to the Spaniard?
did not our Merchants employ many brave sea men, who returned with great booty,
and prizes of all sorts? did not Essex knock at the gates of Lisbone, in the
behalf of Don Anthonio King of Portugal? did not a slender Navy and
unprovided, overcome that invincible Fleet of Spain? was not Ireland reduced,
when it lay sick of a consumption by Montioies fortitude, fortune, and
patience? was not Cales made our own, and Civil it self affrighted with our
approches? was not Spain and all Spanish actions like vnfethered shafts, which
could not fly to any purpose. And though in the Island Voyage, Fortune seemed
to give Virtue the check; yet it was a brave attempt, worthy of memory and
Illustration. Remember the batteries of Roane, and the besieging of Paris; the
many exploits and Marches of our Soldiers, the admiration of our Kingdom, and
unmatchable glory of our Queen; all which proceeded from the wars, and the
Heroic spirit of a woman. Whose virtue proved like an Vberant spring, the more
plentiful and sweeter by agitation and extracting. Yea, her Countries was made
famous, and illustruous to foreign Nations, by the endurances of her
Gentlemen and Soldiers.

I have not breath enough to tell the rest, but for these and the rest I will
be bold to say, we were beholding to the wars and such Martial spirits: who
took example from ancient Patriots, to be indulgent over their Countries
renown and enriching: and yet witha^l was joined the glory of God, the Princes
honor, the Kingdoms prosperity, and their own increases of nob enesse, and
generosity.

But what has the peace done? it has made us drunk with ease and
carelessness, forget our God, be uncharitable to our neighbors, neglect our
calling, sleep in security, accustom our selves to foolish exercises, and by
studying every man for his private, the whole kingdom is confounded with
poverty and wretchedness; insomuch, that the complaints fly about like flies;
and policy is ashamed of her own fallacies: for you see it has invented a
trick by factory, and drawn diverse worthy men into the net of couetuousnesse,
to adventure the Indies: when I must say it, the very exhausting of our
treasure will be the discomfort of our souls, I insist not upon the
remoteness of the place, loss of ships, decay of men, abuse of time,
vnwholesomnesse of women, danger of shipwracks, and the want of our account in
our own channells, things subject to fearful construction, and sensible to
examination: but say plainly, that the bringing in of a million of commodities,
is not, or cannot be so beneficial, as the expo^tation of 30000 l. sterling a
year (besides the conuen^ency at many greater sums) is prejudicial to the
Commonwealth: a great disparity I confess, but experience goes beyond
apprehension. For it is well known, that Henry 8. from one of the richest and
mightiest Kings, became the discontentest and merely indigent to the turmoile
of the subject, by reason of the ransom of Pope Clement, so foolishly and
trecherously sent out of England. And in former days was not the wealth of
this Land almost in the hands of the Romanists, and how poor were our people
by reason of Peter pence paid unto Rome. Look into the story of Solomon, you
shall read of great store of gold brought into the Land, but never any sent
out, or permitted to be transported: only commodity for commodity, or
necessaries for their gold and silver in such Countries as wanted them. As for
their objections, or cossenning their own hearts, that say, England has no
gold growing, and therefore we may spare a little of a great deal which is
brought in; I answer, that because England was sometimes barbarous, full of
boggs, woods, and a wilderness for beasts: therefore it matters not to have
brave Cities, a reduction to ciuillity, and an extraordinary beauty of
Magnificense and glory: we should be no worse then we were before; I hope such
arguing is weak, poor, and full of morosity: seeing all the Majesty of
Europe receives exornation from the various commodities of other Count^ies,
whom it has pleased God to deny the use of his creatures, that they might
serve such as serve him in holiness and righteousness. And then shall Isack
sow in the Land of Ab^melech, and receive a hundredth for one. But to our peace
again.

Now since our peace, what has that done to us, or we done to ourselves? has
it not proved our sickness, and wrought upon our corrupt bodies like a fever,
not only obnoxions in it self, but bringing on apace other diseases. And have
not we taken a liberty to sin, because no punishment followed suddenly. But
hearken how the vengeance of God comes upon us: the cry goes, the country is
weighed, and found lighter by 14 Millions in 15 years; we are haunted with
Beggars, undone in our Trades, pestred in the prisons, the Commonwealth
ouerrunne with poverty, the people cry out of misery, and fear and terrors
make us all amazed, insomuch that in many Country Towns, such idle, lasie,
discontented vagabonds abound, that the inhabitants are afraid of spoils and
rapes, even in the face of Justice: that is, though there be officers to
threaten them, so that if it were not for foreign plantations, and compulsiue
sending some people away, we might devour one another. But mark withal, to
what inconveniences we are driven in our cheifest Cities, there are so many of
all Trades, who confound one another by vnderworke and indirect abuses, that
the welthy are made poor, and the poor in a manner labor for nothing:
besides, young men are grown so proud and sauering of liberty, that they must
be housekeepers the first hour, and consume themselves with comparatiue
expenses to their superiors: filling their houses with children, and the
Commonwealth with bancke-routs; so that there is no preventing of these
mischiefs but war, war must cure this sore, which if we look to in time,
we may find remedy with ease: either by disburthening the Common wealth of
unnecessary people, or enriching the Commonwealth with surprisalls unlooked for.

Let us then resolutely assist the Dutch, they and we are all one, good
neighbors and friends: and so no doubt France will come in: and then a three
fold cable will be very strong; otherwise, who would not condemn his
negligence that stands still, while his neighbors house is on a blase. But
if we now take opportunity by her fair foretop, and join heart and hand,
wealth and courage, prayers, and preuentions against the practices of Spain,
whose very look discouers the pride of his heart: we shall find his treaties
are trecheries, his speeches deceit, his devises scorns, his heart hollow, his
dealings double, and his whole course of his proceedings, make but so many
discourses of abuses and deceit; In a word, they are the great dissemblers of
the world; but let us not dissemble with our selves, especially take heed, and
prepare against them.

Let us then take a veiw of our Countries, especial- Ireland and the Islands,
fortify our Harbors repair our Castles, double our Garrisons, Muster our
Souldies, visit our Navy, store our armories, countenance the Merchants,
strengthen our passages, disarme our Papists, change their dwellings, dissolve
their meetings, break the knot of their factions, watch their ways, and
discover the villainy of their dark lanternes: so shall their insulting pride
and treacherous hearts be kept under, and a^l the rest be sure and safe again
from home disturbances. But yet this is nothing, except you banish the Priests,
hang up the Jesuits, imprison the false hearted, and prevent the discontented
Hispanolized faction; so shall we be sure of them from annoying of us, that
would else make us sure from defending our selves.

Let us with the Belgic Soldier always be in a readiness, keep good watch
and ward, stand upon our guards, and look to our charge, the King, the Prince,
the State, the Church, the Commonwealth is our charge: yea, our Neighbors are
our charge, whose Countries have been lately ouerrun, their Villages
destroyed, their houses burnt, their Cattle pilledged, their Wives deflowered,
their Daughters ravished, their Infants brained, their Children starued, and
their Husbands taken prisoners; and thus while they have (I mean their enemies
and ou^s the Spaniards) been treating a peace and contract with us, they have
established a war against them: and so by degrees will at last set upon us,
if we prepare not to set upon them.

Look over stories, and peruse them with judgment, and you shall find that
Spain has over reached all Nations with treaties, because he found himself
to weak to deal with active employment; so that his greatness has been the
well spring and head of all mischief, the foundation and ground of Europes
troubles, and the mere author and proiector of Religions ruin; I will go no
further then 88, while we were treating of a peace, the Armado comes upon us;
while France looks for a pacification of troubles, the Jesuits inuit the
King to a bloody war.

While we are sending to the Emperor for a restitution of the Palatinate,
Bauaria enters, and is not only Lord of the Country, but made the Electorate.
In 23 he treats of a match in sign of love, but prepares powder and match as
effect of his malice. In a word, we must look about us to ouermatch this
match, and so no doubt every true English heart will afford his helping hand,
heart, purse, prayers, and all he has to overthrow the boasting pride of this
running enemy, and teach him a new lesson for his great ambition, and forward
presumption.

As for me an old Belgic Soldier, I will pray from my heart, with sorrow in
my soul, and sadness from my conscience, with a lively spirit, and passionate
affection that my King, Prince, and native Country: that a^l may jointly
conform themselves to the fashioning a work, which may tell the Princes of
Europe: how patiences abused, turns to fury; and the King of Great Britain
is not a subject for Spanish scorns and indignities. Me thinks I hear his
Majesty say, you have my good will: the Prince cries out, take my true heart
with you: the Council warrant their judicious consent, the Clergy assure their
unfeigned prayers, the Nobillity and Gentry propose their reuinues, the
Countryman expose his body, the Citizen proffer his wealth, the Merchant yield
his wars, the Drum ready to beat, the Trumpet ready to sound, the Horse
furnished: and all sorts are ready with their best endeavors, except
Hispanolized Papists, and temporizing couetuous wretches.

What then do we stay for? but provide our t(...)sure, prepare our arms,
reconcile our hearts, and pray to God, that we may be strong enough with
Abraham against the five Kings, to recover his Brother Lots substance. And so
may we gain and regaine what has been lost: and by an honest and justifiable
war repair all our ruins and damages, ouerworking and ouerweying us by a
dissembling peace.

To conclude, the Belgic Soldier once again intreates the reverent Bishops
and Clergy to prepare their prayers, the Senate of wise men their council, the
Nobles and Gentry their courages, the true Courtiers their loyalty, the
commonalty their arms and provision, the Merchants their Shipping, the
Citizens their means, and the very Usurers their money; That every one may be
ready with the Machabes to defend the Sanctuary of the Lord; And with true
English hearts, not only fight in the defense of their Country, but when God
commands, not to spare, to go on and prepare, and let every one prepare
himself; For the Belgic Soldier is prepared, and made ready to go to the
battle. And the God of heaven prepare your hearts, ways, words, deeds, and
dealings, to be vigilant and careful to provide for us: and we with gods
help, will be careful to fight for you. And so the God of heaven Fight for us
all.

A Prayer.
O Lord, glorious God, and everlasting Father, we entreat thee mercifully to
look down upon us, and hearken to our complaint and desires, and grant we
beseech thee our request; O gracious Father thou know our sins, and our
iniquities are not hid from thee, they lie open to thy judgments: yet we know
that thy mercies are the cure of our miseries, and when we fly to thee, thou
drawest near to us; we beseech thee now to be favorable, and spare us for all
our sins past, and be ready to deliver us from sins to come; look down in
mercy upon us, and as thou have been our everlasting defense, so now defend us
from the rage of our Enemies. Go in and out O Lord before our Armies, before
our General, and grant we may he thy Soldiers, to fight under thy banner:
stir up our hearts and strength against the enemy; defend thy afflicted
flock; Remember we beseech thee the burden of misery laid upon the Church at
this time in Germany, and in thy due time restore it to his former glory:
settle our hearts and affections to regaine and recover that which has been
lost by their treacheries: and now we see their double dealing, grant we may no
longer trust to them which have no truth, they imagine mischief in their
heart, and are set on fire to do ill; but break thou the knot of their malice,
lay open their plots, discover their devises, weaken their Armies, and
overthrow their inventions, confound their counsels, and consume their
numbers. O Lord thou have in times past made the Stars to fight in order, the
Sun to stand still, the Seas to devour, the Winds to overthrow thy enemies;
so now O Lord prepare these thy creatures to assist and help us, that all the
world may know it is thou that fightest our battles. Finally, O Lord bless
we beseech thee us, and every one of us, in what we shall take in hand for
defense of thy Church. Bless we entreat our King, our Prince, our State, our
Clergey, our Commonalty, and give thy blessing unto us all. And last of all,
bless we beseech thee all that worthy and excellent Companies of the
Artillery, and Military exercises in London, and also in this Land: bless O
Lord we entreat their new inventions of war, and mike their practices expert,
make them skillful and full of knowledge, that all the world may know that thou
conductest our Armies. Grant this dear Father, and all other good things unto
us, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

