A SPEECH MADE IN THE LOWER HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT, Anno. 1621.

By Sir Edward Cicill, Colonel.

Printed 1621.

A SPEECH made in the Lower House of Parliament, Anno 1621. By Sir Edward
Cicill Colonel.
THis Honorable House, Is composed of diverse professions, And every one of us,
according to the experience his profession has learned him, is bound to
deliver, what in conscience he shall think needful, for the glory of God and
the good of the Kingdom, which is a service here, wherein I have been a daily
witness of other men's painfulnes. The worthiness of the example requires me
not to be silent, and I would to God a Soldier had less occasion to speak in
this place, where the business of war, is become so great a Stranger, that but
for our neighbors (whose houses are on fire) we should utterly forget it: by
the light of those fires, we may see our dangers and be advised to provide
against them, which is the point I would now speak upon. The defense of
Religion, and the safety of the Land, are the things in danger. For though we
enjoy them by reason of the peace we enjoy, yet it is a peace of such nature,
as cannot assure them unto us, because no peace is able to maintain it self
unarmed. We are then to consider on the one side, who is the Enemy we are to
provide against, how great our danger is, and how near it is. On the
otherside, what defense we stand in need of, and when we are to provide it.
First, who is the greatest Enemy we have in respect of our Religion. The
Catholic King is evident, by the protection he gives our Papists and
traitors, and by his nourishing the Seminaries and Jesuits of our Nation.

2. Who is the gratest enemy we have, in respect of the State. It follows the
Catholic King, whose ambition, it has ever been through the sides of Religion
to thrust at the heart of the State, his Title of Catholic King, reflecting
more upon universal Monarchy, then greatness of religion. That it has been
his ambition to create himself Monarch of the world, his consultations, and
designs have given clear testimony, and under pretense of Religion, he
colors his quarrel for it. So that England is not only a part comprehended
in his ambition, but the chief mark of his offense, because in respect both
of Religion and State, England is the greatest impediment in his way. But some
will imagine (it may be) that this ambition he had to the Monarchy of the whole
world, is a good while ago dead in his mind; I assure my self, it never dyed,
somewhat indeed the action and storm of it was laid in the beginning of his
truce with the States; but if ever it were dead, there is nothing more
certain, then that now it is renewed again to more life then ever it had;
which if it please the honor and wisdom of this house to give me the hearing,
I will manifest unto them. The success of the house of Austria in Germany has
encouraged them, and raised a new spirit of ambition in them. It has crowned
them with a new reputation, and a great one. It calls upon them to follow
their good fortune, which they have these promises for. Their footing in the
Palatine, for the displanting of a whole Country of our religion. The
weakness of the Princes of the Union which is discovered, to be such in their
last cold actions, (that we may truly say) what does remain unlost of Germany
which was never lost before, does hold but upon courtesy, Then the passages
that these successes, do offer to open him down into the United Provinces, in
the body of which state they have a faction now a working, the sect of the
Arminians, which is another thing that animateth them. Out of the Low Countries
they cannot but look into England which will carry all the rest. The King of
Spain having now the advantage in Italy to make himself the master of it by
his forts he has raised in Voltolina, for the blocking up of almost all Italy,
specially the ancient common wealth of Venice, our entire friends. And lastly
the dangers, the house of Austria and the Church of Rome have been in, and the
hopes they are now in, will be still pricking them forwards to follow their
good fortune. These things considered, who can so flatter himself to imagine,
that the catholic Kings ambition, to the Monarchy of the whole world is dead,
thus great an Enemy we have, and thus affected, and yet we are unarmed. Now
then that we may know the enemy we have to provide against, Let us consider how
great our danger is, in that which I have spoken already: The greatest of it is
mainely understood, yet to understand it the better, we are to look on those
of the Religion in France, who were never so dangerously threatened as now, nor
had ever such cause to quake, in so much as did they not hope of relief out of
this Kingdom, I think they would yield presently to mercy, and how can we
relieve our neighbors that are in no able disposition to uphold our selves.
Again to understand our danger the better, now we have weighed the condition
and State of friends and enemies abroad, Let us examine how it stand with us
here at home, how many Papists live here amongst us, that under the Church
cause, carry evil minds to the State, to their own native Country, and
could be willing to see it bleed to death, at the foot of a stranger, at the
foot of the King of Spain, so far do the papists of our nation differ from
others. For such faithful servants are ours to that foreign Prince, as that
they will not only hold arguments against the Majesty of their own King, and
his children, and rail more then any of our best neighbors and friends, but
will spend their study and venture their lives, to make the Spanish King the
Monarch of Christendom, so well they have profited under their Masters the
Jesuits, those faithful Counselors of Spain, and at this very hour, (I
assure my self) the success in Germany is their present object, and the good
they promise themselves by it, their object in future, even very now they are
discoursing of it, and growing proud in the destruction it threatens us
withal: the houses of Parliament where we do now sit, do bear record against
them, in that unmatchable treason, the powder plot, thus great our danger is,
and yet we are unarmed, and that is our greatest danger.

The third thing we are to consider in the danger, is how near it is unto us,
for although we hear the Spaniard is as far from us as the Palatine, yet if
we will take the distance, either by the scale of State or War, we must judge
our danger, not much further from us then our sea coasts. In our profession of
arms its a principle, that if the Counter scarf be gained, though it be
beyond the ditch the whole fortification is accounted lost. For the Rampire
serves but for a defense to make a composition, so that if you will be content
to loose the Counter scarf, then you must think of nothing but a composition.
And with whom will you think to compound, with an enemy that will keep good
quarter? no, with one that will keep the same quarter, the woolfe does with
the lamb. If you will do as no good soldier ever did, that is, suffer your
enemy to dwell in your out works, while his friends among us, are expecting
of him within, and never look to arm and defend your selves, its best for you
to yield betimes, For yielding is like to prove the best of the success: but
if you have no belief in that kind of security, let us do as the Israelites
did, pray and treat with our swords in our hands, for England that has bin
at the least 4. times conquered, was never in more danger then it is at this
present, thus great, yea thus near our danger is, and yet we are unarmmed.

Now for the defense we stand in need of, we are to consider the oppression of
his Majesty's Issue, that we are bound in honor and safety to redeem them
out of it, and if we are to look to defense of our own country against
invasion, which England was never subject to for want of number, but for want
of military strength and order. For the wars abroad, there is required a great
Army, for the defense at home a more sufficient and better discipline, and a
more sincere execution of laws against the Papists. The first touching the
redeeming of the Pallet. is first to be resolved on, which brings me now to the
consideration of our danger, when we are to provide against it, I pray God it
be not too late, you may understand by that prayer my opinion, when we are to
provide against it is now instantly; Let us loose no time, not a day, not an
hour not a minute. The season of the year requires it, for if we loose the
season, which is to be ready with a royal Army, against the beginning of the
spring, and so suffer the Spanish side to go on this year as did the last, you
cannot conceive how it will be in the power of man to keep him from the
absolute height of his ambition. Let us not treat with him, but as I said
before with our sword in our hands, his treaties otherwise are ominous. Let us
all fall down upon our knees, with a communion of mind to God for his presence
among us, and then immediately fall into consultation for the speedy preparing
of money, arms, munition, and good hearts for the defense of Religion, his
Majesty, his children, and the safety of the Commonwealth, For the providing,
whereof money is the first material, but it has bin suggested by some, that the
hearing of the subjects grievances, and the redressing of them was the first
business of Parliaments, admit it to be so. For the same reason then a subsidy
is the first thing at this Parliament to be enacted, for the present necessity
of defending of the Kingdom is the public grievance of the whole
Commonwealth, all other are but particular and private grievances in respect
of this, and this cannot be redressed without a subsidy, and that freely and
presently granted. Other matters for the most part do concern but some of them
one member, and some another of the Commonwealth, and may have more time to
deliberate on: but this concerns the whole Land, we are all engaged in it for
our selves, and for our posterity, and it cannot admit or any delay, for it is
our own cause as well as the Kings, and the thing we should rather offer, then
be sought unto for, seeing it will be money laid out in our extreme
necessity, for our own safeties, if we neglect this, we shall in effect be as
bad as our enemies instruments, and so offer all the rest of our labors to
peril. From which God of his mercy defend us.

FINIS.

