THE PROIECTOR. TEACHING A DIRECT, SVRE, and ready way to restore the decays
of the Church and State both in Honor and Revenue. DELIVERED IN A SERMON
before the Judges in Norwich, at Summer Assizes there holden, Anno 1620.

By THOMAS SCOT Bachelor in Divinity.

PROVE. 11. 10, 11. When it goes well with the righteous, the City rejoices;
and when the wicked perish there is shouting: By the blessing of the upright
the City is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

Printed at London. 1623.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, Satan is subtle, and persuades us all goes well; there
needs no sharpness in this age; and that if any use it, the false humor of
their brains, rather then the tainted manners of these times, provokes it.
Especially this crime of customarie tartness is like to be laid to my charge,
who have been (as some think and I feel) too busy in discovering falsehood
and error, and have followed Truth too near the heels, to have my teeth
beaten out. But whilst my tongue is left in my head; I will say with the
Prophet Psalm 37. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning: If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

I must confess I am the more earnest against these common and crying
iniquities, because I my self was long subjected to them, and do yet bear
the scarres and cicatrices of their malice both in mind, body, and fame. My
mind, though not naked, yet, by the time I wasted idly in their company,
being disfurnished of many necessaries, for which I do often blush; my body,
though not altogether crazed, yet being older, weaker, and more subject to
diseases, and nearer the grave, then either my years or native constitution
would have carried me so early: My fame, though not tainted, yet being not so
odoriferous, as becomes either my general calling as a Christian, or
particular as a Minister of Christ, a Holy and sanctified vessel of honor.

Romans 7. 23 24. 25.
These considerations makes me (being delivered from the bondage, though not
from the body of that sin which has done me all this mischief) more eager
against the common and cursed corruptions of the time, and that for three
respects.

First, to warn other men least they fall into the same snare.

Secondly, to bind my self, that the sins I have by Gods mercy broken loose
from, repossesse not my mortal body again.

Thirdly, to excite, such as have power, to sharpen the edge of Justice against
iniquity, which begins to grow so strong, Mat. 24. 12.
whilst the love of many waxes cold, as a sudden ruin, without a speedy
remedy, is threatened thereby to the Church and State.

We cry out of Popery, and there is cause; but Popery gets ground of us whilst
we want piety to withstand it; and keep Exo. 17. 12.
our own ground constantly. Aaron and Hurr want care, conscience and courage,
to hold up their own hands, much more to hold up the hands of Moses in the
constant course of Justice against the Amalekites, that Actual, Magisteriall
and Maiesticall kind of prayer.

The corruption of manners has broken down our Walls, and let in that Trojan
Horse laden with trumperies: And for my part I fear not what they bring in so
much, as I do the In-bringers. Atheism brings in Papisme; irreligion,
superstition. All are not true Christians that are truly christened, Tit. ^. 16.
as they may deny God, so may they deny Christ lesus in their lives too.

These being the greater number are the more dangerous: otherwise, but for
these, and but that we know these will take part with the worser part, we
would not fear the Roman Catholics, since certainly the number of the true
reformed Catholics are in our Isle the greater and stronger. But when I look
on these assistants I tremble.

First, because I know they will gladly entertayne that Religion which is most
glorious to the eye, promises most worldly advantages, and gives most
satisfaction to corrupted nature, and consists for the most part in external
rites. And if Turcisme should come next, they would prefer it before the
Christian, as Machiavell their master does.

Secondly, I fear lest God in Judgment should suffer these thorns and
nettles to prick and sting us; because whilst Ios. 23. 13.
we had time, occasion, yea provocation, and means to weed up these weeds,
we neglected our duties, and would not do it, but keep them as necessary
fences to the garden of God.

For these fears (if now it be not too late) I propound a remedy preached
before, published now, that all may read as they Habacuck. 2. 2.
run.

It was our Saviors charge to Peter, When thou art converted, help to
strengthen thy brethren. That he denied Luke 22. 32. Mat. 26. 70
Christ thrice, made him thrice as eager and zealous in preaching Christ
crucified. This is my case, Satan's buffetting 2. Cor. 12. 7.
makes me buffet Satan and his associates; what Coward being smitten, will not
strike again? Christ that contemnes the blows of insulting soldiers and is
silent, yet to Peter's smooth temptation, replies sharply, Get thee behind Mat.
16. 23.
me Satan.

If any say I rail (as that is a common aspersion cast upon all that now
speak truth in sincerity) let them know it is against Satan that I rail,
though he be hid under the Mask of Pet^^ himself, or any other high or holy
Stalking-horse. Pray against these evils, lend thy hand also to remove them,
according as thy place and authority gives thee strength; strike not me for
striking on thy side, and taking thy souls part against sin; (so only do
fools and madmen) but pray for me as I for thee, that his grace may mend us;
so that we may help to mend others, and none may be so graceless as to shun
reformation, or hate us for our desires to make them better.

Thy servant in Christ Jesus, Tho: Scot.

THE PROIECTOR.
Justice exalts a Nation, But sin is a shame to any people. Proverb. 14.
34.
THere has been much contention P. Scipio Nascica, perpetuo pronunciauit,
videri sibi Carthaginem debere esse. Cato contra, Carthaginem non debere esse,
Plut. in vit. Catonis.
amongst great Wits about the government of Commonweales: some holding the best
way to exalt a Nation, is to keep it united at home, by action abroad. To
which end Scipio would have Carthage preserved, that Rome might have enemies.
Others think the best way is to secure them at home by making universal
peace, to which end Cato would have Carthage destroyed, that Rome might have no
enemies.

Some think the best way to preserve States, is to make long leagues and
confederacies to combine Nations in marriage, to suffer the Commons to gather
wealth, that so they may be in love with their own ease. Others think
confederacies suspicious and dangerous on both sides; marriages rather scarifie
the^ close wounds; and that wealth makes the people proud and intractable.
Wherefore they think better that the Nobles be curbed, and that stirring edge
of honor ground off; that domesticke faction be maintained, whereby the envy
and emulation of great men may be busied in pulling one another down: That
Country-contention be cherirished, to keep by that means the Common stock
stirring; to vent the spleen of neighbor against neighbor, so that they shall
not need to look out for enemies, nor have leisure to combine themselves and
turn head against the public Magistrate.

Amongst all these various opinions, the shreds of Politicians, which patch up
the Commonwealth like a beggars cloak, Solomon here (as wise I think, as any
other man, especially in king-craft) sets down his observation and opinion in
two brief Aphorisms of State, Justice exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame
to any People.

Herein I observe two Conjunctions, two Seperations, and two Oppositions.

1. The two Conjunctions:
1. First betwixt Justice and Honor: In these words, Justice exalts, or,
honoreth a Nation. 2. The second betwixt Sin and Shame; in these words: But
sin is a shame to any People.
Now, Those that God has joined, let no man put asunder.

2. The two Separations are:
1. First, betwixt Justice and Shame. 2. The second, betwixt Sin and Honor.
Now those that God has severed, let no man join together.

3. The two Oppositions are:
1. First, betwixt Justice and Sin. 2. The second betwixt Shame and Honor.
Now those that God has opposed, no man can put together, without a
Diabolical Contract, a Sodomiticall mixture, a sin against Nature.

2. De Orat:
The Orator says, Legibus proposit a sunt supplicia vitijs, pramia virtutibus.
Here we find both these ends;

1. First, virtue and its reward; Justice exalts a Nation.

2. Secondly, vice and its punishment; But sin is a shame to any people.

Thus as Ianus head (which was an emblem of Policy) looked both ways,
backward and forward, to prevent danger: so this Text, to the right hand and
to the left. It has an eye to virtue, that it fade not for lack of
encouragement, and to vice, that in over-spreade not all for lack of weeding.
Here we have virtue walking like an ancient Englishman with an honorable
train of followers; and vice like a modern Gallant, who has traveled away
his virtue, wit, and wealth, and returns with a single Page, according to that
approved Proverb, Sin goes before, and shame follows after.

The terms are clear enough; we all understand what is meant by Justice and
Honor, and Sin and Shame. Justice is either essential, or virtuall.

Essential Justice is God himself, every attribute of God being God.

Virtuall Justice is a beam of that Sun. For though it be true, that only
divine Justice of it self, absolutely and immediately guilds all persons and
places it reflects upon with favor; yet it is also true, that God by virtuall
Justice, (a spark of the same celestial fire) as by an isntrumental cause,
is pleased to adorn and beautify the humane nature, yea and to accept of
honor intended by man to the divine Nature: For he that honors 1. ^^. 2.
30.
me (faith God) I will honor: As if God were pleased to exchange (as it were)
commodities with man, and so to prize the service of man, as to return a
reward for man's work: not (I must confess) either out of condignitie or
congruitie, as if man did merit it; but out of abundant Justice, since God has
out of Mercy promised it.

This Justice then here spoken of, is virtuall Justice, the justice of man
communicated to him by Gods spirit.

And this is either universal, or particular.

1 Universal Justice is that holiness and sanctity, whereby we give unto God
what belongs unto him in our religious worship and service, as Faith, Fear,
Love, Honor, and the effects of these; which must be performed according to
the express letter of the Law, his will delivered in the Scripture, which is
the infallible Word of truth, otherwise it cannot be just, if it contradicts
that word of God which is the rule of truth and justice.

2 Particular Justice is that, whereby we give unto man what belongs unto
man, as fidelity in promises and contracts, obedience to superiors, love to
inferiors, equality to all: and therefore One says, Iusticia est virtus
adequans vnum cum altero, Justice is a virtue which makes things just. And
Ambrose, Iusticia est virtus quae vnicuique quod suum est, tribuit, alienum non
vendicat, vtilitatem propriam negligit, vt communem aequalitatem custodiat.
Justice is a virtue which gives every man his own, claims not that which is
another man's, neglects private gain, that it may observe common equality. For
Mar. 12.7.
both these our Savior gives a rule, Give unto God the things that are Gods,
there is universal Justice: and unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, there
is particular Justice.

Again, Justice is either private, or public.

1 Private justice is that which a man exercises at home: first to himself in
his own person, then to others in his family: (for I extend private Justice so
far.)

First, teaching himself with all sobriety, declinare a malo, facere bonum,
looking into his own inclination, censuring himself strictly, becoming a
law to himself, restrayning his own perverse and libidinous desires, and
like a just man, neither defrauding himself of that which is meet for him, nor
(with too much indulgence) cockering up his nature with more then enough.
Nimium and parum iniustitia est, propterea quod in exuperantia Arist. Eth. lib.
^. cap. ^.
and defectione consistit.

Thus the just man eats, and drinks, and sleeps enough to satisfy nature,
but exceeds not; clothes himself according to his estate in a mediocritie,
both for necessity and decency; desires an estate, that he may rather be
able to relieve others, then to beg relief, but all without excess,
according to Agurs prayer, Prove. 30. 8. 9.

He robs not himself to leave to others, he knows not to whom, as the rich
fool does, who has no power Eccl. 6. ^.
to eat: neither does he rob others for his own private wealth, eating up
all, and not suffering the poor to eat at all: He robs not the whole world,
and all other men's children for his own, by deceit or violence; neither does
he rob his own children by excess and prodigality. He is not Catiline-like,
alieni avidus, sui profusus; but Salust.
he uses the world as if he used it not, knowing he is but a pilgrim, a
soiourner here. He loves his wife, and gives her all due benevolence; yet makes
her not the head to govern all, nor the foot to be lowest of all; but as the
eye in his head, the apple in his eye, the heart in his body, gives her all due
respect and honor, which may stand with his own honor, and not destroy both.

His children he makes as servants, obedient; his servants as children, loving;
entreating his servants as sons, and so esteeming them; and commanding his
sons as servants, and so nurturing them. If his son has the inheritance,
his servant has the Lease; his servant shall serve his son, but his son
shall keep his servant. And this is a just man to himself and his at home,
without which he can never be truly so abroad to others.

2 Public justice is that which he does exercise to others in the
Commonwealth in his particular calling, as he is a Magistrate, Minister,
Lawyer, Physician, Merchant, Mechanicke, or the like. He makes a conscience of
his calling, and knows he must give an account for the employment of his
talents; and therefore uses himself in his place, not as if the end of his
vocation were only to gather wealth, and enrich himself and his posterity,
but to do God service, and other men good, knowing that Heathens could say,
Non solum nobis nati sumus, sed partim patriae, partim parentibus, etc. and
therefore follows the rule given by Saint Paul to Titus, and Tit. 2. 12.
contracted close in three Aduerbes, vt viuamus sobrie, just, pie.

First, sobrie, soberly: because all justice must begin at home, it is the rule
of all, Love thy neighbor as thy self: if thou do not love thy self well
first, thou can not love thy neighbor well at all.

Secondly, just, justly. Do as thou would be done to: 1. Ioh. 4 20.
for If thou love not thy neighbor whom thou have seen, how can thou love
God whom thou have not seen?

Thirdly, pie, godlily; for this is the sum of all, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor like thy self: in these consists
all the Law and the Prophets.

Now then a man being thus sober at home in his own deportment, just abroad to
others in public commerce, and religious toward God in his devotions, is
accounted by God and Man a just man. Not as if any absolute Justice were in him
(for that alone is Gods, and there is none that sins not) but just in
comparison of ^. Io. 1. 8.
others, just in estimation with others, just in affection to others; just if
we measure his declensions and digressions with his common conversation, and
judge him not by any particular act, but by the general. And thus was Abraham,
Lot, Job, Samuel, David, Zachary, just men; not absolutely just, generally
just, sed secundum quid, after a sort.

And when a man is thus just, see what honor it procures him. Other Men dare
refer themselves and all that they have to the censure of such, knowing his
conscience is a law unto him, and he will not transgress against it for the
world.

What an honor was it for Abraham in the contention betwixt Lots servants and
his, to offer Lot (though he were the younger and weaker) the honor of the day,
the honor of the place, the right or left hand, choose which he would? This was
Justice, and Justice without partiality, without private respect; for it was in
Abraham's Genes. 13. 9
power being both the elder and stronger, to have taken which hand he would, and
either to have left Lot the worst part, or no part.

What an honor was it again for Abraham to take Genes. 14. 14.
arms to redeem his Cousin Lot from thraldom? doubtless, he that would fight to
redeem him being taken, would have fought to keep him from captivity. Even
just Abraham will here be an assaylant. The Justice of the cause is ours as
it was Abraham's, if the courage were ours, as it was Abraham's.

Nay, when Abraham has overcome, see his Justice shining more clearly yet,
protesting to the king of Sodom, who offered him the greatest part of the
spoil, Genesis 14. 22
because he had purchased all with his sword, I have lift up my hand to the Lord
the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth, That I will not take any
thing that is thine, from a thread even to a shoe latchet, lest thou should
say, I have made Abraham rich.

No man but God shall make Abraham rich, especially none adverse or diverse in
religion from Abraham, as the king of Sodom was. Abraham will have no wealth,
but what his conscience assures him is the gift of God. O justice to be
admired, but too much out of date to be imitated, or almost believed! when we
will most unjustly take any thing of any man, by any means, whereby we may be
made rich. There is no shame now amongst men, but to be poor, and honest.

Genesis 41 38.
What an honor was it for Joseph to be sent for out of the prison into the
presence of Pharaoh? to be advanced presently to place of authority, and made
Ruler over all the Land, yea over his old master who had unjustly imprisoned
him? and what an honor was it for him to forget all old injuries, and to
revenge none, and to deal so faithfully and justly betwixt the King and his
subjects, that he gave contentment to them both? he saved the peoples lives,
he gat the King their Lands. This was a Proiector worthy of praise. The Text
says, he Genesis 39. 6.
was a goodly person, and wel-fauoured; a Favorite fit indeed for a Prince, he
sought not to enrich himself, but to enrich his Master, and to honor the
State by his justice, Genes. 41.

What an honor was it for Job both to be, and to be accounted so just, to be
reverenced of old and young, to be loved of the good, feared of the evil, to
be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, a tongue to the dumb, counsel to
the simple, a Patron to the poor, a bulwark of justice to all? Job 29.

What an honor was it to Samuel, that in the confident integrity of his heart,
he could say to all the people, Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I
taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it you? 1.
Sam. 12. And what an honor was it to hear them ingenuously confess and say,
Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken ought of
any man's hand: So that he might justly reply, The Lord is witness against you,
and his Anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand:
and they answered, He is witness.

What an honor was it for Solomon to be visited by a Queen, to have his
wisdom and justice in the managing, both of himself, his household, and
kingdom, so magnified by a foreign testimony? Blessed be the Lord thy God
which delights in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel: because the Lord
loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King, to do judgment and
justice, 1. King. 10. 9.

Thus then we see how a family is honored by having one just man the Master: A
City is honored by having one just man the Magistrate: A Kingdom is honored
by having a just and wise King: but when all, or the greatest part of men are
just in the household; and all, or the greatest part of households are just in
the City; and all, or the greatest part of those Cities and Counties are just
in a Kingdom: when justice reigns thus universally, then, then is that
verified which Solomon here affirms, Justice makes a Kingdom or Nation
glorious: or Justice exalts a Nation. For as in old Rome all the Senators
seemed Kings, so here the Magistrates seem gods, resembling God in justice, I
have said ye are gods: the Ministers seem Angels, resembling Angels in
sanctity and diligence: the people seem blessed spirits, living in love, in
peace, in holiness, and happiness and the whole Commonwealth seems a heaven
upon earth, full of sobriety, justice and godliness. Evil men may malice it,
the Kings of the earth may conspire against it, Satan and his associates may
undermine it, but God protects it with his arm, guides it with his Word and
Spirit, and guilds it with his glorious presence.

Take one example without exception for all, even the Reign of that
euer-memorable Queen Elizabeth, within whose heart, as all royal Virtue was
enshrined, and in her Reign all true Religion and Justice flourished, so for
the confirming of this Maxim after her death, this Elogium was engraued upon
her Tomb, by the commandment of her impartial Successor: which is the more
remarkable for the honor both of the living and of the dead, because Princes
can hardly (with patience) hear the praises of their Predecessors, much less
write them, or command them to be written: Religion reformed, Peace well
grounded, Money reduced to the true value, a Navy well furnished in
readiness, Honor at Sea restored, Rebellion extinguished, England for the
space of forty and four years most vvisely governed, enriched, and
fortified; Scotland freed from the French, France relieved, Netherlands
supported, Spain avved, Ireland quieted, and the whole Globe of the Earth
twice sailed round about.

What could be more? yet all this was true, and much more. And thus were we
happy. And thus we see how Justice exalts a Nation, when it gives Sin his
due punishment, and Virtue his due reward: when the Countriman dares travel
safely abroad, or sleep at home under his own Vine without fear of thieves
or enemies: when the Merchant dares trade without fear of Pirates at Sea, or
Farmers and watchers at Land: when every man dares buy and sell, without fear
of cousening, dares fly to the Courts of Conscience without fear of undoing;
dares plant, and plow, and sow, and reap, and grow honestly rich, and be
known to be so, without fear of Empson and Dudley, or the like: when if men
have no other capital crime, Innocence shall not be accounted one: when all
men dare serve one God after one and the self same manner devoutly, and none
dares serve him otherwise: when things are generally thus disposed, this makes
a flourishing estate, this makes a nation glorious. And thus much of the first
proposition or Aphorism, Justice exalts a Nation. We come to the second: But
sin is a shame to any people.

Aug. de 2. animal.
Peccatum est volunt as retinendi vel consequendi quod justitia vetatur. And
here that rule holds, Iniustitia vniver sa justitiae opposita, non pars vitij
est se vniversum vitium. Arist. Eth. lib. 5.
As justice before contained all virtues, but especially the carriage of one man
to another as the most supreme and sensible virtue; so here all sin is
intended, but especially injustice as the proper and most apparent opposite to
justice: And that to let us see, how in justice (which is justice mis-done,
corruptly, or left vndonenegligently) is the cause of all sin, and so
consequently of all shame the reward of sin, as justice duly executed is the
cause of all virtue, and so by consequence of glory the reward or crown of
virtue both here and hereafter.

To clear this, look into Paradise, look into Hell, look into Heaven, and
look upon the Earth for examples.

1. In Paradise, when God had made man according to his image in original
justice, and given him the law of Nature to be his guide, and to teach him how
to obey God, and command the Creature, with this one easy and express
prohibition not to eat of the fruit in the midst of the Garden, Satan comes
to the woman and like a Sophister persuades her, that if Man would eat
thereof, he should be like God, knowing both good and evil. They were like
gods before, being created the image of God; but in coveting more, they lost
what they had. And observe the vvayes and degrees of precipitation; Euah that
was made to obey, would needs command; for the text says, the Serpent
persuaded her, but she gave to the Man like a Mistress, and it is said, he
did eat thereof, as if he durst do no otherwise. So private justice being
infringed, it made way to public, and the particular law being broken, the
universal defection follovved. Before this whilst Adam stood in integrity of
Justice he was naked and not ashamed; nay, he need Genes. 2. 2^
not be ashamed, for he was a most glorious creature; God himself approues him
for such, and beholding him so, pronounces him to be good. But presently
after when justice was transgrest, and the law broken, it is said, Their
eyes were opened, and they saw that they were Genes. 3. 7.
naked: They were then ashamed, and therefore made Genes. 3. 8.
themselves aprons of fig-leaues, They were then afraid, and therefore hid
themselves in the shadow of the trees. For they knevv that God was just, even
justice it self, and therefore as the sentence was gone out of his mouth, The
Genes. 2. 19
day that thou shall eat thereof, thou shall dye the death, so the svvord of
Justice follows to execute, and they must dye and all their posterity: No
sin shall go unpunished without shame: All must dye with him, since all
sinned in him: And thus we see how shame follows sin naturally, and how
till man had sinned there was no shame, but now Pudor est timor justae
vituperationis, Shame is a fear of a just reprehension; nay rather, Shame is a
fear of a just reiection, which man had by sin deserved.

2. Look into hell; see the sin of Dives repayd with Shame, and that
according to the rule of justice Lege Talionis. ^uc. 16.
He begged a drop of water and could not have it, because he denied a crumme of
bread before when Lazarus begged it. Doubtless had he given a crumme, he should
have received a drop. There is less mercy shown to him then to a dog; he
could not be suffered to lap a little water to cool his tongue: because he
showed less mercy to Lazarus then the dogs did, who lickt his sores with
their tongues.

3. Look into heaven; see Abraham's heart was charitable here, his house stood
ever open to all strangers: Abraham's bosom is enlarged there, made a haven to
all comers; nay, a heaven to all believers. Rich Dives starued Lazarus here,
rich Abraham feasteth Lazarus there. Qui sequitur iustitiam, and facit
misericordiam, inueniet vitam, iustitiam, and gloriam. Pro. 21. 21. The
righteous (says our Savior) shall then shine forth as the Sun, in the
Kingdom of their Father Mat. 13. 43. And those that exceed in justice here,
shall exceed in glory hereafter as one star exceedes an other in splendour.

4. Lastly, look upon the earth; See Cain after his sin degraded of his
honor: Before, he was Lord of all, and had his name from the possession of the
whole earth.

If then to be rich be glorious, who could be more glorious? for who could
be more rich? he was made the lord, king, and ruler over his brother Abel,
Genesis 4. 7. Unto thee (says God) shall his desire be, and thou shall rule over
him. Thus in killing Abel unjustly, he played the tyrant and slew all his
subjects at once, (as Nero would have done, when he wished all Rome one neck,
that he might cut it off at a blow.) And was not this a shame for a King to be
without subjects, and so with his own hands (as it were) to depose himself?
Nay, was it not a shame to fall so low, as from the lord of all, to become a
beggar, a rogue, a vagabond, marked out to future punishment for foregoing
sin? And yet more base, of fugitives the most cowardly, to fear (as the
Psalmist faith,) where there is no cause of fear, to fear the wind amongst
the leaves (as his father Adam did) nay to fear Genes. 3. 8.
the child unborn, for so he says to God, Genes. 4. 14 It shall come to
pass, that every one that finds me, shall slay me. Miserable wretch! there
is yet none borne to find thee, to fear thee, and when they shall be borne
will thou be afraid of every one? of every child? of every weak woman? of
every one? Nay when one has killed thee, art thou still afraid that every one
should kill thee by turns, that every one that finds thee should kill thee? O
see the extent of hell upon earth where torment is endless and infinite, see the
lamentable case of a sinner in despair, who has fallen from instice, he is
afraid of God, and so of every creature of God, afraid of every man, of every
woman, and that successively, eternally of every lease, of every shadow, of
every imagination; nay he is afraid of himself as Caine was, such as these
are dead whilst they live: what 1. Tim. 5. 6 Numb. 25.
a shame was it for Zimri a principal man in his tribe to commit sin openly
and impudently in the sight of the Sun, even then when the rod of affliction
was upon the back of his Nation; and when Moses and all Israel Et stetit
Phinees and placauit, vel placuit. So reads the vulgar.
were weeping and mourning for their sins? And what a glory was it to Phineas
for his zeal in the execution of justice, to have the perpetual Priesthood
conferred upon him, to have his act of justice styled a prayer, Then stood up
Phinees and prayed Ps. 106. 30.
and to have it not only imputed unto himself for righteousness, but to his
Countrymen also for here the plague ceased, as if killing the sinners, he had
killed the sin, and killing the sin he had killed the punishment. As they
were stained by Zimries sin, so they were honored by Phineas Justice; for
Justice exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame to any people. This Balaam knew
well, when he taught Balaack to lay a stumbling block before the Israelites to
cause them sin, that so shame might follow Numb. 31. 16. 17.
Revel. 2. 14. This Phineas knew well, who therefore removed the stumbling
block, that Justice being executed, the Nation might be exalted. Psalm: 106.
30. The stumbling block here laid was Adultery and Idolatry. The Lord
therefore in his mercy keep us from joining in marriage with Idolaters: since
we see temporal fornication brings in spiritual; and the conjunction of
hearts with the bodies of such, makes Solomon sin. Bodily lust blinds the
eyes of spiritual love.

What a shame was it for Sampson the Judge of the people to fall by a woman?
Yea to have his eyes put out, and to grind in a mill as a punishment of his
sin? The eyes of his judgment were first put out, then the eyes of his body.
He that follows lust grinds in a mill, runs in a round circle, beginning
where he ended, and is a slave to worse enemies then the Philistines, even to
his own base lust, passions and affections, and to Satan their Captain and
Commander.

What a shame was it for Elyes sons who should have dehorted others from
sin, to be the ringleaders to sin? and whilst they should have compelled
others to come in, forced them out of Gods house by their scandalous offenses?
And thus by their irregularity to occasion the loss of the Ark of God, the
untimely death of their good old father, and the ouer-hasty travel of a
passionate and affectionate wife, who dying, named the son of her sorrow
Ichabod, to witness, that Glory was departed from Israel, and shame was like
suddenly to follow for their sin. 1. Sam. 4.

What a shame was it for the bad sons of good Samuel 1. Sam. 8.
whilst they should have punished others for bribery, to take bribes themselves,
and to set there authority to sale for covetousness? Peccat voluntarius sciens,
quando e contrario Arist. lib. 8. phisic.
vtitur scientia.

And to sum up all with a supreme example of Gods 1. Kin. 14. 7
Justice in punishing man's Injustice; what a shame was it to Jeroboam, who was
placed by God in a high estate, and raised from being a servant to be a king,
ungratefully to leave that God; and whereas he should have punished others for
sinning, to draw others to sin, by precept To. 1. 32.
and example? And to be branded with a superlatiue shame, That he was the man
who made Israel to sin? Yea to have a curse denounced against him and his
seed, That they should be removed as doung: like doung defiling the 1. Kin. 14
7
chair of State. O what distance is there betwixt the throne and the dounghill?
Yet they should be removed as doung: That dogs should eat such of them as died
in the city, and the fowls of the air such as dyed in the field?

Lastly, take for example the wise obseruer of this point of State, Solomon
himself, who doing justice was honored and enriched above all men; but
declining from justice had shame following his sin so far, that Siracides
one of his own scholars says of him. Thou did Eccl. 47. 19. 20.
bow thy loins to women, and were overcome by thy body, thou did stain thy
honor, and have defiled thy posterity, and have brought wrath upon thy
children, and felt sorrow for thy folly; so the Kingdom was divided, etc. Thus
he made large experience of his own principles, and saw truly by trial, what
he foresaw by wisdom, That justice exalts a nation, but sin is a shame to
any people. And thus much of the second Aphorism, or the opposition; we come
now to the application.

I make no question if now I should propound some admirable project, how to
raise great sums of money, filling the Exchequer, and those mountains aloft,
without drayning the Country bogges below, I should be welcome to Court, and my
message and person intertaind with favor. Or if here I could bring word that
wars were proclaimed where wealth might be bought with blood: that the king
had undertaken the Protection of Bohemia, or the prince the conquest of
France, so that now the old way were set vvide open, to honor this Land by
the sword, and the wreath of Victory were set up with this Motto, vincenti
dabitur; I make no doubt the message would be welcome to all, or to the most,
and perhaps not ungrateful to my self; yea here would be voluntaries enough
even in this City and Country, to make a camp royal. But now I propound a
Project more profitable, more gainefull, more necessary; a war more safe,
more glorious, more honorable: I fear though the Holy Ghost (the Churches
General) bids me lift up my voice like a trumpet, I may have small
intertainement of many, and amongst all scarce find a voluntary; nay, hardly
pressed soldiers enough to fight these battayles of God against sin, Satan,
the world, and the flesh.

Yet for my part since (though unworthy) I am here set as an Officer for the
present, and have vim admonendi, though not vim coercendi in this place; I will
do what belongs unto me, to direct you the right way, arm you to these
wars, leaving the success to God and to the Magistrate, who bears not the
sword in vain, but must either smite with it where he finds sin, or be
smitten with it to his own shame and dishonor.

1. Justice exalts a Nation. Here is a Project to make you rich.

2 Sin is a shame to any people. Here is a war to undertake, an enemy to
conquer, to expel, to cast out.

Such as doubt of the general truth of these Aphorisms, notwithstanding all
that has been said, I refer them over to read at their leisures the 26.
Chapter of Leuiticus, where they shall see this argument handled at large, to
the clearing of every doubt, and satisfaction of every objection, beyond that
which the limited time of an hour will afford me room punctually to
delineate. Only for the present I am especially to acquaint four sorts of men
with this Project, and to arm them fit for these wars; namely, 1. the Judge,
2. the Plaintiff, 3. the Defendant, 4. the Witnesses. For cuery cause consists
of these four parts or parties.

1. For the Judge.

Worthy and honorable Judges, I intend not to take upon me to instruct you as
men ignorant of your duties, though my warrant would carry it, and though my
Master who has instructed you thus far, can yet instruct you farther; and
send Solomon to school to the Raven, to the Pismire, yea to the Lillies of the
field, as being able to teach the wisest man, by the weakest creature; only I
purpose to acquaint you with that which God has taught me; to which end I
humbly beseech you to suffer a word of exhortation: Your good words do well,
your good works, and good examples do better. Solomon the Preacher was King
in Jerusalem, Eccl. 1. 1. As therefore he gave good charges like a Preacher,
he looked that his Officers should discharge and execute his Laws and Canons
like a King. Corpora coelestia calefaciunt, non in quantum calida, sed in
quantum sunt velocis motus and luminosa. Shine therefore as you had wont in the
eyes of all, as glorious examples of grace; and first see, examine, search out
truth and falsehood, vice and virtue, right and wrong; for therein consists
the glory of a Prove. 25. 2.
Magistrate; the advantage of place gives you means to do it, as the Sun
survayes all things in his circuit. And then by swift motion, by swift
execution, heat the coldness of our Climate, stir up our zeal, ripen our
late fruits, dry up our drunken sin, whose inundation makes us barren,
unfruitful, and like water powered forth, vveake to every good work. Oration
gloriae vmbra. The people will speak as they find and feel; and either
praise or disgrace, follows good or evil desert like a shadow. Therefore the
shame of evil government befalls the Governors: For as the Judge of the
people is himself, (says Siracides, cap. 10. 2.) such are his Officers: and
what manner of man the Ruler of the City is, such are all they that dwell
therein. The people are the Magistrates Arist. de Somn.
shadow, but much more his Officers. Cuius est potestas, eius est actus. Judges
therefore ought to beware, that not only themselves be innocent, but that
their Favorites, (O far be that name from a Judge, let Virtue and Justice be
only his Favorites) their Shadows, their Followers I mean, be
cleane-hearted, and cleane-handed too; and ever remember, that the glory or
dishonor not only of themselves, but of the whole State lies in their hands;
For Justice exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame to any people.

Before I part from this party, I must speak to the Justice of Peace, who is
an Appendix to this large Patent of Justice, though somewhat abridged of late.
I desire him to receive this plain, but free and wholesome admonition: First,
that he be careful to bind his wife to the Peace, his children to the good
behavior, that they intermeddle not with affairs of the Commonwealth
uncalled, and unsworn, lest they make the husband, the father ashamed, as they
have done many husbands, and many fathers of late in this Land.

Secondly, that he suffer not a notorious transgressor of the Law in any kind
to be a Retayner of his, and to walk free from the censure of Justice, under
the shadow and protection of his Liuerie.

Thirdly and lastly, since Proiectors have eased him in his Office, and set up
Alehouses (those schools of misrule) under the authority of the broad Seal,
and so left him little to do: that he would pursue carefully, what he has
begun profitably, and bind out youths to Trades, and bind Tradesmen to
their works, that they may not (as now they do) learn to trade to the
Alehouse, and from thence to the Gallows; but by the way take in the House of
correction. And thus much of the first person, the Judge.

The second person is the Plaintiff; the third person is the Defendant: both
these we will join together upon one issue for therefore they come hither.

Here first, I wish that wranglers and malicious persons, who seek and hunt
after occasions of suite and contention, might not only be restrained, but by
severe censures made examples to warn others to beware of uncharitableness.
As David prayed to God, Lord be not merciful to them that sin of malicious
wickedness; so do I to you, my Lords. Doubtless whilst David prays that God
would not be merciful to such, he intended to show no mercy toward them
himself: for where malice is the pursuer of the quarrel, it is pity but
justice with severity should meet with the pursuit.

As for all others I advise them, that (where they can) they should charitably
compound their own differences, or suffer themselves (for their own good) to
be governed by the Justices of peace, or their next discreetest neighbors, who
are ready to do for them without charge, what must be here done perhaps by
Twelve less sufficient men after all their expenses.

But in vain speak I to them, (hotheaded fellows as they are) I must
therefore turn me to their Pastors, by whom perhaps they will be governed.
Alas no, the Suit for the most part is betwixt him and them; he by his example
learnes them to wrangle, and only in that they will be his followers. But if
he be such a man as rather attends upon the preaching of the Gospel of
Christ, then the practice of the Laws of the Kingdom, (I mean in forbearing
to commence actions) and so out of conscience will rather suffer some wrong,
then right himself too hastily by the Law, evil men will esteem him the
less, and give him the less; nay, they will give him nothing, and care
nothing for him. They say of such, that they are God Almighties fools, and
they mean to make them their fools too. Or lastly, if he be (as too often he
is) a good fellow Parson, (as they style him) that is, a Fly in every cup, a
Flea in every company, skipping from the pot to the pulpit: then out of base
fellowship and familiarity with him in sin, they worthily contemn him. He
may lead them perhaps to the Alchouse, there to drink themselves friends, and
then foes again when they are drunk or sober, but from the alehouse he will
not, and from contention he cannot otherwise lead them; having shamed and
stained, and dishonored the dignity of his Priesthood, and so worthily lost
all respect and reverence due to his person and calling. Therefore (hopeles
here of remedy for this mischief) I must turn me to their learned Counsel
at law, by whose advise perhaps they will be ruled; for these stand both for the
Plaintiff and Defendant, and the acts and words of the one are taken for the
acts and words of the other.

You learned Gentlemen are the eldest sons of the Law, the professed followers
and servants of Justice. Is it not therefore a shame that in this Country where
you Norfolk^.
most abound, most suites abound, as if you bred diseases and did not take care
to cure them? Give me leave, I beseech you, all free and generous minds amongst
you, to scour off the rust which canker-frets your noble profession, that so
no spots may be seen to blemish your honors; where the guilty meets
reprehension, there the virtuous meet commendation: The fall of the one, is the
raise of the other. The good mount up with Justice, the bad sink down with
shame.

I know the workman is worthy of his hire; I know what an honorable age a well
spent youth deserves to have. But is not this a shame (I appeal to the best of
you) that a man should sell himself for a Fee (as Achab sold himself to work
wickedness) or let himself out for an hour or two to boulster out an unjust
action, and to outface a just action, and that for a person that is known to
be malicious, against a widow, or an orphane, or a poor simple man, at least
assuredly against an innocent? Nay, is it not a shame to be seen to have a hand
in such causes, much more to give counsel and countenance to such persons for
the advantage of such causes? to use all art, and skill, and authority, to
pervert judgment, to seduce the Jury, to prejudice and confound the true
witness, and to direct and animate the false: as if God had given us all those
talents of Eloquence, learning, judgment, memory, favor, credit, authority,
wealth, and wit, only to do wrong? O! I beseech you, since Justice makes you so
great, as you rise to build the greatest families of this Land, lay a lawful
foundation upon good ground, that it may not totter as soon as you are dead,
and rot before Iosuah. 7.
your bodies be rotten. Let not an ill-gotten wedge be found in your coffers, to
corrupt and consume all the rest. O gather not your Oaks to build your houses
upon that day which God has set apart for himself. Number. 15.
For if stickgatherers were punished who wrought to supply Exodus 16. 26
their necessities, and Manna (Angels food, a Sacrament of Christ) might not be
gathered on that day; then how shall they escape; nay how shall they be
punished; (for escape they shall not) who neglect Gods service, who neglect the
works of justice, charity, and piety, to themselves, to their neighbors, and
to God, and make a covenant, yea sell themselves that day to do unjustly,
uncharitably, and impiously to defend unjust causes, to oppose charitable
actions, to overthrow pious works, and to gather wealth for the maintenance of
riot, excess, and all manner of sin? It was once a question indeed amongst the
Pharesies, whether it were lawful to do good on the Sabbath day or no: but I
thought till now, that to do enil upon any day, especially upon this day, had
been without question unlawful. But if it be now questionable with any,
learn to ouerrule it with a booke-case in the Scripture, the Law of God. And
for Leuit. 26. 34. 35.
practice in the Laws of the Land, take the reverend Judges for a president,
and be sons worthy of such fathers, who being moved by the vveake oratory
of simple man, but the powerful operation of Gods holy Spirit,) have left an
old corrupt custom, submitted themselves to the holy ordinance of God, and
forborne to travel upon that day, because they would do justice, and not rob
God, whilst they were serving Caesar: for they knew well, That Justice
exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame to any people.

And thus much for the second and third person, the Plaintiff and Defendant,
and their learned Counsel at Law.

The fourth person required necessarily in every ordinary judgment, is the
witness. And this is not only he which is brought in by Sub-paena in some
special action, but every Iury-Man, every Officer, who ought to inform the
Court of truth, and to present such crimes as are within the compass of their
inquiry.

These would be looked after, my Lords; for these are the principal cause
that justice is not executed: whilst for fear or favor, or some other
sinister respect, they conceal what they know, or are packt and made
aforehand fit for the matter. And I have heard some of the vvisest sort say,
that if your Honors would be pleased to take an exact roll and account of
such presentiments as are brought and found before you this Assizes, and revievv
it again at your return the next Assizes, and so continue it by a settled
course, you should find some Iacks faulty, and some cogges missing, whereby
the wheel of lustice is hindered in his circular course: yea doubtless, you
should find some saints names wiped out of the Calender, which you had set
there perhaps in red letters.

And now worthy Countrymen, I turn me to you; Consider I beseech you these
three things advisedly: 1. First the danger of lying, much more of swearing
falsely, whilst thereby you offend against four persons.

1. First against your own conscience, which you wound; and though now you
be not sensible of the sore, it will fester, and you shall then feel it most
when there will be found no plaster to cure it. 2. Secondly, you offend against
the innocent, whom you hurt and overthrow. 3. Thirdly, you offend against the
Judge whom you misleade to do injustice. 4. Fourthly, you offend against God,
whom you contemn, taking his blessed Name in vain, and he has sworn, and
will perform it (for he cannot lie, much less forswear Exodus 20.
himself) that he will not hold you guiltless.

2. Secondly, consider the danger of concealing sin: although you think it
nothing, but a cast of your Office, a curtesy, a favor, that you may do a
friend in a corner unseen and vnshent: yet assure your selves whilst you
palliate sin, you take upon you the sin committed; and whatsoever after the
party may commit for lack of censure or due punishment, it is your sin
as well as his; though he be the lawless father, yet you must answer for the
Bastard.

3. Thirdly and lastly, consider the dignity of your employment, and the honor
or shame which succeeds it. What a dignity is it to be eyes and ears to
these great Officers? nay, to be (as it were) joined in commission with them
to punish sin, to execute justice? As therefore you think it a shame in any
of them, where you see, or do but suspect an unjust conniuence at sin: so
call home your thoughts, and consider, if among a few triuiall matters you will
be found faulty, how they may be held excused, if amongst a multitude of
several cases their judgments or affections be entangled by some particular.
And since all crimes in the Country are in your own hands to present to
punishment, blame your selves if you be ouer-cumbred with offenders. Destroy
idleness, and destroy all other vices; for all vices like vermin breed in
that burrow. But if you neglect this, being slothful and idle your selves,
and every one shifting off the work from his own shoulders, posting it from
one to another, (as men rather desirous to pleasure an evil neighbor, then to
benefit the Commonwealth) assure your selves, these vicious persons shall be
left to corrupt your children with their wicked conuersations; and so in time
not only to destroy and waste your private estates, but to endanger the whole
estate of the Commonwealth; and undermine it with vice, as it is reported of a
great City overthrown by Conies, and the like Vermin, suffered to dig and
harbor under the walls and houses thereof. For Justice exalts a Nation, but
sin is a shame to any people.

And thus much of the last person, the Witness. But now lest all the rest that
hear me this day; should think the matter nothing concerns them, who are
neither Judges, nor Plaintifes, nor Defendants, nor witnesses, I must before I
conclude, say something to all in general.

To all therefore in general I give these two observations: you have heard how
Justice exalts a Nation, and how sin is a shame to any people: I pray
therefore collect your spirits, call home your thoughts, and make serious and
diligent inquiry of these two particulars:

1. First, inquire and consider whether this Nation of ours stands now in as
honorable terms with other Nations in the eye of the world, as it had wont: if
you find it does continue the wonted reputation, then judge our Justice
remains; but if you find it begin to stink in the nosthrils of foreign
Nations, then conclude certainly, that our sin abounds.

2. Secondly, begin at the other end, and consider if there be any great sins
practiced in the Land, and left unpunished; such as are blasphemy, the
profanation of the Lords day, drunkenness, murder, and the like; or some
crying sins committed with an high hand, as if they were virtues; such as are
Usury, Extortion, Bribery, Oppression, and all manner of like corruptions:
Sigh, and pray, and weep, and show your selves no partners in the sin, but
sorrowful for the shame that follows. But if upon examination you find this
Nation clear of those crimes, or that justice is duly executed upon the
committers of such crimes, then conclude us a glorious people. For Justice and
Honor have relation each to other, and so has Sin and Shame: if we be just
we are glorious; if we be glorious, we are just: If we be sinful, we are
shameful; if we be shameful, we are sinful.

The poorest and simplest man that is may thus judge of himself, and so
prevent the Judge of all the world, that he be not judged. Nay, thus in
execution of justice upon himself, he may help forward to advance the glory
of a State. But if (being no public person) he cannot by Justice exalt a
Nation, yet by abstaining from sin, he may be one of the ten to preserve a
people from shame, as Lot had done Sodom, if there could have Genes. 18.
been found nine more just like himself in that City. For every inhabitant is
either an Achan to shame the Iosuah. 7.
place in which he dwells with sin, and to draw a general curse upon it, or
else a Lot to save it from destruction; like that poor man in Ecclesiastes
mentioned by Solomon, Eccl. 9.
who with his justice and wisdom delivered the City from the extremity it
stood in. And therefore whatsoever thou art, be sober in thy self, in thy
apparel, meat, drink, desires; be just to thy self, and to thy household:
govern thy wife, chastise thy child, cherish thy servant. Look then abroad,
defraude not others for thine own advantage; sell not heaven for earth. Think
when thou art weighing of commodities, thou art weighing of thy soul; the
scale of Justice is in thy hand, and if thou addest to thy sin for gain,
thou addest to thy shame for loss. Think when thou art measuring thy Wares,
thou art measuring thy Justice, Mat. 7. 2^
and so thy glory. It is in thy hand to make the longitude and latitude thereof
as thou please: For as thou Mat. 7. 11.
measurest, it shall be measured to thee again. And therefore do as thou
would be done to. Ab alio expectes, quod Seneca.
alteri feceris.

You have heard in the beginning of two marriages or conjunctions in this text
of Scripture: the first betwixt Justice and Honor; the second betwixt Sin
and Shame; and how we must not sever what God has joined together.

Where therefore we find Virtue, let us give her the due reward, honor and
reverence, or honor and maintenance.

But have we done thus? have we been thus just? alas no: for then when
Offices either in the Church or Commonwealth were void, it would be as hard a
matter to find just and virtuous men fit to supply them, as now it is hard for
worthy men to find employment, except they buy it from the unworthy.

The second marriage is betwixt Sin and Shame: where therefore we find
Sin in whatsoever person, high or low, rich or poor, let us send his wife
Shame to bear him company; for better trouble one house then more.

But have we done thus? have we bin thus just to give every sin his proper
shame? have not, many husbands amongst us lost their prerogatives with Adam,
and suffered their wives to overrule them without shame? Has not Euah joined
with Satan against God to make her husband great? And has not Iesabell
painted, and whored, and plotted, and witched, and waded through blood to her
own wilful ends, and all without shame? Has not Noah discovered his
nakedness, and Lot committed incest in their drunken fits? Has not the sons
of Ely made marchandice of sacred things? And the sons of Samuel sold Justice
and judgment? and both exceeded in evil as their fathers in good, and all
without shame? Nay, has not Gehezi so traded in bribes, that he goes brauer
then his master, and all without shame? I have no presidents in the Scripture
to expostulate further with this froward generation. Some sins which we
practice are too abhord to find matches, and therefore I must speak plainly.
Are men ashamed to resemble women both in their apparaile, and in their
effeminate fooleries? or are women ashamed to be like men in their clothes, or
in their debosht swaggering and most ruffian-like carriage? Nay, is either sex
ashamed thus accoutred, to confront the Pulpit, which should better instruct
them, or outface the bench of Justice, which should shame and correct them for
these abominations? Is any man ashamed to be an usurer or an oppressor? Nay,
is it not rather a shame that only for lack of money and means, not for lack
of good will, we are not all such? Is any man ashamed to be sacrilegious? Nay,
is there any other sacrilege known, but only to steal a book, or a
Surplice, or the like, out of a Church? For spiritual Livings impropriated,
and Simonaicall Marts justified, these are warranted with double Vouchers. And
Prescriptions below, and Prohibitions above sweep all from the Clergy by sleight or by force, and so muzzle the poor laboring 1. Cor. 9. ^.
Ox, as they make an Ass of him. Is any man ashamed to be a blasphemer or a
drunkard? Nay, is any man ashamed to force men first to drink drunk, and then
by consequence to blaspheme, as the Sodomites would have Genesis 19. 4. 5.
forced the Angels to sin? Briefly, there is no act that know whereof to be
ashamed, but this that I commit in telling men so plainly of their sins: for
this perhaps may be censured by some, but by none (I hope) that can tell how to
censure themselves.

But all this while having spoken of sin, we have mentioned shame as a
condign punishment following it, when now with us shame is of so slight
account, that did not pain follow unlawful pleasure, few or none would
abstain from any sin for any shame. Indeed shame had wont to be such a
punishment, as all other punishments were veiled under it, contained in it,
and expressed by it, as the specials by their genus. So we read Judge. 18. 7.
that the men of Laish were lazy, and careless, and secure in sin, because
there was no Magistrate to put them to shame; that is, to punish them. And
shame 2. Sam. 24. 14.
in noble minds did so work, as David rather chose to fall into the hands of
God, then to fly with shame and dishonor 1. Sam. 15. 30.
before men; yea Saul himself, when his Kingdom was rent from him, desired
Samuel, yet to honor him before the people; though he lost his Crown, he
cared not so much for that.

This was then a sensible part, but now we are insensible of shame and
dishonor; and being past shame and past grace, there is no hope of cure, where
there appears so much dead flesh in the heart.

As we had two conjunctions, so we had two separations in this text, and as
we must not sever what God has joined, so we must not join what God has
separated.

God has severed Justice and Shame, and Sin and Honor, do we keep them
thus severed? O no! we have found a way to make a nullity of this marriage
betwixt Justice and Honor; and we have married Justice to Shame, and Sin
to Honor.

For is it not a shame to be sober, and just, and religious? and if we say, he
is a sober man, is it not understood, as if we called him a rude, melancholy,
and unsociable dolt? If we say, he is a just man like Job, is it not intended
as if we had said, He is a simple silly fellow, unfit to deal in the world?
And if we say, He is a holy sanctified person; Is it not as much as if we had
called him a Recluse, or a Puritan? As if fools, and madmen, and Schismatics
were only holy, and to be a Christian were nothing but to be an Epicure.

Again, have we not married Sin and Honor together? Consider if Honor be
not to be bought and sold; Nay, consider if all honorable Offices either in
Church or Commonwealth be not exposed to sale, and set upon the Market-hill
with this word of Judas in their Mouths, Quid dabitis? what will you give me?
what will you give me and you shall be a Knight, a Lord, an Earl? what will you
give me, and you shall be a Justice of peace, a Sergeant, a Judge? Nay, what
will you give me, and you shall be a Parson, a Deane, a Bishop? This I think is
sin: for the Law (if the Law which is the rule of Justice, be just) calls
it sin, calls it bribery, corruption, Simony, abomination, though our practice
calls it, wisdom, policy, and Justice. Yet how hard is honor got without this
hook? and what preferment need that man despair of, who has this bait, and
knows how to lay it? And must not the buyer sell? I appeal to your
consciences whether it were not Injustice to deny him that liberty.

Lastly, as we had before two marriages, and two separations, so we have in
this text two oppositions; the first, betwixt Justice and sin, the second,
betwixt Shame and Honor, as betwixt light and darkness, truth and falsehoode,
white and black, God and Satan, hell and heaven. It were a shame therefore to
join those things together which God has opposed in Nature. If Justice
therefore should make sin either a wife, or a child, or a friend, or a
servant, or a favorite and companion at bed, or at board, or on the bench; this
could not be done without a Diabolical contract, a Sodomiticall mixture, a
sin against Nature. Therefore let Justice make sin a slave, a drudge, a
prisoner: for if he wax familiar once, he will rule and reign over thee, and
thou shall not be master at home, no not in thine own house; nay, not in thine
own heart.

Genes. 3.
I have put emnity (says God to Satan) betwixt thee and the woman, and
betwixt Her seed and thy seed: This enmity must continue. He shall break thy
head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The best men may have their heels
bruised and trodden on by Satan, sometime be overtaken by sin: (Even holy
David took a nap, holy Paul himself ^ Cor. 12.7
felt a sting in the flesh, vainglory began to puff him up out of the
consideration of his knowledge, zeal labor, and heavenly revelations; the
Messenger of Satan was then sent to buffet him to humility.) But let not
Satan break our heads, no not with oil, with applauses, with glibbe and
smooth sins, petty-seeming sins, sins like virtues; Much less let him
blind our eyes with gifts; for that's the way to break our heads indeed, when
we can not see to defend our selves; ^. Sam. 4.
Nay, to break our necks too from the Chair of Moses, with poor, old, weak,
blind decrepid Ely.

To conclude all, this Nation of ours at this day, outsinnes all the Nations of
the world, even in their proper sins for which they have been infamous: We
outdrab the Italian, out-drinke the Dutch, out-braue the Frenchman, out-brag
the Spaniard. Surely, as we out-act these in sin we must out-suffer these
in shame; and is it not a shame we should do so? we that know so much more
then they do? we that live in the clear light of the Gospel? we that go
every day to Church to hear Sermons, with Bibles in our hands, under our
arms, in our pockets? when they hear no Sermons perhaps but once a quarter,
perhaps but once a year and that at Lent; a Lenten Sermon, a Leaden Sermon, a
Latin Sermon; and for the Bible know not a word of what is within it?

Why shame belongs to Bastards. sin is a note of bastardy; for by sin we
are Satan's children. You are of Io. 8. 44.
your father the Devil, (says our Saiuour) for his works do ye. Shame
follows sin; it is all the Inheritance that Satan gives his children
(except pain) as an increase to the portion. Honor belong to legitimates: such
succeed their fathers in the badges and cognizances of honor, as in virtue and
worth. Justice is a note we are Gods children, it is his character, his
stamp, his seal, his impresse, his image, and shows that we are begotten to
good works by the Grace of his holy Spirit: the inheritance is glory here, an
earnest of greater glory hereafter with the Lord. Of his infinite mercy grant
unto us for his Sons sake Christ Jesus, Our Justice, our righteousness, our
sacrific e for sin, our Preserver, Redeemer, and Saiuour from shame: To whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory given and ascribed by
us, and by every other Creature that he has made for his glory, this present
time and for evermore: Amen.

A Prayer for the whole state of the Realm.
O Lord, thou have made all things for thine own glory to manifest thy power,
thy wisdom, beauty, love, justice and holiness: and amongst all these things,
thou have made man after thine image, enduing him with original power,
wisdom, beauty, love, justice, and holiness. And that he might not only have,
but exercise these virtues, thou made this inferior world for him, and did
subject a world of Creatures to his rule and government; so that he seemed a
God upon earth, having so free, so large, so ample a comaund over his fellow
Creatures. He was naked and not ashamed, for being framed by so perfect a
workman, and formed after thy image, the image of perfection, he knew that
there was nothing within him, or without him, whereof he need be ashamed, but
much whereof to glory and rejoice. The more he saw and contemplated himself,
the more cause he saw there was to love himself, for being like thee, and to
love thee for so making him. This Satan saw with envy, and it was another
hell for him to see it: and (hating thee and all things for thee) he seduced
man with pride and ambition, causing him not to rest satisfied with what thou
had given him, but to desire all things which thou had made only for thy
felfe. And thus vainly and foolishly to neglect the rule of himself and the
inferior Creatures in justice (contrary to thy command) and to affect the
tree of knowledge of good and evil which thou had only forbidden him. By
this means (O Lord) seeking more then he should, he lost what he had; and
laboring indirectly to be equal to thee, he defaced thine image and
whatsoever was within him like unto thee; So that his wisdom became foolish
subtlety; his beauty, painted ugliness; his love, lustful
uncharitableness; his justice, extreme injury and unrighteousness; his
holiness either ydolatrie or profaneness, and the whole man a living ghost, a
golden Sepulcher. And now as before thou did cast Satan out of Heaven for
pride (where no unclean thing can stay or enter) so did thou eject man out
of Paradise without hope of other inheritance (for him and all his wretched
posterity) then hell which he had deserved and we in him. But herein appeared
thy exceeding and superaboundant love, not only pardoning this sin of his and
ours, but in sending thy Son into the world to dye for us, to satisfy thy
justice, and to purchase for us a nearer, and surer conjunction to thee, then
that which we had before, and lost, even a conjunction betwixt thy love and
our faith, which the gates of hell cannot prevail against. And that Satan's
envy might be more exasperated (as a punishment unto himself, a glory unto
thee) that which he intended for our curse thou have turned to our crown, and
we are truly in a way to become like thee, yea to be united to thee: So that
as if thou had made all things for man, we have interest in all things, in
thee and all; and thus are truly, what Satan falsely told us, we should be,
become as Gods knovving good and evil; the evil by present experience and
fruition, the good in future hope and expectation. And that we might not faint
in this our weary pilgrimage, thou have breathed thy Spirit into us, and given
him to be our comforter, who daily assisteth our prayers, our meditations, our
devotions, teaching us to call thee Father, and leading us into every truth;
daily resisting forvs our professed enemy Satan, giving us wisdom to discover
his treachery, and discern him for an adversary; daily renueth in us thine
image, conforming us by degrees to the rules of thy law; making us wise, and
beautiful, and loving, and just, and holy in part, by inspiration,
instruction, and affliction; by the humble and patient sufferance of worldly
wisdom to beguile and flowte us, of corporal beauty to contemn and deface
us, of carnal love to reject and scorn us, of politic justice to persecute
and martyr us, of superstitious and ydolatrous holiness to shun and abhor
us, of devilish Atheism to deride and abuse us: whilst we know and rest
assured, that thou, who workest all things for the best for thine elect, thy
poor distressed and dispersed little flock, beholdest all this, and laughest
to scorn the foolish imaginations of man's heart, and in the mean time securest
us of thy love by infallible testimonies, and teach us in every estate to be
contented: knowing, that thou who orderest all things according to thine own
good will and pleasure, and take care for Lillies to cloth them, for Ravens
to feed them, for Sparrowes to house them, that made an Arc for preservation
of fowls and beasts and creeping things, that numbrest the hayres of our
heads, and wilt not loose one of them, wilt much less loose one of us, or let
Satan snatch us out of thy hand, whom thou have made with such care, and
purchased at so dear a rate, but wilt at thy good time cause all things work
together for our best. So that we Romans 8.
are persuaded, Neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from thy love, which is in Christ
JESUS our Lord. In assurance of which love, we comend unto thee not only our
selves, but all that have written their names upon the cross of thy Son,
especially our Sovereigne the King of great Britain, whom thou have honored
with the style of Defender of the Faith, and to this end made Antichrist (like
Balaam and Caiphas) prophecy his own overthrow, in conferring that title. O
Lord, as thou have honored him with it, and enabled him toward the performing
of that duty more then others, annoynting him with the oil of Science above
his fellows, so inflame his heart with true zeal and courage, and strengthen
his hand with true constancy, that he may still appear worthy of it in the
eyes of all men.

Mat. 4.
Bless the Prince, and remember where he is, in a wilderness of temptations,
as thine own Son was, from whence none but thy divine hand can bring him off
safe. Let it be thy glory 1. Cor. 1. 27.
by babes and sucklings to confound those mighty Potentates; and the more
Superstition and Idolatry he beholds, the more let him abhor it; and now
calling to mind the truth which he has heard, and wisely conferring all
things together; so work, that his constancy may show, it is only ignorance
that holds them in Idolatry, and that our Princes are too learned, and
religious for their Priests to subvert. Keep him [O Lord] safe for us, and
return him, in thy good time, safe to us, and hasten that time, O Lord, we
beseech thee, thereby to free our panting hearts from fear.

Bless the King and Queen of Bohemia, and their royal Issue; restore to them
what they have lost, what Satan a^nd his associates, the Sabeans and
Chaldeans, or men more cursed and cruel, have taken away from them; and as
thou did make the Job. ^.
latter end of Job more happy then his beginning, so verify it in these thy
servants, that their example may be brought as a president in future ages to
prove, that truth by experience which the Psalmist wills us to observe in the
course of our pilgrimage. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for
the after-end of that Psalm. 37. 37.
man is peace.

Bless the Nobility, and teach them to know wherein true Nobility
consists, and then to do as they know. Bless those Councillors that
counsel for thy truth; If Achitophell be in David's Court, give David grace to
know his Oracle and thine asunder, and bring his wicked council upon his own
wretched pate, for the ruin of himself and his house. Give him no wisdom to
set his house in order, who would disorder thine. Regard not him and his State,
who would with subtilty overthrow that State which thou have guarded for thy
self so long.

Bless the Clergy, those laborers that labor for thee; open their mouths
yet wider, fill their hearts yet fuller of spirit, even with thy Spirit:
discover Doeg, and Demas, and Diotrephes, and 3. Io. ^.
thrust them out of thy fold, and let the world know they are wolves.

Bless the Magistracy, teach them only to comaund what thou comaundest; at
least teach them even for conscience sake, to do and command nothing against
thy command, which thou would not have done.

Bless the people, and teach them to obey for conscience sake; Act. 4. 1^.
and withal wisely to know where, and how it is better to obey thee, then man

Bless the whole State with unity, and continue verity amongst them, and
restore to them that prosperity which their sins have provoked thee to take
away, and which stands at the door ready to depart, except their repentance
calls it back. Turn thy face toward them, and turn their hearts toward
thee, and turn the expectation and endeavor of their enemies and thine to
shame, folly and confusion, That the heathen may not Psalm. 79. 1^.
say, where is now their God.

FINIS.

