A right Godly and Christian A. B. C. showing the duty of every degree.
To the tune of Rogero.
ARise and wake from wickedness,
repent and thou shall live:
Or else with sword and pestilence,
the Lord God will thee grieve.
BEware of Lust and Lechery,
keep thou thy body chaste:
Or else frequent the remedy,
that Paul does say thou may.
Confess thy sins as David did,
and turn unto the Lord:
He will thee hear before thou call,
so Esaias does record.
Deal with thy neighbor mercifully,
decei^e no man by guile:
Take heed of all extortion,
it will thy soul defile.
EXamine well thy wicked life,
hide not thy council deep:
The Lord God threatens woe to them,
that secret sins do keep.
FLy theft and all unworthiness,
and labor in the Lord:
The ground of sin is idleness,
with vices it is stored.
GIve alms unto thy children dear,
and turn not from the poor:
Lend to the needy man thy goods,
his pledge to him restore.
HVrt not thy neighbor wittingly,
in body goods or name:
Remit offenses willingly,
left God revenge the same.
IF God do bless thee with his gifts,
of worldly good, and store:
Let not thy heart on them be set,
but praise the Lord therefore.
Keep not thy hyre lings wages back,
God will his cry regard:
In poor (...) matters be not slack,
the Lord will thee reward.
LOve every man unfainedly,
hate no man in thy heart:
Despise the way of wicked men,
pray God they may convert.
MInister Justice Magistrates,
you Masters kindly deal:
You Parents all lest Gods curse fall,
let youth correction feel.
NO guilefull speech, nor lying talk
use thou in any ways:
Eschew all evil, in goodness walk,
if thou will see good days.
Oppress no man by usury,
refuse unlawful gains:
Give plenteously unto the poor,
Christ will thee pay again.
Possess your souls with patience,
against the wicked world:
Power out your prayers with reverence,
before the living Lord
QVarrel with none quench such desire,
to anger be not bent:
Remember God is merciful,
when stuners do repent.
REdeemed from the curse we are,
by Christ to live with him:
Our members let us morti^^e,
which are all bent to sin.
Sanctify the Sabbath, serve the Lord,
from labor see thou lest
Then God will have regard on thee,
and make thy labor blessed.
TAke heed you love no swearing false,
swear not by God in vain:
Let all your talk attend unto
the honor of his Name.
Use no deceit nor unjust means,
to compass worldly wealth:
Extortion, fraud, and usuri^,
and all such things are stealth.
Walk not in worldly lusts (...)
such worldly darkness (...)
But walk as children of the light,
as Christ himself begun.
XAmples many are set forth,
against the drunken sort:
What deadly plagues are due to them,
the Scriptures do report.
Young folk be sober and chaste of (...)
let Gods word be your guide:
Make clean your hearts before the L^^^
and never from him slide.
ZAche a Publican S. Luke does t^^
what zeal to Christ he had:
But to behold our Jewish hearts,
alas it is too bad.
and Plainly Luke does specify,
of that man's Godly mind:
How to the poor most liberally,
half his goods he assigned.
EST, in English does specify,
in speech a Latin Verb:
Into our hearts Lord power thy Spir^^
whereby we may be stirred
TO sigh and groan unfainedly,
with sorrow for our sin:
And for to seek the remedy,
a new life to begin.
A Men, God grant we lose no time,
to walk whilst we have light
That finally we may p^ssesse,
the heavenly joys most bright.
Our noble King with Nestors (...)
the Lord God long endue,
With Sampsons strength and Solomon (...)
his foes for to aschew.
GOd grant his grace, great joy and (...)
with pleasure ^^r^ beneath:
To rule and reign the Royal sent,
so long as he has breath.
FINIS.
Printed at London for Henry Gosson.

A Christian conference betvveene Christ and a Sinner, wherein is showed the
Love of Christ toward Mankind, and the pains which he suffered upon the
Cross for our sins together with the wickedness of our corrupt natures
toward him for the same
To the tune of Go to bed sweet heart.
I Am a poor sinner, how should I begin,
to fall from my folly and horrible sin,
I know not to whom I should make my complaint
my sins are so heinous my heart it does faint.
My conscience accuses me, no man can comfort me
Succor me sweet Christ I would come to thee.

Christ. O thou sinful creature why do thou despair,
can thou not settle thy self unto prayer:
By faith and repentance if thou will relent.
and fall from the former life thou have ill spent;
And turn away from thy sin, that is the way to begin
I that redeemed thee bids thee come to me.

The Sinner. Alas, when to pray to thee I have intended,
My conscience does tell me I have so offended
That thou will deny my request in my prayer,
and this (O Lord) causes me thus to despair.
My conscience accuses me, etc.

Christ. Where do thou find in my holy bible,
that nothing with me can be unpossible:
For were thine iniquity never so great,
my mercy surpasses it, if thou will entreat,
And turn away, etc

Sinner. O how my body does tremble and shake,
my soul is unquiet my heart it does ache:
The Devil does temp and lead me to ill,
enforcing that thou will be angry still.
My conscience accuses me, etc.

Christ. Believe not the Devil for all his delay,
for his subtle fleight is to work thy decay:
Think how I converted my Apostle S. Paul.
by mercy and favor which I give to you all.
Turn away, etc.

Sinner. How apt is ill counsel to lead me to vic^,
how does the world daily my fancy entice,
Adversity pincheth me every hour,
I dread not thy judgment, thy justice and power.
My conscience accuses me, etc.

Christ. O earth and slime learn thou to shun all annoy,
and suffer with patience, so shall thou have joy,
Consider what pain I have suffered for thee,
enduring all torments to set thy soul free.
Then turn away, etc.

Sinner. O my sweet Savior, I cannot deny,
but that for my filthy offense thou did die.
And what cruel pangs thou abidst in the Garden,
and daily sweet Jesus thou pleadst for my pardon
^

Christ. Then since thou confessest that I am thy Savior,
behold which way thou shall attain to my favor
Examine thy sins and be sorry therefore,
and never commit such offense any more.
Then turn away, etc.

Sinner. Alas, I am feeble and have not the face,
take hold of thy promise except thy sweet grace,
My carcass is filthy and nothing but clay,
send help I beseech thee or else I decay.
My conscience accuses me, etc.

Christ. If once I do see thee be sorry in heart,
amending thy life, and in time will convert,
Let nothing dismay thee for I will receive thee,
let all thy familiar and worldly friends leave thee
Then turn away, etc.

Sinner. Then Lord in thy mercy is all my whole stay,
permit not foul Satan to cast me away,
From that f^^^hy tyrant sweet Jesus defend me.
he leads my affections, and still does attend me.
And daily he tells me, no man, etc.

Christ. Say to him thus when he would thee devour,
a void wicked Satan thou have no more power,
But that which my God does permit unto thee,
thou have not the power to be master ore me.
Believe not his treachery, that is the, etc.

Sinner. I thank thee sweet Jesus that of thy good grace.
thou stand to asist me in every place.
Yet I am disloyal unjust and perverse.
no creature more filthy that I can rehearse.
My conscience accuses me, etc.

Christ. Take up thy cross and follow then me,
with patience continue and look that thou be,
For all thine offenses repentant with sorrow,
think death is at hand to present thee to morrow,
Then turn away from thy sin, that's the way to begin
I that redeemed thee bids thee come to me.

Sinner. My filthy unworthiness here I confess,
forgive me, O Savior and send me redress:
Increase my faith and patience that I may
attain to thy presence, and boldly may say,
Depart from me vanity, Christ has released me,
Succor me sweet Christ, I would come to thee.

FINIS.
Printed by the Assigns of (...)


