crown
CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND,
DEFENDER OF THE FAITH,
To Our Lovits, (...) Heralds, Messengers, Our Shyreffs, in that part,
conjunctlie and severallie, specially constitute Greeting.
FOR-SA-MEIKLE as We are not ignorant of the Great Disorders, which have
happened of late within this Our ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND, occasioned, as
is pretended, upon the introduction of the Service Book, Book of Canons, and
High Commission, thereby fearing innovation of Religion and Laws. For
satisfaction of which fears, We well hoped, that the two proclamations of the
eleventh of December, and nineteenth of February, had been abundantly
fufficient: Nevertheless, finding that disorders have daily so increased,
that a powerful rather than perswasiue way, might have been justly expected
from Us: Yet We out of Our innatiue indulgence to Our People, grieving to see
them run themselves so headlong into ruin, are graciously pleased to try, if
by a fair way We can reclayme them from their faults, rather than to let them
perish in the same. And therefore, once for all, We have thought fit to
declare, and hereby to assure all our good people, that We neither were, are,
nor by the Grace of GOD ever shall be stained with Popish superstition: But by
the contrary, are resolved to maintain the true Protestant Christian Religion
already professed within this Our ancient Kingdom. And for farther clearing of
scruples, We do hereby assure all men, that We will neither now nor
hereafter press the practice of the foresaid Canons and Service Book, nor
any thing of that nature, but in such a fair and legal way, as shall
satisfy all Our loving subjects, that we neither intend innovation in
Religion or Laws. And to this effect have given order, to discharge all Acts of
Counsel made thereanent. And for the high Commission, We shall so rectify it
with the help of advice of our privy Counsel, that it shall never impugn
the Laws, nor be a just grievance to Our loyal Subjects. And what is farther
fitting to be agitate in general Assemblies and Parliament, for the good and
peace of the Kirk, and peaceable government of the same, in establishing of
the Religion presently professed, shall likewise be taken into Our Royal
consideration, in a free assembly and Parliament, which shall be indicted and
called with Our best conveniencie. And We hereby take GOD to witness, that Our
true meaning and intention is, not to admit of any innovations either in
Religion or Laws, but carefully to maintain the purity of Religion already
professed and established, and nowayes to suffer Our Laws to be infrindged. And
although We cannot be ignorant, that there may be some disaffected persons,
who will strive to possess the hearts of Our good Subjects, that this Our
Gracious Declaration is not to be regarded: Yet We do expect, that the
behavior of all our good and loyal Subjects will be such, as may give
testimony of their obedience, and how sensible they are of Our Grace and
Favor, that thus passes over their misdemeanors; and, by their future
carriage, make appear, That it was only fear of INNOVATION, that has caused
the disorders which have happened of late within this Our ancient Kingdom: And
are confident, That they will not suffer themselves to be seduced, and
missled, to misconstrue Us, or OUr Actions; but rest heartily satisfied with
Our pious and real Intentions, for mayntenance of the TRVE RELIGION, and LAWS
of this KINGDOM. WHEREFORE, We require, and heartily wish all Our good
People, carefully to advert to these dangerous Suggestions; and not to permit
themselves, blindlie, under pretext of Religion, to be led in disobedience, and
draw on, infinitely to Our grief, their own ruin; which We have, and still
shall strive, to save them from, so long as We see not Royal Authority shaken
off: And most unwillingly shall make use of that Power which GOD has endewed
Us with, for reclayming of disobedient People.

OUR WILL is herefore, and We charge you straytlie, and command, That
incontinent these Our Letters seen, you pass to the Market-crosse of Our
Burgh of EDINBVRGH, and all other places needful; And there, by open
Proclamation, make publication hereof, to all and sundry Our good Subjects,
wherethrough none pretend ignorance of the same. The which to do, We commit
to you conjunctlie and severallie, Our full Power, by these Our Letters;
delivering the same, by you duly executed and indorced, again to the bearer.

Given at Our Court of GREENWICH, the twenty eight day of June, and of Our
Reygne the thirteenth year. 1638. Per Regem.


