A BRIEF DISCOVRSE, CONCERNING THE POWER OF THE PEERS and Commons of
Parliament, in point of Judicature.

WRITTEN BY A LEARned Antiquerie, at the request of a Peer of this REALM.

Printed in the Year, 1640.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE, Concerning the power of the Peers and Commons of
Parliament in point of Judicature.
SIR, to give you as short an account of your desires as I can, I must crave
leave to lay you as a ground, the frame or first model of this state.

When after the period of the Saxon time, Harold had lifted himself into the
Royal Seat; the Great men, to whom but lately he was no more then equal
either in fortune or power, disdaining this Act, of arrogance, called in
William then Duke of Normandy, a Prince more active then any in these Western
parts, and renowned for many victories he had fortunately achieved against the
French King, then the most potent Monarch in Europe.

This Duke led along with him to this work of glory, many of the younger sons
of the best families of Normandy, Picardy and Flanders, who as undertakers,
accompanied the undertaking of this fortunate man.

The Usurper slain, and the Crown by war gained, to secure certain to his
posterity, what he had so suddenly gotten, he shared out his purchase retaining
in each County a portion to support the Dignity Sovereign, which was styled
Demenia Regni; now the ancient Demeanes, and assigning to others his
adventurers such portions as suited to their quality and expense, retaining to
himself dependancy of their personal service, except such Lands as in free
Alms were the portion of the Church, these were styled Barons Regis, the
Kings immediate Freeholders, for the word Baro imported then no more.

As the King to these, so these to their followers subdivided part of their
shares into Knights fees, and their Tennants were called Barons Comites, or
the like; for we find, as in the Kings Writ in their Writs Baronibus suis and
Francois and Anglois, the sovereign gifts, for the most part extending to
whole Counties or Hundreds, an Earl being Lord of the one, and a Baron of the
inferior donations to Lords of Towne-ships or Manors.

As thus the Land, so was all course of Judicature divided even from the
meanest to the highest portion, each several had his Court of Law, preserving
still the Manor of our Ancestors the Saxons, who jura per pages reddebant;
and these are still termed Court-Barons, or the Freeholders Court, twelve
usually in number, who with the Them or chief Lord were Judges.

The Hundred was next, where the Hundredus or Aldermanus Lord of the Hundred,
with the chief Lord of each Townshippe within their lymits judged; Gods people
observed this form in the public Centureonis and decam Judicabant plebem omni
tempore.

The County or Generale placitum was the next, this was so to supply the
defect, or remedy the corruption of the inferior, Vbi Curiae Dominorum
probantur defecisse, pertinet ad vice comitem Provinciarum; the Judges here
were Comites, vice comites and Barons Comitatus qui liberas in hoterras
habeant.

The last and supreme, and proper to our question, was generale placitum aupud
London universalis Synodus in Charters of the Conqueror, Capitalis curia by
Glanvile, Magnum and Commune consilium coram Rege et magnatibus suis.

In the Rolls of Henry the 3. It is not stative, but summoned by Proclamation,
Edicitur generale placitum apud London, says the Book of Abingdon, whether
Epium Duces principes, Satrapae Rectores, and Causidici ex omni part
confluxerunt ad istam curiam, says Glanvile: Causes were referred, Propter
aliquam dubitationem quae Emergit in comitatu, cum Comitatus nescit dijudicare.
Thus did Ethelweld Bishop of Winchester transfer his suit against Leostine,
from the County ad generale placitum, in the time of King Etheldred, Queen
Edgine against Goda; from the County appealed to King Etheldred at London.
Congregatis principibus and sapaientibus Angliae, a suit between the Bishops of
Winchester and Durham in the time of Saint Edward. Coram Episcopis and
principibus Regni in presentia Regis ventilate and finita. In the tenth year
of the Conqueror, Episcopi, Comites and Barons Regni potestate adversis
provinciis ad universalem Synodum pro causis audiendis and tractandis
Convocati, says the Book of Westminster. And this continued all along in the
succeeding Kings reign, until toward the end of Henry the third.

AS this great Court or Council consisting of the King and Barons, ruled the
great affairs of State and controlled all inferior Courts, so were there
certain Officers, whose transcendent power seemed to be set to bound in the
execution of Princes wills, as the Steward, Constable, and Marshall fixed upon
Families in fee for many ages: They as Tribunes of the people, or ex plori
among the Athenians, grown by unmanly courage fearful to Monarchy, fell at
the feet and mercy of the King, when the daring Earl of Leicester was slain
at Evesham.

This chance and the dear experience Hen. the 3. himself had made at the
Parliament at Oxford in the 40. year of his reign, and the memory of the many
straights his Father was driven unto, especially at Rumny-mead near Stanes,
brought this King wisely to begin what his successor fortunately finished,
in lessoning the strength and power of his great Lords; and this was wrought by
searching into the Regality they had usurped over their peculiar Sovereigns,
whereby they were (as the Book of Saint Albans terms them.) Quot Dominum tot
Tiranni.) and by the weakening that hand of power which they carried in the
Parliaments by commanding the service of many Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
to that great Council.

Now began the frequent sending of Writs to the Commons, their assent not only
used in money, charge, and making Laws, for before all ordinances passed by
the King and Peers, but their consent in judgments of all natures whether
civil or criminal: In proof whereof I will produce some few succeeding
Presidents out of Record.

When Adamor that proud Prelate of Winchester Liber S. Alban* fo. 20. ^* An.
44. H. 3.
the Kings half brother had grieved the State by his daring power, he was
exiled by joint sentence of the King, the Lords and Commons, and this appears
expressly by the Letter sent to Pope Alexander the fourth, expostulating a
revocation of him from banishment, because he was a Churchman, and so not
subject to any censure, in this the answer is, Si Dominus Rex and Regni majores
hoc vellent, meaning his revocation, Communitas tamen ipsius ingressu^ in
Anglia^ iam nullatemus sustineret. The Peers subsigne this Answer with their
names and Petrus de Mountford vice totius Communitatis, as speaker or proctor
of the commons.

For by that style Sir John Tiptofe, Prolocutor, (...) orig. sub ^igil* A^ ^H. ^
affirms under his Arms the Deed of Intaile of the Crown by King Henry the
4. in the 8. year of his reign for all the Commons.

The banishment of the two Spencers in the 15. of Edward the second, Prelati
Comites and Barons et les autres Peers de la terre and Communes de Roialme
give consent and sentence to the revocation and reversement of the former
sentence the Lords and Commons accord, and so it is expressed in the Roll.

In the first of Edw. the 3. when Elizabeth Rot. Parl* ^^ E. 3. vel. ^.
the widow of Sir John de Burgo complained in Parliament, that Hugh Spencer
the younger, Robert Boldock and William Cliffe his instruments had by duresse
forced her to make a Writing to the King, whereby she was despoiled of all her
inheritance, sentence is given for her in these words, Pur ceo que avis est al
Evesques Counts and Barons and autres grandes and a tout Cominalte de la
terre, que le dit escript est fait contre ley, and tout manner de raison si
fuist le dit escript per agard del Parliam. dampue elloques al livre a la dit
Eliz.

In An. 4. Edw. 3. it appears by a Letter Prelation^^ Parliam. 1. Ed. 3. Rot
11.
to the Pope, that to the sentence given against the Earl of Kent, the Commons
were parties as well as well as the Lords and Peers, for the King directed
their proceedings in these words, Comitibus, Magnatibus, Baronibus, and aliis
de Communitate dicti Regni ad Parliamentum illud congregatis injunximus ut
super his discernerent and judicarent quod rationi et justitiae, conveniret,
habere prae oculis, solum Deum qui eum concordi unanimi sententia tanquam reum
criminis laesoe majestatis morti adjudicarent ejus sententia, etc.

When in the 50. year of Ed. 3. the Lords (...)
had pronounced the sentence against Richard Lions, otherwise then the Commons
agreed they appealed to the King, and had redress, and the sentence entered to
their desires.

When in the first year of Richard the second, (...)
William Weston and John Jennings were arraigned in Parliament for surrendering
certain Forts of the Kings, the Commons were parties to the sentence against
them given, as appears by a Memorandum a^nexed to that Record. In the first
of Hen. the 4. although the Commons refer by protestation, the pronouncing of
the sentence of deposition against King Rich. the 2. unto the Lords, yet are
they equally interessed in it, as it appears by the Record, for there are
made Proctors or Commissioners for the whole Parliament, one B. one Abbot, one
E. one Baron, and 2. Knights, Gray and Erpingham for the Commons, and to
infer that because the Lords pronounced the sentence, the point of judgment
should be only theirs, were as absurd as to conclude, that no authority was
best in any other Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer then in the person of that
man solely that speaks the sentence.

In 2. Hen. 5. the Petition of the Commons (...)
imports no less then a right they had to act and assent to all things in
Parliament, and so it is answered by the King; and had not the adjournall Roll
of the higher house been left to the sole entry of the Clarke of the upper
House, who, either out of the neglect to observe due form, or out of purpose
to obscure the Commons right and to flatter the power of those he immediately
served, there would have bin frequent examples of al times to clear this doubt,
and to preserve a just interest to the Commonwealth, and how conveniently it
suites with Monarchy to maintain this form, lest others of that well framed
body knit under one head, should swell too great and monstrous. It may be
easily thought for; Monarchy again may sooner groan under the weight of an
Aristocracie as it once did, then under Democracie which it never yet either
felt or feared.

FINIS.

