NATVRALL PHILOSOPHY: OR A DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD, AND OF the several
Creatures therein contained: Viz. Of Angels, of Mankind, of the Heavens, the
Stars, the Planets, the four Elements, with their order, nature and
government: As also of Minerals, Metals, Plants, and Precious stones; with
their colors, forms, and virtues.

By DANIEL WIDDOVVES.

The second Edition, corrected and enlarged.

1 King. 4. 33. He spoke of Trees, from the Cedar tree that is in Libanon, even
to the Issope that springs out of the wall: He spoke also of Beasts, and of
Fowls, and of creeping things, and of Fishes. These little leaves the Worlds
huge load sustain,
And what besides the great World can contain.
Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at the
three Golden Lions in Cornehill. 1631.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir William Parsons Knight Barronet, his Majesty's Survayour
General, Com missioner in the Court of Wards, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel in Ireland, etc.
Honorable Sir:
I Do present to your view a small frame of the world, and of the Creatures
therein contained, drawn with the Pensilles of judicious Scribon, and of D. W.
A work in nature not unlike to our Survayes in Ireland, that represent most
lively, vaste Countries within a small Map. I offer this to you, having
heretofore given to you an account of those services that I have lately done in
the survey of Ireland, you being Survayor General of that kingdom, wherein I
have spent the most part of thirty years, in the service of my Prince and
Country, Tam Mart, quam Mercurio, both by Pike and Pen, with great toil, much
hazard, and many hurts; but little profit. Notwithstanding, your demerits and
worth be such, as Gratitude has chosen your Patronage: and Devotion wishes
all honor, health, and happiness to you, to my good Lady, and to yours,

At your Honors Command, I. Wyddowes, alias Woodhouse.

The Contents.
CHAP. I.
WHat philosophy is. Page. 1 What God is. Ibid The actions of God towfold.
ibid What Angels are. ibid How they appear. ibid What their office is. 2
CHAP. II. Of motions, qualities, colors, tasting, etc.
TWo kinds of movers in the world. ibid How created things move. ibid What
motion is. ibid Five things in motion. ibid Six kinds of motion. ibid What
qualities are. ibid What the quality of heat is. 3 Lightness and thinness
comes of heat. ibid Heaviness and thickness of cold. ibid What proceeds
from moisture. ibid What proceeds from dryness. ibid The use of colors. 4
What a Simple color is. ibid White, what it is. ibid Black, what it is. ibid
Of mixed colors, and whence they proceed. ibid How they are compounded. ibid
Tasting, whence it is. ibid The diverse kinds of it. ibid Smelling whence it
proceeds, when good, when bad. ib. Qualities arising by means, what they be. 5
Hid qualities how known. ibid They are either native or passionate. ibid
Native governed by the Heavens. ibid How and when of most effecacie. ibid
Passionate how effected. ibid What concord is. ibid What discord is. ibid
CHAP. III. Of the Celestial bodies, as the Heavens, the Firmament, the
Stars, with their places, order, and government.
WHat Heaven is. 6 What the Firmament is. ibid What the Etheriall part of it
is. ibid What a Star is, with their diverse kinds. ibid Their operation over
bodies, and how it is. ibid Their rising and falling, and how it is. ibid
Stars fixed or wandering. 7 How known from Planets. ibid How and where
contained in the heavens. ibid Stars Masculine and Feminine. ibid Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, ibid Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, 8
Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces. ibid Of Stars in the Zodiac. ibid What the
Northern Constellations are. ibid What the Southern Constellations are. ibid
What Planets are. 9 Why called wandering. 9 When and how they are stayed. ibid
When and how they go back. ibid The virtue and force of Planets. ibid The
proper house of each Planet. ibid Planets, some of one light; some of more.
ibid Conjunction of Planets common or special. 10 They presage things to come,
and how. ibid A description of Saturn, his properties, and how he rules in
the body; and over whom. ibid A description of Jupiter, his properties, how he
rules in the body; and over whom. 11 A description of Mars, his properties,
how he rules in the body, and in whom. ibid A description of the Sun, the
office and use of it, and how and whom it governes. ibid It makes Winter and
Summer, length and shortness of days. 12 A description of Venus, her
properties, how and in whom she governs. ibid A description of Mercury, his
nature, how and in whom he rules. ibid A description of the Moon. 13 How the
Moon increases and decreaseth. ibid When and how the Moon is in the full.
ibid In what time she ends her revolution. 14 What a Comet is. ibid The light
of some Planets, especially of the Sun and Moon, fails sometime, and the
reason of it. ibid Of the eclipse of the Sun and Moon, and the reason of them.
ibid
CHAP. IIII. Of the four Elements.
WHat Elements are. 15 Some Elements clear, as air and water. ib The regions
of the Air. ibid The necessity of the Air. ibid What water is, the natures
and uses of it. ibid Why the water in the Sea is salt. ibid The reason of the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea. ib. Of Floods and Fountains. 16 Diverse colors
and tastes of water. ibid What the earth is. ibid The compass of it. ibid Of
concreat and mixed bodies. ibid Of mixed livelesse natures, as meteors, what
they be, with their several kinds, and the reason of them. ibid Of mixed fiery
meteors, as thunder, what it is, and the reason of it. 17 Of lightning, what it
is, and the reason of it. ibid Of watery Meteors, as clouds, what they be, and
the reason of them. ibid Diverse shapes in the clouds, and the reason of it.
ib. A false Sun, how occasioned. ibid A rainebow, how occasioned. 18 A
description of the rainebow, and the signs of it. ib Of Meteors of dissolved
clouds, with the reason of it. ibid Snow what it is, and how occasioned. ibid
Hayle what it is, and how occasioned. ibid Dew what it is, and how occasioned.
19 Manna, what it is. 19 Frost, what it is, and how occasioned. ibid Of Meteors
caused of both kinds of Smoke, the reason of them. ibid Wind what it is, and
the diverse kinds of it, as Storm, Whirlewinde, Earthquake. ibid
CHAP. V. Of mixed living Natures.
WHat a vegetative soul is, with the nature and office of it. 20 What
nourishment is. ibid What concoction is, with the necessity of it. ibid The
necessity of temperate heat cleared by comparison. ibid The benefit of good,
and hurt of bad concoction. 21 Whence inflammation arises. ibid The companions
of concoction are, 1. Attraction, 2. Retention, 3. Expulsion, what they are.
ibid What generation is. 22 What is the object of it. ibid
CHAP. VI. Of Minerals and Metals.
BRimstone, what it is, the nature of it. 22 Quicksilver what it is, the nature
of it. 23 Gold what it is, the nature of it. ibid Where it is found. ibid
Silver what it is, the difference betwixt gold and it. 24 Brass what it is.
ibid Copperasse what it is, the nature of it. ibid Iron, the nature of it. 24
Lead, the nature of it. 25 Tynne, what it is. ibid Stones, whereof they are,
and their variety. ibid Precious stones. ibid Crystal the nature of it. ibid
Adamant, the nature of it. 26 Saphyr, the nature of it. ibid Smaragde, the
nature of it. ibid Sardonyx, the nature of it. ibid Selenites, the nature of
it. ibid Carbuncle, the nature of it. ibid Calcedonian, the nature of it. ibid
Assarites, the nature of it. 27 Rubie, the nature of it. ibid Topaz, the nature
of it. ibid Hyacinth, the nature of it. ibid Corrall, the nature of it. ibid
Asbestos, the nature of it. ibid Loadestone, the nature of it. ibid Galactites,
the nature of it. 28 Achates, the nature of it. ibid Turcoys, the nature of it.
ibid Corneolus, the nature of it. ibid Chrysoprasus, the nature of it. ibid
Hematite, the nature of it. ibid Chelidonius, the nature of it. ibid
Alectorius, the nature of it. 29 Toadestone, the nature of it. ibid Crabs eye,
the nature of it. ibid Perch stone. ibid Curpe stone, the nature of it. ibid
Porphirite, Allabastar. 29 Ophite. ibid Common stones. ibid Salt, what it is,
and the nature of it. 30 Salt Amoniack, the nature of it. ibid Salt Peter. ibid
Salt Gemme. ibid Salt of Indie. ibid Salt of water. ibid Alome. ibid Liquid
Alome. ibid Hard Alome. ibid Bitume. 31 Liquid Bitume. ibid Naphtha Petreolum*
ibid Ambar of Arabia. ibid Hard Bitume ibid Pissaphaltus. ibid Succinum. ibid
Terra Lemnia. ibid Bole Armenian. 32 Terra Samia. ibid Ampelite. ibid Chalk.
ibid Black Chalk, with the nature of them all. ibid
CHAP. VII. Of natures perfectly living.
WHat natures perfectly living are. 32 Of Plants. 33 Frankincense tree, the
nature of it. ibid Myrrh tree, the nature of it. ibid Mace, the nature of it.
33 Nutmeg, the nature of it. ibid Pepper, the nature of it. ibid Wild Palm
tree, the nature of it. 34 Balsame tree, the nature of it. ibid Balm, the
nature of it. ibid Pomegranet; the nature of it. 35 Pome Citron, the nature of
it. ibid Orange. ibid Cedar; the nature of it. ibid Figtree. ibid Quince tree,
the nature of it. ibid Laurel tree, the nature of it. 36 Juniper tres, the
nature of it. ibid Chestnut tree, the nature of it. ibid Beech tree, the nature
of it. 37 Oak tree, the nature of it. ibid Ilex tree, the nature of it. 38
Cork tree, the nature of it. ibid Pine Appletree, the nature of it. ibid Pitch
tree. ibid Fur tree. ibid Larix tree, the nature of it! 39 Elm tree, the
nature of it. ibid Alder tree, the nature of it. ibid Teile tree, the nature of
it. ibid Box tree, the nature of it. ibid Birch tree, the nature of it. 40
Willow tree, the nature of it. ibid Poplar tree, the nature of it. ibid Shrubs.
41 Cinnamon, the nature of it. ibid Cassia Fistula, the nature of it. ibid.
Hasell, the nature of it. ibid Elderne, the nature of it. ibid Barberies, the
nature of it. 42 Small Raysin, the nature of it. ibid Rose tree, the nature of
it. 43 Bramble, the nature of it. ibid Gooseberries, the nature of it. ibid
Colutea, the nature of it. ibid Herbs. 44 Wheat, the nature of it. ibid
Barley, the nature of it. ibid Spelte, Rye, Oats, Millet, their nature. ibid
Rize, Lintils, Pease; Beans, their nature. 45 Pot herbs. ibid Coleworts,
Spinach, Lettise, their nature. ibid Beets, Purslaine, Mallows, Onions, their
nature. ib. Leekes, Parsley, Violets, Daysie, their nature. 47 Ielley flower,
Marioram, their nature. ibid Rosemary, Spicknard, Lavender, their nature. 48
Daffodill, Rose Campion, Saffron, their nature. ibid Ginger, Wormeseede,
Gallingall, their nature. ibid Calamus Aromaticus, Acorus, their nature. 49
CHAP. VIII. Of humane Creatures, etc.
WHat man is, and the manner of his generation. 49 What a feeling soul is.
ibid Senses outward, as Touching, Hearing. 50 Tasting, Smelling. 51 Senses
inward, as Conceiving, Preserving. ibid Sleep, how caused. 52 Waking, how
caused. ibid Dreams what they are, and their variety. ibid The nightmare, how
occasioned. 53 A Trance, what it is. ibid Appetite, what it is. ibid Motion
what it is. 54 Of the bodies of living creatures. ibid What the matter of the
body is. ibid Conception, what it is. ibid Natural. ibid Extraordinary 55 Of
the parts of the body: ibid Humors, as Blood, Phlegm, Glue. ibid Spirits.
ibid Vital, Animal, what they are. 57 Gristles, Sweat, what they are. ibid
Brain, what it is. 58 Excrements of the brain, ears, and nose. ibid The
breathing parts. 59 Heart, Spittle, midriffe, stomach* what they are. 60
Throat, Vomiting, Liver, what they are. 61 Urine. 62 How to discern a sound
body by it. ibid Complexions. ibid Diet. 63 Guts, their several kinds. ibid
How placed in the body. ibid The distinction of living creatures, and their
several kinds. 64
FINIS.
Natural Philosophy.
CHAP. I. What Philosophy is.
Philosophy is a knowledge of Natural What Philosophy is.
things. Things (her subject) either are He who alone is; from, by, and for
whom all things are: or else such they be as are numbered by time, and measured
by place, and subject unto motion. God is a Spirit, infinitely good and great.
What God is.
God is but one divine Essence, consisting of three distinct Persons, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The actions of God are either, the
Creating or Governing The actions of God two* fold,
of the world. The World consists either of things invisible, as of Spirits:
or Visible, as the heavens, the elements, and the bodies composed of elements.
The heaven of the blessed, vide Genesis 1, 1. is counted the third heaven, the
Orbs are the second, the Air is counted the first. The third Heaven visible
is of all substances What Angels are.
most perfect. The invisible Spirits, viz. Angels were created here. Angel
signifies a messenger, by How they appear.
nature he is a spirit. Angels appear sometime in dreams and visions,
sometime in bodies apparent and sometimes in true and real bodies: their
number is great; their office is to celebrate Gods glory, to watch What their
office is.
over the world, to preserve us, to declare and do Gods will, to put good
motions into our minds, to resist ill spirits. The Devils were Angels cast
from heaven for sin, into the lower parts of the World, and here they continue
seeking to deface the Image of God in man and all creatures.

CHAP. II. Of motions, qualities, colors, tasting, smelling etc.
THings visible contained in the world, are Substances, or Accidents. Accidents
are either general to all things, as motion, time, and place, for these belong
to all: or proper to some things, as Qualities.

There be two kind of Movers. 1 God. 2 Things Two kind of movers in the
world. How created things move.
created by him.

Things created move from God, and are of finite power in moving in a prefixed
matter, and in time. They be of two kinds, without, or within the thing moved;
the one called violent, the other natural: Motion is an unperfect act, moving
to that it was not, What motion is. Five things in motion.
from that it was: Five things are in natural motion, the mover, the thing
moved, the term from which, the term to which it is moved, and time.

There be six kinds of motion, generation, corruption, Six kinds of motion.
increase, decrease, alteration of quality, and change of place.

Qualities are either manifest, or secret: Manifest What qualities are.
are either principal, or such as proceed from them: the chief of the
principal, are heat and cold.

Heat gathers together things of one kind, and What the quality of heat is.
separateth things of contrary nature; as Gold from Silver or dross. Cold
joyneth together things, as the frost in winter.

The weaker qualities are moisture and dryness. Moisture is hardly contained
in his own bounds. Dryness keeps his own bounds.

Qualities common from the first are either seconds or wrought from them.

Second qualities from one or more, are derived.

From Heat comes Rarity, and Leuity. For Lightness and thinness comes of
heat.
Heat opens and enlarges the poores.

Raritas or Thinnes is that which has hollow parts or spongie as a sponge,
clouds etc.

Lightness proceeds from heat, drawing easily Heaviness and thickness of
cold.
upward. Thicknes and heavines, are of cold. For cold gathers together, and
stops bodies, by which, bodies become heavy.

Thicknes has his parts shut up together as stones.

Heavines, moves downwards: thus is Mercury, heavier than gold, and gold
than Lead.

Tactile or qualities that may be touched: coming What proceeds from
moisture.
from moisture, are softnes: and tenuitie from the Air: smoothnes and
slipperines from the water.

From dryness proceed hardness and roughnes, casines What from dryness.
in breaking and drought.

From the first qualities diversely disposed, arise others called sensible
qualities.

Their Original is obscure or more manifested.

Qualities of obscure original, are such as do not always plainly and
clearly declare the ground whence they arise. Of this nature are colors:
which is the The use of Colors.
splendour of the body, illustrated by light, with which all bodies are dyed
according to their moystnes, decocted more or less apt to receive greater, or
smaller light. Color, is either simple or mixed.

A Simple color consists of none other, as black What a simple color it.
and white.

White consists of much light in a thin body, of White what it is.
an ayery moisture well concocted.

Black, is in a thick body containing but small Black what it is.
light, of moisture either adust or raw watrish mixed with the earth: as
appears in the inner parts of the earth.

Mixed colors are from those two, mingled either in Of mixed colors and whence
they proceed. And how compounded.
a mean or unequall-portion, of equal mixture is red. Other are made of this
mean, and one of the extremes. Yeallow is of much white and a little red,
viz. two parts of white and one of red. Saffron color or Orange-tawny, is of
greater redness, and of lesser whiteness.

Purple is of much red, and less black. Green is of much black and less
red. This being a clear moisture is most pleasant to the eye.

Qualities, of a more manifest original are perceived Tasting whence it
proceeds: diverse kinds of it.
in smells and tastes. Taste is made from the straining of dryness through
moisture, is either hot or cold, in a high or meanest degree. Very hot tastes
are biting, bitter, or salt.

Tastes meanly hot or sweet: Cold tastes are either thicker or thinner, thick
as sour and sharp: or thin as tartnes: where also we place freshness.
Smelling whence it proceeds


Smell, is a quality coming from a dry earthly heat, made thin by mixture of
vapors. If it be well When good when bad.
mingled, it is good: if not, it is stinking.

These qualities come from the first, there are others Qualities arising by
means what they be.
that come by Means from the first, such are, generating flesh by dryness,
and binding in, healing and joining Hid qualities how known.
together, but more moderate. Hid qualities are only known by long
experience, coming from the form and essence of a thing, which in most things
makes it hard to discern. Hid qualities are either They are either native or
passionate. Native governed by the heavens. How and when of most efficacy.
inbred or passionate. Native or inbred, come from forms taking their
original from heaven, and therefore are governed, most according to the
position of the heavens and stars, being of most efficacy in their subject
matter rightly prepared, and at certain times.

As the Lodestone in drawing Iron. The Pionie for falling sickness, Polypody
in the diseases of the liver, etc.

Passionate qualities, are effected by an agreeing or Passionate how effected
disagreeing concord.

Concord is the natural agreement of things, whereby What Concord is.
a feirce Bull tied to a fig tree is made gentle.

An Olife taken up and replanted by a virgin, brings forth abundance of
fruit.

Ocymum a Pulse, being at the sowing banned grows the better: The bleeding of
a dead body at the presence of the killer. Discord in natural things, What
discord
whereby the horse-fly is killed with the smell of roses: so goats are
poisonous unto plants.

CHAP. III. Of the Celestial bodies, as the Heavens, the Firmament, the
Stars, with their places, order and government.
Natural things are simple or compact: Simple are stable or unconstant; stable
are the heaven and stars. Heaven is as it were a vaulted body made What
heaven is.
of water, thin like a skin, and moveable.

The Firmament is the orb of the moveable heaven: What the firmament is.
containing the world, which consists of Ethereall and elementall parts.

The Ethereall part compasses the Elementall: and What the Ethereall part of
it is.
is not variable: it contains 10. spheres, and is in continual motion being
moved from the East, to the West in 24. hours, and makes the natural day. A
star What a Star is. The diverse kinds of them.
is a firm essence, in heaven, giving light. One star is brighter than
another, and they are of diverse motion, either simple, as from west to the
east; or diverse, as their variable motion, north and south: and they have Their
operation over bodies, and how it is.
their operation over inferior bodies, which they work by themselves, or by
aspect with others; which is either conjunct, or opposite: conjunct, is either
in the same or several places:.... caracters be of conjunction. Sextile,
Trine: quadrat: opposition, aspects. Their Poeticke rising or falling is Their
rising and falling, and how it is.
either true or apparent, the true is Acronicke, which is of such stars as
rise and set about the sun setting: Cosmicke ascend with the and set with the
sun rising. Those stars which rise Cosmically fall Acronically. Apparent
rising is called Helical which is of stars getting out of the sun beams, and
so if the star get into the beams at setting: or when any star sets with
the sun. Stars are either fixed or wandering, Stars fixed or wandering.
sixed are the stars of the firmament, whose motion is not sensible; For in
72. years they move scarce a degree: How known from Planets.
keeping still one like distance. Stars are known from planets, by their
twinkling. The stars are far bigger in compass than the earth, and they are of
sixfoold order, first bigger than the earth, 107. fold, second 87. third 72.
forth 54. fifth 31. sixth 18. times. These stars are more or less glistering:
the most glistering are disposed into 48. Images and are divided into three
parts the zodiac and both sides thereof. The zodiac contains How and where
contained in the heavens.
12 signs,........... of the East are... fiery signs. North.. watery....
Ayery of the West:... earthy Southern signs. Stars Masculine and Feminine.
Fiery and Ayery are Masculine: Waterish signs and earthly feminine.

Aries the Ram is the first sign of the Zodiac consisting Aries.
of 13. stars, representing the image of a Ram, it has 2. stars in his
horn of the 3. bigness and 3. in his tail, and one in the tippe of his right
soote of the 4. bigness.

Taurus the Bull consists of 32. stars, 5. of these Taurus.
in his forehead are called Hyades, causing rain, the greatest is called the
Bulls eye, being somewhat pale. 7. stars in his shoulder are little and
called Vergiliae, and Pleiades, because they show the time of navigation by
their rising in the Spring and setting in the Autum.

Gemini the twins of 18. stars; in each head, is a Gemini.
bright star, called Castor and Pollux.

Cancer the Crab consists of 9. stars somewhat Cancer.
obscure.

Leo the Lion is a bright sign of 27. stars, one in his Leo.
heart and one in his tail, are of the first bigness, near his tail are 7.
stars called Berenices hair. Virgo.


Virgo the maid with wings of 26. stars, one in her left hand is called
Spica.

Libra the balance is expressed with 8. stars. Libra.


Scorpion has 21. stars, of which but 14. are notable. Scorpion.


Sagitarius the Archer consists of 31. stars. Sagitarius.


Capricornus the Goat, has 18. stars, of which 12. Capricornus
are most conspicuous.

Aquarius the water-bearer, of 24. stars, like a man Aquarius.
pouring water fourth of his pitcher, the star in the extreme of the water
is of the first bigness. total. 364. Pisces.


Pisces, the fishes consist of 34. stars.

The other stars that are not in the Zodiac are Of Stars not in the
Zodiac. What the northern Coustellations.
either northern or southern stars.

The Northern Constellations are Cynosura, the little Bear has 7 Stars.
Helice the greater Bear has 27 stars, of which 12 are more visible. Draco
the Snake 31. Boots the Heardman 22. betwixt whose legs is Arctur. Ariadnes
Crown 8. Hercules 28. Cepheus 11. The Vultur or Lira 10. The Swan 17.
Cassiopeia 13. Perseus 19. The Carter 13. he bears upon his left shoulder the
Goat, Aesculapius 24. The Serpent 18. stars. The Arrow 5. The Eagle 6. The
Dolphin 10. Pegasus 20. The foale 4. Andromeda 23. stars. The Triangle has 4
stars. The total 360.

The Southern constellations are 25. The Whale What the southern Constellations
are.
has 22 Stars.

Orion has 38. Eridanus 34. The Hare 12. The great Dog 18. The Whelpe 2. The
ship 45. Hydra 5. The Crow 7. The Centaure 37. The Wolf 19. The Altar 17. The
Crown 13. The fish 12. Stars. The total 316.

Plannets are Stars in the neaver part of Heaven, What Plannets are. Why
called wandering.
and are of diverse motions, and are therefore called wandering, which motions
happen not according to the course of other Stars, because in the spheeres
attributed to the several plannets, they moving themselves circularly are
stayed either in their highest or lowest Absis, or else are made to go
backward. Plannets When and how they are, stayed.
are stayed when at their set bounds they stay their course and turn to some
other part, and so seem to stand still.

Absis or Aux, the highest place of the Plannets, to which being moved, they
can ascend no higher, is called Apogaeon, viz. farthest from the earth.

Absis or Aux, the lowest contrary to the other, and nearest unto us, is called
Perigaeon.

Plannets are said to go back, when removing When and how they go back.
themselves, they go not forward their course, but return back the way they
came, in some part.

The virtues and force of Plannets, are as diverse as The virtues and force of
Plannets.
their motions be: stronger by the proper habitation of the house, or by
conjunction: otherwise they be weak.

The proper house of each Plannet is that sign of The proper house of each
Plannets.
the Zodiac, in which first at the creation they were placed after the
opinion of Astronomers.

Thus far in general. Now some shine with one Plannets some of one light,
some more.
particular light, other with more. They that have the same shinning, are moved
with equal or unequal course. Plannets of uneven course have a proper motion
to themselves....

Their conjunction is common or special. Common Conjunction of Planets, common
or special.
are of these three together, and it is called the greatest conjunction: this
through his slow motion foresheweth wonders, as Astrologers say, though their
They presage things to come
grounds are uncertain, yet we will set down what they say, not all as
truths, yet some may be probable. (Especially the sun regarding) destruction
to kingdoms And how.
etc. If such conjunction, be in a fiery sign it presageth great drought. In
a watery sign it argues rain, in Aerie mighty tempests. In earthy extreme
cold. In Masculine death of men, In feminine death of women. Special
conjunction is either mean or extreme. Mean of Saturn and Mars betokens
wars, contention, strife of Kings and Princes, and to these prosperous
successors, if the dominant be good in conjunction.

The extreme conjunction of Plannets, is great or less, greater of,.
betokening new sects, and other like. If. be all stronger, shall be for the
best, if. be stronger, then follows loss, tribulation and great discord, say
the Astrologers.

. Saturn is a star of a leaden color, finishing his A description of Saturn
his properties, how he rules in the bodies, and over whom.
course in thirty years, he is a Plannet masculine, of cold and dry nature,
therefore melancholicke, bad and not fortunate, whose proper house is in..
governing malancholike persons, and diseases of that humor, and those of a
tough and congealed phlegm as Lepry and Morphew. But if he govern in his
proper house in due aspect and degree, most profitable experiments may be made
against these infirmities, His rule appears in conception of men, as in the
first month, and in the eight month much more. Wherefore the child borne in
this month, through the bad aspect, and coldness of Saturn, can scarce live
long: he rules also the lives of men, especially in their end, when old men
be cold and full of fleame, as say Astrologers. A description of Jupiter. His
properties.


Jupiter is a bright Plannet, which runs his course in 12. years, his light
is so great, that it causes a shadow, being near the earth, of which he is
called Phaeton: He is hot and moist of nature, good, masculine, How he rules
in the body and over whom.
and his house is in and he rules over the sanguine, young men and merry
sports, and over discases springing of blood not adust: and rightly disposed.
In his house, remedies are best applied for cure of such infirmities. Under his
power is the child in the second, but more in the ninth month, and the child
that is borne is long of life. A description of Mars.


Mars, is the 3 wandering star, in color red or fiery shining, his course is 2.
years, is a masculine exceeding hot, schorching and dry nature, after a sort
malignant His properties. How he governs man's body and in whom.
and unfortunate: His house is and he shows his force most upon Cholerike
persons, and upon motions of youth, stirring to sedition and war: if he be
well disposed in his house in fit aspect and degree, there may be remedies
used for the Frenzy, agues and other hot sicknesses. He governs the 3.
month of conception, and from 40. to 50. of man's age.

Now of stars, that finish their course in like space A description of the
sun. The office and use of it. How and whom it governes.
of time.. in a year space. The Sun is the brightest of all wandering
stars, appointing seasons, nourishing life, being the fountain of light, of
heat and all vital powers, he is hot and meanly dry, his house is. he
rules hot and dry affections, and therefore in his rule is fit remedy for such.

In man's conception he rules the 4. month, and governs from 22. till 41.
years of age. by being nearest or farthest from the earth, makes Solsticium,
which is our Summer and Winter: summer is, being He makes winter and summer.
in. at the highest; winter solstice is, being farthest from us. The motion of,
causes like length of day Length and shortness of days.
and night., in and the Sun in these points of heaven is equally moved in the
6. signs of our hemisphere, and also in the six opposite, although the points
and times of both Equinoctialls vary and change.

Venus is a very white star, she goes near, sometime A description of Venus.
before him, sometimes after him; in the morning going before him, she is
called Lucifer, in the evening, following, she is called Vesperugo and
Hesperus. is could and Ayery, and moist, her house is in and Her properties:
how and in whom she rules.
. She loves youth, women, and wives, rules cold and moist diseases, happening
most about the genitalls. Therefore in her house in due aspect is best remedy
of such, she uses her power in the 5. month, and disposes life, from 14, to
20. years and two, according to Astrologers.

Mercury is the least wandering star, somewhat white, A description of Mercury.
His nature: how and in whom he rules.
his nature is changeable, and full of turnings, he is hot with the hot,
cold with the cold, of the nature of him with whom he is joined, his house is
and, and is of force in merchandise, of which he has his name, and
mathematickes are under his rule, he begins and follows studies, and reports
rumors and news. He guides the 6 month, and from 4. to 14. years; if he
join with the higher Plannets, he denounces wet and floods, which also he
does meeting Venus in a wet house, in his proper house, winds etc.

The Moon is the lowest wandering star, finishing A description of the Moon.
her course in 27. days 7. hours; although this star have light of he own,
yet does she borrow her shining from the Sun. But because her essence or
body, is not alike, but thicker in one place, than another, therefore she is not
in all places enlightened alike from the Sun. That part which is turned from
the Sun, is all of it shadowed and darkish, but that which looks upon the.
is full of light, and only so much light as stands toward us, seems to
gain or lose light, as it is farther off, or nearer the sun, where as indeed
ever the one half is enlightened from the sun.

The face seems to be enlightened, as joined with, or departing from him.

The joined with the in the 4. first days is covered with greater light of the
beams, and is called the new Moon, but departing from she appears still
more enlightened, and it is either in part or whole.

In part before and after the 8 day, called the increase How the Moon
increases and decreaseth.
and the waine of the Moon. In part less or more, the less is when she is
horned, or half moon about the 4. day, being distant from 2. signs: and
after 8. in the 26. day, the half is seen about the 7. day and after 22. day
when she is distant 3. signs or degrees from. The greater apparition of the
Moon in part is, she being near her roundnes, which is about the 11 day and
after the 19. day distant from 4 signs.

The full apparition of is when in a right line she is When and how the Moon
is in the full.
opposed to at 14 days or full Moon. Although she finish her couse in the
foresaid time in the circle of the Zodiac, yet is allowed to every Moon 29:
and a half day, because she is to pass forward 2 days and 4 hours, before
she can overtake the which makes 29 days, 12 hours. And in 9 years she
ends In what time she ends her revolution.
all her diversity of conjunctions and aspectes, and anew begineth her former
revolution, etc.

A Commet is a wandering star, of diverse motions, What a Commet is.
shining in the region of the Plannets, this appears seldom, sometime above,
and sometimes below the Plannets. It foretells greevous accidents.

Others say that a Commet is a fat substance drawn by the heat of the Sun
from the earth, and the heat of the highest region of the Air; is set on fire
appearing like a star, and is sometime moved in the air.

It foreshewth war, Pestilence, drought, and barrennes of the earth.

The light of some Plannets sometime fail, especially The light of some
Plannets especially the sun and moon fails sometime, and the reason of
them.
of and The defects happen in the Zodiac, if these 2. stars be in the
knotts of their circles, or near to them; which knotts are cuttings, made by
the course of the and, and is called the dragon. The higher is called Dragons
head, the lower the Dragons tail. The Ascendant or higher is where, departing
from the middle Zodiac, does come nearest unto us.

The descendant, when the is removing from us. Of the Eclipse of the Sun and
Moon and the reason of them.
The Eclipse of those stars is in whole or part. In whole all being obscured,
as in the midst of them.

In part it happens near one of the knotts.

The Eclipse of, is by coming of between our eyes and the, in the conjunction
of both Plannets.

A great Eclipse of, is when the centure of these stars, proceed in a direct
line to our eye.

The Eclipse of is the depriving her of the light of, in the opposition, the
earth shadowing her, coming in a straight line between them; her Eclipse is
sooner seen in the East than in the West.

CHAP. IIII. Of the four Elements.
ELements are simple essences, less durable than the What Elements are.
heavens, and are the wombs of mixed things etc.

Of the Elements 2. are clear, air and water. Air, Some clear as Air and
water: three regions of the Air.
which is cold and moist, and of these there are described 3. regions, the
first is hot and dry, this is termed the fiery which causes it to be called an
Element Air the flame being but inflamed air: the middle region colder and
darker; the third region, in which we live, is hot and cold, by the more or
less reflection of the Sun beams.

Air, is so needful to creatures, that none live The necessity of the Air.
without it, the thinner the better, and more healthful.

Water, is an element less thin and clear, moist and What water is. The
natures and uses of it.
most cold. Water warmed in channells in the earth causes hot springs, this is
heated by running by some hot mineralls, and helps moist and cold bodies.

Water, is greater or less. The greatest is the Sea, Why the water in the sea
is salt. The reason of the ebbing and flowing of the sea.
which is salt, because that the stars draw sorth the thin substance leaving
the earth behind. The Ocean ebbeth and flows after the motion; and from the
new moon to the full, humors increase and after decrease, and the tides are
known by the Moon. Particular Seas take their name of some country, or of
some accident, as the red Sea, etc.

Waters are in floods or fountains, fountains are Of Floods and Fountains.
best which come out of Mountains, or Rocks, etc.

Water is of diverse colors and tastes. Milky, Diverse coours and tastes of
waters. What the earth is.
Green, Red, Salt, sharp, bitter, and like wine.

The Earth is a thick element, cold and dry, and is unmovable, about which
all things move, it is round and all things tend as near the center as they
can.

It is in compass with the water 21600. miles, and The compass of it.
is but as a point to the whole world.

Concreat and mixed bodies or natures, are essences Of concreat and mixed bodies
mixed of parts severally disposed. For from sundry things of diverse forms, one
form may be formed: and things of one mixture according to the diverse
affection of their elements are diversely affected.

As some are Ayery, some Fiery, and some Earthly. But the proportion makes
temperature, which is a proportion of qualities, cleaving together in mixture:
it is equal or uneven, and is either simple or compound: simple is in act or
power: compound, as heat with dryness, etc.

Mixed natures are either livelesse or living. Liveless Of mixed livelesse
natures, as meteors; and what they be, with their several kinds, and the
reason of them.
as Meteors which are a hot smoke lifted up by the attractive force of
stars, some 15. German miles into the air and no higher: this smoke is a
vapor or exhalation. A vapor is a moist smoke drawn from water, and is
easily resolved into water. Exhalation is a dry smoke drawn from the earth,
easy to fire: from exhalation arise fiery impressions which burn like fire,
as pillars, darts, candles, goats, shooting stars, fiery Dragons, dark
streams, fools fire, and such like firery Meteors.

Mixed fiery meteors whose exhalation is somewhat Of Mixed fiery meteors, as
thunder, what it is, and the reason of it.
unpure thicker and long, her mixture is thunder which is a fiery exhalation,
breaking forth of the clouds, with a sound. Lightening small and great is a
flaming light, of a burning exhalation, shining before thunder. Though we hear
not the thunder, it is at the present breaking out of the flash, the eye being
quicker than the care. The great lightening is thicker and burns more, if it
be hardened with the heat of the Sun, and it self, it makes a stone which
is cast out at the crack, this does much harm.

Lightening is thick or thin, this boreth through Of lightning; what it is,
and the reason of it.
without leaving any sign of it. The thicker scorcheth and burns, it has
much earthy matter, setting on fire steeples and such like, and in great
flashes is but some small deal of this earthy matter, else all things would be
fired.

Watery meteors, are vapors more fully compact together, Of watery meteors, as
clouds, what they be, with the reason of them.
and appear in the lowest part, or midst of the Air, as clouds and such
like. A cloud is a vapor joined together by the extreme cold of the middle
region. Clouds hang in the Air by the Suns heat, which draws them up, and
by the moving of the winds are tossed up and down.

In these Clouds by and, are framed diverse Diverse shapes in the clouds, with
the reason of them: as a false Sun, how occasioned.
shapes, having no proper matter, but only appear in the clouds, either
about and, or opposite to them as:

A half Sun which is imprinted in the Cloud by the reflection of his beams,
in a cloud being waterish, so that sometime the shape of 2. or 3. Suns are
seen, so of the Moon. Bright circles of the clouds, being black, are from
the reflecting beams, seeming to compass the or yet they are far lower. These
circles appear more often about the moon: she being not able with her beams
to consume these vapors.

The shape in the clouds opposed to the Sun, is A rainbow how occasioned.
the rainbow of diverse colors, in a hollow, thin and in an unequal cloud,
fashioned by reflection of the Suns beams, and the rainbow is greater the
nearer it comes to the Horizon. If many raine-bowes be seen, the latter is
made by the shining of the other, and are more obscure than the former.

The colors of the Rainbow, be light, red, green; A description of the
rainebow and the signs os it.
sky color and yeallow: the rainbow, is a foreteller of rain, it shows
that many vapors are dissolved, which will shortly be rain. The hayle is like
this, but it is always under the Sun.

Meteors of dissolved clouds, are either hardened, Meteors of dissolved
clouds.
or moist, as rain, which is as it were a cloud melted and turned unto water;
if the cloud be near the earth the drops are great, if hie, the drops are
smaller. The rayning of frogs, fish, milk, flesh, and such like, come of
such matter being carried up, which does again Reason of it.
fall with the rain, as worms etc. are begotten of dead carkases in summer
time.

Meteors made hard, after the cloud has been melted, are snow and Hail.

Snow is a cloud, prepared for rain before it fall, Snow what it is and how
occasioned.
being congealed by cold, is by the motion of the winds dispersed into
fleakes, and falls only in winter.

Hayle is rain, made hard in the fall, the higher the Hayle what it is and how
occasioned.
fall, the rounder and lesser, because in the fall it melts. It hayleth most
in Autumn and in the Spring, for then the sharp air, has most power over
the drops, and in winter, the extreme cold makes it snow being yet in the
clouds.

In the lowest region of the Air, are dew and frost. Dew what it is, and how
occasioned.
Dew is a vapor thickened with some earthly matter, which in falling is
presently turned into water.

Dew falls only in summer, for then the vapor is dissolved with the Sun.

A fat kind of dew like melting honey, especially at the shining of Syrius,
being gathered from leaves of trees, is Manna, called also wild honey, or
meldewes.

This Manna hardened by the heat of into Manna what it is.
lumpes, is called Tereniabin.

Frost is a dewish vapor, made very hard by cold in Frost what it is, and how.
winter before it be dissolved.

Meteors made of both kinds of smoke joined together, Of Meteors caused by
both* kinds of smoke, and the reason of them. Wind what it is, and the
diverse kinds of it.
are winds and such like.

Wind is a subtle smoke, beaten downward by the cold in the middle of the
air, and is moved sideling on the earth: Ancients noted out 12. principal
winds, all which in regard of matter are hot and dry, but differ for their
situation of their qualities.

The wind being great, carried with force, darkens Storm. Whirlewinde.
the Air, and is called a storm. If it do roll about, it is a Whirle-winde,
if it be but small, it is called Air.

An Earthquake is a fume, contained in the earth: Earthquake.
when it finds no vent, it shakes it, and is made acoording to the breadth
or depth of the earth. In breadth it causes sometime such trembling, that it
shakes down whole Cities. That in depth causes a gaping or swelling. A
Gaping is when the Earth opens, as it were her mouth, and does swallow down
trees, walls etc. A Swelling is when the earth being lifted up like a
mountain, either remains so, or else falls down again.

CHAP. V. Of mixed living Natures.
NAtures mixed perfectly are living and corporal essences, endued with a
Vegetative soul; A Vegetative soul is a faculty giving life to bodies. What
a vegetative soul is.
Therefore so long as any part of this shall exercise her power in any body, so
long is that alive, and remains safe. But her chief operation, and so life
it self, The nature and office of it.
consists either in preserving several bodies or whole kinds. Nourishment is
the preserving of several bodies, What nourishment is.
and is the making of food received, like to the body nourished. Under that
name is every thing which is received to sustain our bodies, of which sort is
the air it self.

Some other faculties are required to perfection of nourishment, as concoction,
and his companions: Concoction What cocoction is, with the necessity of it.
is a working or framing of nourishment, and it is made either of temperate, or
increased heat of the parts to be nourished.

By temperate heat is made ripening: which is a The necessity of temperate
heat for nourishment cleared by comparison.
concoction of nourishment with moisture, by how much therefore the moisture
shall be better tempered with heat, by so much is the ripening sooner, and
more perfect, as in a summer too moist, the increase of the earth is later made
ripe. Concoction arising from greater store of heat, is either elixation or
assation. Elixation is a concoction more perfectly working the thick or
watrish moisture, with a strong moist heat: As flesh is sod in water, whose
moist heat alters and consumes the fomy moystnes of meat: if this
Elixation remain unperfect, it is called rawnesse, and the nourishment is not
refined, for want of moist heat: For it was not of power to finish concoction.

Assation is concoction, by means of dryer heat fully strengthening the
moisture of nourishment. If The benefit of good, and the hurt of bad concoction.
this strength of bodies be somewhat weak, it is called thickning; if
concoction be vicious, it is turned unto putrefaction. Moist and hot things
do most easily corrupt, if the bodies be not open to the Air.

In stopped bodies, heat having no vent is increased. Whence inflammation
arises.
Whence comes inflammation, which putrefaction does follow, causing greater
heat. This of concoction.

The Companions of concoction, are Faculties, fitly The companions of
concoction.
serving for the perfection of it.

Of these, one goes before, the other follows. The former is Attraction and
Retention.

Attraction is a faculty, supplying matter of convenient 1. Attraction, what
it is.
nourishment, as is seen in things drawing our of the flesh Arrow-heads or
thorns deeply fastened. So wheat draws water out of on earthen pot, it being
set upon the heap. Retention which retayneth 2. Retention, what it is.
nourishment, until it be concocted, and does nourish the body. Nourishment,
is first put to and afterward united. The companion following concoction is
expulsion.

Expulsion, is a driving back of unprofitable matter: 3. Expulsion, what it is.
when concoction is once made, it is within or without the body. Within, when
the stronger thrust superfluities to the weaker, until they come to the
weakest of all. Increase which is joined to the nourishment, is continued but
to a certain age, and then the nourishing growing weak it cease. Now
follows conservation of the whole stock.

Generation is a faculty of the body, procreating any What generation is.
thing like it self. This faculty preserves all kinds of things in their
estate, though continually they do perish.

The object of generation, is the procreating seed What is the object of it.
of every thing.

The changing faculty, alters the seed into parts of the body to be begotten.

The ministerial virtues of this faculty of generation, do change or form.

The forming faculty fashioneth the thing into distinct form.

CHAP. VI. Of Minerals and Metals.
THe Vegetative soul being explained: now follow the kinds of such natures as
have perfect, or unperfect growth. Those of unperfect growth are Metals, which
are decocted in the veins of the earth. Metals are to be melted easily or
hardly. Those that are easy to be dissolved, are either first, or such as
spring from them.

Principal, or first, are of themselves from the original, Brimstone what it
is, and the nature of it.
as Brimstome, and Quicksilver.

Brimstone is the fat of the earth, with fiery heat decocted unto his
hardness, which is the cause that it so speedily is enflamed, and burns even
in water, yea sooner than the fat of the beasts, which though it be fatter
than brimstone, yet it is far colder. So that for his fat dryness, it
helps scabbes of all kinds, and the leprie.

That Brimstone is counted the best, which is green and clear.

Quicksilver is a slimy water, mixed with a pure white Quicksilver, what it is.
earth, which metal for the matter whereof it does consist, is thin, cold,
and heavy.

It is in continual motion, and his thinness causes The nature of it.
that it pierces metals.

Metals derived from the first, are more or less Gold what it is.
pure; purer, are Gold and Silver. Gold is a metal made of most subtle and
pure red brimstone, and of the like quicksilver. Gold has the most perfect
mixture; as it is most thin, so it is most solid, whose substance is not
corrupted, with either earth, water, or air, nor consumed with fire, but is
more purged in it. The nature of it.


And for his thin solidnesse, it is most soft, and easy to be melted. So that
is most worth, which is most red and glistering and soft, that easily it may be
wrought.

Experience teaches, that the 3 part of one grain of gold can gild a wyre of
134 foot long: upon plates of silver, one ounce of gold will suffice to gild
eight pound weight of silver. His nature is to be marvelled at. It waxes cold
toward day light, so that those that wear rings of it, may perceive it, when
it waxes day. Where it is found.


It is found in the mountains of Arabia and else where; and the best, in the
mountain Terrat, near the City Corbachiam.

Silver is a metal begotten of pure white Mercury, Silver, what it is. The
difference betwixt it and gold.
and the like clear white Brimstone. It differs from Gold almost only in
color, it being Gold not perfectly refined; yet in pureness, firm
solidnesse, and thinness, it is next to Gold, and one ounce of it may be
drawn 3200. foot long, so that it can scarce be discerned from Gold. Yet it
is thicker an hundredth fold.

When it is found, it has the shape of hairs, twigs, fishes, serpents, and
such like.

Metals less pure, consist of greater store of Brimstone or Quicksilver; of
greater store of Brimstone, come Brass, and Iron.

Brass is a metal, begotten of thick red Brimstone, Brass what it is.
and Mercury somewhat impure; that coming from Cyprus, is called Copper: the
matter of Brass is more burnt than that of other metals, and indureth long,
and is fit in any work. For it is without all moisture, whether it be kept in
earth or water. Minerals near Brass are Copperasse, etc.

Copperasse, is a mineral mixed of humors strained Copperasse, what it is.
by drops into small holes, and it shines like glass.

It is hot and dry in the 4. degree, vehemently binding, The nature of it.
being of great force to season and preserve raw flesh. It also begets sound
flesh in festered sores, and stancheth blood. It is of a green, yellow, and a
sky color, the best has in it white spots; his kind are Roman vitrioll,
and red vitrioll, or the foam of Copperasse.

Iron is of store of Mercury, and of thick sulphur, Iron, what it is.
impure and adust. It may be softened by quenching in The nature of it.
juice of bean shuls or mallows. It being red hot and cooling of himself,
becomes pliable.

But if it be often quenched in cold water, it becomes thereby, very hard and
brittle.

Mettalls of greater store of Mercury, are Lead and Tynne.

Lead is an unpure metal, begot of much unpure Lead, what it is.
thick and drossie Mercury, and likewise of unpure Brimstone; his impurity
causes blackness, which by refining is made whiter. It increases in weight,
if it lie in moist ground.

Yea it is thought to increase with rain. It is of a The nature of it.
cold and binding nature, and therefore scarce wholesome for man's use.

Tynne is a metal mixed of Mercury, white without Tynne, what it is.
and red within, and of Brimstone not well mixed, as it were Lead whited with
silver.

Thus far of mettalls pliable.

Metals less pliable are those which are not easily wrought, or melted, and
are hard or brittle.

Those that be altogether hard, are stones. These Stones, whereof they are,
etc the variety of them.
are engendered of a watery moisture, and fat earth mixed hard together. Of
stones, some be rare, some common. Of the rare and strange, some are of more
estimation than others.

The more esteemed are precious stones; which are Precious stones.
more beautiful and fine, in regard of their pure and subtle matter: Of
Gemmes some are of one coullour, some of sundry colors. More or less
transparent be either white, or of other colors.

White are Crystal or Adamant. Crystal is a Crystal.
gem, bright through, begot of a most pure stony moisture, The nature of it.
and is found in mines of Marble, etc. His quality is binding: therefore his
oil or powder is helpefull in Laxes, and increases milk in women's breasts.

The Adamant or Diamant is a gem clear and most Adamant.
hard, it can scarce be broken (and thence it is named) The nature of it.
unless steeped in the warm blood of a Goat that has drunk Wine or eaten
Parsley.

Transparent Gemmes not white, as the Saphir Sardonix, and Smaragde, have the
same coullour in all their kinds. Saphir.


The Saphir is a gem clear through, of a sky coullour, growing in the East,
and specially in India: The nature of it.
Being drunk, it helps against the stinging of Serpents, poison, etc. as
some affirm.

The Smaragde is of a green coullour, making Smaragde.
green the air near about it; the stone of Brytaine The nature of it.
is the best. It preserves the wearer from the falling sickness: eight
grains of his shaving drunk, expels poison, etc. as some affirm.

The Sardonyx is a clear gem, representing in coullours Sardonyx.
the nail of a man's hand: it preserves chastnes, The nature of it.
and heals ulcers about the nails.

The Selenites is a transparent gem like glass, it Selenites.
seems to increase and decrease with the moon: The nature of it.
whose shape in the night it bears, and is called therefore the Moone-stone,
etc. It is of a white, black, and yellow coullour. His scrapings heal the
falling sickness. Bright shining Gems do follow.

The Carbuncle is a gem shining in the light like Carbuncle.
fire: it is the noblest, and has most virtues of any precious The nature of
it.
stone.

The Calcedonian is of a purple coullour, shining Calcedonian. The nature of it.
like a star, it expels sadness and fear by purging and chearing the spirits.
It hinders all visions.

The Astarites is a Crystalline stone, having in the Astarites. The nature of
it.
midst like a full moon. Bright stones not shining do follow: or the less
shining. Rubie.


The Rubie is a red gemme, shining in dark like a spark of fire: it clears
the sight, it expels sad The nature of it.
and fearful dreams.

The Topaz is of the color of gold, casting Topaz.
beams in the Sun: being laid to a wound, it stancheth The nature of it.
blood: or cast into hot water, keeps the hand from scalding. Hiachinth.


The Hyacinth is of waterish color, it is exceeding hard, and cloudie in the
dark, but pure and clear by The nature of it.
day. It is cold, moderating the spirits of the heart and of the other parts,
and causing mirth, which being worn obtains favor.

Precious stones of less shining, be Corrall, Asbestos, Magnes, and Galacte.

Coral is a stone growing in the Sea like a slimie Corrall.
shrub, which by the air presently is made hard. It is The nature of it*
taken up full of moss, but being unbarked, it appears clear in his proper
color. The spongie Corrall is white and cold. The solid is more stony, and
is red and black. Red and full of branches is the best, which worn of one
shortly to be sick, waxes pale. His tender substance is affected by the bad
vapor, which yet is unable in the body to afflict it. It is good for sore
eyes, for the stone, and falling sickness.

Asbestos is of an Iron color, being once fiered, it Asbestos. The nature of
it.
cannot be quenched: it is found in Arabia.

Magnes or Loadstone is of a sky color, or an Iron The Loadstone. The nature
of it.
color: It draws Iron. It has like virtue with the Adamant. It purges the
dropsy, belpeth the flux; respects the North and South pole.

Galactites is of an Ash color, it seems to sweat Galactites. The nature of
it.
as it were milk, it increases milk, and helps running of the eyes, and
ulcers.

Now follow stones of diverse colors.

Achates is a stone of diverse colors, resembling a Achates. The nature of it.
Lions skin: sometime it is black with white veins and yellow: sometime it is
as it were sprinkled with blood, it is very variable in color. Eagles lay it
in their nests to preserve their young from poison.

Turcois is dark, of a sky color, and greenish: Turcois.
It helps weak eyes and spirits. The nature of it.


Corneolus is like water of washed flesh. It helps Corneolus.
against the Pyles in the fundament, and to stop fluxes. The nature of it.
In a ring it restrains anger.

Chrysoprasus is of a green color with golden Chrysoprasus.
spots. It shines a little in the dark, it is rare and dear. The nature of
it.
It comfort the heart, helps dim sight, etc.

Hematite is of an Iron color with bloody veins: Hematite.
It is cold and dry, cools hot waters, stancheth blood, The nature of it.
and helps against* the scorching of the Sun, as Authors write.

Also the qualities of other stones depend rather upon authority than upon
proof.

Stones be found in Beasts, Birds, and Fishes.

Stones found in Beasts be;

1. Chelidonius is a small stone in the belly of young Chelidonius.
Swallows. It is found in those of the first hatching in The nature of it.
the new moon: if two be found, the one is red, the other black. The best is
of a sprinkled red. The red in a linen cloth carried under the left arm,
expels madness, the falling sickness, and gets favor, say some.

2. Alectorius is of a crystal or watrish color. Alectorius.
It is found in the Maw of an old Capon: as big as a bean in one of nine
year old, small in one of five year The nature of it.
old. This stone quenches thirst, being held in the mouth. It makes warlike
and courageous.

3. The Rubet or Toadstone, grows in the head Toadstone.
of a Toad: It is of a white brown color, sometime The nature of it.
it has a sky colored eye in the middle: It is to be* taken before the Toad
touch any Water. It is a remedy against all poison. If it come near poison,
it changes color, and sweateth as it were drops.

In fishes are found stones which are made of the cold hardening their matter.

4. The Crabs eye, of the female, is like an eye, Crabs eye.
it dissolveth blood congealed, and expels The nature of it.
stones.

5. The Perch stone found in his head, is white and as Perchstone,
big as Hemp Seed.

6. The Carpe stone found in his chap, is trianguler, Carpestone.
white without, yellow within. It helps against The nature of it.
abundance of choler. Thus far of precious stones.

These following are of price because of their beauty, but not so rare.

Porphirite, is a Marble shining like purple. Alabaster Porphirite. Alabaster.
is a marble like in color, to spotted Honny. At this day it is clear, and
smooth, like Plaster.

The Ophite is a most hard marble, of a sad green Ophite.
spotted, and serpent-like color.

Common stones are of unpure slimie earth, thick, Common stones.
and dark: some be solid, as the Flint, Boulder, the Whet-stone, etc. Some be
full of pores as the Pumise, Gravel-stone, and freestone.

Salt is a fryable metal, begotten of a waterish and Salt, what it is.
earthy moisture, mixed and decocted together: It The nature of it.
binds, scowreth, purges, disperseth, represseth, makes thin and hard. It
is gotten in pits or waters. The sorts of dug salts be:

Salt Amoniack is found in plates under the hot Salt Amonaick The nature of
it.
sands of Cyreniae. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and serves to
purge slimie humors. That which Apothecaries sell in black clods, is made of
Camels stale, and because store of Camels be in Armenia, it is called Armeniack.

Salt Peter is found in dry places under the ground, Salt Peter.
and in hollow Rocks: It is sometime called Nitre, of a Region in Egypt. Of
this kind is the salt called Borax.

Salt Gem, is a white kind of Even-salt, shining like Salt Gem.
Crystal: It is also called Stonic, marbly, salt Sarmaticke, or Dacian.

Salt of Indie is blackish Salt, or ruddy. It is in clods Salt of Indie.
cut out of mount Oremen.

Salt of Water is taken on the Sea coast, or from some Salt of water.
lakes and springs, and it is sod and congealed of the Sun, or by fire.

Allo me is a salt sweat of the earth, it is either liquid Allome.
or hard.

Liquid Allome is called Roch or Rock-Allome, Liquid Allome.
with it is paper washed, etc.

Hard Allome, or Allome Scissile is thick, and Hard Allome.
cleaves: It is as it were gray.

Bitume is a fat and tough moisture, like pitch, and Bitume.
is called Earthy pitch.

Liquid, is like an oylely moisture flowing, and is of Liquid Bitume.
diverse colors, after the variety of the place, of which Naphtha is a white
fat of Bitumen, which enflamed by water, does easily draw to it fire, through
store of oil that is in it. Naphtha Petreolum.


Naphtha Petreolum is found in rocks. It is for his fatness of some called
Oil.

Ambar of Arabia is Bitume of an Ash color. Ambar of Arabia. Hard Bitume.


Hard Bitume is tough, like foam swimming on the water, but being taken forth,
it waxes hard: of this kind is Asphaltus, which is black Bitume, hard like
stone pitch: The best is gotten in the dead Sea of Judea. etc. Pissaphaltus*


Pissaphaltus Asphaltus, smelling of Pitch, mingled with Bitume: It is called
Mummie. Where this wants, they sell us counterfeit of Syria; for poor men that
die there, be stuffed with Bitume, but the rich are dressed with Mirrh, Alloes,
etc.

It also is found in clods rolling from mount Ceravine into the Sea. Succinum.


Succinum is Bitume, like a stone, exceeding hard, named, Ex succo, the Juice
of the earth. It is white or yellow, which is called Ambar, or black as Iet.
His fatness is so great that it burns like a Candle, and smells like the
Pine tree. It draws to it chafe, and such other light stuff, by a certain
hid nature.

Metallar Earths which are dug forth of mines. Terra Lemnia


Terra Lemnia, an exceeding red Earth of Lemnos I Will, dug in a red hill: It
is sometime used for Armenian. In old time this had Dianaes seal upon it,
printed by her Priests, who were only wont to wash this earth.

It is of force to expel poison, it heals wounds The nature of it.
festred and old, and poisoned.

Bole Armenian, is earth of Armenia, it is of a pale Bole Armenian.
red color, smooth, and easy to break as chalk: It is The nature of it.
a dryer, and profits against all fluxes.

Terra Samia is white, stiff, and tough, coming Terra Samia
from the I Will Samos.

Ampelite is a pitchie earth, cleaving and black, it Ampelite.
is named of annoynting Vines, to kill the worms. This earth is like that we
call Stone, or Sea coal.

Chalk is white earth of Creete, and there is found Chalk.
of it in many other places.

There is also some found that is black, which is Black Chalk
called Pignitis.

CHAP. VII. Of Natures perfectly living.
SO far of Minerals; Now follow Natures perfectly living. What natures
perfectly living are.


Natures perfectly-living, are Plants, or bodies endowed with a soul. In all
these bodies are sundry virtues, according to the temperature of the principal
qualities. For the form uses their qualities as Instruments: Whence come
diverse distinct degrees of those qualities, as some are hot, cold, dry, moist,
in the first, second, third, and fourth degree. The qualities in the first are
obscure, and scarce to be perceived: in the second they are apparent and
manifest: in the third they be vehement: and in the fourth immoderate, and not
to be endured. And again each of these has a beginning, middle, and end.

Plants grow from a stalk or a trunk. Those from a Plants.
stalk have but one stalk or many. Trees are Plants having but one stalk,
full of Boughs, and rising on high from the earth. Some grow only in hot
Countries: others grow indifferently in all places: those that prosper best in
hot Regions, are Frankincense, Mace, Pepper, Palm, Balsame, Pomegranet,
Lemmon, Ceder,

The Frankincense tree grows chiefly in Arabia; Frankincense tree.
it is tall, and has leaves like the Mastike tree, his gum The nature of it.
is soft, white, fat, and round, and is apt to perfume, and the stiffer and
liker Rosen it is, so much the better. This perfume was used for sacrifice.

Myrrh is a tree in India, of hard wood, wrythen Myrrh.
toward the earth, with a smooth bark, the leaves The nature of it.
sharp poynted toward the end: his gum is fat, like Rosen, thick, and
shining red. The distilled liquor of fresh Myrrh was once called Stact, but now
it is named Storax. It is hot and dry in the second degree. It dries and
closes wounds, it expels the worms: it is of force against an old cough
and short wind. It is bitter: It is good to heal wounds of the head.

Mace is an Indian tree, grown in the I Will of Banda. It Mace.
is almost like the Peach tree, it has narrow and short leaves, whose fruit is
the Nut-meg covered with Mace.

The Nut-meg has an husk like a Filberd: the Nutmeg*
fruit is covered with a rind like our Wal-nut, which with ripeness opens
and shows the Mace, which does cover the Nut-meg, etc.

The new and best Nut-meg is full of juice or oil, smelling sweet. It dries
and heateth in the end of the second degree, with a kindly binding. Pepper,


Pepper grows in India, Of it be two sorts of trees, and two sorts of fruits,
one long, the other round. The round grows on branches like vines, which
imbraceth trees that stand by it; and his fruit is in clusters, first green,
then being dried, it turns black and rough: it is gathered in October.

Long Pepper grows like the long bud on Nuttrees. The nature of it.
It is hot and dry.

Palm tree grows most in Egypt, and Arabia, always Palm tree.
green, with a long round body; his bark is like scales of a Fish, and the
more it is pressed, the better it grows: therefore was it used as a reward
for the Conqueror.

The wild Palm in India, is called Thamarind, Wild Palm tree. The nature of
it.
the Date is his fruit, it being ripe is black and sweet: Of these be three
kinds. Our Dates come from Egypt: they are hot temperately.

Balsame is a low tree, his trunk is not much unlike Balsame tree.
the Turpentine tree; it has leaves like Rue, but wither, never falling. It
grows in the valley of Hierico, and Egypt: being cut it sends out a milkish
liquor: The nature of it.
it is to be cut in the uper part of the bark with glass or bone, and not
with Iron, least it die. His juice is gathered with wool into small horns: of
it is scarce got each year six Congies: a Congie is about three Pints.

Native Balm mixed with milk does easily separate: Balm.
and easily dissolve in water, neither does it stain The nature of it.
cloth. It is hot and dry in the second degree: it is of thin parts, and hard
to come by. In his stead most commonly is used the Oil of Nut-megges.

The Pomegranet The Orange The Cedar tree
does follow.

1. Pomegranet is a low tree, that has narrow shining Pomegranet.
leaves, red flowers, and his fruit filled with graynes. It came from the
Country in which Carthage stood; The nature of it.
The juice of this Apple helps the stomach: It is very good in a burning
Fever.

2. Pomecytron, Lemmon, and Orange trees, Pomecytron.
are always green, the leaf of the Cytron is like The nature of it.
the Laurel, endented. The fruit is rough, and always fruitful; his juice
cures inflammations, and other diseases in the skin: the bark comfort the
heart, etc.

The Orange has a smoother skin, and leaf. Orange.


3. The Cedar is like to Juniper, his leaves being Cedar.
sharper: the tree is exceeding tall, chiefly of that of Cyprus; The nature of
it.
It never rotteth, his nature destroying sound things, preserves corrupt
things.

The trees less hot are either fruitful or barren. The fruitful have fruit
that have a rind thick, or thin. The thinner rind is of Apples, or Berries.
Apples are round, as the Fig, Olive, Plum, Cherry.

The Fig tree is not high, it has a smooth bark like Figtree.
the Walnut tree. It yields a long fruit like a Pear, full of grains. It is
so fruitful that it brings forth three or four times in a year: so that
one Fig thrusts off another. They are of two kinds, great and little.

The Olive: the Apple tree: and Peach be common.

The Quince tree is lower then an Apple tree, his Quince tree^
fruit has downie hair; it is called Cidonia, of a city in Crete, where
first it grew. The fruit is cold and The nature of it.
binding, and does much profit hot stomachs.

The Pear, the Plum, the Medler, and the Cherry be common.

Now follow those trees that bear Berries.

The Laurel is a tree growing in hotter countries; Laurel tree.
which in cold does hardly prosper; it has sharp and thick leaves ever
green, with a thin smooth bark: His leaves be hot and dry, his oil for hot
and The nature of it.
softning nature helps diseases of the breast; and other springing of cold.
The powder in wine causes urine, breaks the stone of the bladder and reins.

Juniper bears a small fruit, the space of two years; Juniper tree.
and before the first be ripe, it brings forth other* This tree has short
and sharp leaves, and a straight back, and slit almost in every place: the
gum sweating out of is, Vernix, called so because it congealeth The nature of
it.
in the spring. It is hot and dry in the third degree. It heals and gleweth,
and also heateth a cold stomach. His berries are hot and dry in the first
degree, comforting the spirits, and healing putrifactions. It consumes rotten
and moist humors. The oil helps the Gout, if you annoint the backe-bone
therewith: it cures deafness, and eaten helps melancholy, and stays the
Rheum, and the Flux.

Now follow trees whose fruit has a shell.

1. The Almond tree.

2. The Walnut tree.

3. The Chestnut tree takes his name of a town Chestnut tree.
in Magnesia, the tree is much like the Wallnut, yet the leaf has more
veins, and his edge like a Saw. His fruit is covered with a sharp husk, and
within it has a red husk. It is of two kinds: both hot and dry in The nature
of it.
the first degree; and for their earthie matter binding. They are hard to
digest, and beget lice: but good if roasted and eaten with Salt, Pepper, and
Sugar.

The powder of dry Chestnuts voydeth Urine.

The Beech is tall with a thick white bark, or a Beech tree.
sad red. It has leaves like Laurel, nicked on the edge. His fruit is a
theerangle Nut, closed in a little The nature of it.
pricking husk. His fruit is hot, sweet, and binding. His leaves are cool,
which being eaten, do help much the grief of the gums and lips. If they
be stamped, they much strengthen dead members, being anointed with it. Swine
and Mise delight much in this fruit.

Trees whose fruit is but half covered.

The Oak is a tall tree, having a thick rough bark, Oak tree.
his leaves are deep gashed, and his boughs are knotted: his proper fruit is
the Acorne: the gall and his glue are but accidental. It is moderately hot and
dry, The nature of it.
it binds, and especially the little skin which covers the Acorne.
Distilled water of Oak leaves cures Fluxes, and rottenness of the Liver: and
expels all congealed blood. His leaves stamped and applied to green wounds
heal them.

Likewise they draw heat from swellings and pimples arising by heat.

Galls grow especially in old Oaks, and in the night, in the Summer, the Sun
then leaving Gemini: they be of two sorts; small and rough, and great and
smooth.

Galls have in them sometime Spiders, Flies, and Ants: Some think Spiders do
presage pestilence, Flies war, and Ants dearth. The powder of Galls does
heal wounds without any scarre. Robur is very hard and during: It has less
fruit.

The Ilex is very tall with leaves, Lawrell-like, ever Ilextree.
green, but lesser and sharp: a thick wood, and of a black red color; and
is very rare.

Another kind is the Cork tree, having like leaf, Cork tree.
fruit, and greenness, yet is it lesser, and has a most thick bark, which
though it be taken off, yet does The nature of it.
not the tree wither: it is called the female Ilex: his wood is full of pores
and holes, and most light, and not to be sunk.

Now follow trees that bear gum, whose Nut has scales.

The Pine apple is a Tree full of boughs, with hayrie Pine Apple tree.
leaves like Comb teeth, of whose sharp top it takes his name. His fruit is
Pine-nuts, these are hot The nature of it.
and dry, and bind. They are good against coughs, and consumptions,
strengthening, and heating.

The wild Pine is a great high tree with hairy leaves.

The Pitch tree is tall with a black bark, tough and Pitch tree.
stiff, and running along his boughs like a cross, from both sides of the
trunk: his leaves are broader, softer, and smoother than Rosemary. From
between the bark and wood of this tree flows a gum like Rozen.

The Fur tree is a kind of Pitch tree, but somewhat Fur tree.
whiter, his leaves on one side are of an Ash color: from this flows also a
Rozen, which sod with honey profitteth against the destillations of the head
and throat, against the Quinsey and other maladies; it asswageth the
inflammation of wounds, and joyneth them: it sodden with Barley bran and wine,
cures hard kernells.

The Larix is a high tree with a thick bark clifted Larix tree.
on each side: his boughs grow by degrees about the trunk: his leaves are
thick, long, soft, and hairie; his fruit is almost like the Cypres, and has a
pleasant The nature of it.
smell. The wood of this, for that it is dry and full of Rozen, burns
vehemently, and soon melts metal. His Rozen is in smell, taste, and
working better than common Turpentine.

In color it is like honey, tough but not hard. In the body of the tree
grows Fungus Agaricus, a swamp or mush* rome. The best is white, thin, full
of pores, light, and easy to break: it purges fleame.

Now follow trees that bring forth no fruit of note, called Barren-trees.

The Elm is tall with rough leaves and sharp: his Elm tree.
wood is yellow, hard, and deformed: the bark, boughs, The nature of it.
and leaves have a healing faculty in scabbes. It also closes wounds.

The Alder has a long straight trunk, his wood is Alder tree.
soft, his leaf like Peare-tree, but greater, thicker, and rounder: it grows
in moist places, and by rivers. His wood is hot and dry, and indureth long
under the The nature of it.
earth, or in water. His thin and fat leaves laid upon tumors with hot water
cure them, and help all swellings.

The Teile is a large and broad tree, with a thick Teile tree.
stalk: his leaves like Ivy, but softer and sharper. It The nature of it.
binds: his other qualities are like the wild Olive.

The Box has little round leaves always green, Box tree*
his stalk is rough, for most part full of knotts, and black: the wood is
hard and heavy, it sinketh in water, and never decays with age. Of this,
boxes are named, because most of them were wont to be made of Box. It is dry
and binding; the powder of his The nature of it.
leaves, with Lavender and water, profitteth against madness. Lie of Box
makes yellow hayres.

The Birch is a tender tree, his bark is black at Birch tree.
first, but after white; his wood is soft and weak above other. It has a
sweet sap; In the rude age, his bark was used for paper. His sap taken in the
Spring helps The nature of it.
the stone, Iaundies, and rottenness of the mouth; also being put in milk,
preserves the Cheese made of that milk from Maggots.

Willow grows apace, it endures long, for Willow tree. The nature of it.
though it be hollow and rotten, yet it lives. It is of two sorts, solid or
brittle: the solid is black or yellow: the black is the greater and better,
and is most apt for binding.

The yellow grows chiefly near water, it is sometime white. The brittle
Willow is most white, and unapt for binding. Willowes are dry and thick: his
leaves and bark sod in Wine, helps gripings of the belly.

The Poplar delights in moist and watrish places. Poplar tree.
It is white or black: the white has a long straight trunk, and a smooth
bark: his leaf round, and after sharper, green beneath, hoarie above, and do
continually shake; it is moderately hot and dry. The root taken in drink,
defends from gripings in the belly. Black Poplar is like the white, but
greater, softer, and has narrower leaves, and green below, and of an The
nature of it.
Ash color above. It is hot and dry: the boughs held in the hand (some say)
forbid weariness of hand and foot: his gum stamped helps looseness.

Now follow shrubs, which spring up with many Shrubs.
stalks; and are noble or less noble: The noble, as first, Cinnamon, which is
a bark of a shrub of that Cinnamon.
name growing in India: of a black color, with thin boughs, which if they be
broken, cast forth a sweet sent: His bark is of two sorts, thick and thin.
The thin is of the sharpest and best taste. The thick is more slowly
digested; it comfort the heart: the best The nature of it.
is red and sharp with some sweetness. It is of subtle parts, hot in the
third, and dry in the second degree. It helps a cold stomach, it
strengthens the sight, heart, and liver, and begets pure blood.

Cassia Fistula, is a round, great, and purple Cane, Cassia Fistula.
having a very black pith; the heaviest and reddest Canes are best. Of the
black pith is made a good and The nature of it.
gentle purgation, called Cassia extract. This helps much against fevers,
and many other diseases, if one ounce of it be taken with as much Rose water.

Shrubs less noble.

The Hasell is an high shrub with a slender stalk, Hasell.
and full of white spots. His leaves are broader, and have more gashes than the
Alder. The tree bears the The nature of it.
Filberd, and the Nut: these Nuts are hot and moist, and make fat, but hurt the
stomach, and procures a laske. If stamped in water and sugar, they be
applied, they help an old cough. The ashes burnt with Swines or Boares grease,
and applied to the head, causes the hair to grow.

The Elderne has boughs of an Ash color, and Elderne.
in it is store of pith, and his leaves are much like to those of the Wal-nut
tree, it bears purple berries, having red juice.

Dwarf Elderne is low and short, with a foure-square stalk; these plants are
hot and dry, and have power to The nature of it.
purge and digest: Also it heals and closes; the root or leaves of Elder
sod in wine, purge the dropsy, and nothing is more effectual to that purpose
than the root of Dwarf Elderne. Water in which the leaves of Elderne are sod,
helps to rid the dry cough. The Pitch or an electuary of the berries,
expels sweat, and all poison.

Barberries are not much unlike the wild Pear, although Barberries.
they be far less, and in the boughs some two or three pricks grow
together. His leaf is like The nature of it.
Quince leaves, but narrower. Barberries be hot and dry in the second degree.
The juice of the berryes profitteth against inflammation of the Liver, as also
against inward impostumes: if it be applied with nightshade, it quenches
thirst. The bark of his root or fruit stamped, plucketh out a thing fast in
the flesh: his syrrope tempered with sugar comfort the heart, restores
appetite, profits against burning Fevers, and all inward diseases of much
blood.

The small Raisin has purple boughs, and pampin Small Raysin.
leaves, but less, and of blackish green: it has The nature of it.
round red berries, upon long stalks; his fruit and leaves are cold and dry
in the second degree, having power to close. The juice of the fruit taken,
helps against trembling of the heart, and inflammations of the body; but
chiefly it helps the plague: his juice with Endive water profitteth to remove
specks of the face.

The Rose grows up with small twigs, of a black Rose.
green, full of crooked pricks; his leaves are dented The nature of it.
on the edge; his fruit, namely, Roses be of diverse colors. All Roses be
cold and dry, and help both inward and outward affections of the body.

The juice sod in Wine helps griefs of the head, eyes, and gums. Honey and
Rose water strengthen all parts, and purge melancholy and fleame; sodden with
Fennel and Salt, his oil heals burnings, and laid on the forehead takes
away heaviness, and hot sicknesses. The funge of wild Rose trees in powder
with wine expels the stone. Water of Roses helps sore eyes, comfort and
cools the brain, it being drunk, relieveth the heart and stomach: it
keeps the spirits, and natural heat.

The Bramble is full of pricks, and crawleth about: Bramble.
the leaves of sweet bryer on the one side are white, on the other black; his
fruit is the black berry, full of juice, the berry is dry, cold, and close.
His fruit, The nature of it.
leaves, or sprouts quench inward heat. The top of his leaves sod in Wine stay
the bloody flixe, help ulcers of the mouth, and fasten loose teeth.

Poterion, uva orispa, Gooseberries is full of boughs, Gooseberries.
has ash colored bark or white, full of sharp thorns, his leaves are less
than ground Ivy and crooked, his berries from green turn to reddish: it is
cold The nature of it.
in the first, dry in the second degree; his green leaves cure inflammations,
and apostumes, and assuage Ignis sacer.

Colutea in leaf not unlike to Fengreke, has a Colutea.
round fruit, as big as a Lentle in a puffed shell. It is hot The nature of it.
in the beginning of the second degree, and dry in the first: it purges the
panch: scoureth away chiefly melancholy, The nature of it.
without trouble, from the head, brain, and the Instruments of the senses.

Thus far of Plants growing from a trunk or stalk, etc.

Now follow Herbs which have but a thin small Herbs.
stalk, consisting most upon leaves: These do nourish more or less, as Corn
and Pot-herbes, which nourish more.

Wheat is a kind of Corn, having an ear upon Wheat.
the blade, stuffed with many graynes; it is moderately The nature of it.
hot and dry, and of much nourishment, and helpefull for many diseases, as well
within as without the body: the best is hard to break, heavy, and of gold
color, smooth, and grows in fat ground.

Leaven of Wheat does draw, ripen, and open ulcers, and apostumes: Biscuit
profitteth against rheum.

Barley is cold and dry in the second degree, and Barley.
purges. His flower and new milk in plaster cure The nature of it.
Biles, and such tumors, by easing their pain, and drawing forth heat. Bread
made of it begets cold and slimie humors, and nourishes less than wheat,
Barley water makes the skin fair and smooth.

Spelte or Zea is of a middle temperature, between Spelte.
Wheat and Barley: it is a kind of Wheat, and commonly goes under that name.

Rye is not so hot as Wheat, and hurts much, except Rye.
it be well disgested.

Oats are colder than Wheat, and of operation almost Oats.
like Barley.

Now follow of Pulse:

Millet.
Millet is a most fertile Pulse with sharp leaves, broad below, and sharp
toward the top: his cod has The nature of it.
in it a round long fruit. It is cold in the first, and dry in the third
degree: It stops the belly, and nourishes but little.

Rize is smaller than Millet, and far less, it grows Rize.
in moist and watery places: it binds.

Lentells grow like small pease, and have a virtue to Lentels.
bind.

Pease are either of the field or garden; bearing a Pease.
white, ot a purple flower.

Beans are meanly cold, and moist, inflaming, Beans.
windy, hard to digest. Pot herbs.


Now follow Pot-herbes.

Coleworts have very broad leaves, which enclosing Colewortes. Their natures.
one another round about become Cabbedges. These be cold and moist; and in
Egypt be very bitter. The Romans for the space of six hundred years used this
only herb to cure all diseases. His broth expels the stone and gravel,
his leaves applied by themselves, or with the flowers cure inflammations: his
juice heals festred sores, it cures the falling of the hair. Broth made of
his leaves with an old Cock, cures the Collicke, and other gripings.

Spinagh has an high stalk, and bears sharp Spinagh.
seeds, his leaves being sharp and triangular; it is The nature of it.
cold and moist in the first degree. His juice expels hurtful rheum: It
mollifieth the belly, and cures hardness of the back and belly. His Juice
takes away the pain and heat of the stomach and liver: it helps the
biting of Spiders,

Lettise has his leaves gathered into a curled roundnesse; Lettise.
that which grows in the field has a shorter stalk and leaf than Garden
Lettise, being bitter, and full of milk.

It is moderately moist and cold, like Spring water, The nature of it.
it is wholesome in Summer, to restore appetite to meat. Yet too much of it
hurts the eyes: and boyld with woman's milk cures burnings.

Beetes have two colors, the one white, the other Beetes.
black and red, both of them for their salt digest and cleanse, but the white
is more salt, and binds, yet being boiled, it looseneth: It cures
obstructions of The nature of it.
the liver, especially if it be taken with vinegar and mustard: It also cures
those that be sick of the spleen.

Purslaine has round, thick, fat, and white leaves Purslaine:
on the back, a red stalk, yellow flowers like a Star: They of the Garden
have broad leaves, and a thick stalk: the wild, lesser, and more leaves. It
is cold in The nature of it.
the first, and moist in the second degree: it is tart; his juice helps a hot
stomach, and hot diseases; it being somewhat binding, helps fluxes, and
evacuations of blood, if it be used with Barley flower.

Garden Mallows grow with a round leaf, and high Mallows.
stalk, his flowers be red, or white: wild Mallows mollify, and a little
digest: Garden, are moist, and The nature of it.
weaker. The decoction of Mallows drunk, cures on old cough: his leaves sod
and used with common oil heal burning.

The Onion has a subtle stalk, round and hollow, Onion.
arising from a round root, wound about with many fouldings: it is hot almost
in the fourth degree: it is The nature of it.
of thick parts: his juice is a dry substance, and hot. An Onion all night
laid in cold water and drunk, kills worms, and being beaten with salt, it
draws away warts by the roots: his juice put in the ear cures deafness.

The Leeke grows almost like Onions, and is of Leekes.
the same quality, it does dissolve swellings, and congealed The nature of it.
blood, being applied like a Plaster.

Parsley has leaves like Cicuta, it is hot and dry in Parsley.
the third degree, it peirceth and dissolueth, provoking The nature of it.
urine; the seed is more effectual than the herb. It dissolveth the stone,
it consumes ill moisture, and sores of the head.

These herbs following are used for Garlands, or physic; some of them
smelling sweetly.

The Violet has leaves lesser and thinner than Ivy, Violet.
but more black; his stalk comes from the midst of his root, bears a
purple flower, and a seed full of graynes. It springs in woods, and shadowie
The nature of it.
places, wild, but not sweet: it is cold in the first, and moist in the
second: and cools hot diseases and inflammations. Of it there be diverse
kinds, and colors: as the Pancey or Harts-ease.

The Daisie has leaves somewhat round above and Daysie. The nature of it.
small below, and the root in the ground wheeling about: it is cold in the
second degree.

The Ielly-flower has sharp leaves, growing like Ielly-Flower.
grass with flowers of sundry colors: it has an attractive The nature of it.
force, and the juice heals wounds in the head.

Maioram has almost a wooden stalk, with many Maioram. The nature of it.
rough round leaves, and it smells sweetly. It is hot and dry in the fourth
degree, it is of thin parts, and of a disgesting faculty. It heals,
disgesteth, and provoke urine.

Rosemary is hot and dry in the third degree, and Rosemary.
smells like Frankincense. It mollifieth, disgesteth, The nature of it.
and dries.

Spicknard is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree. Spicknard.
The nature of it.


Lavender heateth and dries in the second degree. Lavender.


White Daffodill is hot and dry. It is of diverse Daffodill.
kinds.

Rose Campion is an herb with an Ash colored Rose Campion.
stalk, as it were cotton, long leaved, and white, bearing purple flowers,
growing up like the Prim-rose: The nature of it.
his seed is hot and dry almost in the second degree: it prevails against
the stinging of Scorpions.

Herbs used in medicine, are Aromatike, or ordinary. Aromaticke do comfort
and strengthen the spirits. Thence they take their name.

Saffron is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree: Saffron.
it a little binds, and concocteth; it may with good keeping be preserved
five years. The nature of it.


It comfort the heart and stomach, it makes pure blood, and provokes
urine, it scowreth the breast, it is deadly, if it be taken too much.

Ginger waxes green twice or thrice in the year, Ginger.
it heateth in the third, and is moist in the first, it is of The nature of it.
more subtle parts than Pepper.

Zadury or Wormeseede heateth and dries in the Wormeseede.
second degree, it is that we do call the root of China, like Ginger but not
so biting. The nature of it.


Gallingall is the root of a plant growing in Memphis Gallingall.
and Syria, it grows like the flouredeluce, but with pricks, and is broader
and thicker from the The nature of it.
root. It is hot and dry in the third degree, as is the root of Cyprus.

Calamus Aromaticus is an herb of India, growing Calamus Aromaticus. The
nature of it.
like reeds or figs. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and a little
binding.

Acorus is a plant growing with leaves like Iris, but A corus. The nature of it.
smaller, or like segges; the root is white, sweetly smelling. It is hot and
dry in the second degree.

There be sexes of herbs, as of other living things, some of which more
help, namely, the Male or Female according to their kinds.

CHAP. VIII. Of humane Creatures.
MAn is a creature that has reason, and as he is most What man it, and the
manner of his generation.
excellent, so has he a more perfect shape in body than others. His members
are formed, and begin to appear distinctly about the six and twentieth day.
And they are all perfect in Males at thirty days, and in Females at 36. days.
About this time the Child begins to live, and to feel. The Male is moved
in the third Month, but the Female in the fourth Month: then it is nourished
and increased till the ninth Month, and after the ninth Month, when it is
grown great, it is brought forth. This is the forming, and procreating of Man,
for whose sake all other creatures were made.

A feeling soul is a power apprehending and What a feeling soul is.
perceiving things placed without the body of living creatures. This faculty
is exercised by the senses, and by motion accompanying the senses. The senses
are outward or inward. The outward only Senses outward.
perceiving things present: And every one of these have their proper subject:
and the most have a middle instrument; of all which, if there be a certain
mutual consent and just proportion: the senses become of more force: but if
any one of them have too excellent an object, or his instrument be corrupt,
they are dull and unfit to be used; This is the cause of blindness to those
that walk in snow, and of deafness unto Smithes, etc. Furthermore, senses
are common to the whole body, or proper to some part thereof. The Touching.
sense in the whole body is touching. This is a sense by means of flesh, full
of sinews, apprehending tactill qualities.

His instrument is flesh, full of sinews, or rather a nerve like a hair
dispersed throughout the whole body. In man for the abundance of nerves is this
sense most quick; his means is flesh and skin, for though the skin be
removed, yet a man feels hurt. Senses of certain parts are more or less
noble. The nobler are Seeing, and Hearing; whose means are the water, Geeing.
and air: Sight by the eye perceives bright and colored things: The subject
thereof is light, etc. Green a most temperate color is most acceptable to the
sight. His instrument is the nerve Opticke, which from the brain comes to
the eyes.

Hearing is a sense perceiving soundes; his instrument Hearing.
is a little skin in the lowest winding, or turning of the ear, dry and full
of holes: the skin is double, one below, which covers a little bone like an
Anvile: another above, containing a little bone, as it were a small Mallet. The
upper stricken by the soundes, strikes the lower, and stirs up the spirits
in the nerves to perceive the sound.

The more un-noble senses are Tasting, and Smelling: Tasting.
Tasting apprehends tastes. His instrument is a nerve stretched like a Net
upon the flesh of the tongue, which is full of little pores. His means is a
temperate salt humor, which if it do exceed the just quantity, it does not
exactly perceive tastes: but if it be altogether consumed, no tastes are
perceived.

Smelling judges qualities fit for smell: his instrument Smelling.
is the entrance into the first ventricle covered with a small skin; the dryer
it is the quicker of smell, as in Dogs and Vultures: but man for the moystnosse
of his brain, has but a dull smell.

Now follow the inward senses, which beside things Senses inward.
presently offered, do know forms of many absent things. By these the
creature does not only perceive, but also understands that which he does
perceive. These have their seat in the brain: They are either conceiving or
preserving: Conceiving exercises his Conceiving.
faculty by discerning, or more fully judging: it is called, Common sense, and
the other is Fantasy. Common sense more fully distinguishes sensible things;
his instrument is the former ventricle of the brain, made by dryness sit to
receive. Fantasy is an inward sense more diligently examining the forms of
things: This is the thought and judgment of creatures, his place is the middle
part of the brain, being through dryness apt to retain.

The preserving sense is Memory, which according Preserving.
to the constitution of the brain is better or worse. It is weaker in a moist
brain than in the dry brain. His instrument is the hinder part of the brain.

Memory calling back images preserved in former time, is called Remembrance:
but this is not without the use of reason, and therefore is only attributed to
man.

The witty excel in remembrance, the dull* in memory.

Sleep is the resting of the feeling faculty: his cause Sleep how caused.
is a cooling of the brain by a pleasant abounding vapor, breathing forth of
the stomach, and ascending to the brain. When that vapor is concoct, and
turned Waking how caused.
into spirits, the heat returns, and the senses recovering their former
function, cause waking. There be certain appointed courses for watch and
sleep, lost creatures languish with overmuch motion.

Affections of sleep are Dreams, Nightmare, and Dreams*
Ecstasy, etc.

A dream is an inward act of the mind, the body What they be.
sleeping: and the quieter that sleep is, the easier be dreams: but if
sleep be unquiet, then the mind is troubled.

Variety of dreams is according to the diverse constitution Their variety.
of the body.

The clear and pleasant dreams are when the spirits of the brain, which the
soul uses to imagine with, are most pure and thin, as toward morning when
concoction is perfected.

But troublesome dreams are when the spirits be thick and unpure. All
natural dreams are by images, either before proffered to memory, or
conceived by temperature alone, or by some influence from the stars, as some
think.

From dreams many things may be collected, touching the constitution of the
body.

The Nightmare, is a seeming of being choked or The nightmare.
strangled by one leaping upon him: fear following this compression, the voice
is taken away. This affection How occasioned.
comes when the vital spirits in the brain are darkened by vapors,
ascending from melancholy and phlegm, insomuch, that that faculty being
oppressed, some heavy thing seems to be laid upon us.

Therefore this disease is familiar to those, who through age or sex are much
inclined unto these humors.

An Ecstasy or trance, is a vehement imagination A trance*
of the departure (for a time) of the soul from the body. A deep sleep
lasting some days enseweth, for What it is*
the foul giving over it self to cogitation, cease to serve the body.
Wherefore men wanting motion and sense seem to be dead. And with what humors
the brain shall be compassed, such phansies does it conceive, although
sometime spirits working on such phatasies, imprint other things.

Now follows Motion, which accompanies sense, and is caused either by
appetite, or change of place; for we desiring things perceived in sense, cannot
attain unto them withour moving our body to that thing. Appetite* What it is.


Appetite is a faculty desiring such things as are objects to our sense. It
chiefly follows touching, or thinking. Delight follows touching. Delight is
a desire of an agreeing Object. Grief is his contrary, which is a turning from
the hurtful object, or from that we count unpleasant. Appetites following
cogitation, are all the motions of the heart, which be called affections, and
are either good or bad. The good cherish and preserve the nature of our
sensitive faculty, as mirth, love, hope, which come of heat: when the heart
dilating it self, desires to enjoy the thing, with which it is delighted.

Motion is a faculty of living creatures, stirring a body, Motion what it is.
entised by appetite from one place to another. It is either of the whole body,
or of parts: Of the whole body, as by going, etc. Of parts, as breathing,
which is made either by enlarging of the parts, which serve for the taking in
of the air, or by the closing of them for the expelling of corrupt air.

Now follows to entreat, Of the bodies of living Of the bodies of living
creatures. What the matter of the body is.
creatures.

The matter of the body in which the foresaid faculties be, is the seed of
both sexes. Seed is most pure blood, perfectly concocted in the testicles, and
it is gathered from the whole body. For the testicles lacking nourishment,
draw blood from the hollow vein and change it.

Conception is the action of the womb, by which Conception, what it is.
the power is stirred up to execute his inbred gift. Then that power being
stirred up does diversely distract the matter, separating his diverse parts: and
thus all parts alike get together their shape. Likewise all of them together
are adorned with the faculties of the vegetative, or sensitive soul. Amongst
the natural faculties of the parts of the body, if there be putrefaction, a
fault of the concocting faculty, there is made a certain generation of
matter: This is natural, or extraordinary.

Natural is by an inbred heat, not altogether subdued, Natural.
but slackly exercising force, through disposition of the mattter. Such is to
be seen in inflammations, botches, and impostumes. For in these, nature so
far as it can, labors to bring this his subject matter to the best form.
Therefore such suppuration is wont to argue a certain strength of nature,
wherefore often with convenient helps, it is carefully increased. In this
kind, especially is praised white, thick, smooth, equal, and least smelling
matter.

Extraordinary mattering is, when nature altogether Extraordinary.
subdued, the humors or parts themselves are made full of corrupt matter
through store of rottenness.

But nature, or the concocting faculty, is overcome either through proper
weakness, or by corrupt matter: this is observed in all rotten, malignant, and
stinking botches, in which according to the diverse fashioning of abounding
matter, are found diverse sorts of solid bodies, as hairs, and such other like.

Of parts of the* body which appertain to the Of the parts of the body.
making up of the whole body, some are containing, and some contained. The
contained for their fluent nature are sustained by help of others: Such are
humors and spirits. Humors are moist parts begot of the first mixture of
nourishment in the liver. These are in the seed of creatures, and are called
the beginning of things endued with blood. Any of these if they fail of their
proper nature, are not fit to be in the body, but are become unnatural.

Humors are of the first, and the second sort. The first Humors.
are hot or cold, and moist, and dry: Blood is hot and Blood.
moist, and it is a thin, red, humor, and sweet. With this the other parts
be chiefly nourished, amongst whom this is the chief. The faults of this is in
substance, as putrefaction, or mixture of vicious humors: or in quality, as
too thick or too thin; or is affected with some other badnesse. The humor
that is hot and dry, is choler; this is a thin, yellow, pale, and bitter
humor. His use is to help the expelling faculty, and chiefly in the Guts.
Gall besides nature, through adustion is yellow, like an eggs yolke, in the
stomach it is like rustic brass.

The cold and moist is phlegm, which is a tough, Phlegm.
slimie, and whitish humor, and tastlesse. If this have a fuller concoction,
it is turned into blood. His use is to moysten the joints. When it declineth
from his proper nature, it is salt or tart, according to his mixture. The cold
and dry humor is black choler. This is a thick, blackish, tart, bitter
humor. It serves to strengthen the stomach, that it may more easily retain,
and receive meat. When it declineth from his proper nature by immoderate
burning, it has diverse kinds. Humors of the second sort are begotten of the
first, being wrought with concoction they are like dew or glue. Dew is a humor
contained in the hollownesse of the members, and joined to their substance,
like dew, with which they are nourished.

Glue is a humor immoderately congealed, and being Glue.
firmly fastened to the members, begins to be changed unto their substance,
of which change it is called Cambium, and carniformis, like the flesh.

Now follow the spirits, which are a fluent part of Spirits.
the body, most thin, and begotten of the blood of the heart. The spirits are
the chief instrument, and as it were the Chariot of the souls faculties, for
with most speedy, and swift motion, it carries them over all the body.

Spirits having root in the heart, be either absolute Vital. What they are.
or rude, and to be finished in other parts. Vital spirits be absolute in the
heart, and are of a fiery nature, and from the heart by arteries are spread in
the body, by whose communication all parts do live.

Spirits to be perfected in other parts be Animal, Animal.
which from the heart be carried into the brain, and What they are.
there made subtle by nerves, flowing unto all the other parts; and this is
the Chariot of functions or faculties of all living Creatures.

Parts containing are more solid, which are sustained by themselves; all these
either are as a stay or covering. The stay to other parts, is either bone, or
gristle. Bone is the hardest and dryest part, and stay to all the body. Bones
are knit together by ligaments, which are like hard and thick threeds, being
as bands to the bones of the body.

Gristles are somewhat softer than the bones, and Gristles.
sustain all other parts. The covering of the other What they are.
parts, is the skin, which is tender without blood, and covers the whole
body. The membrane is a tender skin, covering some parts.

There is yet in these parts a common excrement of Sweat.
concoction, which is sweat, and is a moystnesse of the What it is,
veins, expelled by secret pores; of this is to be seen a diverse color,
according to the die of the moystnesse, or matter thereof: the usual is
watrish, through the white substance of the channels, through which it runs.
But if the pores be large and open, that without delay, and long change it may
slide through them: especially, if for some affection of mind or disease, it
become thinner, then is it speedily expelled, and tainted with some other
color, etc. Therefore from the color of sweat, the bodies constitution may
be known. Cold sweat is worse to be liked than hot, but either is bad if
they be unequal.

Also the containing parts aforementioned are animal, or vital, and each of
these are more, or less principal. Animal parts are, in which the animal
parts are most exercised, as sense and motion together, or alone. The chief
member of motion and sense, is the brain contained in the head; whose
substance being hurt, it is in danger to lose both sense and motion.

The Brain is softer than the other parts, white, Brain, what it is.
and covered with a double skin closely. The skin of the brain is either
called Pia, or Dura matter. The scalpe is a thick bone, covering the whole
head, and has up on it a skin with hayres. The scalpe is distinguished with
certain seames in certain parts, which are true or feigned, etc.

The excrements of the brain are either thick or Excrements of the brain.
thin: The thin are tears bursting from the brain by the angles of the eyes.
The greater the flesh of those angles be, so much more plentiful be tears,
chiefly if the complexion be cold and moist, as of women. Tears be caused by
heat which opens, or cold which presses the flesh, and causes tears.

The thicker excrements which are expelled from the brain, either are by the
ears or nose.

In the ears is a moist excrement of the brain, gathering Of the ears.
and rotting in their hollownesse.

That of the nose is a thicker excrement than that of Of the nose.
the brain: which although it be like phlegm, yet it is altogether of another
nature. The pithe of the back bone is near to the nature of the brains
excrement, save that it is harder and something hotter. The back is bonie,
round, and in his length has twenty four joints. The Nerves are less
principal parts of sense and motion, which if they be out of order, the parts
in which these be, become unfit to move. Nerves or sinews are thin parts,
round, etc. white, much like to thick threeds. Some are softer, some harder.
The softer are of more use, of which are six pair, by two and two, from the
brain arriving to other parts.

First, to the eyes. Secondly, To moove the eyes. Thirdly, to the tongue and
taste. Fourthly, to the pallet and skin of the mouth. Fifthly, to the hearing.
The sixth, to the mouth of the stomach, by which sense and motion descend.

Hard Nerves have a duller faculty, and less serving to the senses, of which
are thirty pair, which by couples come from the marrow of the back bone: by
whose conduct the back easily executes his faculties.

Of the parts to breath.

The principal parts of breathing are in the breast: The breathing parts.
being either Lights or Heart; wherefore these being touched, breathing is
immediately hurt, and such wounds be deadly. The Longes are a spongious and
thin part, soft, and like foame of congealed blood, declining something to the
right side. Breath is brought unto the Lights by a rough Artery, knit to the
root of the tongue. This Artery is a long channel made of many gristle rings
on a row, which ends in the Lights. If any thing fall into the hollownesse of
this, the breath is hindered, and there is danger to be choked.

The Heart is a fleshie part, solid, and well compacted, The heart, what it is.
almost like a Pyramid: it has two ventricles, the right and the left. The
right by an arteriall vein communicates blood to the Lights. This vein is so
called of a proper substance and office. From the left ventricle of the Heart
arises Aorta the root of all the Arteries. These are hollow vessels in the
Heart begotte: and are thick, distributing spirits throughout the whole body.

The excrements of the principal parts of breathing Spittle, what it is.
be spittle and cough. Spittle is a windy foame cast out of the breast, and his
parts: If it be avoided with noise, it is called coughing. Superfluity of this
matter is judged by the color, for red spittle is of blood, yellow of choler:
white of phlegm, and black of melancholy:

The less principal parts of breathing, are the Midriffe, what it is.
midriffe, and the mediastin. The midriffe is a thin skin, like perchment,
fastened overthwart to the sides, and includes the parts of the breast, The
mediastin is a double skin in length, dividing the breast into two sides.

The vital parts are those which serve to the preservation of the spirits of
living creatures, and are appointed to nourishment, or generation. The
principal parts for the perfection of nourishment be the stomach and the
Liver.

The Stomach is a part like perchment, sticking to Stomach, what it is.
the throat, round, but long, and as it were, twisted with many small threeds,
and it is the kitchen of nourishment to be concocted.

The throat is a channel, full of nerves, carrying Throat, what it is.
meat from the mouth to the stomach. The Fibers are as it were, very small
threeds, by benefit whereof the stomach enjoys her faculty. These if they
be straight and right, draw nourishment unto them: if crooked, they are
oblique or transverse: those retain nourishment received; these expel
excrements.

The casting forth of excrements by the upper parts Vomiting.
of the stomach, is called vomit, which expels that which abounds in the
stomach: yet such excrement is many times sent back from other parts into the
stomach. The Liver lies upon the stomach on the The Liver.
right side, enclosing it with his laps, and is a fleshy part of nourishment,
red, like congealed blood, placed next unto the Midriffe. In the Liver is made
the second concoction, namely, of nourishment in the belly, turned into a red
mass: from the Liver arises a hollow vein, the root of all other veins.
These are hollow parts, round, and guide the blood unto all the body; the
substance of these is thinner by six fold than the skin of the Arteries,
whose substance ought to be thicker for the vehement motion of the spirits.
That the office of the Liver may be made perfect by means of veins, other
particles are allotted thereunto: which receive the abounding humors, choler,
etc. The Gall receives yellow choler, and the Milt black. The bladder of the
Gall is a slimie part in the hollow part of the Liver, of the figure of a
Pear: the Milt is a long part like a shooe-sole, on the left side over against
the Liver, but somewhat lower. Water from the Liver is received by the reins
and bladder. The substance of the reins is thick, and solid flesh; they
stick on both sides about the loins, and have emulgent veins arising from
the hollow vein. From the trench of the veins hang downward white, narrow
veins, guiding water from the reins unto the bladder. The bladder is a slimie
part, round, and containing urine in it. Urine is a whey separated from blood
in the reins, Urine.
and more fully purged in the bladder. This in the body of a temperate man,
and sound, is of a mean substance, and in quantity answers the drink
received: in the chollerike it is yellow, or red. His sediment is white,
smooth, and equal without bubbles, etc.

A sound body is known by voyding urine, which How to discern a sound body by
it.
in the morning is white, and after something red. For the one signifies that
it does, and the other that it has concocted. Urine is of a mean substance
betwixt thin and thick. Thin urine argues the weakness of the body, and
coldness predominant, and rawnesse of the parts of concoction. And this either
remains the same or becomes troubled. That shows concoction is not yet
begun, and therefore raw, or This, that it is but new begun. Thick urine
like that of beasts, notes excess of matter or concoction. Urine does vary
according to age or complexion, or according to diet and affections of the
mind. For the urine of Infants for the most part is white and milkie, the
urine of boys is thicker, and not so white, the urine of young men is like
gold, and of old men white and thin.

Touching complexions, the chollerick have Orange Complexions*
color: Phlegmatike pale, and thick: the Sanguine, red and mean. The
melancholic, wan and thin.

Diet changes urine, as Saffron or Cassia caussth Orange Diet.
color. Urine of those that fast long is yellow, of those that eat too much,
it is white.

The less principal parts of concoction, are the Guts.
gutts and mesenterion. The gutts are long, round, hollow, and are knit to the
lower part of the stomach. These are thick or thin. The thinner are the three
uppermost, as Duodenum, Iejunum, and Ileos.

Duodenum is the uppermost gut, twelve fingers long. Their several kinds.
The Iejunum begins where the Duodenum begins to turn unto rundells.
Ileos is a thin gut, having inwrapped windings. The thicker guts of a thicker
skin, are Coecum, Colon, and Rectum.

The blind gut is thick, large, and short, having but one mouth. The Colon
has many turnings. The right goes straight to the Tuell: The excrement of the
belly, if it be but softly* compact, and made at the appointed time, and
somewhat yellow, and not much smelling, argues good concoction. If it be red,
it argues, that much color flows in the stomach: if it be white, it
shows cruditie and want of choler.

Blew shows mortification, and cold of the inward parts. Too thick or thin
egestion, argues bad concoction: if fattish, or slimie, it notes a
consumption. Above all, in these things it must be observed, what meat has
lately been received.

The guts are wrapped about with the Mesenterion, How placed in the body.
which is a skin in the end full of kernells, and woven with many thin veins,
which meeting together, make a multiplying of Vena porta in the hollow of the
Liver.

Thus of the common parts of all creatures: their kinds follow.

All Creatures are reasonable, or unreasonable. They The distinction of living
creatures, and their several kinds.
which want reason, are Beasts, who live on Land or in Water. Those which live
on the earth, moove on the earth, or in the air. Beasts moving on the earth,
are fourefooted, or creeping. Fourefooted Beasts, bring forth young shaped as
themselves, or eggs. Those that bring forth living Creatures, some have solid
feet, and some cloven feet. They have solid feet who want horns, as
Horses, Mules, and Asses, etc. The cloven footed Beasts, for the most part
have horns, as the Ox, Goat, Heart, etc.

Land Beasts bringing forth eggs, are the Crocodiles, and some which have a
shell.

Frogs, Liserts, and some Serpents have four feet.

Creatures creeping on the earth, are all kind of Worms, Ants; Earwigs: to
whom may be added, Spiders, Lice, Gnatts, and such other.

Fowls are hotter and dryer than Creatures living only on the land, and all
of them bring forth eggs* and have but two feet. They have either whole feet
or claws. Geese, Duckes, Swannes, have whole feet to row in the water.

Other Birds for the most part have claws, as Doves, Swallows, Hens,
Sparrowes, etc.

The insect of Fowls, are Waspes, Bees, Hornetts, Gnatts, Flies. These
Creatures are they which live upon the earth: those that live in the water, are
Fishes, or of that kind, as the Seahorse, the Sea-Dog, etc.

Fishes many of them are like to Creatures living on the earth in their parts:
but they have not so much blood: therefore they are colder and moyster.

Fishes are soft, or hard: the soft have scales, or only a skin.

Of the scaly be the Carpe, the Perch. Of the slimie be Eeles.

The harder fishes have plates, as the Crabbe, the Lobster, etc. Or shells, as
Oysters, Mussells, etc.

FJNJS.

