The Blazon of Papists.

Imprinted by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop without
Newgate.

To the Queens most excellent Majesty.
SAcred, and most excellent Majesty: May it please the same, to vouchsafe the
reading of this Pamphelett, being a toye proper to the time, pleasant for your
Highness veiwe, and most profitable to be understood. It is called the Blazon
of Papists: The diversity of whose natures being brought within the method
of Armorie are by an Armorist (your faithful Servant) blazoned accordingly.
For as in that Science the actions, gestures and natures of Beasts, Birds,
and other things, by terms of Art, are lively expressed, so in this Sect of
Papistry, their actions, gestures and natures compared with like terms are in
some most properly blazoned. viz. A Papist Couchant, A Papist passant, A
Papist passant gardant, A Papist Variant, A papist Volant, A papist Seminant, A
papist Saliant, A papist Rampant, and a papist pendant. All which if it might
please your Majesty to read and consider of, your Highness shall find as much
performed in the Total, as has been promised in the Title. Beseeching the
Almighty King of Heaven to bless preserve and keep thee most worthy Queen
on earth.

Your Majesty's most humble Servant and Pursuyuant at Arms, William Seager,
alias Portcullis.

A Poem Aenigmaticall upon the letter P.
THe letter P. is most accursed I trow,
Of all the letters in the Christcros-rowe:
For that it sets (as it plain appears)
The christcros-row together by the ears,
The reason is, this most proud letter, P.
Would be above both, A. B. C. and D.
And would proceed before, E. F. and G.
H. I. K. L. M. N. O. worthy Q.
Seeking the Spoil of R. S. T. and V.
(P). The Pope.

(The Christcros-rowe.) Christendom.

(The letters) particular. Signiories, Estates, and Degrees.

(Q) The Queen. (R) Religion. (S) State. (T) Truth. (V) Your Majesty.

The Blazon.
A Papist Couchant is that kind of man
That humbly bows and bendes at every beck,
He knows his times and therewith closely can
Conserve his credit, and eschew the check,
And by his chouching save both head and neck.
With least suspect and greatest fraud he lives,
For in his heart consent to ill he gives.
A Papist Passant.
A Papist Passant is of other spright,
He is not nice to let his zeal be shown:
For he will keep the Laws and Statutes right,
To make himself true subject to be known.
But such ill seeds proves weeds where they are sown,
They play but with the Feathers of Times wings,
Hoping for chance and therewith change of things.
A Papist Passant Gardant.
The Passant Gardant Papist as I find,
Is he that lurkes with watchful Linxes eyne,
Wary in words, and doubtful in his mind,
Least that his deeds should give forth any sign,
Hating the Church, and Service most divine,
Often changing places like a Runnagate,
He shunnes the Law, and to Communicate.
A Papist Variant.
Party per pale a papist Variant,
Variant in show, and counterchang'de in life,
One while papist, another Protestant,
Taking the strongest part in every strife
I fear such Ambodexters are to rife,
Who for to keep their estimation,
Resemble Apes in imitation.
A Papist Salliant.
A papist Salliant is a public Foe,
A Malecontent, a hoper after harms,
A Libeller, and one where ere he go,
That harkens after vprores and alarmes.
Pressed with the first to salie forth in arms,
To ravish, rob, and rauine fully bent,
Making Religion cloak of his intent.
A Papist Seminant.
Joined with the rest of this pernicious brood,
Are Seminants calde Jesuits of some,
The Devil sowes these tares among the good,
To choke the corn before the harvest come.
This weedy seed does spring from wicked Room,
And scattered here, to spoil and ruinate,
Our common quiet and our happy state.
A Papist Volant.
A papist Volant is that Fugitive,
That flies the Realm (for conscience as they say)
When as in deed it is treason make them strive,
For fear of Law to fly some other way,
Least that their wings be clipped if they should stay,
But honest minds will such ill Birds detest,
That so vnkindelie do defile their nest.
A Papist Rampant,
A Papist Rampant is a furious Beast
That will not let to set upon the Prince
With violent hands, or seeks at the least
With foreign force his Country to convince.
Such Rampants have been rent not yet long since
Whose bloody minds intending bloody floodes.
Were duly drenched in their proper bloodes. D.
A Papist Pendant.
Now to conclude a papist Pendant is,
Such Malefactors as do law offend:
Thinking it conscience for to do amiss,
But Lord vouchsafe their wicked minds to amend
Or send them all unto a speedy end,
For of all others of this Romish race,
A papist pendant has his duest grace.
Summa.
Of Couchant, Passant, and Passant Gardant,
Of Variant, Volant and Seminant,
Of Salyant, Rampant and Pendant,
Now make the account, and Summa forth will fall,
Not one good Subject found among them all.
FINIS.

