FIVE SERMONS PREACHED upon several Occasions. (The Texts whereof are set
down in the next Page.)

By JOHN SELLER.

Aug. de Doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 1. Omnis res quae dando non deficit, dum
habetur, and non datur, non dum habetur.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under St.
Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1636.

The Texts of the several Sermons.
Sermon. I. PSALM. 116.16. O Lord truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant.
Preached before the King at Bagshow, upon Tuesday, September. 15. 1635. Sermon. II.
JOHN, 21.22. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow
thou me. Before the King at Hampton Court, upon Sunday, September. 27. 1635.
Sermon. III. JOHN, 1.16. And Grace for grace. To the Household at White Hall,
November. 29. 1629. IV. ECCLES. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy Youth. V. JOHN, 20.17. Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father.
QVinque has Conciones a Domino Iohanni Sellero habitas, perlegi, nec in iis
quicquam reperio quo minus Cum utilitate publica imprimantur.

SA: BAKER.
Ex aedibus Londin: Martii die ultimo 1636.

PSALM. 116.16. O Lord truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant.


THe fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the end of all things
is this, Fear GOD and keep his Commandments. Nay, the means which happily
joyneth together this beginning and this end, is still the same; Blessed is the
man that always fears. This is the Alpha and Omega, the entrance, the
progress, the close of all true practical Religion: and this happy beginning,
and this happy end is the subject which I shall now commend unto you from the
example of the Prophet in my text, O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy
servant. In the handling of which words, three pious observations there are
which I shall now present unto you. The first is this.

Go^ is our Lord and Master, and we must do him service; O Lord I am thy
servant: an argument wherein I shall not so much need proofs as persuasions.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and whom on earth in comparison of thee? He
that knows there is a God, cannot but acknowledge, the only difficulty is
to win our hearts to proportion our service to his love; Thou art my God and
I will thank thee, thou art my God and I will praise thee. We all know there
was a time, if I may so speak, before all time, a time of Eternity before all
time of succession, when GOD by himself inioyed all fullness of complacencie
in himself. For, as the Sun in the Heavens shines in its full brightness,
though there were no earth to shine upon; so the brightness of Gods glory was
then it its full luster, when Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, as it
is now all things to all, was then all things to it self: Angels and men, and
for their sakes Heaven and earth, when in the powerful and gracious counsel
of his will with a word speaking only, he created: all this was done, not that
thereby he might augment his glory, but communicate it. For, can a man be
profitable unto God; Job, 22.
and yet who is there to whom God has not been profitable? He stands not in
need of our service, but we cannot live without his command. When one man
waits upon another, there is for the most part a mutual dependence on each
other: the servant cannot live without his Master, the Master knows not how to
want his servant. The glory of a King is upheld by the multitude of his people:
for let Subjects withdraw their alleagiance, and we see Princes themselves are
but private men, and therefore we read in the state of Rome, that when the
commons, upon terms of discontent, withdrew themselves from the Nobles, the
Nobles were forced to become petitioners unto the commons, and to remit
somewhat of the rigor of their command, that they might hold them afterward
more constant in their service. But look upon our great Master, the King of
Kings, and we shall find no such depending references: Let all the world
withdraw themselves from him, yet still [Deus solus is Deus sufficiens] God
alone by himself is all sufficient to himself: so that the less necessary
our service is the more necessary is it we should serve, if not for Gods sake,
yet for our own: he can loose nothing by us, but we loose all things in the
loss of him.

And yet strange it is, and wonderful to consider thereby with all
cheerfulness to draw us to his service, how careful he has been of us, who
are yet so little useful unto him. Look upon our Creation, when we first
came into the world, and you shall see, that as God made all other creatures
for men, so man, because for himself, he would make like himself; that as
often as we view our own souls, and see whose image and superscription they
have, this might persuade us to give them up unto God, from whom, and for whose
service they were first received. Look upon our preservation, since we came
into the world, and but that, In Johan Tract. 8.
Quod omni anno fit, assiduitate amittit admirationem, as St. Augustine
complains, the continual enjoying of these great blessings lessens our
admiration; with what joy might we behold the Heavens spread over us like a
curtain, the Sun, the Moon, like two unwearied Giants, always for our sakes
rejoicing to run their course, by virtue of whose several motions and
influence, while the earth remains, Seed-time and harvest, Summer and Winter,
night and day shall not cease, that so the necessitude of the different seasons
of the year may give us contentment in them all. And if all this be yet too
little, look upon his preparation for our safe conduct to another world, and
there behold the word of Life. The sincere milk of the Word for children,
strong meat for men, food co^venient for us all; behold the Sacraments of
life, the signs, the seals, the pledges of the Love of God; behold the Spirit
of life, the power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing our souls, and by an
immortal seed begetting us again unto a lively hope of immortality: surely
then well may the eyes of all men wait upon him, whose eyes run through the
whole earth, nay through the whole heaven too, to show themselves powerful and
gracious unto them that serve him.

And indeed, if we shall consider the several attributes of God how they are
fitted to the several necessities of men, this might be a strong persuasion
also to draw us to his service. For God is a powerful God, and what more
fitting for our weakness? when the Prince of this world, like the strong man,
has by his subtle temptations got footing in our souls, unless CHRIST JESUS,
the Prince of Princes, and Captain of our Salvation, shall make re-entry, and
cast him out again; weak and wretched men that we are, who were able to
deliver us? God is a wise God, and what more fitting for our folly? for [Melius
stulti omnes viverent si servi essent sapientum, August. de Vtil. Credendi.
] Happy were it for all fools, had they but wise Masters. And when we see so
foolish oft-times, are we so ignorant to prefer the Tree of Knowledge before
the Tree of Life; how necessary is it, that we should go unto Gods School,
and there learn, that this is life eternal, the perfection of all knowledge,
to know him to be the only true God, and JESUS CHRIST, whom he has sent.
Lastly, God is a merciful God, and what more fitting for our sin? for every
man we know to be a sinner, every sin a transgression of the Law, every
transgression liable unto a curse, and this curse no less then eternal death:
how necessary is it then that we should seek for a powerful protection in the
service of this Merciful God, that by his assistance we may be able to
contest, not only with flesh and blood, but even with Principalities and
powers, and say with Saint Paul, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect, his elect and faithful servants? It is God that justifies, who is able
to condemn us? Seeing then we are all weak and helpless, and want God as a
powerful protector; we are ignorant and foolish, and want him as a wise
instructor; we are wretched and sinful, and want him as a merciful Savior:
if our duties can not prevail, may even our necessities enforce us, and let
every man say, and say from his heart, O Lord truly I am thy Servant, I am thy
Servant. And thus much for my first observation, I come now unto a second.

2. As God is our Lord and Master, and we must do him service, so this
service must be hearty and sincere: and therefore we see here, to prevent all
suspicion of Hypocrisy, the Psalmist binds himself with a threefold cord.
First we have a profession of his service, O Lord I am thy servant; secondly,
we have a repetition of this profession, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant;
lastly, we have an asseveration affixt unto this repetition, O Lord, truly I am
thy Servant, I am thy Servant: and justly may we be true and sincere in our
service unto him, who in all his promises is so sincere and faithful unto us;
nay therefore, only requires sincerity in our service, that he may more
faithfully reward us. When one man waits upon another, that which breeds
indignation and reluctancie, the wages oftentimes are proportioned, not
according to the worth of the Servant, but the fancy of the Master: and so we
read of JEWS the eleventh of France, View of France page 61.
who neglecting men of better abilities, made his Tailor his Herald, his
Chyrurgion his Chancellor, his Barber his Ambassador; The New-Man, page 48.
and of Pope Paul the fifth, that he would make no learned Cardinals, least by
them his own ignorance might be upbraided, his Auditor, his Treasurer, the
Clarke of the Chamber, these are the unworthy Worthies he made choice of to
fill up his co^sistorie. But when man waits upon God, so diligent is he in
rewarding those who diligently seek him, that as in his Book all our members,
so all the service of our members are recorded; every humble sigh and groan of
the heart, every good word of the mouth, every penitent tear of the eye, every
charitable act of the hand shall be remembered. He is not like most Masters, who
lay the chief burden of the work upon the Servants shoulders, and reap the
main benefit themselves, but where he gives us Talents to labor and increase
withal, he requires again nor Talents nor increase; nay, Quae dat munera
muneratur, Salvian. de Gubernat. Dei. lib. 7.
according to the proportion of the increase, still he increases his rewards.
For so we read, that when he who had received five Talents, had gained five
more, his Lord requires again nor principal nor use, but to him that has
still shall be more given, even use upon use. Thou have been faithful over a
few things, I will make thee Ruler over many: enter into thy Masters joy. Now
who would not gladly with all sincerity serve such a Master, from whom he may
assuredly expect the whole benefit, and a thousand times more tha^ the whole
benefit of his own service? Especially, when as we know that as God has his
different servants, some formal, some real, so he has his different rewards
too; for formals he has his formalities, his realities for reals. See thou
not Ahab (says God) how he humbles himself, humbles himself with a
temporary sorrow, and see we not God how he requires his humility? Ahab is
good for a time, and for a time only God is gracious unto him. Again, See
thou not my Servant Job, that there is none like him upon the earth, a perfect
and upright man? and according to the uprightness of the Servant, see we not
the gracious favor of his Master? As great was his godliness, so his
godliness was great gain, had the Promise of the blessings of this life,
after the patient loss of his goods, receiving them all double, had the
assurance of the Blessings of the life to come: for I know, (says he) that my
Redeemer lives. Now who would not desire a thousand times rather to be a JOB
then an AHAB; and therefore, who would not be careful to serve GOD like Job
with a perfect and an upright heart, without which he knows it is impossible
that he should obtain his desire? And indeed when, in the solemn
Congregation, we read, in the presence both of GOD and man, the several
passages of pure and undefiled Religion contained in this book of Psalms, not
as expressions only of other men's devotions, but as Patterns of our own;
when we read, Lord how do I love thy Law? It is sweeter to me then honey and
the honey comb: Morning, and Evening, and noone-tide do I pray unto thee, and
that instantly: As the eyes of the Servants look upon the hands of their
Masters, so our eyes wait upon thee O Lord; And again in my Text, O Lord,
truly I am thy servant: what soul trembles not to take these Sacred
protestations, without some competencie of true Piety and holiness, least, if
we had no other witness against us, our own heart might too justly give our
tongue the lie? Will you steal, (says the Prophet) commit adultery, and
swear falsely, and then will you come, and stand before me in this house? And
then, even then perhaps, when the Conscience of these, or the like sins shall
cry for vengeance, dare we then say? O Lord, if I have done any such thing, or
if there be any wickedness in my hands, then let mine enemy persecute my life,
and take it. What is this, but solemnly to curse our souls, even then when we
come to bless them. Take heed then unto thy foot, (says Solomon) when thou
go into the House of GOD: for God is holy, and his house is holy, and true
and sincere Holiness becomes his house for ever. If any man shall here
inquire what measure of truth and sincerity we must attain too, before we can
be partakers of so much holiness, as shall present us acceptable unto God,
this is a question wherein we may better give our selves satisfaction by our
piety and prayer, then by our discourse: so great is the variety of several
ages and sexes, of several natures and graces, of several callings and
educations; that it is impossible with such wisdom and caution, to frame
universal rules, but that either on the one side we shall be too indulgent,
or on the other too severe: and therefore all the answer I will give you, shall
be this: When we read in the Gospel, that Many are called, but few are chosen,
many are called to cast out devils, and prophecy in the name of CHRIST, and by
these acts shall confidently challenge acquaintance of him, who for all this
will not vouchsafe to acknowledge them: when we read of the five foolish
Virgins, that they had lamps in their hands, and some oil in their lamps, yet
for want of oil in their vessels too, for want of a full measure of that
holiness, whereof they thought a little quantity would suffice, Heaven gates
are shut against them: When we read in St. PAVL, that a man may be once
enlightened, and yet so seeing he may see, as that he can never truly say
with SIMEON, Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation; a man may taste of the Heavenly
gift, and yet never sit down at the marriage supper of the Lamb: Lastly,
when we read in that great and fearful day, that CHRIST by his
discriminating power, having set the sheep on his right hand, shall set, not
only Wolves and Tigers, but even the Goats also, men of a more civil and
hopeful demeanor at the last; judge you, what manner of men we ought to be in
all holiness of conversation, before we can ever sincerely take up the
protestation of my Text, O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant. And
thus much for the second observation, I come now unto a third.

You have seen; first, that we must serve GOD, secondly, that we must serve
him sincerely; that which now in the last place we are to observe is, that we
must serve him presently, O Lord, truly I am thy servant. It Is not enough to
say, Lord, I have been thy servant: for if any man draw back (says GOD) my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. It Is not enough to say, Lord I will be thy
servant; for who knows what alteration a day may may produce? no, time present
only, this is the sure time: and therefore, Remember now thy Creator, (says
SOLOMON) I will pay my vows now, says DAVID. Exhort one another daily, while
it is called to day, (says St. PAVL) and To day if you will heart his voice,
harden not your hearts. For, if CHRIST our Master be the same to us yesterday,
and to day, and for ever, why should not we his servants be the same, and
reserve all time for him, not to morrow only but to day? For come and let us
reason together; why are we so unwilling to tender our present service unto
God; can we say, What profit is it to serve the Lord? Does JOB fear God for
naught? It was the confession of the Devil, does any man fear God for naught?
surely Godliness (says St. PAVL) it is profitable for all things: and Blessed
is the man (says DAVID) that fears the Lord, thou shall eat the Labor of
thy hands; O well is thee, and happy shall thou be. Can we say, what pleasure
is it to serve the LORD? The best we can read of Sin, is that it has
Pleasures for a season, but the service of God has Pleasures for evermore: a
little Oratorie might soon suffice to declaime upon all the joys of the
World, but the tongue of Men and Angels is not able to set forth the joys of
the Spirit in the service of our GOD: For we rejoice (says St. PETER,) even
with Joy unspeakable. And surely had we the power to recall times past, and
the choice of what days, what hours we would be pleased to live again;
would we desire a reiteration of those earthly, sensual delights, which once
to have enjoyed has been too much? Surely Impiety it self durst not yet be
so impious: no rather, what ever Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the HOLY
GHOST, what ever consolations in CHRIST, comforts of Love, or fellowship of the
SPIRIT, whereof our Conscience to this day has preserved the sweet
remembrance: these are the acts which being most pleasing to our souls, we
would be best pleased to recall. May we then cheerfully go on in the
imbracement of those courses for time present, which were we able to call back
time past, our own consciences bear us witness we would willingly make
choice of.

When the Master of the Vineyard questioned those Laborers he went to hire,
Why stand you all the day idle? it was some excuse to make answer, because no
man has hired us: But if we shall suffer our Souls justly to be charged with
the same question, are we able so much as to pretend the same reply? Let us
Look upon our indentures, that solemn stipulation, when in the waters of
regeneration we were first consecrated unto GOD, what promises, what vows have
been made in our behalf: or if we dare plead the invalidity of such acts, as
have been performed for us in our nonage, then let us look, since we came to
have the knowledge both of good and evil, to have the discretion to order our
own ways, upon the word of God, and the Spirit of God; and if these earnests
will convince us, that again and again we have been hired; what answer can
we make, if still we shall deserve to be questioned, why stand you idle?
Surely, always those sins are must punishable, which are most inexcusable.
For, what if God let some men stand idle, and call them not till the last
hour? What is this to us, who have been called at the first? True indeed it
is, that GOD has his own liberty, and calls men at what hour he please; but
it is true withal, that at what hour soever he calls us we must come. And if
in things secular we strive all who shall be first called, to riches, to
honor, to the several contentments of the world; shall we be so basely
humble, as not to care, though we come last to be partakers of the Heavenly
calling, to be called to the Saints? Especially, when as we know that God in
the secret council of his will, as he has his set times how long he will
call, so he has his times also when upon the stopping of our ears he calls
back his calls. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, had thou known, at the least in this
thy day, the things that belong unto thy Peace: but now they are hidden from
thine eyes: Thou had once Grace offered, when to the comfort of thy Soul
thou might have said. O LORD, I am thy Servant, but now no longer will he
be thy Master: This happy opportunity shall never be recalled; For the days
come, when thine Enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and lay thee even with
the dust. And why? because thou knew not the time of thy visitation. The
neglect of that happy day wherein they were visited with Mercy, puts them
off unto the terrible day of the Lord, to the visitation of his Justice. Now
because among many of those ways of God, which are unsearchable, this is one,
to observe how patient he is with some men, giving them day after day, even to
the last hour, and yet how quick he is with others, come, come presently,
and give an account of thy Stewardship; a thousand times blessed is that Soul,
which every day is prepared for this great day of account.

So then to draw all to a conclusion. We read in the Revelation of four
Angels let loose, Chap. 9.
and no sooner let loose, but presently prepared, for an hour, and a day, and
a month, and a year, to sley the third part of men. May we then learn
diligence from our enemies, and let not them be more careful to destroy our
Souls, then our selves to preserve them, but may we all be prepared, at a
year, at a month, at a day, at an hour to say, and do as we say, O Lord
truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant. Amen.


JOHN, 21.22. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee,
Follow thou me.


THese Words contain a sharp answer of our SAVIOR to an indiscreet, and
unseasonable question of St. PETER.

In the handling whereof this order I shall observe. First, I will endeavor to
clear the difficulty of my Text, and show you what is the meaning of our
Saviors answer, If I will that he tarry till I come; and secondly, I will
commend unto you such observations as may prove useful to our selves. To begin
then with the first, If I will that he tarry till I come.

In the Exposition of which conditional speech of CHRIST, I find great variety
among Interpreters. Some will admit of no positive meaning of the words, but
think they were spoken only to put off the inquisitivenesse of PETER, If I
will that he tarry till I come, or as we use to say; If I will that he tarry
till doomesday, what is that to thee? not that he intended that JOHN should
tarry till he come, but to show that whether he tarryed or not tarried, that
was nothing to PETER. But this exposition, if we mark it, will neither well
agree with the phrase of the speech, nor the wisdom of the Speaker. And
therefore others there are who do conceive, that whereas St. PETER was to dye
of a violent death, and follow his Master to the Cross, it might be the
meaning of our Savior to express, that no such violence should be offered
unto St. JOHN, he should dye of a fair death; fairly and quietly be buried,
and so tarry, and rest in his grave till CHRIST'S coming unto Judgment. This
is an Exposition, I confess commended by learned Interpreters on all sides yet
such as I cannot be persuaded to approve; First, because it seems to strain
the phrase of the Text to an unusual sense, If I will that he tarry, that is,
tarry in his grave. Secondly, because thousands there are who may thus be said
to tarry till CHRIST comes, when as the speech of our Savior seems plainly
to intimate somewhat more peculiar unto JOHN. Thirdly, because the ground of
the Exposition is very questionable. For howsoever certain it be that PETER
dyed a violent death, yet whether JOHN dyed of a natural death or no, it may
be doubted. Sure I am, that Polycrates in Eusebius says, Lib. 5. cap 23.
that he dyed a Martyr; and Theophylact confirms his saying from the words
of CHRIST himself; In Mat. 20 23.
who speaking of JAMES and JOHN, says expressly, that they shall drink of his
Cup, and be Baptized with his baptism. Now James we know drank so deeply of
this Cup, that HEROD stretched forth his hand and killed him with the Sword:
And, as the words of our SAVIOR do imply, JOHN must pledge him so deeply in
the same Cup, either as a Martyr, or at least (as all agree) as a Confessor,
that in this respect the words in my Text cannot seem to conteyne any special
privilege of JOHN above PETER, when it is said; If I will that he tarry till
I come.

And therefore a third exposition there is, which though it be refused by
almost every Commentator; yet I shall now endeavor to assert it. For I find by
often experience that it is with weighing of opinions, as with weighing of
gold; that which in one pair of scales is thought too light, in another will
hold weight. The exposition is this; that however as our Savior had foretold,
PETER should more speedily follow him, follow him to the Cross and to the
grave, he should make no long tarrying here on earth, but go hence and be no
more seen; yet it was his will that JOHN should be longer lived, live and
tarry till he came, till he came to execute exemplary judgment on the
unbeleeving Jew, in the destruction of their nation, their City, and their
Temple, till the same judgments in fearful manner should attend the sins of
the Gentiles too, till as the Prophet Joel had foretold, having first come with
a gracious and plentiful offer of his Spirit to be powered upon all flesh, upon
the resistance of this Spirit, he should come again with wonders in the
Heaven, and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. For the
confirmation of which exposition, three things I shall observe unto you.

First, that it is usual in holy Scripture, to imply positive truths in
conditional terms; and it is the safest way in expounding of hard texts,
obscura de manifest is, to demonstrate things obscure, from the evidence of
things manifest. Now then manifest it is in the sixth of St. John, Verse 12.
when our Savior says to his Disciples [ Does this offend you, what and if
you should see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?] that his
meaning is, The time shall come, when, to remove this offense, you shall see
the Son of man ascend. Manifest again in the 9. to the Romans. Verse 22.
when St. Paul says, [What if God willing to show his wrath?] that his meaning
is. It is the will of God, that he may show his wrath, to endure with long
suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. Manifest again, in the
12. Verse 49.
of St. Luke, when our Savior says, [ I am come to send fire on earth, and
what will I, if it be already kindled?] that his meaning is. It is my will,
that it shall be kindled already. And so that when he says here, If I will
that he tarry till I come, we may fairly expound this speech with
correspondence to those others: It is my will and pleasure that he shall tarry
til I come.

Secondly, we find mention in holy Scripture, of a special coming of CHRIST,
whereto these words in my Text may seem to have special reference. For we
know that CHRIST is said to come two ways, either in person, or in power; in
person he has come once already in the flesh, and at the last day will come
again in glory. 1. His coming in power, is either in the power of his grace,
for Behold, says he, I stand at the door and knock, and if any man hear my
voice and open the door, I will come in, and sup with him, and he with me; or
in the power of his Justice: and so St. JOHN threatens the Church of Ephesus.
Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, or I will come against thee
shortly, and remove the Candlestick out of his place; but more remarkably have
we described unto us the like manner of his coming in the 24. of St. Matthew;
particularly intimated in these words of my Text. For when the Disciples asked
our Savior, what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the
world? To that which they propose, in sensu conjuncto, in an united sense, as
being falsely persuaded, that when ever he should come to destroy the Temple,
then presently would follow the end of the world too; he makes answer, in
sensu diviso, in a divided sense; tells them that for the day and hour of his
coming in the end of the world, no man should know that: this was a secret
hidden even from the Angels in Heaven. But as for the day and hour of his
coming in severe and exemplary manner to visit the sins of the Jews, and
Gentiles also, for not believing in his name, hereof he gives them a certain
and particular relation: Nation shall shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom, there shall be Famines, and Pestilences, and Earthquakes in
diverse places, the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her
light, and such and so great should be their tribulation in those days, as was
not from the beginning of the world: and that they might not securely put these
evil days far off, and say, The Lord will delay his coming; he tells them
that within one Age, all these things should happen: for verily I say unto you,
This generation shall not pass, that is, the men of this generation now alive
shall not all dye, and pass away, till all these things be fulfilled; till
they shall see the sign of the Son of man coming with great power and
glory. For so we find, that St. JOHN a man of that Generation, did live and
tarry till CHRIST thus came to judge the world; lived to see the reign of 13.
Emperors of Rome, from Augustus unto Trajane, during which time, all those
judgments denounced by St. Matthew, as the signs and effects of CHRIST'S thus
coming in power were accomplished.

Lastly, we may take notice of the singular providence of CHRIST, who intending
thus shortly to come to judge the world, was yet for the good of his Church,
graciously pleased that St. JOHN should tarry till he came, and that for these
three reasons.

First that whereas false Teachers were from the beginning crept into the
Church, and afterward Nicolaitans, Cerinthians, Menandrians, Ebionits, and
Gnostics, had corrupted the doctrine thereof, mingling with Christianity the
rites of the Gentiles, and the ceremonies of the Jews, some denying the truth
of CHRIST'S humanity, others affirming that he was but a mere man; it pleased
God that after the departure of all the Apostles, St. JOHN should tarry and
continue, to stand as a Pillar to uphold the truth, as an Oracle to be
consulted in all difficulties: and for this cause, his Gospel was last
written, that in such points wherein the former Evangelists had not given so
full satisfaction to the Church, his Writings might more perfectly resolve
them. Secondly, that he might help strengthen the weak faith of the Brethren,
amidst those wars and rumors of wars, amidst those fears and terrors,
which CHRIST was now coming to bring upon the world, and whereof it was his
pleasure, that his own chosen, for the trial of their faith, should bear a
part; that when they should see, as St. JOHN reports of himself, that He also
was their brother and companion in the Kingdom and patience of CHRIST JESUS,
that He was cast into banishment for for the word and Testimony of God, this
might be a strong motive unto the^, constantly to possess their souls with
patience. For if the beloved Disciple, he that lay in the bosom of his
Master, if he have suffered adversity, why should any man complain? Thirdly,
whereas (as St. PAVL informs us) there were even in his days, divisions and
separations, one of Cephas, and another of Apollo's, with Hymns by themselves,
and Doctrines by themselves; which divisions afterward we find by the increase
of Heretics, daily to increase (for commonly as men side in opinion, they
will side also in affection,) hence was it that St. JOHN tarryed so long,
tarried if it were possible to compose all differences, and persuade the
faithful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And therefore
it is reported of him, even in his decrepite age, his speech and strength
almost quite spent, that when in one word he would epitomize what ever formerly
he had more largely preached unto them, it was his daily exhortation to his
auditors, Filioli diligite alterutrum, My little Children love one another:
Hieron. in cap 6. ad Galat.
and again, My little Children love one another: that if in so great
distraction of opinions, it was rather to be wished then hoped for, that they
should be all of one mind; yet at least that excellent gift of charity,
which believes all things, hopes all things, indures all things, might hold
them in one accord. And surely it is worth the observation, that the same
Disciple whom CHRIST loved best, is most frequent and earnest in his
exhortations unto love, to let us understand, that one principal effect of
Gods love to us, is that we should love one another? And thus much for the
exposition of my Text: I come now in the second place, to commend some
observations to our selves.

Where first may it please you to observe, that of all the Apostles, as we
find none more commended, so none more reproved then St. Peter. And the reason
is, because Peter was a man of a quick, active, and zealous spirit, so
forward, upon all occasions, to be doing, that many times, through the
exuberancy of his zeal, he does that which is amiss. For it is a true rule
of the Author De Vocatione Gentium, Lib. 1. c. 2.
Voluntas mutabilis, quae non ab incommutabili voluntate regitur, tanto citius
propinquat iniquitati, quanto acrius intenditur actioni, the more earnestly the
mutable will of man, not guided by the incommutable will of God, is intent upon
action, the more prone it is to act amiss. To teach us, that the more zealous
and active we are, the more careful we ought to be in the moderation of our
actions, lest partaking of St. Peter's forwardness, we partake of his sin
too: (though truly) happier is that man who being zealous to do well, shall
sometime do amiss, then he who for fear of doing ill, will do nothing at
all. Now if we look into the particulars of PETER'S sins, we shall find one
great fault he had, te be given to question and control, when it better
behooved him to answer and obey. When our SAVIOVR in the 16. of St. Matthew,
had declared himself that he must go up to Jerusalem, that he must suffer
many things of the Scribes and Elders, that he must be killed and rise again
the third day, and it had befitted St. PETER'S piety to make answer with the
like prayer which afterward his Master used: O that this Cup might pass from
thee, yet not my will, but thy will be done: you see how imperiously he takes
upon him to rebuke and to control: Far be it from thee, this shall not be
unto thee. When our SAVIOVR had now guirt himself, and told PETER, that he
must wash his feet, and it had befitted him in wisdom, though be knew not
yet the reason of this Ceremony, to make answer, Be it unto me as thou will; you see how in a show of humility, he shows indeed some pride and
disobedience, Thou shall never wash my feet. And here, in this story, when our
Savior says unto him, Follow thou me, and it had befitted his devotion, upon
the remembrance how lately he had played the runaway, to make answer, Lord I
will follow thee wheresoever thou go: you see how presently he forgets
himself, and begins to question after John, Lord what shall this man do? Now
because we know Peter's infirmities were not his alone, and though we have
warning from him, yet daily we are prone to commit the like errors again; Let
me commend unto you that sober exhortation of St. James, Fratres mei ne sitis
multi magistri. My brethren be not many masters. Be not too forward to question
and control, what shall this man, and this thing do? and this and this be
far from us, it shall not be so. For however the great Masters, in Church and
Commonwealth, over our souls and bodies, be not like Peter's Master, have not
an infallibility in all the directions they propose; yet because such as they
are, we are commanded to obey them, and it behooves our Christian modesty to
be persuaded, that they know better how to command us, then we to advise them.
Let us be very wary upon what terms we contradict or disobey; Lest God in
defense of those higher powers, with whom we are but too prone to contest, may
give us the like check, which once he gave unto his people Israel; They have
not rejected you, but they have rejected me. Or if there may be some things
whereof the wisdoms of some men cannot be so well persuaded, (as indeed
while men are men, it is not to be expected in all things that great men
should be Gods) let us not foolishly heap the coals of other men's fires upon
our own heads, and with too much hear and violence make the sin of our
complaining, greater than the matter whereof we do complain. No, rather when
we know, that there is no evil in the City, which the Lord has not done, in
all the evils which either we feel or fear, let us lift up our eyes unto the
Lord for a redress: for certainly with him our humble prayer is able to
prevail more, then ten thousand stomackfull complaints. And thus much for my
first observation, I come now unto a second.

Where in the second place we may observe, that however when we read the bare
question of St. Peter, our charity might easily be satisfied, as some of the
ancient have conceived, that St. JOHN having heretofore asked at the request of
St. PETER, to put the rest of the Disciples out of fear, Lord who is it that
shall betray thee? So Peter now by way of friendly requital, that John also
might know his end, and by what death he was to glorify God, makes the like
request for him; Master what shall this man do? a request wherein admitting,
of this fair paraphrase, we may find matter rather to commend then censure
him. Yet when we read the answer of our Savior, that we may know he sees not
as man sees, he judges not as man judges: whereas our ignorance would have
said, We find no fault in this man, no sin in this question: his knowledge
finds as many sins as words. But four words did Peter utter, Domine hic
autem quid? which we more largely translate, Lord what shall this man do? and
yet in these four words there are four sins. First, a sin of presumption,
Lord what shall this man do? as if CHRIST would have forgotten St. John,
unless Peter had remembered him. Secondly, a sin of curiosity, Lord, what
shall this man do? as if because John knew what should become of Peter, Peter
must needs know what should become of John. Thirdly, a sin of repining, Lord,
what shall this man do? as if Peter had no mind to follow Christ, unles John,
who had always heretofore been his companion, might go along with him; and
lastly, a sin of negligence, Lord, what shall this man do? as if it were
fitting for him now to inquire after others, when as the strictness of his
Masters charge might have put him in mind rather to look to himself. All
which sins seem to be expressed or intimated in the answer of our SAVIOVR. If
I will, or it is my will that he shall tarry till I come: a check for his
Presumption: He shall tarry, and you shall follow me; a check for his
repining? Whether he tarry or tarry not, what is that to thee? A check for his
curiosity; and lastly, Follow thou me; which being a repetition of the same
charge immediately given him before, implies a check for his negligence. So
that when we see in this case of PETER here, and every day in our own
questions, our own answers, our own actions, the case may be the same; how
many Sins the knowledge of GOD takes notice of, which otherwise our ignorance
would never have observed. He searches the heart and reins, and weighs each
word we speak; how ought this to persuade us carefully to take heed unto our
ways, to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, and in such things
wherein we think we have done well, ever to be jealous lest we have done
somewhat amiss.

When we read the several Apologies of the Church of Rome, except only for
the foul Sin of his Denial, for all other infirmities of Peter; Charge him
with his imperious controlling of his Master, opposing his own nay unto CHRIST'S
yea; This shall not be unto thee, so that our Savior with indignation gives
him this sharp answer, Get thee behind me Satan; yet Bellarmine will excuse
him with an error in sensu non affectu, though he might err in his
understanding, not apprehending the just reasons of CHRIST'S going to Suffer at
Jerusalem, yet there was no error, (says he) in the sincerity of his
affection; though in truth great was the error of his affection, so to desire
to show his love to CHRIST, as thereby to take a course to bereave himself of
the benefit of CHRIST'S love to him. Charge him with his indiscreet Petition,
wherein the Text expresses, that he knew not what he said, when he said;
Lord, let us here make three Tabernacles: hoping, as St. Chrysostom
conceives, Homil. 57 in Mat.
that if he could have persuaded his Master to dwell there, he would never
have removed to go and suffer at Jerusalem; yet Bellarmine will excuse him
with a Potuit errare, non potuit peccare. Perhaps he might err, (says he)
but surely he could not Sin; for he knew not what he said: as if it were no
sin for a man, to say, he knows not what Charge him with his overconfident
Protestation, as we see afterward by the cowardly event, Though I should dye
with thee, yet will I not deny thee; and yet not long after denies him again
and again, and that before he was in any danger of death; yet Bellarmine will
excuse him with an aut nullus hic lapsus, aut amoris excessus, either he was
not to blame at all, or gently to be blamed only for an excessive expression
of his love: though we may easily conjecture at the greatness of his sin, by
the greatness of his punishment, for if PETER had not so boldly offered to dye
with CHRIST, CHRIST would never have suffered that he should so shamefully deny
him. Lastly, charge him with this Presumptuous, querulous, curious question in
the Text; Lord, what shall this man do? yet Bellarmine will excuse him, and of
all the Sins before mentioned, find him guilty only of a little Curiosity,
and that with an If too, Si curiositas dicenda venia dignissima, If you will
needs find him guilty of a little sin of curiosity, surely it was but a
venial sin. So zealous in all things are they in the defense of St. PETER,
as if his credit were their own. Now when we read, and hear these things,
and wonder at their boldness in making such strong Apologies in his behalf, as
if indeed Peter had not been so much to blame for any desert of his to be
reproved, as his Master for reproving him; let us beware lest in the like kind
making the like weak excuses for our selves, we make their Sins our own. Let
us beware that we be not too forward to censure and control, to intermeddle
with things in Church or State, which are too high for us, to speak evil of
that we do not understand, and then think to excuse all with an error in sensu
non affectu; if our judgments may be mistaken, yet our affections are well
devoted. For it is a great error in men's affections to be strong in the
prosecution of such things wherein their judgments are but weak. Let not the
commonness of many sins cause us to give indulgence to our selves in the
committing thereof, because they are so common, and then excuse all with a
potui errare, non peccare, It was my error, and in many things we offend all,
but it was not so great a sin. For surely, there is no readier way to make
sins great, then thus to lessen them. And indeed, strange it is to consider,
how just and strickt we are in point of Doctrine, and will acknowledge no
sin to be venial; and yet how unjust and licentious we are in point of
Practice, as if we thought few sins to be mortal. Lastly, when by the
faithful dispencers of GODS word, we shall often hear our Sins anatomized,
and multiplied to more particulars, then we can suddenly discover, while we
look upon them only in the gross. Let us not break out into terms of
indignation, and say, We hate these men, because they aggravate our sins,
and Prophecy unto us evil and not good: No, rather let us hate those Sins;
for which we deserve these evils. And when we know, that the heart of man is
deceitful above all things, and a hard matter it is for any man to know the
worst of himself, if we shall sometime hear more then our self-indulgence
will easily believe, let us yet be persuaded that we deserve more then we
have heard of, and humbly take up the Meditation and Prayer of the Psalmist;
Who knows how often he offends, O cleanse thou me from my secret faults. And
thus much for a Second observation. I come now unto a third, and I have done.

And my last Observation, omitting many others, shall be this; That the great
Mercies of GOD are commonly attended with great Judgments: For therefore, does
our SAVIOR here mention his coming in my Text; because having come once
already to offer great Mercy to the Jews, such as had never been offered
before, to offer himself to as many as would believe in him that they might
not perish but have everlasting life; he intended to come shortly again to
show great judgments, such as he had never showed before, judgments so much
the more severely to be executed, by how much they had been the more
regardlesse of his Mercies. Thus if you look back on the first judgments on
the Angels. Saint AUGUSTINE will tell you, In Johan. Tract. 100
tanto execrabilius beneficii, Dei ingrati, quanto beneficentius sunt creati,
That the more excellent was the perfection of their Creation, the more
execrable was their Sin, the more severe, and exemplary was their punishment,
or if ye look on the first judgment upon man, the same Augustine will tell
you, Hoc tam leve praeceptum ad observandum tanto majori injustitia violatum,
Civit. Dei lib. 14. cap 12.
quanto facileori observantia poterat custodiri: That Gods first command was
with so much the greater injustice violated, with so much the greater justice
punished, by how much with the greater facility, and the promise of the greater
Happiness, it might have been observed. Thus if we look upon the Seven
Churches in St. JOHN, as we read a declaration of great Mercy, the Tabernacle
of GOD came down among Men, with Stars and golden Candlestickes: So we
hear a denunciation of great Judgments too; Repent, or I will come and remove
the Candlestick, to the Church of Ephesus: Repent, or I will come and fight
against thee, to the Church of Pergamos; Repent, or I will kill thy Children
with death, to the Church of Thyatira. Now when we seriously consider what our
SAVIOR says, He that reads these things let him understand, and what St.
JOHN has added, He that has ears to hear, let him hear what the Spirit
says to the seven Churches, (for the case of these Churches is a leading case
for all the Churches of the World;) Let us remember that all these things have
been said and done to serve as ensamples unto us. That since the reformation of
our Church, great have been the manifestations of Gods mercy, great peace,
great plenty, and that which is greater then all this, great salvation in the
free and sincere dispensation of the great mysteries of Godliness, we cannot
but all thankfully acknowledge. And if my observation (as certain it is) be
true, that great judgments attend great mercies, upon the neglect of so great
Salvation, that great Visitations will ensue we cannot but be afraid. But yet
it is not for me to tell you the times and seasons of those judgments, which
God has reserved in his own power. For as the exhalations arising from the
Earth and Seas, we all know to be the cause of those clouds which produce
rain and storms, yet no man dares take upon him to assure, That this day, or
this hour it will rain, or this month, this year will be a great flood: So
though we know the exhalations of our sins raise clouds of separation
between GOD and us, yet how long these clouds will be gathering together
before they produce a general storm, it exceeds the apprehension of man to be
able to determine. And indeed hitherto, whether in the course of our Religion
in this last Age, there have been ebbes or flows, whether we have increast or
diminisht the talents God has given us, though many men rashly take upon them
to give judgment, yet I think it is not so easy a matter to decide. And
because in this argument every man almost presumes to spend his conjecture, I
hope the commonnesse of the Presumption will excuse me, if I shall discover
mine. And for my part I am persuaded, that there is no such iniquity in Jacob,
no such transgression in our Israel, no such transgression exceeding the
transgressions of our Fathers, even in the best times that can be named, that
for this reason we should have any more cause then they to fear, that God who
has hitherto come graciously to us with his Love, should now shortly bend his
bow and whet his Sword, and come upon us with the Rod. Necessary I confess it
is, that with the declaring of GODS just judgments unto sinners, we should
often threaten and humble the Souls of men; but yet so far to dishearten the
Lords people with the fear of general imminent visitations, as to bring them
into dislike of the Church and State wherein they live, to occasion them to
remove by hundreds and thousands into remote and desolate parts of the world,
as if they could any where be more safe then where they are; surely this is a
point of zeal strained so far beyond discretion, that I am persuaded GOD
himself does not approve it. It Is possible I confess on the one side to daube
with untempered mortar, and say; Peace, peace, when there is no peace; but on
the other side let me tell you, It Is not impossible for men to make ZEDECHIAS
horns, and say; Thus, and thus shall the Lord push, when the Lord has not
sent them, and thereby as the Prophet complains, make the heart of the
righteous sad, Ezech. 13.22.
whom the LORD has not made sad. For mine own part, as long as we are not
able (and blessed be GOD that we are not able) to demonstrate the like sins
of Idolatry, cruelty, injustice, and oppression, wherewith God by all the
Prophets charge his people Israel, before ever he threatens to come and
visit them; I cannot be persuaded, that any man has just warrant to denounce
the like judgments against us. And thus far have I declared my self, not
that I would flatter the Times, or footh men up in their transgressions; for
we know, that every day God for single sinners has single visitations, though
the great and terrible day of his Wrath be never so far off. What? because
we fear not any judgment on the whole Land, shall any Sinner therefore not
be afraid of judgment on himself? This is, as if a Soldier in the wars,
thinking himself safe from the Cannon, should therefore desperately run upon
a volly of small shot, when as we know a little Pistol will kill a man, as
well as a great Ordnance. But thus much have I spoken for three causes. First,
that I might advise men to be more wary in their comparative invectives
against Sin. For cry aloud and spare not, tell Judah of his sins, and
Israel of his transgressions: but shall we therefore, to the heavy prejudice
of the government of the State, and if the imputation were true, to the
inexcusable dishonor of our owe profession, to whose charge the Souls of men
are committed, if we that are appointed to build up shall suffer them to fall
down; shall we therefore say, never more sin, never more transgression,
never more fear of CHRIST'S coming unto Judgment? For who has kept a book
of remembrance? who knows how often we have offended? or who knows how often out
Fathers have offended? Nay, who knows but that GOD may be offended for want
of our thankfulness for the increase of his grace and favor toward us, which
we will not be persuaded to acknowledge? Secondly, that I might a little
moderate the zeal and passions of men: For as we are equally beholding to the
motion and influence of the Moon, if that be the second cause, sometime for
withdrawing the waters to an ebb, as well as sometime for raising them up unto
a flood: so surely it is as commendable an act, though not so popular, sometime
to allay the affections of men, when they begin to overflow, as well as
sometime to raise and stir them up, when they are at a low ebb. And indeed,
if the minds of men be once strongly persuaded, that daily the World grows
worse and worse, every man will take upon him to find out the cause, and
commendable it were, would they only conceive in general, that the
Imaginations of the heart of Man were continually proner and proner unto evil,
but when they presume to go on unto particulars, and one points at the
Doctrine, another at the discipline of the Church, one at the government,
another at the Governors both in Church and Commonwealth; this is that, which
in time may bring all unto confusion, and with their own hands help, to pluck
down those Judgments, which they pretend to be most careful to keep off:
when as if the minds of men were persuaded better things, and such as accompany
salvation, would they believe that it is with our Religion as with our wealth,
though many men be miserable, and poor, and naked, yet for the most part there
is more gold, more silver, more precious stones, more knowledge, more piety,
more men that have given up their names to CHRIST; this might be a strong
motive to retain them in a good opinion of the Church and state wherein they
live, and to cause them to confess with JACOB, Surely the Lord was in this
place, and we were not aware of it. Lastly, that this may serve as a spur to
our Piety and devotion, and cause us thus to dispute and argue with our selves,
Does Religion daily grow up from strength to strength, and shall I stand only
at a stay? Is there every where more understanding, more plentiful means of
Salvation in the free and sincere dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, and
shall I be a stranger in Israel, and know little or nothing of these things?
Have the hired Servants in my Fathers house now bread enough and shall I perish
for hunger? And indeed, what stronger argument to persuade us to be proficients
in Christ's School, then to see and acknowledge the towardlines of our fellow
scholars.

So then to draw all to a conclusion, We read in the book of Numbers, when
BALAK requested BALAAM, Come curse me JACOB, and come and defy Israel, that
BALAAM returns him answer from the mouth of GOD, How shall I curse, whom GOD
has not cursed, or how shall I defy, whom the Lord has not defied? Thus in
the handling of this common place of CHRIST'S coming unto Judgment, if the
heat of some men's zeal shall call upon me to curse JACOB, and defy Israel,
and in the voice of thunder threaten the sudden executions of Gods wrath, my
fair answer is, How can I curse whom, from my heart I am persuaded, God has
not cursed, or how can I defy, whom the Lord has not defied? All that I will
say is this, that as the general goodness and religion of this Land may cause
us, according to the wonted mercies of Almighty God, to conceive a fair hope,
that there are no general visitations near at hand, so I beseech you, the
better to vindicate the not unquestionable truth of so good a Paradox, let me
crave the aid of your Piety, to make a strong party against any man that shall
oppose us, and let each single man in singleness of heart, be so careful of
his own particular, that we may all daily present our selves as a living
Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, that we may come behind our Fathers
in no gift, that we may be confirmed unto the end, and found blameless at
the coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Amen.


JOHN, 1.16. And Grace for grace.


WHen the fullness of time was come, so God loved the World, that he sent
forth his own Son; and (that which sets forth the rareness of this Love) in
this fullness of time, when the fullness of Sin did now cry for the full
vyals of GODS wrath, behold! where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound;
Verse. 14.
GOD sent forth his Son, full of Grace and Truth. And that this fullness of
his might not serve to upbraid the empty world, and to condemn it, but that
the world thereby might be saved; it was not only Plenitudo abundantiae, a
filling fullness; but plenitudo redundantia, a flowing fullness: For, of his
fullness have we all received, and Grace for grace.

In which words, two Parts in the general may be observed: First, the
Fountain of bliss, from whence all Happiness is derived to us, Of his
fullness have we all received: and secondly, in my Text, the streams which
flow from this Fountain, commended to us by way of excellency in the emphasis
of this little particle And, Of his fullness have we all received: And that of
no ordinary common fullness, nay not only, Truth for truth, a great happiness
to know our Masters will; but that then which the goodness of the Father has
vouchsafed here no greater blessing to his own Son, Grace for grace; that by
the fullness of Truth, knowing the will of our heavenly Father, by the fullness
of Grace, we may be so happy to fulfill it.

Now because the words of my Text will hardly be divided, for they are
coincident, Grace and grace; it shall suffice me to make a division of the
sense thereof; and three expositions there are, all concurring to make one
complete Commentary, which shall serve me in stead of so many Parts; in the
handling whereof, I hope I shall not need to crave your attention; surely, the
very name of Grace, the most acceptable blessing, which, next unto his Son;
GOD ever gave unto his Saints, will challenge it; and upon the delivery of so
happy an Embassage from Heaven solicit your thoughts with the like
meditation, which old ELI put into the month of SAMUEL, Speak LORD, for thy
servant hears.

Now then three Expositions there are, and the first is this: Of his fullness
have we all received, and Grace for grace; that is, variety of Graces, some
one grace some another: For, as no man has received the fullness of CHRIST,
but of his fullness only, so of his fullness every man receives not grace
alike, but Grace for grace. Though the Spirit be the same, and the same Lord,
(says St. PAVL,) yet there are diversities of gifts, and difference of
administrations, and GOD has set in his Church some Prophets, some Apostles,
some Teachers, some Interpreters. For the Church of CHRIST is a mystical body;
and a Body (says he) is not one member but many. And as in the Natural body
all motion, the Physician will tell you, comes from the Head, and yet every
member has a different motion by it self; So in our Spiritual head CHRIST
JESUS we all live and move, and have our being, and yet diverse are the motions
of the different members of this body. Minut. Faelix.
Simil^ universi videmur, and tamen dissimiles inter se universi invenimur. As
in the Bodies, so in the Souls of men also, there is a kind of unlike
likeness; and not only in the graces of illumination, but of Sanctification
too, every man almost has a different manifestation of one and the same
Spirit. In my Fathers house (says CHRIST) there are many mansions, as in his
upper House of glory many mansions, so in his lower house of Grace also many
mansions: Some, we see, more humble, others more temperate, some more devout,
others more charitable, some more merciful, others more just. In ABRAHAM we
read the singular commendations of Faith; in JOB, of Patience; in MOSES, of
Meekness; in PHINEES, of Zeal; not that those graces are infused alone, but
oft-times eminent alone. For as a candle, which enlightens the whole room
within, shines only through the window to those which are without; so in
diverse men there are different kinds of claristories, whereby the graces of GOD
which inlighten the whole Soul within, do yet but in part shine forth to
others. Et qui non habet omnia, Hieron. Dialog. advers. Paelageum.
non condemnatur ex eo quod non habet, sed justificatur ex eo quod possidet.
And he that wants the eminency in himself of many a commendable virtue in
another man, shall not be condemned for what he has not, but justified
rather for what he has. Vnum iter, Hieron. Epist. 11. ad Ageruchiam.
at perveniendi quo cupias multa compendia. For though there be but one
highway to Heaven, yet there are many paths therein. JOHN BAPTIST came
neither eating nor drinking, the Son of man came eating and drinking: and yet
both came the right way. Surely then the way to Heaven is not so narrow, but
that in respect of the different expressions of one and the same Grace, we may
walk thither as well hand in hand, as step after step. To give you a quick
instance in the present affection of many virtuous and good men. For as no man
is so far to sequester himself from the public affairs of Church and
Commonwealth, but even in the most private condition is to labor and pray that
we may all lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty, to
joy or grieve, according as the happy or unhappie success of things shall
minister just cause; So I persuade my self many thousands there are of piously
devoted men, some who mourn to behold the streams of ungodliness
overflowing the Souls of a world of men, and how far the best come short of
the perfection of that Holiness, whereto the sincerity of that Truth which
we profess directs us: and yet some again who do rejoice, to see, amidst a
crooked and froward generation, how many names there are yet every where given
up unto GODS service, to see the free and sincere acknowledgement of that
Sacred truth, the zealous and painful dispensation whereof daily produces
happy effects of righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, more
perhaps then in five times so great a circuit in any part of the whole
Christian world. And surely what ever, for what causes soever, may be our own
apprehension of our own condition, when time shall have buried all these small
occasions in forgetfulness, Posterity will live to make an honorable
remembrance even of these days of ours, which our ingratitude can now hardly
mention but with spleen. Now then, shall he that mournes say, Woe be to you
that rejoice? Or shall he that rejoices, despise the sorrow of the mourner?
No surely, are they not both Brethren, why then should they strive? Godly joy
and godly sorrow, they are but Grace for grace, both different effects of one
and the same Spirit. As then upon the view of the second Temple the Story tells
us many wept with a loud voice, and many showted aloud for Joy, all equally
affected to the good and welfare of that State; so now whether we mourn for
the happiness we want, or joy in the present happiness we do enjoy, let us
give each to other the right hand of fellowship; and in our daily Prayers
salute both Church and State in the language of my Text, and say Grace, grace
unto them.

Again, as in diverse men there are different kinds of Grace, so different
degrees too; there are Babes, and there are men in CHRIST, and there is milk
for babes, and strong meat for men. For the Church of GOD (says St. PAVL) is
like to a great house, and in a great house there are not only vessels of gold
and silver, but vessels of wood and earth.

Now as in zeal we are all to endeavor to be made of the best mettle, so in
charity we are to hope well of the worst too, lest the vessel of silver,
while it smites against the vessel of clay, striving to break that, may
bruise it self. Spiritus Dei super aquas ferebatur, Hieron. Ocean. cap 3.
and nascentem mundum partunebat, The Spirit of God moved, not only upon the
high Heavens, but the low waters too; and as we read in the Creation, that God
called the light Day, and the darkness Night; yet when he joins them both
together, the denomination follows the better part, and the Evening and the
Morning make a Day; so in the Souls of many men, though there be evening as
well as morning, darkness as well as light, though there be great
disobedience, if there be great repentance too; Such is the goodness of
Almighty GOD, as that the darkness shall be swallowed up of light, and the
Evening and the Morning make a Day. Where GOD sowes plentifully he expects
plenty, and where he sowes sparingly he is content sparingly to reap: for
five Talents perhaps he would not have been pleased with the increase of four
more, and yet for two he accepts two. For as the Church of GOD is like JACOBS
ladder, though none but Angels climb it, yet there are some ascending, some
descending, some above, some below, and all upon the Ladder; so the Grace of
GOD it is like Manna in the Wilderness. So strict an exactor is he of the
utmost of all that we can do, as that he that gathers much, ZACHARY and
ELIZABETH, who all their life long feared GOD and walked blameless, shall have
nothing over, no works of Supererrogation, no Treasure for the Church; and yet
so merciful is he unto those on whom he will have Mercy, as that he that
gathers little, the Thief upon the Cross, not till his last hour bethinking
himself of his last end, though he take up but a short Memento; Remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom, shall have no lack.

Let not him then that is now reaching the top of the Ladder, despise him, who
perhaps is yet but on his knees humbly creeping to the foot. Let not the tall
Cedar, who once himself he knows was but a broken Reed, for what has he
which he has not received, let him not fall heavy on the smoking Flax. For
even babes in CHRIST, they are the children of GOD, and may live to become Men;
and where the stomach is not able to digest strong meat, life a while may be
maintained with milk. You know what a smart answer our SAVIOVR gave St. PETER,
when partly out of good will he was but a little inquisitive after JOHN, Master
what shall he do? What Is that to thee? follow thou me. Surely then, what
excuse shall we make, who not only by way of inquisition, but by way of
censure and despair, as any man's life and actions, nay (such is the
touchinesse of this waspish age) but his opinion only shall but a little
thwart us, presently we give him over, with a Lord what shall become of this
man, when as indeed the conscience of our own infirmities might far better
busy our meditations to inquire, Lord, what shall become of me? and I could
wish that golden sentence of the Heathen were imprinted in the heart of every
Christian; Optimum ego et emendat issimum existimo, Plin. l. 8. Epist. 22.
qui caeteris ita ignoscit, tanquam ipse quotidie peccet; ita peccatis
abstinet, tanquam nemini ignoscat. He indeed is a right good man, who in all
things is so favorable to the sins of others, as if himself were the
greatest sinner; and yet so severe and strict unto himself, as if he would
favor no man. And thus much for the first exposition of my Text, I come now
unto the second.

And of his fullness have we all received, 2 Exposition.
and grace for grace: that is, grace upon grace, grace after grace, first one
grace then another. For GOD who gave not the Spirit by measure to his Son,
gives it by measure and portions to his Saints; which like good seed sown into
good ground brings forth first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn
in the ear; first the will, and then the deed; first begins the deed, and then
perfects it. And therefore give diligence, says St. PETER, and add to your
faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance
patience, to patience godliness: and that we may know there are many and high
degrees to be ascended before we come unto the height of grace, to that full
assurance, whereof fondly oftimes we secure ourselves even at the first step,
you see again he doubles the same caution; Give diligence to make your calling
and Election sure. And St. PAVL often, Let the word dwell richly in you, in all
wisdom; Let your love abound more and more, That you may be rooted, and
built up, and stablished in the faith; That you may be holy and unreproovable
in the sight of God; That he may present unto himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle. Indeed it is the desire of most men, to be partakers of
Gods grace, so much at least as may enlighten them a little, give them a taste
of the heavenly gift, and keep them from despair; and then are they ready to
say unto their soul, Soul take thy ease: for thou have now enough, grace
enough, laid up in store. But the earnest and constant desire of grace for
grace, and grace upon grace, to follow our Petitions as St. HIEROM did (with a
peto ut accipiam, and cum accepere rursus peto,) daily do I ask the grace of
God, Avarus sum ad accipienda beneficia dei. Nec ille deficit in dando, nec ego
satior in accipiendo. Ad Ctesiphor. adv. Pelag.
and when I have obtained what I ask for, daily do I ask the same again,
and as long as he is well pleased to grant, never will I give over my desire;
this a rare zeal: though yet in truth better have no talent, then wrap it in a
Napkin. For GOD will not be content with his own, he must have interest;
where he sows grace, he expects to reap grace for grace: and therefore
having once tasted of the heavenly gift, let us daily so hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, as that we may be filled with the Spirit.

For we are to observe, that as in GOD there is a fullness, if I may so speak,
of capacity, fullness of justice, fullness of mercy, fullness of wisdom,
fullness of power, all fullness at the full, because he is infinitely full; as
in CHRIST there is a fullness of satietie, such a fullness as was fitted and
proportioned by the will of his Deity, such a fullness as did abundantly
satiate the will and desire of his humanity; a fullness without measure, if
compared to that small portion vouchsafed to the greatest of the Saints: and
yet a fullness which had measure and proportion, if compared unto the infinite
fulness of the Deity. Deus quamvis omnipotens non potuit vel inaequalem sibi
gignere filiis, Bernard. Homil. 3.
vel aequalem condere creaturam. It was impossible that even the omnipotency
of GOD, should either beget the divine person of his Son unequal, or create
his humane nature equal to himself: so in tne Saints of God there must be a
fullness too, a fullness of competency, fullness of Faith, and fullness of
works also, that while we believe in him who justifies a sinner, we may
daily labor the reformation of our sins. Behold, says CHRIST, I stand at
the door and knock: and if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will
come in, and sup with him, and he with me. Here then you see there must be a
mutual entertainment of supper for supper, fullness for fullness, for indeed
then only is this Feast rightly prepared, when as well CHRIST suppes with us,
as we with him, he on the delight of our obedience, we on the confidence of his.

True indeed it is, that if we look into the empty world, a little goodness
may soon raise us unto a Pharisaicall ostentation, and serve to justify our
selves by negatives, Lord I thank thee, that I am not thus nor thus, nor like
unto this Publicane; and think that we have grace enough, if we can point
out any man more graceless then our selves; when as yet St. AUGUSTINE will
tell us, Civit. dei, l. 14. c. 3.
Ipse diabolus non est fornicator, neque ebriosus, the Devil himself might
thus commend himself, for he was never drunk, nor ever committed Fornication;
and the Publicane might make reply. LORD I thank thee that I am no Pharisee,
when as perhaps his whole life has been so far from expressing the truth of
godliness, as that he was never yet so well devoted to make show of it.
Infaelicissimum genus consolationis est, Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. lib. 2.
de miseriis hominum peccatorum capere solatia. It is a most unhappy kind of
comfort, for a man to solace himself in his own sin, upon the view of
greater sins in others; No, rather letting pass these deceivable discourses,
let us strive to fashion our selves according to the infallible rules of holy
Scripture: and when we know they are no common graces of the Spirit, whereby
we are sealed unto the day of redemption; let us daily implore grace for
grace, that we may approve the things that are excellent, and be filled with
the fruits of righteousness. Nativitas salutaris non accepta sed custodita
vivificat: Cyprean Epist. 7.
It is not a single grace, but grace upon grace must save us: and however the
goodness and mercy of God might be content with less, then our own care and
zeal will be content for our own selves; however our selves in humility
might be content with the lowest room, even to be doore-keepers in the house
of God: yet how unspeakable would be our joy, if it might please him to grant
more, then we dare presume to ask, and according to our increase in grace for
grace, multiply unto us glory for glory too, and entertain us in his Kingdom,
with an Amice ascend superius, Friend sit up higher: As then JACOB returning
into his own Country, and afraid of his brother ESAV, sends before him
present after present, first Goats, then Ewes, then Rams, then Camels, and
commands every Messenger to say; These are thy servant JACOBS, and it is a
present sent to my Lord ESAV; that if the first present could do nothing, the
second, the third, or fourth, might move him; and thus where he feared most,
he finds most love, ESAV imbraceth him, falls upon his neck and kisseth him:
so let it be all our care, being how onward on our way to seek a Country, and
bow soon we may meet with our LORD we cannot tell, to send before us present
after present, grace after grace; that when he shall meet here with our
patience, there with our humility, here with our prayer, there with our
repentance, here with our faith, there with our charity; he may embrace us in
the arms of his mercy, and encourage our trembling souls with a Confide fili,
Be of a good comfort my Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. And thus much for
the second exposition, I come now unto the last.

Of his fullness have we all received, 3 Exposition:
and grace for grace, that is grace to us answerable to the grace of CHRIST;
not he one grace we another, but grace for grace, grace in some proportion of
like nature, like condition with his. GOD is faithful, says St. PAVL, by whom
we are called into the fellowship of his Son, who when we were dead in
trespasses and sins, has by the same spirit quickened us together with
CHRIST, has raised us up together, made as sit together in heavenly places.
And indeed it is a meditation full of comfort, that all those graces and favors
imparted to CHRIST the head, are communicable to us his members, of his flesh,
and of his bones. Was he saluted with that gracious voice from Heaven, This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: behold the same spirit, though
secretly yet powerfully cries, Abba Father in our souls, and assures us that
we also are the Sons of God, nay heirs, yea coheyres with his own Son. For
as CHRIST was incarnate and made the Son of God by assuming our nature to his
person; so there is a kind of incarnation in every Saint of God, by uniting
his nature to our persons. And indeed every pious Soul is another Virgin MARY,
wherein we reinwombe our SAVIOVR, Qui parturit verbam Christum parturit. Amb
in Luc. lib. 10. cap. 5.
and with whom we travail till he be formed in us, til he who is conceived
in us, is the Author of our new conception, and gives spiritual life and
motion to our souls. Had he the wonderful grace and power to work great
miracles, give eyes to the blind, speech to the dumb, health to the sick,
life to the dead? He that believes in me, says he, the works that I do,
shall he do also, nay even greater works then these shall he do. For if we
fail of the shadow, in the practice of those great works upon the body; yet
we have the substance of far greater works upon the soul. And such to this
day, is the powerful efficacy of this quickening grace, as that it opens the
blind eye, and the deaf care, with joy to behold and hear the wonderful
works of God; it looseneth the dumb tongue, and out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings, ordeineth strength; it stretches forth the lame hand, with
cheerfulness to distribute to the necessities of others; it softeneth the hard
heart, and kindles it with zeal and forwardness, O Lord, my heart is ready,
my heart is ready. Nay though we be dead in trespasses and sins, grace is
able to recover us. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
CHRIST shall give thee light. Lastly is CHRIST ascended up to Heaven, far
above all Principalities and Powers, there for ever to sit at the right hand of
the Father, and will he leave us comfortless alone? No surely, as he has
given us grace for grace, so will he give us glory for glory too, and
therefore Blessed be GOD, says St. PETER, who has begotten us again unto a
lively hope, by the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST, from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, reserved for us in the Heavens.

Now hitherto, I persuade my self we all gladly give ear to this discourse,
and are ready to second it with the like Petition of the Disciples, Lord
evermore give us of this grace. But yet I fear that as DAVID, who went with
joy to fetch the Arc out of the house of AMINADA^, on expectation thereby of a
blessing to befall his own house, when he saw VZZAH smitten with sudden
Death, for presuming to touch the Arc, was presently displeased, and afraid
too, for how shall the Ark of the Lord, says he, come to me? and therefore he
sent it to the house of OBED EDOM. So I fear many there are well pleased with
the grace of CHRIST, as long as we discourse of the joy, the comfort, the
glory that attends it: but let us once mention the sorrow and affliction which
for grace and righteousness sake we must endure: let us tell them that he that
will be CHRIST'S Disciple, must first in humility deny himself, and with
patience take up his Cross and follow him: this is a hard saying, say they,
and who is able to endure it? If these be the difficulties which attend the
Ark, let it go to the house of OBED EDOM, we will not bring it to our City.
But before you send it away, let me ask you but one question, shall we
receive good at the hands of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil? nay
more, Is it not enough that the Disciple be as his Master, and the Servant as
his Lord? Would we receive grace, and will we not have grace for grace? would
we have the grace of his exaltation, and will we not have the grace of his
humility? CHRIST himself we know first suffered, before he entered into
glory; and we must first be made conformable unto his death, before we can
attain the resurrection of the dead.

But blessed men are we, in that this conformity now in a great part consists
only in a preparation, and resolution to endure; when as the peace and
happiness which we enjoy have removed the misery of those evil days far
off from us, which thousands and millions of the Saints of God have been
enforced to endure. Indeed we live by faith, says St. PAVL, the best part of
our life by Faith, and not by sight, yet what eye so dull, that sees not the
happiness of this present life of ours, or what tongue so tied, whose heart
will not force it to break out into terms of gratulation; Praise the LORD O
my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name. Let us look into the
primitive times, or we need not go so far, but on the days of our
Forefathers, and how terrible then were the conditions of salvation? What
strength of grace, what a complete armor was then requisite, to defend them
against all the fiery darts of Satan? Coelestis regiae januam gradibus panarum
ascendentes, Salvian. de Gubernat. Dei, lib. 3.
scalas sibi quodammodo de eculeis catastisque fecerunt. The wrack, the
scourge, the stake, and what ever torture the witty cruelty of man was able to
invent, these were the steps whereby they painfully ascended up to Heaven: But
surely, if ever unto any, our yoke is easy, and our burden light; in a
peaceable age we reap the fruits of peace; with the freedom of our
conscience, we enjoy the freedom of the world too; in all the fair pleasures
and delights whereof, what ever liberty a discreet Heathen would desire, a good
Christian may enjoy; and after all this, with Non obstante to St. HIEROME,
Difficile imo impossible est, ut quis transeat de deliciis in delicias. ad
Iulianu^ Epist. 34.
de deliciis in delicias, out of the bosom of the World we may gently remove
our head into ABRAHAM'S bosom, quietly breath our last, and into the hands of
our Redeemer commend our Spirit. Then indeed (to invert a little the words of
St. CYPRIAN) facta est Ecclesia in cruore Martyrum purpurea, Epist. 9.
the Church was of a scarlet dye in the blood of the Martyrs: nunc in operibus
fratrum candida, now she has or may have, her garments white in the fair and
peaceable conversation of the Saints. Sic floribus ejus nec lilia, nec rosae
desunt; thus has she been adorned and beautified with flowers of diverse
colors, then with the red Rose, now the white.

Yet true indeed it is, that even to this day, many are the troubles of the
Righteous, but troubles common also with the sinner, wherein the graces of
CHRIST'S patience and humility are so far from dejecting us, as that they are
the chief comforters we have. There is a trouble of poverty, wherein grace
cheerfully sustaines us; teaches of as well how to want, as how to abound; and
if after a fair endeavor we cannot raise our means unto our mind,
presently humbles our mind unto our means. There is a trouble of sickness,
but yet in all our sickness grace makes all our bed. The Lord gives (gives
health and wealth) and the Lord takes away: and blessed be the name of the
Lord. Lastly, there is a trouble of sin too, which if grace shall sometime
increase, by laying the greatness and danger thereof near unto our heart; yet
it will easily persuade us that it is good for us to be thus troubled.

For indeed such is the strange and powerful efficacy thereof, as that,
vulnus opemque, it both wounds and cures; with a quick and sharp sense of
our sins it often times draws tears from our eyes, and presently out of a joy
that it has made us become thus sensible, it wipeth them off again. As then
trouble is the inseparable companion of our life, what more necessary then that
grace should be the inseparable companion of our trouble: that if trouble
should sometime overcharge us, and force us to cry out, Wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me? Grace may presently succentunate and releeve us, with a
Thanks be to God through JESUS CHRIST our Lord; on which firm Rock as long
as we truly fasten the Anchor of our hope, nor hight nor depth, nor life nor
death, shall ever be able to remove us.

Again, are we all to receive grace for grace, grace parallel and
proportionable to the grace of CHRIST, as indeed among other causes, therefore
was CHRIST incarnate that he might give unto us a pattern of true grace, that
in all things we may learn to be holy, as he is holy; surely then from hence
we may best put in practice that caveat of St. JOHN, and learn how to try the
Spirit. By the grace of GOD (it is the common language of us all) we hope we
shall do well, but how shall we know whether the grace we speak off, be a
grace in word only, or in deed? And I hope there is no man here so insensible
of such things as belong unto his peace, but sometime in secret will commune,
with his own heart, and make inquiry, Lord are there but few that shall be
saved, and those few such only as have received the mark of thy spirit; how
then shall I know whether I am partaker of this spirit, that I may have, if not
an assurance, yet a fair hope that I shall be of the number of these few? A
question, as very necessary to be made, so truly very difficult to be
resolved. For mine own part, I am persuaded there is no readier way to give
our selves satisfaction in this doubt, then to propose the doubt even in the
very terms of my Text, Have I grace for grace, the grace of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, some commendable measure of his charity, his zeal, his meeknes, his
temperance, his justice, his mercy? Have I true patience and humility, true
sorrow and anguish of soul for mine own sins, answerable to that sorrow of
his above all sorrows for the sins of the whole World? Alas otherwise, if we
be full of spleen and malice, if our mouth be an open sepulcher, therein
ready to bury the good name and honor of every man whose ways and actions do
but a little thwart us; (though yet Michael the Archangel in a far juster
contestation, then can be between man and man, would not revile the Devil;)
we know that CHRIST prayed for his enemies, and dyed for his enemies, and how
then dwells the love of CHRIST in us? If upon every slight provocation we shall
break out into foul curses, the pox, the plague, the devil, evils that we
need not imprecate; happy are we if with all our prayers we can deprecate them;
and these curses shall second with fearful oaths, and at each word be
prodigal of the life, the wounds, the death, the blood, that precious blood of
Christ, one drop whereof perhaps the time may come when we shall call and cry
for, and not be so happy as to obtain it; we know that CHRIST when he was
reviled, reviled not again, and in all our familiar discourse has confined us
to a yea, yea, and a nay, nay; and how then dwells the meekness, nay even but
the language of CHRIST in us? If we say unto our Soul, Take thy ease, eat,
drink and be merry; and shall vilify all others, who will not follow the
same excess of riot with our selves: we know that it was the strict charge of
CHRIST, that we should not overcharge our selves with surfeiting and
drunkenesse, the bastard parents of chambering and wantonness, and how then
dwells the temperance of CHRIST in us? If we be always querulous and
discontent, upon every light cross ready to blaspheme the sufferings of
CHRIST, (with a non est dolor sicut dolor meus) was there ever sorrow like unto
my sorrow? we know that CHRIST, though made a man of sorrows, and this sorrow
for the sin of man, yet like the Sheep before the Shearer he opened not his
month, and how then dwells the patience of CHRIST in us? Lastly, if we put off
the chief care of our Soul till the last hour, our prayer, our repentance,
and strict examination of our ways, and think in the mean while that a Lord,
Lord, a formal devotion will suffice; we know that CHRIST spent whole nights
in prayer, and in the anguish of his soul, and that for the sense of our
sins, sweat even drops of blood, and how then dwells the devotion of CHRIST
in us? Those are quaeres able to startle a good soul; and surely would we let
pass those deceivable examples, which from the frailties of men too
indulgently ofttimes we propose unto our selves, this man will do thus, and
that man thus; and strive more nearly to square our actions according to this
infallible pattern in my Text: a world of sins there are wherewith the World
through custom is now almost uncontroullably full fraught, which we should
then be as far from any desire to commit, as now I fear we are from any
intent to amend; and having received at first, though but a spark of grace,
we should in time so kindle and inflame it, as that like JOHN Baptist, it
might prove a burning and a shining light, by which light we might then easily
discover our own happiness, and say with JOB, Now I know that my Redeemer
lives.

But some men perhaps will here reply, as the Patient once did to the
Physician, prescribing him to keep a good diet; if I had meant, (says he) to
keep a good diet, I should never have need to come to you for Physic, pray
tell me how I may keep an ill diet and not be sick: so you will say perhaps,
we al know already what good we must do, and what grace we must have that we
may be saved, but pray tell us what evils we may do, and what grace we may
want, and yet be saved? May we not swear a little, riot a little, and if our
beloved sin be but little one, may not our soul fly thither and yet live?
But first I pray tell me, what sin is there which any man dares call little,
which without repentance is great, heavy, and enough to weigh him down to
Hell? Indeed so great is the mercy of God, as that we find a pardon often times
given to great sins; but where ever do we find beforehand a dispensation
given to the least? God sometime upon the foresight of our repentance,
antedates his pardon; Thy sin is forgiven thee, says Nathan unto DAVID;
though it is thought the solemn repentance for this sin was afterward
performed: but shall we therefore upon the fore-intendment of our repentance
antedate our sin? Surely, if you would give me a house full of gold I dare not
tell you so. For this quaere is as if a man should ask, how high may I fall
down headlong, before I break nay neck? or how often may I stabbe my self,
before I be wounded unto death? Surely because a little wound oftimes proves
dangerous; or at leastwise full of pain, a wise man will not rashly cut his
skin; and if skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for his life,
how diligent and tender ought to be every man's care for his own soul? Quae
insania est, Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. lib. 2.
ut non quanta potes omnino facias, cum ignores penitus quid tibi competat ad
salutem? What madness is it for a man not to take the best care he can for his
soul, when as he knows that after all the care which he can take, even the
Righteous shall scarce be saved? Let us not then presume to inquire, how far
we may suffer sin to abound? Be we never so careful to suppress it, sin
will abound too far: but ask rather, how far must grace more abound, to
obtain the forgiveness of our sin? and when we see what high patterns of
obedience are every where in holy Scripture proposed unto our imitation, the
perfection of the Father, the grace of the Son, the fellowship of the Holy
Ghost, the Communion of Saints and Angels, may these great examples daily
enlarge our endeavors, and as long as we can never hope to do what we
ought, let us never cease to do what we may.

Now then to draw all to a conclusion; We read in this Chapter of a two fold
fullness in CHRIST; there is a fullness of truth, and a fullness of grace:
fullness of truth we have revealed in holy Scripture, and from hence truth for
truth we are able to communicate each to others: but fullness of grace this is
Gods praerogative, which he reserves only to himself; and grace for grace
what man ever durst take upon him to bestow? Fullness of truth is the religion
of the soul, and furnishes the eye, the ear, the tongue, the head: but
fullness of grace, this is the soul of our religion, and draws all unto the
heart: fullness of truth it is a diligent MARTHA, and provideth many
commendable things; but fullness of grace this is the devout MARY, and brings
the maine necessary part: this is the pearl, which though we should sell all
that we have to buy, will buy a thousand times more then we can sell: this is
the oil which cheereth the countenance, the wine which makes glad the heart of
man, and with a good conscience keeps a continual feast. This is comes in
via pro vehiculo, the most gentile and faithful companion in the world; which
when wealth, when honor, when strength, when wit, when speech, when sense, when
life it self shall fail, will yet never leave us nor forsake us. I beseech
you then as we cannot but all thankfully acknowledge, that we have already
received the religion of the soul, truth for truth; let us daily implore from
Heaven the soul of our Religion, grace for grace; grace upon grace, even the
grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that having given us an understanding head, he
would be pleased to create in us a new heart, and renew a right spirit within
us: that when with the sighs and groans of this spirit, from the bottom of
this heart, we shall call and cry unto him Abba Father, he may graciously make
answer from Heaven, I will be unto thee a Father, and thou shall be to me a
Son. Amen.


ECCLES. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


WHen I read the saying of St. JOHN, My little Children this is the last time,
the time, says St. PAVL, even of the end of the world, and consider withal,
that it is now near 1600 years ago, since this caveat was first given;
surely, me thinks, we that live at the end of this end, at the last period of
this last time, have now great cause, together with the end of the world, eve^
daily to bethink our selves of our own end, and not only for fear of our day
of death, but out of some respect also even unto the day of judgment; with the
wife Virgins to begin betimes to prepare oil ready for our lamps, seriously
often times to catechize our souls with the like question of the Psalmist,
Wherwithall shall a young man cleanse his ways; and make answer with my Text,
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

In the handling of which words three things I shall breefly commend unto you.
First, I will propose some reasons and motives to persuade the young man to be
thus mindful of his Creator: Secondly, I will remove those excuses, which all
youth for the most part are ready to pretend for the neglect of this duty.
Lastly, I will close up all with some short and useful remembrances, which may
serve to imprint and fasten this so necessary duty into the meditation and
practice of our Souls. In the handling whereof, though I have here a young man
only to remember, yet you shall see no age shall be forgotten: to begin then
with the first.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth; and even for this cause in
the days of thy youth, because thou know not whether ever thou shall live
till thou art old. For the life of man it is as a Shadow, and our days are now
but a spanne long; nay even this short measure, as by sad experience we have
too frequent trial, we see so much contracted, as that we enjoy oft-times
but some few inches even of this Spanne neither. Few and evil are the days of
our Pilgrimage here on earth, have we now more reason to complain then JACOB
had. Now because our days are evil, we had need to remember our Creator to
amend them: because few, we were best do it quickly; lest we forgetting him,
he may prove too mindful of us, and in his justice cut off those few days of
ours, wherein we have been so evil, as not to fly unto his Mercy. And hence
is it I should think that St. JOHN in his first Epistle does so often style the
Saints of GOD by the name of little Children: My little Children these things I
write unto you; Little children keep your selves from Idols; little children
it is the last time: not only to express his fatherly and tender affection
over them, with whom like PAVL, he did even go in travail, till CHRIST
should be formed in them; not only to teach them gentleness and humility,
and that he that will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, must first stoop to
the confession of the Psalmist, LORD I am not high minded, but even as a Child
weaned from his Mothers breast, so do I behave my self; but even in this
respect also to let us understand, by reason of the shortness and uncertainty
of the life of man, that even from our Childhood we are to be trayn'd up, with
the child SAMVEL, to minister unto the Lord girt with a linen Ephod, while
our garments are yet white and spotless, that both Body and Soul too may as
it were hand in hand grow up from strength to strength, till of Children we
become perfect Men, and atteyne unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of CHRIST. For we are all by Nature the children of wrath, all liable to those
everlasting chains prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and as long as this
state continues, we may, complain with REBECCA, I am weary of my life; and
we may sit down with JOB, and curse the day that we were borne in: and can
we then think any time too soon to begin to make an agreement with our
adversary by the way, by our Prayer, our repentance, our faith in the washing
of the Blood of JESUS, get the handwriting of tne Law cancelled and washed off,
that as with PAVL and SILAS in the Prison, our fetters may fall away, and of
the children of wrath we may be redeemed into the glorious liberty of the
sons of GOD. For was it not madness in PHARAOH, when as the Frogs were now
swarming in the Land, in his Court, in his Bedchamber, in his bosom, and MOSES
came kindly to him and when, (says he) shall I entreat for thee to destroy
these Frogs, was it not madness (I say) to put him off and bid him come To
morrow? Surely we would think even but that one nights torture he would have
redeemed rather, though with the one half of his Kingdom: and are not our
Sins as noisome companions as those unwelcome guests of his? When then our
conscience like Moses shall say unto our Souls, when shall I entreat the Lord
to destroy these sins, should we not be more mad then Pharaoh, did we reply,
To morrow: no, To day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts. For
the life of man as it is sweet, so it is short too, and though but one only
way we have into the world, yet many out. Whether this or that shall be our
end, whether sooner or later it shall come, this is a secret which GOD has
purposely reserved unto himself, that so we may ever be prepared for that,
from which we can never be secure.

Let us not then put off necessary duties to uncertain times; let us not turn
Prodigals in our youth, in hope of I know not how many years are yet to come
to cry Peccavi in our age. For what know we but that even in the midst of our
jollitie, when we shall say unto our soul Take thy ease and be merry; what
know we but that even then we may be arrested with a Thou fool this night
shall thy Soul be taken from thee, and then as the Tree falls so it must lie?
Quid enim saeculi potest esse diuturnum, Ambros. in Luc. lib. 4. cap. 5.
cum ipsa saecula non sint diuturna? For why should we presume of our life, or
any thing else to continue long in this world, when as the world it self has
not long to continue?

Secondly, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; because though
thou were sure to live, and were resolved to sin when thou art young; yet
thou art not sure to repent when thou art old, and therefore why should thou
venture on a certain disease upon so uncertain a remedy. For the Grace of GOD
it is like the Poole of Bethesda, and cures but at set times, and therefore
with the Cripples in the Gospel we must wait all opportunities, and call upon
the name of the LORD, not when our selves at leisure shall be pleased to seek
after him, but when he in his mercy will vouchsafe to be found of us. Indeed
some Examples we find in holy Scripture of men, who have made but a short
passage unto Heaven, and having not set forward toward CHRIST till they came
unto full years, have yet lived to overtake him, before they came unto the
grave. The Thief, we read it in the Gospel, in one and the same day comes
a malefactor to the Cross, and goes a Saint to Paradise: but pray tell me,
for this one, this single one, who had so good success, how many thousands do
you think, have gone from the Cross to Hell? Were it not madness in us then
to venture on that disease, whereof thousands have been cast away upon this
cold Presumption that some odd man or two have been recovered? We are all too
prone to look on the Thief that hung on the right hand, but we might do
well sometime to think upon him who hung upon the left. For is there great
Mercy with GOD, and is there not great Justice too? Do but look into the same
Book, and you shall see that the same hand has purposely registered many
fearful Examples in all kinds, of men suddenly surprised by his justice, even
presently upon the committing of their sin, that so the memory of their ends
may fright us from the imitation of their actions, as knowing that what has
befallen one, may be common unto all, and that in such sins wherein some men
have dyed so desperately, no man can live secure. And surely as Sins do
propose themselves to us, would we but seriously oppose these Examples unto
them; and as our SAVIOR has already made the application to our hand,
Remember LOTS wife, when having put the hand unto the plough, we are ready to
look back again: Remember ACHAN in our Covetousness, ABSOLON in our
Disobedience, ZIMRI and COSBI in our Lust, HEROD in our Pride, ANANIAS in our
Hypocrisy and the like; surely I say, would we but seriously lay these
precedents to heart, the fear of the punishment would soon fright us from the
love of the sin. Let us not then presuming on GODS patience provoke his
anger; Let us not fondly persuade our selves because no time is too late for
him to forgive, that therefore any time is soon enough for us to repent: no,
if we will be sure to sing a requiem at our going out of the world, let us
begin our miserere at our coming in. Ambros. de Paenit. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Infir maspes quae committitur tempori, cum omne tempus incertum sit, neque
omni spes tempori superstes; for weak is our present trust or time to come,
when as we know that all time to come is uncertain. Nor can we certainly trust
all time that comes, because that goodness of GOD which has promised pardon
wherever we shall repent, has no where promised repentance when ever our
selves please.

Lastly, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, because in the
days of thy youth thy Creator has remembered thee: who is it from whom thou
have received thy being? Are not children, and the fruit of the womb a gift
that comes of the Lord? who is it by whom thou live, and movest, and
enjoyest the blessings of this life? do not the eyes of all things wait upon
thee O Lord, and thou fillest every living thing with Plenteousnesse? Who is it
that amidst all the casualties of the world preserves thee in thy going out
and in thy coming in? Has not he given his Angels charge ever thee, that thou
shall not so much as dash thy foot against a stone? So that from thy first
conception to this hour, one day telling another what great things he that is
mighty has done for thee; what can thou do less in testimony of thy
thankfulness then to serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness
all the days of thy life? GODS remembrance of thee, it is voluntary, but thine
of him is of necessity. He can say of the best of men, I have no need of you,
but can the best man say to him, I have no need of thee? If then his goodlesse
freely moove him to be mindful of thee, let thy duty constrain thee to
remember him. And that not without just cause; for unless thou shall put him
in mind to perfect the work of his own hands, and to his creation of Nature
add the creation of Grace also, a thousand times better had it been that thou
had been quite forgotten, and not Created at all. For however of all the
Creatures of the earth man be the most noble and divine; yet simply to be a man
is but a doubtful blessing, thou know not yet whether thou shall be loved
or hated. That which puts all out of doubt must be a new creation; and
therefore if thou desire to take up the language of the Pharisee but with a
better mind, Lord I thank thee that I am not as other men are, now no more an
old but a new creature; remember thy Creator with the prayer of the Psalmist,
Create in me O Lord a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me, a
spirit whereby our hearts may be enlarged with obedience and thankfulness, and
daily remembrance of our duties unto him, according to the largeness of his
goodness and mercy, and continual mindfulnesse of us, and then Quam beati
essemus, si quam promptam erga nos Dei audientiam legimus, Salvian. de
Gubernat. Dei. lib. 2.
taem prompto ipsum audire velimus, O how happy should we be, were we but
half so ready to hear and fulfill the commands of GOD, as we are to overheare
and challenge his promises. And thus much for the reasons and motives to
persuade the young man to remember his Creator. I come now in the second place
to answer his objections.

First then it may be urged, must the young man so early begin to remember his
Creator? Must the tender neck presently become subject to this heavy yoke, no
sooner have we with-drawne our hand from the ferula, and come newly but to
feel and know our selves, but presently must we be bound in a perpetual
apprentiship, and that to a harder Master then before? This is a hard saying,
and who is able to endure it, willingly would we take up our cross and follow
CHRIST, but gladly would we have a little respite first, to go and bid the
world farewell.

Indeed were Religion an easy profession, it might more easily be deferred:
Things wherein there is less difficulty, require less industry: But because
all the World will grant that it is very hard to be good, surely we had need
to begin betimes. Difficulty then you see which is urged as an objection to
put off Religion till old age, proves a strong argument to persuade us to be
religious in our youth: yet notwithstanding could it but well appear, that the
same yoke, which punishes us in our youth, would prove more easy to old age
the excuse might be more pardonable: But for my part when I consider that all
Trades, all Arts, all Sciences, are in their first rudiments, best learnt in
our minority; I cannot be persuaded but that religion also, (which with
pretense of difficulty, because we are unwilling to make trial of our own
strength, we are all too ready to put off till we are old) will yet prove
most facile in our youth: And he that shall compare the several advantages
which age and youth have each of other in matters of Religion, will find
perhaps that it is no paradox to maintain against the great Philosopher, that
Iunenis est magis idoneus auditor moralis and divinae Philosophiae too, that a
young Timothy is a fitter Auditor of a lecture of Divinity, than an old
Nicodemus.

Age I confess, to give it its due honor, has many prerogatives of youth.
Age is cool and temperate; those hot pursuites of vain delights if grace
restrain not, we see in time nature itself forbeares. Age it is stayed and
resolute; good courses well begun it will hold on: though the hand be hardly
drawn unto the plough, yet the eye will not suddenly look back again. Age
it is wise and experienced, and having made frequent trial of the fickle
unconstancie of all things under the Sun, can now truly say of laughter,
Thou art madness, and that all the glory of the world, it is but vanity and
vexation of spirit. Lastly, Age it is sickly and crazed, and daily draws
onward nearer to the grave; and we see the tongue no not of men and Angels to
be so powerful an Orator to proclaim unto us. Dust thou art, and to dust thou
must return, as but one dumb fit of a disease. ALEXANDER whom in his health
all the World could not persuade but that a GOD he would needs be, upon a
wound received seeing the blood come, could then humble his conceit, and jam
sentio me mortalem, and now I see, says he, that I must dye: so that the old
man daily seeing that death, which may be near unto the young man, cannot be
far off from him, is the more easily persuaded to prepare himself for the more
easy passage when it comes. These indeed are great advantages of age, and yet
perhaps the young man has far greater.

For first, Youth it is bashful and modest: and modesty, (says the
Philosopher) if it be not a virtue, it is virtues companion. And thus much
Christianity also seems to acknowledge, when we say of a man that is not yet
past shame, that surely he is not yet past Grace. For shame oft-times it is the
Guardian of Grace, and many sins there are for the forbeara^ce whereof even the
best Souls are sometime as much beholding to their modesty, as to their
Religion But age you know it is more bold and daring, and therefore oft-times
for want of virtues companion, virtue her self proves wanting, and the loss
of shame becomes the ruin of Grace. Again, Youth it is always subject to
control, has a Father, a Mother, a Tutor, a Master, or if all these may
fail, yet old age it self, we see, if for no other cause, yet because old,
it challenges a kind of Fatherhood over all youth, and if but old ELIES gentle
reproof, Nay my Sons why do you such things, it leaves some impression in
the Soul. But age it is uncontrolable, Rebuke not an Elder, it is the precept
in the Text, and ELIHU in JOB conversing with his Ancients, though they gave
him just cause of speech and reproof too, yet you see how long he lays his
hand upon his mouth before ever he durst speak: so that we see oft-times the
greater is the old man's liberty, the greater also is his license. Again,
youth it is more free and generous; in all dealings of the world lives nearest
to the best law of nature, Do as thou would be done unto, not so ready to
defraud, and yet more ready to restore. But Age, it is penurious and griping,
and now come in those cruel times of extortion and oppression, Quocumque modo
rem, a man will transgress even for a piece of bread. Lastly, and that which
is the maine advantage, youth it is like gold, soft and pliable, if soon
bent, soon set to rights again; but age, it is like Iron, sullen and stiff:
Youth indeed it is more heady, but tendermouth'd; but age it is more
headstrong, if it fly out, it will run its course; the old man's Motto is like
that of PILATE, Quod scripsi scripsi, He will have his will. Sins of youth
they are but ill dispositions; but sins of age they are commonly ill habits.
Here the flesh turns Traitor, and rebelleth against the Spirit; but there it
turns Tyrant and commands. In the days of our youth, GOD patiently
stands at the door of our hearts and knocks; and when he has spoke once
and twice, though we regard not, he will not yet presently leave us nor
forsake us: but when once thirty or forty years long he has been grieved
with a rebellious and gaine-saying generation, in the end his patience turns
to anger, What could I have done which I have not done? and so gives them over
to a reprobate sense.

Thus then you see the young man also has his advantages, and indeed what ever
precedence our age can challenge of our youth, it is then only to be found when
the old man ploughes with the young man's heckfer: For then it is no wonder,
that the incomes of our age multiplying upon the stock of our youth should
make the fairer revenew: but set the comparison right, and then thus much I
dare boldly say, that whereas in these days of ours, whereof out of zeal I
presume to make them better, we wrongfully complain oft-times as if they
never had been worse; many rare and virtuous young men are not perhaps so rare
to be found: yet I think it is almost a miracle to see a very good old man,
who never began to be good till he was old. If then virtue be so hard a
task, as to excuse our vices we are all too easily persuaded to believe;
surely in all discretion we are to make choice of the fittest season to
attain it, and that I have shown you are the days of our Youth. For let
sin have but its course a while, and if you will not believe me; Saint
AVGUSTINE shall tell you what will be the issue. Ex voluntate perversa facta
est libido, Confess. lib 8. cap. 5.
and dum servitur libi dini, facta est consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non
resistitur, factu est necessitas. From a perverse will, which naturally we all
bring into the World, arise sinful desires, and while we humor our desire,
custom lays hold upon us, and while this custom is not controld it proves
another nature. Here then you see the difficulties of Sin: they are like the
waters mentioned by the Prophet, begin at the ankles, rise to the knees, thence
to the waste, after to the neck, till in the end they overwhelme us. Were it
not better then at the first to venture over shoes, then at the last over head
and ears? and therefore while the waters are yet low and passable, before the
overflowings of ungodliness shall too much fright our souls, let me commend
unto you that Item of our SAVIOR but upon a better errand, Quod facis fac
cito? That which thou meanest to do, do quickly. And thus much for the first
objection, I come now to answer a second.

For Religion you will say, and the early remembrance of those duties which we
owe to our Creator they breed melancholy, and fright the Soul with many sad
and desperate thoughts; not an idle word can be spoken, not a Racha given or
Thou fool, not the least riot or excess committed, but presently the
conscience checks us with judgment and Hell fire; and gladly would we desire
the freedom to live a little chearly in our youth.

Thus have I seen a patient sometime complain of his Physic, when as indeed
he was heart sick of his disease. For pray, tell me what is it, which in those
sad fits, whereto the Souls of good men are oft-times subject, (and perhaps
did we more often feel them the more happy might we be;) what is it I say,
which breeds this melancholy, is it our Religion? that we know is the Physic
of the Soul: no surely, it is our sin, and that is the disease. Were it not
madness in us then, to desire to live freely in our sin, that we might live
free from sorrow, when as indeed there is nothing truly to be sorrowed for but
sin? For let us reckon up a catalogue of all such delights, as our own Soul
would wish to concur to make a cheerful life, and you shall see religion
has the promise of them all. Would thou enjoy long life, and see good days?
Keep thy tongue from vill, and thy lips that they speak no guile. And this
life of thine would thou have as healthful as it is long? Praise the Lord O
my Soul, for he it is that renews thy strength, and makes thee young and
lusty as an Eagle. And this health of thine would thou have maintained with
plenty, Trust in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shall be fed, Delight
in the Lord and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. And this plenty of
thine, would thou have seconded with joy? O be joyful in the Lord all ye
Lands; serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his presence with a song.
And lastly, of this joy of thine, would thou have a patent, not for thy self
only but for thy posterity? The Righteous shall dwell at ease, and his seed
shall inherit the Land. If then life and health, plenty and joy, can make a
cheerful man, certainly religion cannot make him melancholy. But yet I must
confess these rare effects, they are perhaps but rarely to be found, and
short life, crazed health, small plenty, unconstant joys they are the portion
oft-times even of GODS dearest Saints; not that GOD has forgotten to be so
good as his word promises, but that men have not remembered to be so good as
his word commands, but have neglected the performance of those strict
conditions, whereupon the accomplishment of these so large promises depend. But
however do the righteous, and such as daily remember their Creator, do they
only eat sour Grapes, and are the sinners such as have not GOD in all their
thoughts, are their teeth never set on edge? It is true indeed, that GOD
receives no man but whom he does chastise, chastise not with cross and
affliction only, but with sorrow and anguish of Soul, with fear and
trembling for his sin; yet here we have a mixture of little judgment with
great mercy, the joy of our receiving soon easing the smart of our
chasticement. But is it not true withal, that the sinner he shall receive his
chasticement and yet never be received; here is judgment without mercy. With
the righteous heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning: but with the sinner this order is inverted; joy indeed may endure for
a night, but sorrow returns in the Morning. When upon the sober view of of his
intemperate luxuriances finding his Soul like CAINS, guilty of more sin then
he knows how to have forgiven, he becomes subject to the fearful
expectation of more punishment, then he knows which way to endure.

Indeed if we look upon the surface of things only, the sinner may seem to
be the only chearly man, sits down merrily to eat and drink, rises to his
play, and wondereth that any man should refuse to follow the same excess of
riot with himself. But let us now a little change his commons, and remove him
from his own table, which from the excess and riot thereof I fear we may too
justly ofttimes style the Table of Devils, and bring him to the Table of the
Lord, and then behold with how heavy a heart does he reach forth his trembling
hand to partake of those sacred mysteries, as justly fearing upon this
Conscience of his great unworthines, lest he should eat and drink his own
condemnation, and rise up seavenfold more the child of Hell the^ he sat down.
When as the Righteous comes with joy and cheerfulness, whose innocent
conscience as it keeps a continual feast, so never then now is it more
plentifully fed, and thankfully (says Grace) with a Nunc dimittis, Lord now
let thou thy Servant depart in peace: for mine eyes have seen my
Salvation. For now I know that the Kingdom of Heaven, (true happiness indeed)
it is not meat and drink, but Righteousness, and peace, and joy upon joy,
joy unspeakable, even joy in the Holy Ghost. It is a memorable speech of HAMAN,
who recounting the glory of his riches, the multitude of his children, the
great honors whereunto he had been promoted above other Princes by the King;
yet in the end concludes, All this is nothing, as long as MORDECAL sits in the
Kings gate. So surely he that shall examine the Souls of the Hamans of this
World, men who for pleasure, wealth, and honor seem to be the only happy
men; will find them sometime ingenuously to confess, All this is nothing: for
there is a MORDECAI, a tormenting conscience, daily sitting in the Gate, which
like JONAS his Worm, no sooner is the Gourd of their felicity sprung up a
little, but presently it biteth and gnaweth it down again. And therefore we
see daily nothing more frequent the^ for the luxurious prodigal upon the sad
remembrance of the follies of his youth, to break out into a Laetare sterilis,
Happy are the barren, and the Souls unsensible of these vain delights, the
fruition whereof is but a transitory vanity, and the remembrance a perpetual
vexation of the Spirit. As then GOD said once unto the Jews, Bring my tithes
into my storehouse, and prove me now if I will not open the windors of
Heaven, and power down a blessing without measure; so let me say here to young
and old, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, in the days of
thy age, even all the days of thy life, serve him in chastity, in temperance,
in justice, in charity, in prayer, in repentance; make a trial of his
goodness, and see whether he will not open the windors of Heaven, and in stead
of sadness and melancholy, power down joy and gladness, the joy and
comforts of his Grace and Spirit, whereby like the wise men at the appearance
of the Star, thou shall daily rejoice and that exceeding greatly.

But suppose it were true that the sinner had the whole world at will, came
into no misfortune like other men, were subject to no discontent, no sorrow;
yet notwithstanding, me thinks, that one saying of Lactantius might serve to
settle and compose the affections of a good man in the constant profession of
his goodness, against all the fears and melancholies which for conscience and
Religions sake he might be subject to. Institut. lib. 6. c. 4.
Bonis brevibus mala aeterna, and malis brevibus bona aeterna, etc. So has the
providence of GOD ordained, that for short pleasures he has threatened us with
eternal pains, for short pains he has made promise of eternal pleasures.
Let every man therefore seriously consider with himself, how much better it
is to be subject here unto a little sorrow, an assurance hereafter of eternal
joy, then for short and transitory joys to expose himself unto eternal
sorrow. And thus much by way of answer to the young man's Objections; I come now
in the last place to commend unto him a few short and useful Remembrances, and
then I conclude.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth: Remember from the days of
thy Youth, even from thy infancy, to whose service thou have so solemnly been
consecrated, what promises, what vows have been made, at the partaking of one
Baptism, to embrace one Faith, to serve one Lord; and be not deceived, GOD
will not be mocked, thou art not now thine own man, thou have not the freedom
to go serve another Master. August. in Ioh. Tract. 7.
Deus non vult communionem, sed solus vult possidere quod emit. For GOD cannot
endure a Partner, but what he has purchased alone, he will possess alone.
Tanti enim emit, ut solus possideat, and indeed so dear a price has he paid
for thy soul, that well may he challenge the whole purchase to himself.

Remember the way to Heaven is difficult, and at each third step there are
mazes and bypath, and therefore be not rash in thy course, but stand often
times and make a pause, and inquire which is the old and the right way. Will
these actions* these thoughts, this company, this discourse, this idleness,
this expense, will these lead a man to Heaven? And though thou often see good
men take an oblique course like the Sun, cross the line and back again,
Hieron. Epist. 9. l. 2. edit. Canis.
yet always remember, Securius esse perire non posse, quam juxta periculum non
perisse; that it is the safer way not to have ventured on a danger, then to
have escaped it.

Remember always in the serious estimation of thy sin, not to follow the
loose account of men, who are ready to set down fifty for an hundred, nay
sometime scarce one of a thousand, but the true and just account of God. Call
no sin light, which without repentance is heavy enough to weigh thee down
to Hell. Think not so much on the smalnesse of the command, as the greatness
of the commander. For even small commands often times, as we see by the example
of the fall of ADAM, tanto majori jusi^tia violantur, Aug Civ Dei, l. ^4 c. 12.
quanto faciliori observantia poterant custodivi, are with so much the greater
injustice violated, the greater justice punished, by how much with the easier
observance they might have been fulfilled.

Remember always to prize thy soul not according to thy nature but thy grace.
The gifts of nature, gentleness, civility, wit, understanding, memory, may
raise us often times like Saul higher then the people, and get their applause who
judge only by appearance, but they are the gifts of grace, which like DAVID
must make us gracious with God, and win his heart. Melius est esse digitum,
Aug. in Johan. Tract. 13.
and esse in corpore, quam esse oculum and evelli de corpore. For a thousand
times better it is in the eye of God to stand though but for a finger, and be
joined unto the body; then in the eye of man to look like an eye, and yet to
be plucked out.

Remember always to part thy care between thy body and thy soul, and if so
much time be perhaps too pleasingly spent in the food, the dress, the sleep,
the recreation of the one; do not forget to set apart some time also for the
other. Bernard Sermon 6. de Advent. dom.
Noli O corpus, noli praecipere tempora. For why should the pampering of the
body steal away that time, which might be far better spent in the tending of
the soul. Potes enim impedire animae tuae salutem, tuam ipsius operari non
potes, too much care of the body, may ruin it self and the soul too; but it
is the soul alone, which must save both soul and body.

Lastly and to conclude all; Remember that at the will of the Lord, thou art
but a Copyholder of thine own life; the Tabernacle of thy body, at his
pleasure he has set up, and at the same pleasure he will pluck down again;
whether at the first or the last watch, whether in the morning or evening of
thy days thou can not tell: and therefore watch always, that thou may be
prepared, that when ever thou shall lay down this earthly Tabernacle of thy
body, thou may with joy and cheerfulness commend thy soul into the hands of
thy Redeemer, in hope of an Eternal Mansion in the Heavens. Amen.


JOHN 20.17. Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.


WHen the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman;
that as in the beginning the woman (says St. PAVL) was in the transgression;
first in the transgression, not the man; so now the seed of the woman, not the
seed of the man, was to obtain pardon for this transgression, reconcile the
woman to the man, and both to God. And surely it is not without a mystery, in
the performance of this great mystery of our redemption, by the passion and
resurrection of our Savior; that when the Shepherd was now smitten, and the
Sheep (the Disciples) the men were scattered, yet the women they hold fast
together: his mother and mothers sister, MARY MAGDALEN, and MARY of Cleophas,
with many others, stand resolute by the Cross. The first that after his
burial durst come unto his sepulcher were women, and that for the greater
commendation of this fearful Sex, early in the morning, while it was yet
dark. The first to whom the Resurrection was made known were women, Why seek
ye the living among the dead (says the Angel to these women) He is risen, he
is not here. The first to whom our SAVIOVR himself appeared, was a woman;
Woman why weepest thou? says he to MARY MAGDALEN. Lastly, the first that had
the honor to carry these glad tidings to his Disciples was a woman; Go to my
Brethren (says he to the same MARY) and say unto them I ascend unto my Father.
But a little before PETER and JOHN were there, they went both into the
Sepulcher; yet they see, they hear nothing; why did not our Savior show
himself to them, but MARY must be his Messenger? CHRYSOLOGVS will give you the
true reason; Vt portet vitae, portet resurrectionis auditum, quae auditum
mortis portaverat and ruina; That as the woman had been the unhappy agent
between the the devil and man to procure his fall; so now the woman might
have the happiness to be employed between God and man, and recommend and
indeere her self again by the joyful news of his resurrection. If then so
great has been the honor vouchsafed unto this Sex, and above al unto this
MARY, how comes it to pass, that amidst so many courtesies, we find here so
great a strangeness in my Text? She that first sees him, speaks to him,
goes on his errand, must not (it seems) presume to touch him, Touch me not,
for I am not yet ascended to my Father.

In which words, great is the difficulty if we shall enquire, either why our
Savior should thus prohibit MARY to touch him, Touch me not; or why he
should give this reason for his prohibition; for I am not yet ascended to may
Father? In the handling of which words, first I will endeavor to clear the
difficulties thereof, and secondly in several observations, apply all unto our
selves.

To begin then with the difficulty of this strange prohibition, Touch me not;
Wherein shall we say with some that CHRIST being risen from the dead, his
mortal having put on immortality, and death being swallowed up in victory,
begins now to keep a distance, requires a more reverent respect, will not
condescend to the like familiarity which he had suffered heretofore; and
therefore seems here to give a check to MARY, coming after her wonted
manner to embrace him, Touch me not? But surely this cannot be the reason, for
we read in the last of St. Matthew, that this same woman with many others, and
in all probability even at this same time, did touch him, touch him without
control, hold him by the feet, and worshipped him: and appearing afterward to
his Disciples, he was so far from being thus estranged, as that, Behold,
says he, my hands and my feet; touch me, nay more, handle me, touch me
again and again: and St. JOHN in his first Epistle brings this as an
evidence of his Resurrection. That which we have heard, (says he) that which
we have seen, nay more, that which our hands have handled of the word of life,
declare we unto you. Or shall we say with others, that our Savior does not in
these words reprehend MARY, but inform her: she thought perhaps that CHRIST
being risen from the dead; would presently ascend unto the Father; and
therefore now with one large salutation she bids him welcome from the dead,
she takes her farewell from among the living, she falls down, she
holds him by the feet, she worshippeth him, and thinks she cannot now
touch him too long, as being never to touch him any more? And for this cause
they conceive our Savior might here say, Touch me not, that is; Do not
embrace me now, as if you were to take your last farewell; for I am not yet
ascending to my Father, have many days to continue here on earth, and you
shall have time enough hereafter to visit, to embrace, to discourse, and
therefore now forbear your salutations, arise rather and make others partakers
with your self of the same joy, Go tell my Brethren, that I ascend unto my
Father. But this interpretation, however at the first proposal somewhat
plausible, yet in the examination will not hold. For first it seems more
probable, as I shall show you anon, that MARY was mistaken rather in thinking
that he would stay longer then himself intended, then that he would go away
sooner then her self desired. And seondly we do not read that our Savior did
ever afterward appear to MARY, nay it appears rather by the message she was
to deliver, I ascend unto my Father, that he would inform her that he was not
to stay long, and that he meant not to be seen often. We may observe in the
last of St. JOHN, This is now the third time, but the third time only, that
CHRIST showed himself to his Disciples; and if but thrice to them, surely not
so often to MARY, that for this cause he should dismiss her now, as if there
would be time enough hereafter, Touch me not.

Surely then some other cause must be found out, for the full discovery
whereof, two things I shall observe. First that MARY is not here simply forbid
to touch her Master, that is, to salute and to embrace him: for St. Matthew.
plainly tells us, that not MARY only, but all the women held him by the feet
and worshipped him: and this embracing of the feet it was a common solemn
salutation among the Jews. Thus the Shunamite takes ELISHA by the feet,
Abigail falls at the feet of DAVID, the Ruler of the Synagogue, the woman of
Cannaan, at the feet of JESUS; Cornelius at the feet of PETER, JOHN of the
Angel: only she is advised here not to be too long, too passionate in her
salutations. For it may seem proble, that when all the other women were risen
from the ground, still Mary kneeleth, imbraceth him, holds him by the feet,
and as she loved much, striveth by her very gesture to testify the greatness
of her love. And we know there is nothing more usual in holy scripture, then
in the same latitude of terms to forbid the excess of actions, as if the
actions themselves were forbidden: I will have mercy and not sacrifice; that is
not sacrifice in comparison of mercy: Labor not for the meat that periseth,
Take no thought for tomorrow; that is no labor, no thought, in respect of the
thought and labor for that meat which endures to everlasting life; so here, Touch
me not; that is, do not too long lie prostrate at my feet, do not dwell upon
your salutations; or, as we use to say; Do not hang upon me. Secondly, that
such was the ignorance not of MARY only, but of all the Disciples in this
great mystery of CHRIST'S rising from the dead, as that till the day of his
Ascension they were still strongly possessed with the conceit of some great
worldly happiness, which should now presently befall them. All those
Spiritual discourses concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, the twelve Thrones,
the Houses and Lands, they apprehend in a carnal sense: and hence is it that
they so often quarrel who should be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven: And
what was their earthly conceit of this heavenly Kingdom, appears by that
question of theirs in the first of the Acts: Lord will thou not now restore the
Kingdom, (or the Kingdom of Heaven) unto Israel? meaning thereby such a
felicity in this life, whereby they hoped to enjoy a little heaven upon earth:
and this seems to be one maine reason of MARY'S excessive joys and
salutations; now at length she hoped the Kingdom would be restored, the
Thrones erected, the Houses and Lands divided, upon the false apprehension of
which imaginary happiness, our SAVIOVR thus gently corrects and informs
her, Touch me not. Be not therefore overjoyed with my presence, do not for
this cause so zealously embrace me, as if I were now risen to restore the
Kingdom unto Israel: for my Kingdom, I have told you, is not of this world;
but as I am now risen from the grave, so must I shortly ascend from the earth
too, to ascend to Heaven unto my Father; and there is the place of your true
happiness, there are the mansions which I am going to prepare, and therefore
now arise, and that my brethren may not deceive themselves with the like
worldly expectations; Go tell them that I ascend unto my Father. And indeed
very remarkable it is, that however our Savior, after his rising from the
dead, intended to stay forty days, before his ascension up to Heaven, to
certify and publish the truth of his Resurrection, to recollect the distracted
thoughts of his Disciples; yet in all his apparitions he discovers himself
strangely, and by starts, in one form to MARY, in another to the two
Disciples; comes suddenly to their astonishment while the doors are shut,
and after some short conference leaves them as much amazed, and vanishes out
of their sight: and here you see MARY has scarce leisure to bid him welcome,
but presently he is ready to bid her farewell. And all this was done, that by
thus strangely appearing it might manifestly appear, that therefore he
declined the frequence and concourse of the people, therefore he refrained the
reiterating of his plausible miracles, therefore he withdrew himself from the
familiarity even of his own brethren, that he might draw their minds from
that strong intention wherewith they were fastened on things earthly, that he
might let them understand that he was not now risen to restore the Kingdom
unto Israel; and then afterward, as they perhaps might imagine, dye again;
but that, as St. PAVL says, being raised from the dead he might dye no more,
death might have no more dominion over him: for in that he dyed, he dyed unto
sin once, but that he lives he lives unto God; lives not to continue upon
earth, but to ascend to Heaven unto his Father, and therefore now, Touch me
not, says he, Set not your affections on things below, but seek those things
which are above. And thus much for the Interpretation of my Text; I come now to
commend some observations to our selves.

First then when we see, after so many heavenly instructions, the
earthly-mindednesse of Mary, that so are her thoughts fixed upon things below,
and for this cause so is she overjoyed with the presence of her Master, as
that he is forced with a gentle check to reprove her indiscretion, Touch me
not. This may teach us as St. JOHN has already made the application to our
hand, that we love not, love not too well, the world, nor the things of the
world, that in our prayers and desires we be not too solicitous; Would I had
this House, this Land, this Wealth, this Honor, lest being guilty of the same
error, we may be subject to the same censure, and seem to hear from
Heaven, a Noli me tangere, do not for this cause Touch me, do not importune
me. It is a memorable answer of our SAVIOVR, when the Mother made that
ambitious request, Grant that my two Sons may sit, one at thy right hand, and
another at thy left hand in thy Kingdom; Are you able, says he, to drink of
the Cup, that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism, that I
shall be baptized with? not with the baptism of water and the spirit, but with
blood and Martyrdom: the more pleasing and honorable are the conditions she
desires, the more harsh and unpleasant are the conditions he proposes; as
indeed there is nothing more frequent with God, then to answer the desires of
men by contraries, because they are contrary often times to that main end, which
we should all desire; the good and welfare of our souls. And though we al know,
Not many noble, not many rich, but Blessed rather are the poor, blessed are
you when you suffer persecution; yet we are all, out of a sensual love to our
selves, too prone to press God with that request of IABEZ; O that thou would
bless me indeed, and enlarge my coasts, and that thy hand might be with me,
and that thou would keep me from evil, that it may not hurt me: so that God
knowing better how to give, then we know how to ask, as ofttimes in his anger
he grants our requests, so ofttimes again in his love denies them; and male
usurus eo quod vult accipere, Aug. in Johan. Tract. 73.
deo potius miserante non accipit, and such things which he foreseeth we ask
to our own hurt, he grants us a favor in not granting them. When BALAAM
tempted with the rewards of divination brought unto him by the Princes of
Balack, was desirous to go and to curse Israel, and for this cause ask't
counsel of God; the first answer he receives, is a Noli me tangere, Touch me
not, do not entreat me; for thou shall not go with them, Thou shall not curse
this people, for they are blessed. But upon the second message, when Balack
sends more Princes, and more honorable, with promise to promote him, and
grant what ever he should ask, he comes the second time to God, and then
because he was so earnest, Rise up, says God, and go with them: but
presently we read that the anger of the Lord was kindled against him, because
he went; and we find him branded by St. Peter with the perpetual ignominy
of loving the wages of unrighteousness; for the love whereof we read afterward
that even by the hand of Israel, for whose slaughter he was so ready to be
hired, himself was slain. Nu^b. 31.
Thus often times upon the covetous desires of worldly blessings God puts men off
by the direction of his word by the motions of his spirit, with a Touch me not;
do not for these things so earnestly solicit me: for that which you hope will
raise you, may chance to be your ruin. But yet if with an impetuous affection
the heart be so strong fixed, that it will not be removed, he gives them their
hearts desire, and according to the largeness of their heart, suffers them to
enlarge their estate, and make their gain their godliness: and now in a
sensual jollity, when indeed they are most cursed, are they forward most to
bless themselves, with a Soul take thy case, for thou have now enough laid up
in store: when as we know there is no evil more common under the Sun, then
goods thus purchased, to prove the undoing of the purchaser, the stone will cry
out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber will make answer; Woe to the
man that thus adds house to house, and land to land. For what shall it profit
thee for a time to have gained the whole world, Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. l. 3
and in the end to loose thine own soul for ever? Et infaelicissime omniu^,
cogitas quam been alii post te vivant, non cogitas quam male ipse moriaris, and
unhappy wretch thou art, to please thy self to think how happily thy
posterity, raised by thy art and industry, shall live, and never once think
how miserably thy self must dye. And indeed strange and wonderful it is to see
the impotent desire of the world, to purchase good house, good la^d, good
drink, good air, and yet how slender is their care to be good themselves;
Aug. Civ. Dei, lib. 3. c. 1.
quasi hoc sit homini maximum bonum, habere bona omnia praeter seipsum, as if
this were the chief good of man, to have all things good about him but himself.
Deuteronomy. 3.
As then we read, that when Moses made that passionate petition unto God, O
Lord thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand; let
me I pray thee go over, and see that good land beyond Jordan; God with a short
answer stops his mouth, let it suffice thee, speak no more of this matter, for
thou shall not go: so if sometime our earthly desires shall make the like
petitions unto God, may we prevent his answer by replying to our selves, Let it
suffice thee to have spoke once or twice, and if he will not hear thee, speak
no more. And indeed what madness is it for a man to be importunatly solicitous
for such things, which he knows not whether they will prove unto him good or
il? For notwithstanding that great licentiousnes which commonly wealth and honor
usurp unto themselves; so strict an imposition do we find laid upon all
things under the Sun, that he that shall seriously bethink himself of his
account, and that of him who receives much, much shall be required; shall find
perhaps the ods to be but very little, not to have the world to use; or (as St.
PAVL requires) to use the world, as if we used it not; unless in truth the
task may prove more easy, with patience to want the world, then with
moderation to enjoy it. Quotus enim quisque sapientum est cui non crescat cum
prosperitate vitiositas? Salvian de Guber. Dei, lib. 7.
For it is a great hazard to the virtue of a wise man, but that if riches
increase, sin will increase too. Labor not then for the meat that perishes,
nor take much thought for the blessings of this life. For all these things touch
not, trouble not the Master; with an honest and fair endeavor of our own daily
to ask our daily bread it will suffice; if we will importune him, let us make
choice of blessings worth our importunity, and not for religion only, but for
shame; lest it should be said that we are more careful of our bodies then our
souls, let us first seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and
then though in a low condition, it will be no hard matter to attain unto that
height of happiness which St. Hierom commends in one of his devout women; quae
unius cellula clausa angustiis latitudine paradisi frucbatur, De laudi^^
Asellae. Ep. ^5.
though cloistered within the compass of a narrow Cell, by divine
contemplation to expatiate throughout the whole latitude of Heaven. So shall we
put more gladness in our heart, then if our corn and wine were never so
plentifully increast, and always such blessings God is best pleased to grant,
which are most profitable for us to receive.

Secondly we may observe, that as Christ frustrats the expectation of Mary in
denying the worldly blessings she desires: so, to comfort her again, he
exceeds her expectation in proposing the hope of heavenly blessings, more the^
she now thought on No sooner did Mary (rapt with a sudden joy) cry out
Rabboni, have I found thee, O thou whom my soul loves; no sooner could she
fall down and worship him, as for joy that he was risen, so in hope that she
should be raised too, raised to honor in in that new Kingdom which she
persuaded her self would now shortly be restored, but presently all this
conceited happiness is blasted, with a Noli me tangere, Touch me not. Do not
therefore honor me, as if I were now risen to raise you to honor here on
earth; for though I be risen, I am not yet ascended, and till I be ascended you
must wait: yet with the same breath wherewith she is disheartened, she is
comforted again; for as the Yet in my text plainly intimates, and the end of
the verse expresses it, he was shortly to ascend to his Father, and their
Father, to his God, and their God; and then and there would he build up the
houses, set up the thrones, and make them all Kings and Priests. Thus is it
usual with GOD to with hold lesser blessings, where he intends to bestow
greater: for the earth, whereon MARY had now seated the throne of her desires,
shall not be worthy to be the footstool of that happiness, which he intended
to prepare. Indeed if in this life only we had hope of all men, good men were
most miserable. But blessed be God (says St. PAVL) who has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings, in coelestibus, in things heavenly, in places
heavenly: and again, Blessed be God (says St. PETER) who has begotten us
unto a lively hope, to an inheritance incorruptible, reserved for us in the
Heavens: and therefore often times withdrawes his favors from us in the depth
below, that we may the more earnestly seek after the^ in the height above.
For as God made some creatures merely heavenly, without any dependence for
their preservation upon things below, others merely earthly, without any hope
or expectation of any happiness above: so he made man in a condition between
both, his body from the earth earthly, but his soul a spark from Heaven; and
according to the two different parts whereof he does consist, he has provided
him two different mansions; first the earth, and then the Heaven. Now however
between these two mansions there be no compare; for the earth, which we see,
is temporal; but the Heaven which we see not, is eternal: yet because, as in
the absence of MOSES the people come flocking unto AARON, and Make thou Gods,
say they, to go before us, for as for this MOSES we know not what is become of
him: so in the absence of Heaven we are too prone to lay hold upon the earth,
and set our affections upon things below; the providence of God has purposely
blasted the felicity of all things sublunarie, set a Noli me tangere, vanity
and vexation of spirit on them all, that even this vexation here on earth, may
raise our spirits up to Heaven, with a Domine illic tabernacula, Lord let us
there, there make our Tabernacles. For alas the earth it has no constant form
nor comeliness, and when we look upon it, there is no true beauty that we
should desire it. If we complain that long and tedious is our expectation here
on earth, before ever we can come to enjoy those felicities in heaven, let us
solace our selves to think, that it is enough, and abunda^tly enough, that the
Disciple be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord: now let us look upon
our Lord and Master, and forty days is he tempted in the Wilderness, hungry,
and thirsty in a barren and dry land, and yet he is not ascended. The Foxes
have holes, the Birds of the air have nests, the Son of man not where to lay
his head; and yet he is not ascended. He is betrayed, arreigned, condemned,
crucified, buried, and yet he is not ascended. And that we may know this delay
of his proceeded not out of any impotency, but was meritorious and exemplarie
unto us, he rises again, and the same power of his, which raised him from the
grave, could presently have lifted him up to Heaven, yet he continues
visiting, co^forting, instructing his Disciples, and yet he is not ascended.
The Lord himself, you see, has tarried, tarried our leisure, tarried for us,
and shall not we wait patiently and tarry the leisure of the Lord. Perhaps he
therefore makes us tarry, that daily here adding to our grace, he may one day
add also to our glory: Et libenter suscipiam dispensationis moram magnitudine
favoris duplicatam, Hieron. ep. 33. ad Castratium.
and who would not forbear the principal a while, to receive it hereafter with
such interest? perhaps therefore himself tarries, because we are not yet
prepared for his coming. We complain often times, upon the sense of sickness,
and sorrow; How long Lord, how long will thou absent thy self? Whenas indeed
upon the conscience of our sins, we might rather turn our complaint to a
confession, how long Lord, how long have we bin absent from thee? Thy word has
been often preached unto us, in season, out of season, by thy Ministers
teaching, reproving, exhorting, and yet we have not obeyed. Thy grace has bin
graciously offered unto us, all the day long standing at the door of our hearts
and knocking, and yet we have not opened. Thou have made open proclamation;
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you: and
yet though never so heavy laden, we will not be weary of our sins, we
will not seek out for ease. Can we then wonder that God should yet delay to
put an end unto our sorrows, when as our selves have yet refused to put an end
unto our sins? Can we be impatient at the forbearance of that happiness,
which if God should deal with us, as we with him, not yet, nor yet, nor ever,
should we be so happy to enjoy? Why art thou then so troubled, O my soul; may
every pious soul now say, and why art thou so disquieted within me? delight
thou in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire. If thou fail of
thy hearts desire on earth ( Mary her self you see has thus been disappointed)
yet thou shall abunda^tly be recompenc't in heaven. For though here thou
seem to be but dead, dead in regard of the fruition of any great felicity in
this life, dead in the opinion of the mere natural man, who believes not the
hope of any life to come; yet thou haft a life hidden with Christ in God, and
when Christ who is thy life shall appear, then shall thou also appear with him
in Glory.

Lastly as you have seen whether Christ is ascended and where he will be
Touched, so now behold to whom he is ascended, and what hopes we have to Touch
him. My text tells you that as he was to ascend so he ascended to his Father.
Now if you shall say that Christ had a Father to ascend to, and a Father
pitieth his own child; but how shall we ascend, show us a Father too and it
suffices? I will show you: and indeed with joy of heart we may observe, that
all the honors of Christ are for the most part diffusive and communicative,
and even of this near Relation of Father and Son we also do participate.
Thou art my Son, my only begotten Son, says the Father unto him, In whom I
am well pleased; and pleased so well, that in him he has reco^cil'd the world
unto himself, of enemies he has made us his adopted Sons, and given us the
privilege to pray unto him, Abba Father. If then my Text will not content you,
read but the words following, and you can wish no more: Go to my Brethren, and
say unto them, I ascend unto my Father; but he stays not there, To my Father,
says he, and your Father, to my God, and your God. And surely, as when the
Father gives the Son, so when the Son gives the Father, together with him he
will give us all things. And indeed when I compare both Testaments together,
and observe at sundry times those diverse manners, whereby God in his goodness
has pleased to make manifest, not the effects only, but even the language of
his love; me thinks, (as after some cloudy storm, I see the Heavens look
clear, again and smiling) whereas before God spoke, as it were in a mighty
wind and Earthquake, looking high and holding his people under with those
Majesticke names of Lord, and Lord of Hosts; now with a courteous affability
he has bowed the Heavens, speaks in a still and a soft voice, and as if he
had set a veil before his Majesty, calls himself our Father, and the God
of peace. And surely but this single compellation Father proceeding from a
piously devoted soul, attended with sighs and groans, the Hears most
powerful Oratorie, is able to make such requests, which as our selves oftimes,
for fear and trembling, know not how to utter, so neither does God know how to
deny. The Prodigal you see, after he had spent all, and that vngratiously
too, yet when he thinks upon the gracious name of Father. I will go to my
Father, says he, and going but with a resolution only to say, Father I have
sinned, he is anticipated with imbracements, and by an indulgent welcome has
his pardon sealed unto him, before he could have time to ask it. For the arms
of Gods mercy, they are like the windore of Noah's Arc: if the Dove, our soul
shall sometime fly out, and the overflowings of ungodliness shall make us
afraid, let us return upon the wing, and with humility and repentance crave a
new admission, and behold all the day long are these arms of his wide open to
embrace us, and restore us to our rest again. For does a Father pity his own
child, and will not the Lord be merciful to them that fear him? nay call no
man Father upon earth, for beyond all natural affection we have a Father in
Heaven, and his love is like that of Jonathan and David, even greater then the
love of women. When Abraham intercedeth for Sodom, you see he puts in many
doubts and fears, I have taken upon me to speak, who am but dust and ashes;
and let not my Lord be angry, and once more, and once more let me speak: and
still he fears, and still he speaks, and still he obtains what he
speaks for: neither does God in mercy cease to grant his petitions, till he
in modesty gives them over. Thus sometime if the conscience of our sins, and
terror of the throne of Justice, and those terrible names of Lord, and jealous
God, shall make us to tremble, and be exceedingly afraid, as indeed in this
confident age it is good that we should sometime be frighted, yet upon our
true humiliation and contrition, we may boldly appeal from the throne of
Justice to the throne of Grace, and that gracious name of Father; and then
enough the flesh have been a Sodom, yet if the spirit now become an Abraham,
dust and ashes as we are, we may speak; and once more, and once more may we
speak, til we bring our sins, from fifty shall I say? nay from an innumerable
number, for who knows how often he offends? to forty; to twenty, to ten, to
nothing; and blot them out of the book of Gods remembrance. Let me then say
once again, Why art thou so disquieted O my soul, and why art thou so
troubled within me? put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good, implore
the adoption of a son, and get thy soul sealed unto the day of redemption,
and then with confidence may thou appear before the Tribunal of God, where
thou shall find the Judge thy Father, thine Advocate thy Brother.

But let us beware that we do not please and content our selves with a titular
alliance, for it is not a Lord, Lord, nor my Father, Salvian ad Eccles. Cathol.
l. 3
my Father, will suffice. Assumptio religiosi nominis spon^^o devotionis. Our
challenging of God to be our Father, chalengeth from us the duty of his
Sons. For as under the Law, if they were obedient unto his will, and with
care and conscience did perform their service to their Lord, he did show
himself a Father to his servants; so under the Gospel, if like graceless
children we shall neglect the will of our heavenly Father, he will show
himself a Lord unto his Sons: and as then not every one that cried Lord, so
nor now every one that prays Father, but he that does the will, whether of
Lord or Father, he and he alone shall be acceptable in his sight.

So then to draw all to a conclusion. As we are all already filii regni,
children of the Kingdom, and called to be Saints; so because we know such
children for their disobedience may in the end be shut out of this Kingdom,
let us strive to be filii regnantes, to reign as children in this Kingdom, and
make our calling sure. CHRIST is now ascended up on high unto his Father, and
has given gifts to us, such as will enable us to follow him; let us then be
careful so to improve these gifts, to add to our Faith virtue, to virtue
knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, and charity, that as our graces
rise, so may our hope of glory rise withal, and when age and death shall
press down our bodies to the grave, our souls may be lifted up to Heaven,
and take a comfortable farewell of our friends, even in the very language of
our Savior; Weep not for me, but for your selves, for I am now ascending to
my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOr Iohanni read Iohanne, page 8. necessitude read vicissitude, p. 11, so r.
and, p. 25, last r. left, p. 46, that dele, p. 47, 1. dele, p. 53, for dele, p.
63, our r. one, p. 72, strong r. strange, p. 77. beneficii r. beneficiis, p.
111, partunebat r parturiebat, p. 122, filiis r. filium, p. 143, succentunate
r. succenturiate, p. 150, Those r. these p 153, heavy, and r. and heavy, p.
177, Nor r., nor, ibid. vvherever r. whe^ever, p, 183, punishes r. pincheth,
p, 203, this r, the, p, 208, an r, on, p, 212, custodivi r, custodiri, p. 216,
that thou r, that so always thou, p, 223, hold r, hold, p, 225, have r, but
have, p, 227, We r., we. p, 32, dele 2. p, 256, favor^^ r, foenoris, p, 258,
nor r, nor.


