THE EYE OF FAITH open to GOD.

Unfolded in a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of that virtuous and Religious
Gentlewoman Mrs. JVLIAN BLACKVVELL, together with a Narration of her virtuous
Life and happy Death.

By JOHN SEDGVVICK Bachelor of Divinity, and Preacher of GODS Word in London.

Prove 31. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised. LONDON, Printed by GEORGE MILLER. MDCXL.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL JOHN BLACKVVELL Esquire, his Majesty's Grocer, comfort, and
happy imitation of the deceased.
Sir,
WHilst Ministers preach Funeral Sermons, they find the wind setting in their
faces from their auditors: some think that too little, others that too much,
and most that what is spoken concerning the dead is but formality or flattery;
They report that the Aethiopians do picture Angels black, and Devils white,
and I think that they Amandus Polanus Syntag. Theol lib. 20 c. 17.
justly suffer censure who do knowingly call evil good and good evil: yet I
deem, that meet and just praise is a due to Gods Saints departed, and Salatia
vivorum, non suffragia mortuorum. Orationes Aug.
though they add not to their honor and happiness being in Heaven; yet they
may prove both comforts and instructions to the living left upon earth;
especially to such who forgo those with grief whom they for a time enjoyed
with love; I do not send the living to the dead with Papists, yet let me tell
you, that there are these things comfortable to the living from the dead. 1.
Their holiness of life, and comfort in death, grounded evidences for our hope
of their future happiness: And 2. That there shall be a time of meeting and
enjoying each other again at the last day, such being not lost but gone before
us; add to this the good of their examples (which are of great force) for the
teaching of posterity; who may take them for their pattern, and so resemble
them in their religious courses, that they may seem to survive in them: both
these ends are my aim in publishing this Sermon, and with it the just
testimony which I gave unto your late loving and beloved Wife, whom death has
freed from all sinful and sorrowful evils, and brought to the enjoyment of
her God in Heavens happiness; she well knew that the world could never make
her fully happy; and that Christians are never in their best condition, till
that they are in their heavenly condition; I desire not to renew your grief,
but to show that I had a share in your loss of that Jewel laid up by God in
the highest Heavens; whom all your care and cost (which did demonstrate you to
be a loving Husband) could not longer continue on earth: whilst she was yours,
you did (I confess) what could be done for her credit, comfort, and
continuance, and thereby deserved from her that praise which often she gave of
you to my self and others; but being gone, there remains a double monument of
her; one of her own, for she has left with you those in whom she lives,
whom (I need not say to you) you must love as a Father, and a little the more
for the Mothers sake; another of mine in this Publication, wherein her memory
is made precious among the Saints, and perpetuated unto all posterity; a Work
done by me upon your own earnest entreaty, and therefore cannot but be
welcome unto you. You have your desire, let me have mine. Think of your
loss; and remember your self, and place, in which God has set you; doing
things so, that your comfort within, and credit without, may still be upheld in
the Churches of God, amongst whom you have obtained an excellent name: I need
to say no more to you, but that I am

Your much obliged friend, Io: Sedgvvick.
From my house in S. Dunstances in the East, London.
To the Reader, and in special to my worthy good Friends, in and aabout the
City of London, Peace, and settling of mind.
THe shaking of A double temper of men in t^mes of danger.
the water does not more discover the mudd that is at the bottom, nor the
beating of the pulse the distemper of the body; then Times of Danger do bewray
men in point of defect, or excess: now men appear 1. To be careless.
either to be careless and gracelesly secure, having their eyes bound up, and
their consciences so seared, that they neither see or fear any danger: or to
be over-fearing: having their 2. To be over fearful.
eyes too open upon, or their hearts too much affected with the sadness, and
miseries of the times; the first sort I leave to the vanity of their mind, and
sinfullnesse of their courses, assuring them that their continuance in carnal
security is to them an evident forerunner of their future misery: the latter
sort I shall advise to consider of these two things: First, that the The
Springs of overmuch fearing.
overmuch fearing of man's heart in evil times does arise, from a false eye,
or a wrong foundation: I mean the eye, and the Arm of flesh; he that at such
time has no other eye to see withal, then that by which he sees every thing,
or being able to pierce no deeper, or look no higher then natural reason, or
outward objects can help him, shall be sure to find that his senses will
fail him, and his troubles sink him: Besides, the Arm of Flesh trusted unto,
and relied upon, will make him to ebb and flow, and shall hold his spirit in a
course of such constant agitation, that in the end he shall flagg and faint:
Flesh at the best is too weak a prop to stay the soul, a certain impeacher,
and empairer of man's confidence, and comfort; and who so do put it into the
place of a god, shall undoubtedly find from it the deceivings of a creature.
Secondly, that the best way to quit our selves of an over-fearing heart in the
days of trouble, is to get an eye of Faith, which alone shuts up the eye of
sense, and gets such views of Gods Love, Power, and providence, that God is
known to be, and also made the sole stay, and staff of the soul; upon whom
whosoever truly trusts he is in such safety, that no malice of men or devils
can endanger him. My Brethren, had we the Angelical eyes of faith, we should
fear less; though times unto sense are distressefull, and almost desperate:
this alone can see a better issue then carnal reason can apprehend, and an
higher power to protect and guard then humane helps are either liekly or able
to afford; this will make a man wait till the fifth Scene of the Tragedy is
acted, knowing that troubles have their turnings, as spring-tides have their
ebbings: This eye David had in his troubles, as the following Discourse will
show you, and this eye I wish unto you all, that your confidences and comforts
may abound: and though I hope that many of you have this eye, yet beholding
your dimnesse, and weakness, I have sent unto you these following Meditations
upon a Text given unto me, to preach on at the Funeral of Mistrisse Julian
Black well, and I desire that they may have the same work upon you that was
wrought upon Elisha's servant, that by them you may be enabled to rid your
minds of those base and unbeleeving fears, wherewithal you have been too
long and too much assaulted and perplexed; and may direct your souls amid your
troublesome cogitations, and distractions to your only resting place, namely,
the strong God in whom all safety and security is to be found, which is the
only thing aimed at in the public Preaching, and sought for in the private
prayers of him that is your daily remembrancer,

IO: SEDGVVICK.

THE Eye of faith open to GOD.
PSALM. 141. VER. 8. But mine eyes are unto thee O God the Lord, in thee is my
trust, leave not my soul destitute.
GOD was with David in love, and David was with God in life and that in every
condition of his life; the Context does render David in a very sad calamitous
condition, and the Text does report him unto us in an holy and Christian
carriage toward his God, for his eyes were upon him, his confidence in him,
and his prayer unto him: a fit behavior for all Christians in sorrow and
distress:

The words contain two parts,

1. A believing profession laid down in two choice actions respecting God as
their chief object, and they are 1. The carriage of his eyes from men to God,
Mine eyes are unto thee O God the Lord. 2. The planting or firm placing of his
trust or confidence in God the Lord, in thee is my trust.
2. An hearty petition, the undoubted evidence of his believing profession ( a
believing heart is a praying heart) Leave not my soul destitute.
From the whole we see, Note. The godly do know theselves both in their graces
an^ practices.
that good men do know their own tempers in grace, and speak their own
practices in godliness; David did not vaunt himself out of pride, but humbly
expresses himself in that carriage which does belong unto all Christians in
their sad and distressed conditions; I see no reason why Christians may not
speak of their gracious practices so be they do it sincerely, humbly, for
instruction of others; may not all ages learn from David how to compose their
affections and dispose their souls in evil times? but come we more closely
to the words.

Mine eyes are unto thee O God the Lord:

Whence I conclude,

Doct.
That in calamitous and distressefull conditions, Christians have or should
have their eyes unto God the Lord.

When Iehosaphat and the people were in great distress, and the times were
full of fears and dangers, insomuch that all humane power and policy failed
them, (for the Text says, They knew not what to, do) then they had their eyes
unto God; they say, But our 2 Chronicles. 10. 12.
eyes are upon thee. When Stephen Acts 7. 5 56.
was stoning he looked up steadfastly into Heaven and saw the glory of God,
when David was in danger and the Church in Captivity, they did lift up their
eyes to the Psa. 121. 1
hills from whence came their help, and had their eyes to God that dwells in
the Heavens. For the opening of 123. 1.
the point observe these things.

First, that Gods eyes of mercy and compassion are as surely upon his to behold
them for their good, as their eyes can be believingly upon him in the
expectation of good from him, a Christian looks up to God, and God looks
down on a Christian, the Christian says, O Lord mine eyes are unto thee, and
God says, O Christian mine are upon thee, sure I am; that eye answers to
eye, no man can look up, but God will look down upon him, hence says God,
Surely I have seen the affliction Exodus 3. 7.
of my people which are in Egypt, they looked up to God in their groanings and
cries, and God looks down upon them, in a merciful regarding and relieving
of them.

Secondly, that there are two sorts of eyes by which men do look up unto God.

1. One are the eyes of the Eyes of two sorts.
body, which we may call the eyes of sense. 2. The other are the eyes of the
soul, which are called the eyes of Faith.
The point is true of both, though the latter be intended.

Thirdly, that a Christian may have God before his eyes, as well as his eyes
unto God in times of affl^ctions, the God before the eyes, what?
former does note an act of reverentiall and awful respect begot^en in the
soul toward Gods Majesty at such times especially: for when should men more
awe God, and reverence before him, then when they are in and under trouble? the
latter does note the advancings of the soul by the workings of The eyes unto
God, what?
Faith, to a looking for the promised good from God to a man in and under
afflictions; and this is the thing I am to speak of, which I thus open to you.

1. That there are many special promises for good unto Christians in all
(especially) their afflicted conditions, yea God has promised to make every
condition good, according to that of the Apostle, All things shall work Romans
8. 18.
together for good, Simile.
even the cross going of the wheels shall further the right going of the clock.

2. That the heart of a Christian is much lifted up after the enjoyment of the
promised good; we do naturally fear evil, and desire good, and though we
do see that a man may do us hurt, yet our eyes are not upon him that he
should do us hurt, the Scripture phrase is, I looked for Job 30. 26
good, and I waited for light.

3. That the soul never advances it self to look up in a waiting and
expecting way until it is made believing: unbeleeving men have no God to look
unto, nay they are blind and without eyes toward God, it is Faith that is the
hand that opens the door, and helps the eye to look in and upon God, this
gives light, and sight unto the soul, having the command of the body, and
soul, and senses in exercising themselves upon God, I say Faith has her
senses, it is a grace in the soul that has feet whereby she goes to God,
hands whereby she does take hold of God, arms wherewith she does embrace God,
ears whereby she does hear God, and eyes whereby she does look up to God;
in a word, it is a soul within the soul, and a body within the body, not an
eye, but eyes, which is enough for the vision and fruition of God, and it is
whole work is to bring in the soul unto God, and to determine it self in
God, it takes much pleasure in God, and satisfies it self with God at all
times; the soul by it is cast into this frame of reasoning dependence, God
has said that he will do me good in all my conditions, and I have his word
for it which is sure, and unchangeable, when I shall be answered I know not,
but that I shall be answered I am confident; this one thing will I do, I will
still keep to my God, and never give off the word of his promise, for I know
that he will do me good in his time; I will set me down and rest me quiet
in his word, waiting upon him, and looking for him, believing that he will
never frustrate my expectation, this is, or should be the carriage of the eyes
unto God.

4. That we do not narrow up this carriage of a Christians soul toward God
only to the times of misery and distress, we must know that the eyes of
Christians are upon God in all conditions of their lives, in times of
prosperity they eye him, and observe him as well as in times of adversity; but
herein is the truth and power of their Faith seen, that no dark or dangerous
condition can hinder them from looking up unto God, suppose that flesh and
blood does interpose by contrary reasonings, and that the outward condition
seems to go contrary unto a promise, so that it shall be all night and no
day, all sorrow and no joy, yet a Christian that is in darkness and has no
light, has by the power and presence of Faith, a God to go to, and to look
upon: nothing can take off his dependence upon God, and expectation of good
from God: read Isa. 50. 10. and Hab. 3. 17, 18.

4. Fifthly, that all Christians do not equally cast their eyes upon God in
evil times; it is true, they have all eyes, and all a God to look unto, and
upon, yet for as much as they have not all an equal measure of light in
revelation, nor an equal measure of assistance for application, their
expectations of good from God cannot be equal: experience does teach us, that
some men's eyes are upon God with victory and conquest over the Arguments of
sense and reason, and the workings of fears and doubts; other Christians have
their eyes as truly upon God, but it is with much weakness and many combats;
I alas! they have much a do to look up, and it may be they are so far from
an evidentiall looking upon God, that their expectation is only habitual and
their whole life is the longing and endeavor of their souls to bring their
eyes unto God.

6. Sixthly, that even a David whose faith carries his eyes upwards toward God
in his promises and name of mercy, may have his eyes at sometime downward even
below his desire; I cannot conceive that he so sixth his eyes on God, but that
as he was man and did walk on the earth, he had his eyes on the earth to
direct his going; and as he was a Christian, the eyes of his soul were
sometimes downwards, for Faith would make him to be looking into himself, so
as he did see into his own sinfullnesse and unworthiness; and again, if we
take him as he was in trouble and misery, I doubt not to affirm that his eyes
were too open upon the same, and that he did look down upon the roaring and
raging of the Sea to the q^alming of his Spirit, and the failing in those
degrees of expectation which formerly he found in himself, I say he was not
only sensible, but over sensible of his troubles, and was so up and down in
his expectations, that even perishing thoughts take hold of him, for he says,
One day 1 Samuel 27 1.
I shall die by the hands of Saul, Neither David nor any Christian can hold up
his Faith in looking unto God at all times alike: but thus it is with them, at
sometimes they are higher, at sometimes lower, sometimes stronger, and
sometimes weaker in their dependence.

But whence is it that they have their eyes upon God?

I conceive it springs from these causes: First, because God and they stand in
relative terms each unto other: we say there is no comfort in an absolute God
standing by himself distant from the soul; but in a relative God made over in
covenant unto his: so that it is the mutual relations that are made and
established in the Covenant betwixt God and them, that makes them to fix their
eyes upon God: God is Father, and Friend, and Lord, and Husband, and Guide unto
his children, and no marvel if their eyes are upon him.

Secondly, because in God is an All-sufficiencie for help and comfort in evil
times, the creatures have an emptiness in them, and cannot become either
foundation or comfort to a Christian in and under his miseries; but God is full
and fit even one that exceeds all maladies, able to supply all wants, and to
satisfy all cravings, he being an universal good, full Fountain, and high
hill, or mountain set up for the Christian to look unto.

Thirdly, because of the promise of good which is made unto them by God; this
is truth, that Faith is founded on the Promise, and the good that it does
expect is a promised good; Now because the soul has the grant of a promise,
hereupon has it a ground for expectation; for take away the promise, and the
light is removed, and the eyes are so put out, that there is no turning of the
soul toward God; as the door turns upon the hinges, so does the soul turn
in a believing way upon the Promises.

To apply this point.

Faith that is in wicked men in times of calamity; this we say of them, that
their eyes are upon and unto the creatures both to see what they have done
against or can do for them; they look down ward to the creatures, and have
an eye of expectation of help from them, if they are sick, they insist in the
hand of the Physi^ion; if they are in danger, they run to this house and that
Tower; to this policy and that power, looking to be safe and secure in and by
these means, if they are dying they fly to this creature and that Saint; so
that still their eyes are creature-ward and earth-ward; wicked men in no
condition can look upward to God; in prosperity they scorn God and his will,
and cannot look unto him with an observing eye; and in times of adversity they
fall off from him, and do not look upon him with an expecting eye, and in
this they do purchase to themselves an increase of misery here, and assurance
of damnation hereafter; no looking unto God, no comfort of conscience in any
condition.

God in evil times; men do justly cry out of the miseries of ourtimes, and I
think we may say, We have heard a Jer. 30. 5
voice of trembling there is fear, and not peace, alas! for 7.
that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of. Jacobs
trouble. Our times are trembling times, and troublous times, and there is no
Christian man or woman but must needs confess so much, and beside the general
calamity, we have the time of our particular misery, our conditions either are,
or have been sad and perplexed, tell me now, where are your eyes fixed? upon
God? then it is well, and give me leave to press you to this trial upon this
one ground, because that multitudes of men have no eyes upon God in evil times.

Surely if our eyes are upon God,

First, we shall make God present with us, beholding and regarding us in our
miseries; the eye does make the object present to it self, and faith looking
upon God, does make God present to a Christian; the truth is, that it is no
misery that can divide a Christian and his God, for God has tied his presence
and love with his children in the fire, and water, and prison, and dungeon; and
Esa. 43. 2.
it is as true that if the eye of faith be once rightly set upon God in times
of trouble, there is no want of God to such a soul; such a one whose eyes are
upon God, may want the company of near and dear friends, they may be
seque^tred and kept from him; but ^he company of a God he can ^ever want, a
Christian is never without his God, so long as he can keep up the eye of his
Faith upon God: Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, thou art
with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

O sweet comfort and happy condition in times of distress! when the soul can
say men are against me, yet God is for me; men are shut out from me by men,
but my God they cannot shut out from me, the eye of Faith will bring down God
into a dungeon, and see him in a dungeon, and makes a man to see no want of
creature-company, because he has divine company.

Secondly, we shall have some comfortable representation of God unto us; it i^
true in nature, that the eye in it self has no color, but all its color is
in the object; and I conceive that the glorious discoveries of God are made
over unto Faith; till the eye of Faith be erected in the soul, God is in
darkness to a man, let things have a color Simile.
and luster in them, until light come to make them clear, they are as if they
were not, so though there be a glory in God, yet to sense and reason, God is a
God in night and darkness, or such a one as cannot be espied and observed, but
when Faith comes into the soul, now God is a God in the light, and the
Christian is enabled in some measure to enjoy the blessed reflexe of God to his
soul, whereby even in his greatest misery he is able to look upon his God with
that boldness, that the very beholding of his God in the way of Faith does
greatly joy and glad his soul, making him unspeakeably glorious unto his
soul, a man that looks up to God shall see more grounds of comfort seated in
God, then grounds of sadness in his troubles, the face of times cannot gather
more blackness or threaten more misery; then Gods face does promise and assure
peace and protection; Faith sees all the worst below, and best above in God
and with God.

Thirdly, we shall be ravished, and greatly affected with the glories and
beauties of God, vision draws on affection, or things do affect the soul by
sense, by looking we come to liking; the true cause why a wicked man does
neither joy in God or admire the beauties that are in God, is because he wants
eyes to look upon God, but the man whose eyes are opened, and open unto God,
takes notice of such excellency of grace and mercy in God, that his soul is
taken with God, and rapt up into a holy ravishment and admiration; Now he cries
out who is a God like unto our God? O the Majesty and mercy that is in him; I
see that in him for me and my necessity, that I cannot see in all the
creatures put them together; the soul does now begin to feed it self and
cheer it self in and upon God in the midst of all afflictions making this to
be its greatest comfort, that it has such a God, who is so great a good to
enjoy: Faith cannot look up to its God without increasing of its confidence
and comforts.

Fourthly, we shall be set into a longing after God, and his comforts; the
seeing of things stirs up desires in us after them, so the looking up to God
does fill the soul with a fervent longing after the Lord; the Christian that
looks up hopes: the soul in this case is much after the manner of a tender
wife, who looking for her Husband by such a day, or such an hour, she is
faint and full of grief until that day come, and when the day is come, she
runs to the door and window to see if he be not coming, being much troubled
that he is not yet come, surely all the sight of God which we have by Faith
does cast us into hope of enjoying God according to his promise, and now our
souls Psalm. 119. 81. Romans 8. 23 Psalm. 119. 82.
do faint for him and his salvation; we sigh in our selves waiting, and our
eyes do fail for his Word, saying, when will thou come to us and comfort us?
O when shall I have my help and deliverance from the Lord! the eye of Faith
does either actually bring down God into the soul, and is as the setting of
the eye of a skillful fowler upon a bird, who if he hold the bird in his eye,
he will not have him long out of his hand; or actually carry up the soul unto
God in strength of desire, so that the soul cannot be in any quiet until God
be gotten and gained.

Fifthly, we shall not be overwhelmed by the sight of any calamities; troubles
beheld without a God do exceedingly damp and daunt the spirits of men, till
Elishaes servant had his eyes opened to see the strength of Heaven, his heart
was much dismayed by the host of the Syrians; but to have an eye to God in
times of trouble, will prove the great upholdment of the soul, and it is no
miserable estate that can distress that man, whose eyes are the eyes of Faith;
say that troops of troubles come, and that we are to encounter with
contrarieties and crosses, even the ruffling rage of wicked me^, whose power in
some degree might equal their malice, yet such a soul stands, and his heart
is stayed within him; for he sees more with him then against him. O the
wisdom and power which Faith does see in God for the preservation of those
that are his.

I read of a General, who Antigonus.
finding his soldiers dismayed by the smalenesse of their company and the
multitudes of their enemies, asked them, but how many do you reckon me at? who
am your Commander and Leader? this General is Faith in the soul, which takes
off all the disquietments of our hearts under trouble by making men to be
creatures, and setting God ruling in the midst of his enemies, surely it was
this eye of Faith that wrought Luther to such confidence of heart in times of
dread; for when he was told of great troubles that were like to befall him and
the rest in Germany, he made this answer, come, come, no matter for them all,
let us sing the forty sixth Psalm, and let them do their worst: so faith the
believers soul, let men combine and conspire to do me and the Church all the
mischief they can, and let things go how they will, and dangers be what they
will, yet I see a God with me, and for me, and unto him will I look, for by
him I am sure to be safe, The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, Psalm 9. 9.
yea a refuge in time of trouble. The Mariner is not quite dejected, Simile.
though he sees all his Sails torn and gone, so long as his Anchor holds;
the Soldier is not vanquished so soon as his out-workes are taken, if he be
in a Castle or Town of strength; neither is a Christian quite out of comfort
and hope so long as Zach. 9. 12.
he sees his God remaining; but is a prisoner of hope turning to his strong
hold.

Sixthly, we shall be fearful of sinning in times of calamities, God, seen by
Faith is acknowledged by duty, and a man's eyes cannot be upon God at any time,
but he shall walk with God, and tremble to sin against him; times of
affliction should be times of praying and of holy walking; can a man look upon
God but he shall observe that God has an eye upon him, and should not Gods
sight be the great awer of the soul from sinning? to look upon a Judge
looking upon us, and to cut a purse is the aggravation of a felony, and to
have an eye upon God in trouble, and to mingle sin with our sorrow is an
argument of a false and faithless heart.

David, O let us have our eyes to God in all our extremities, God says, Look
unto me and be saved, where Isa. 45. 22.
we see, that we can never be safe till we look unto God; I know it is a
very difficult, but yet it is a very useful and comfortable thing to have our
eyes upon God in times of danger and death; the eye upon God makes the burden
easy and heart lightsome; It is said of the Governor of a ship, that he is
Oculus ad coelum, for though in a storm he has his hand on the stern, yet
his eye is to the pole star, and it must be said of a Christian that he is
Oculus ad Deum, an eye upon or unto God; O that our eyes in these evil times
were less upon the creature, and more upon God; O look up, look up unto God
the Lord.

Now that we may with comfort practice this duty, I shall desire you,

First, to get those eyes which David had, we shall never practice David's
duties without David's graces; how can a man see who wants his eyes? and is it
possible that the soul should ascend to God that wants Faith? set in for these
eyes, a man must be more then nature, and reason, and sense that has his eyes
toward God in evil times.

Secondly, to get that God which David had, I tell you, that David had gotten
God in his acquaintance and by way of special interest, and this made him to
look upon him in an evil time; if God and we are strangers, or there remain
strangeness twixt God and us, we shall never turn the eye of Faith unto him
in any condition of our life; I look for help from my friend, not from a
stranger, O acquaint your selves with God, and then you may have your eyes upon
Him.

Thirdly, close not with Satan in his temptations, it is the maine work of the
Devil to keep men off from the fight of God, it is noted, that he it is that
does blind or cast dust into the eyes of men, 2 Cor. 4. 4
interrupting, and intercepting the soul in all its recourses unto God. I am
certain of this, as at all times, so especially in times of trouble, Satan is
most in his darkning works unto Christians; then he is raising up clouds and
mists to hinder the clear sights of God; now he labors to keep down the eye
from looking Satan keeps Christians from looking up to God three ways.
up to God; O it is his most malicious work to rob a Christian of his God in
point of comfort and confidence, and this he does many ways,

1. Sometimes by disgracing and disabling God unto a Christians Faith, as if
that God were not able enough for supplies, or answerable to exigencies, of
which if the soul be once persuaded, it will never be drawn to look toward
God in an expecting or depending way, for who will go to an empty conduit to
fetch water?

2. Sometimes by disgracing and disabling a Christians Faith unto God, for what
though God be able to do him good that looks up unto him in evil times, yet
says he, where are thine eyes? and what is thy Faith (which is so weak and
poor) that it should be able to become thine eyes to look unto God? can any
man see that wants eyes? or look so far whose eyes are dim?

3. Sometimes he does over-greaten the danger, and makes men believe that
deliverance thence is impossible, which despaires the heart from expecting
help from God: Now let the Devil come which way he will, we must not believe
him against God, or follow him in his suggestions against a duty, but still
hold this conclusion, that God is never so dark to sense, but Faith can see
him, and the eyes of Faith are never so weak, but that they can thorough the
darkest cloud and in the greatest storm, see an All-seeing and an All-helping
God, whose comforts are ready and suitable for miserable and suffering
Christians.

Fourthly, dust not your selves with the dust of the world: If men look down
too much upon Earth, they shall never look up to God in Faith, for the eye
cannot at once look both ways, a worldly heart is a dark heart, if the
riches, and honors, and pleasures of the world, once get into the eye of the
soul, it is not possible for the soul to look up unto God, can the bird fly
upwards if you tie a weight upon its leg? then is it possible for an earthly
heart to look upon God in evil days. I have read of Duke of Alva to Henry
the fourth.
one that was asked if he had not observed the eclipses; and his answer was,
that he had so much to do upon Earth, that he had no leisure to look up to
Heaven; and this I am sure of, that an heart idolizing the creature can never
be truly depending on God, can the eye see its object that is full of dust? or
that soul look up to God that is buried in the creatures?

Fifthly, keep the eye much in mourning for sin; a sight of sin and corruption
accompanied with godly sorrow for the same, will clear our eyes toward the
comfortable sight of God, and make us more fit to turn our eyes toward him in
any condition; he that cannot grieve and weep for sin, shall never look up to
God with confidence; Repentance is the turning of the soul from sin unto
God, so that men practicing repentance are in the right way of having their
eyes toward God.

Sixthly, go to God for help and strength unto the work, for no man can see
God without God, the Lord must take off the covering cast over all people, and
the veil that is spread over all Isa. 25. 7.
Nations, and vouchsafe the light of Heaven unto the soul, ere the soul can
see him or look unto him, and therefore let us make this prayer, Lord open
mine eyes that I may see Thee, and turn mine eyes from the creatures, that I
may be able to look up unto Thee in a depending and expecting way.

In Thee is my trust.
Here is trust well placed, I wounder not at the connection of these two; to
have eyes on God and to trust in God: sight is a convincing sense and best
persuading; where we expect good, we dare to trust, and no soul is more
confident then the soul that is most expecting by Faith, the point intended is
this,

That the truly Godly do Doct. 2. Suffering times are trusting times.
more or less trust in God in times of calamities: suffering times are
trusting times, here note (that by suffering times) Suffering times what?
I mean times of inward and outward straits wherein either a man's fears are
many by reason of danger threatened, or a man's sorrow is much by reason of
misery felt, called Amos 5. 13. Pro. 15. 1^
in the Scripture evil times, or days of affliction. 2. By trusting in God at
such times, I mean that choice expression of Faith in applying the soul
Trusting in God what?
to God by an act of recumbencie and dependence, upon the application of the
word of his promise, take it up 7. Things about trusting in God.
thus.

1. That God has made over in the word of his promise abundance of good and
mercy, which he will vouchsafe unto his being in and under misery, as That he
will be with them, know their souls in adversity, and administer both
seasonable and suitable comforts unto them.

2. That the trusting soul does take God at his word, and closes with the
promise made, not only by general assenting, but by particular applying acts;
he sees himself and his condition in the promise, and makes it not only
agreeable and fitting to and for such an one as he is but withal he does
fasten upon it for himself, conceiving upon good grounds that he is the man
that is spoken unto, and unto whom this gracious promise does belong, this I
call the souls putting it self into a promise.

3. That the soul in making God his trust does set God in his promise before
it as a rock, or bottom, or foundation for upholdment and staying: so that he
is apprehended to be such a one that will not suffer the soul to sink or
perish; for no man will lean upon a broken reed or sandy foundation.

4. That the maine nature of trusting in God, stands in the laying or hanging
all a man's hopes, for help and comfort in evil and sad times, upon the Lords
truth for the performance of his own most gracious promise.

5. (That the person thus trusting in God is the truly godly) my meaning is,
that we must exclude all wicked and unregenerate men from this dependence and
reliance on God in evil times: none but a renewed and sanctified heart can
truly trust in God: it being a work of grace to trust in God; hence says
David, Psalm. 64 10.
The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and the
Prophet Isaiah Isa. 50. 10.
says, Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him trust in the
Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

6. That trusting in God is either.

1. Habitual. Or, 2. Actual.
Then does the soul habitually trust in God, when it is inclining and bending
toward act of reliance; O the soul is willing to rest it self, and has a
constant disposition in it to stay it self upon God, even when it is not able
actually to exercise its trusting upon God in that way and measure it would and
should; but take me a Christian at the worst and lowest, and we may affirm of
him, that he does habitually trust in God.

7. That the godly man does trust in God 3. ways, 1. Only, In thee is my
trust, says David, not in men as God, nor in men with God, but in God alone.
2. Wholly, the all, even the might and the truth of their confidence is cast
upon God. 3. Constantly, at all times and in all conditions do they rely upon
God, though chiefly and mostly in evil and sad times.

Now this they do upon 4 Grounds of Christians trusting on God.
these 4. grounds.

First, Virtute praecepti, because that God does call for, and require their
trusting in Him; the commands are so many that I shall save my labor to quote
the Scriptures.

Secondly, ratione pacti, because God in the covenant has made over himself
to be Sun and shield, rock and tower of defense, yea and an house of
fortresses unto his, and one every way All-sufficient for the defense and
safety of his, so that there is no danger so great and imminent from which his
power is not able to rescue his; as he can hurt and spoil all the Churches
enemies, blasting their power and defeating their policy, so he can shelter
his under his wings, becoming their safety and security, he is the hill of
help and mountain for safety, it is the Periphrasis Psalm. 65. 5.
of God to be the confidence of all the ends of the Earth: and David says, God
Psalm. 46. 1. expounded.
is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble: Mark well the
place, 1. God is a refuge, where the allusion is to those Cities of refuge
unto which a person that had slain a man at unawares was to fly, where he was
secure and safe from the pursuer, intimating unto us, that if dangers and
troubles do pursue Christians at the heels, yet God would be their hiding and
securing place from all: 2. God is a strength, it may be the power of dangers
and troubles may be great, now if the refuge want strength, a man's security
cannot be much, but God is Almighty, and such strength unto his that no
strength shall overcome them, until it can overcome him. 3. God is a help, he
does not stand by looking on his in their troubles, and suffering them to be
overcome by their own weakness, but will put forth his strength and
assistance, bearing all their burdens for them, and enabling them to stand
under all. 4. God is a present help in time of need: that is, let dangers be
present, God will not be absent, neither will He delay his defense for his, or
come in with the same when it is too late; so that this Text does show that He
is unquestionably sufficient for the safety of his, which must needs be the
ground of confidence; for the soul does betake it self alone to strength;
according Pro. 18. 10 Psalm. 18. 1, 2. 28. 7. 3.
to that of Solomon, The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous
run into it and are safe.

3. Thirdly, ratione facti: because God is trusty, and such a one that never
fails them that place their trust in Psalm. 22. 4, 5.
Him: Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and thou did deliver them,
they cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee and were not
confounded. The meaning is this; that there care was in evil times to trust in
the Lord, and God did not deceive their trust, but made it to be their safety;
Ahas made the King 2 Chronicles. 28. 20. Isa. 30. 1.
of Assiria his refuge, but he was not his strength; Israel went down to
Egypt for help, and trusted in Charets and Horsemen, but they were not
helped; but who so come unto God by way of dependence, are sure to find this
made good, I will not fail thee nor for sake thee. Heb. 13. 5.


Fourthly, ratione fidei: because upon them is bestowed the grace of Faith,
which is a trusting grace, a relying grace, full of fiduciall acts, and never
more active upon God then in hard times, and times of dangers; the Prophet
says, Heb. 2. 4. opened.
The just shall live by Faith, which place we thus expound, the Prophet had
foretold of sad times to come upon the Church; Now upon the hearing of this, it
became a great question, but how shall the just do in such times? The answer
is, he shall live by Faith, God has given him the grace of Faith, which now
he shall exercise, by putting himself under Gods wing, and making God his
tower of safety: when others shall live either by their wits and shifts, or by
their fears and fence, the truly godly shall subsist by their believing
dependence on God: surely they that do believe in God cannot but trust in God:
to apply the point, note 3. things.

difference between the Difference between godly and wicked men in trusting
God.
child of God and wicked men in times of extremity and trouble: I deny not
but the same calamitous condition may befall them both, God may and does cast
both the one and the other into sad and fearing times, but the thing I aim at
is this, that the carriage of the one and the other is not the same in respect
of confidence in God; there are 3. things incident 3. Things incident to wicked
men in evil times. 1. To have no place for confidence. Pro. 30. 26
to wicked men in evil times.

1. Either they have no place for confidence, but run up and down crying, Who
will show us any good? they are worse then the poor silly creatures, who in
times of danger have their retyring places; the poor Conies a feeble folk,
yet make they their house in the rocks, the rocks are Psalm 104. 18.
a refuge to the Conies; these creatures can burrow themselves in the rock
when they are in danger of Dogs; the Birds have nests wherein they hide
themselves when dangers approach, hence Moab is advised to be like the Dove,
Jer. 48, 2^
that makes her nest in the side of the holes mouth, there she will nestle
her self, when she is pursued by the Birds of prey; but a wicked carnal man
when troubles come, lies open to all winds, and is like unto a ship whose
tacklings are broken, and Anchor lost, tossed up and down, and hurried from
place to place, till at length she suffer shipwreck; or as a Meteor that hangs
in the clouds, and cannot tell which way to fall; Oh how are wicked men
surprised with fears and cares, and pulled in pieces with distractions? Oh how
distressed, hopeless and helpelesse are they, and even at their wits end, when
dangers are threatened or present.

2. They misplace their 2. To misplace their confidence.
confidence, they cannot say in thee O Lord is my trust, but O God my trust is
in men and means; That I may not A caution about the use of meaes for safety.
be mistaken, know, that I do not speak against the use of lawful means, or
outward helps for our safety in dangerous times, but this is the work of
wicked men to Idolize the means, and by them to rob God of that trust that
Wicked men's confidence lies
is due to him, what is more usual with them, then to put trust in places; if
in times of 1. In places.
fears and dangers they can but get into a strong City and a well built Tower
or Castle, now with the men of Tyrus Ezekiel. 27. 11.
they are safe enough, that shall be their God, and all their safety shall
depend upon it; if their confidence lie not in this, then it may be it is in
men and munition, wherein 2. In munition and men. Psalm. 20. 7.
the arm of flesh is relied upon: Some trust in Horses and some in Chariots,
forgetting that an Horse is a vain thing for safety. Others place their
confidence in their riches and 3. In weal th and honors. Pro. 18. 11
honors; The rich man's wealth is his strong City, and as an high wall in his
conceit, says Solomon, And they set their nests on high that they may be Hab.
2. 9.
delivered from the power of evil, says the Prophet Habbacock. O say they,
were it not that we were wealthy, and known to be so, and had we not high
places, then we might fear gunshot, and think our selves in dangers: others
run a little higher in their vain confidence, and do trust upon their Church
privileges, 4. In Church privileges. Ier. 7. 4.
like those in Ieremiahs days, who cried out the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord: they do think because they have the Ordinances of God
amongst them, that these shall be a refuge unto them, which the Holy Ghost
calls a trusting in lying words, these and other the like confidences are vain
confidences; for all strong holds if trusted unto, shall be like Figg-trees
with the Nah. 3. 12 Zephan. 1 18.
first ripe figgs, and it is neither silver or gold that shall be able to
deliver them in the day Esa. 29. 1, 2
of the Lords wrath, and Ariell it self shall be distressed.

3. Or they shall fall away 3. Forsake the Lord for their confidence Jer. 2. 11.
from the Lord, slighting and rejecting his help in evil times, Saul went to
the witch, and the Prince would attend no longer upon the Lord, and wicked men
forsake the fountain of living water; surely such as fall from God do not
depend on God, unless you will say, that he does lay himself upon the
fountain or rock, that casts himself from the rock into the Sea; but to
leave them to the misery of miseries, and to inherit their folly.

Examination.
whether that we are trusting Christians in evil and dangerous times, can we
say with David, In thee is my trust? then these 6. things 6. Signs of men that
trust in God in evil times 1. Care to please God.
will be more or less found upon us.

1. Our care will be to please God in all things: him upon whom we depend we
will study to content; a child fears to displease his Father, and a Tennant
fears to displease his Landlord, because of their dependence on them, and
surely if we do trust in God, we will covet to walk in all well pleasing
unto God, shunning whatsoever way or course is contrary or grieving to him:
None but a madman would offend his defense: shall God defend us, and shall we
offend Him? That soul does look for very little good from God that is
careless of his praise and pleasing.

2. We shall make up our 2. Making God a portion to us
selves in God in all conditions: the heart does choose that thing for its
portion, which it makes to be its confidence; The Lord is my Lam. ^. 24
portion, therefore will I hope in him, says the Church, hereupon is it that
the Psalmist says, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
Psalm. 73. 25, 26.
Earth that I desire besides thee, my flesh and my heart fails, but God is
the rock of my heart and my portion for ever: Surely God is heritage and
portion enough to that soul that trusts in him; the soul that relies upon
him, shall find him to be a full and suitable good unto it self, and can see
that it has no reason to look out of God for supplies and sufficiencies.

3. We shall use the means for safety, but leave the issue to God: such as
trust in God will not tempt God, but apply themselves to the wise and careful
use of all those means which serve God in his care and providence over them.
Jacob trusted God for deliverance, and so did David and Paul, and yet they did
not neglect or fly over the means for their succor and safety in evil
times, the one sends presents and marshalls Genesis 32.
his family, the second abides in strong holds in the wilderness, 1 Samuel 23.
and the last stays in the ship and keeps the Mariners Acts 27.
with him; he that trusts a Physicians skill will be careful to observe what
is prescribed to him, and as means are to be used, so when means are used,
we shall trust God with the issue, and unto God for the success; it is
presumption not trust to sever the means from the end, it is fear not Faith
to use means, and yet to vex our souls about the success: such as trust God
do chiefly commit the issue of all the means they do use unto God: knowing
that it is man's work to use the means, and Gods to bring about the success.
4. Living by Faith in the promises when outward means fail.


4. We shall live by Faith in the promises when outward means for comfort and
deliverance are wanting, a politician will trust as far as reason can carry
him, and a natural man will trust as far as his senses lead him; if either
can see reasons for, or ways and means of deliverance and safety before them,
they can and will trust in God, else they fall down or fall off, whereas such
as truly trust in God, will and can (in some measure) rest on the bare word and
naked promise of God, even then when they can see no means before them, but
that the present face and state of things do seem altogether contrary unto
them; Though the Lord kill Job 15. 13
me yet will I trust in him, Esa. 50. 10
says Job: and the command is, when that we are in darkness and can see no
light, even in such an estate to trust in God: a child in the dark takes hold
of his Father, and a Christian without means will trust in his God, knowing
that God is all means in himself, and that he can do things for his Churches
good and comfort, when all outward means does threaten the contrary.

5. We shall trust God 5. Trusting of God.
withal: they that do trust in God, will also trust God, as knowing that the
safety and security of all is in God; tell me now, do you trust God with your
names, estates, callings, posterities, bodies and souls? do you trust your
temporal and eternal estate in Gods hand, so that you can say, I have nothing
in mine own keeping, I dare not so much as to trust my self with my self, or
any thing I have with any other creature, but all is committed by me to the
Lord, whom I know to be faithful; this is an argument that the soul does
trust in the Lord: I know whom I have believed, I am 2 Timothy 1. 12.
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that day.

Lastly, we shall have a 6. Quiet and rest of soul.
ground for rest and quiet unto our souls: Trust in God does 1. Bottom the
soul strongly, so that there shall be a staying of murmurings and grudgings
arising within the Soul. 2. Supply the soul with a greater ground of quiet
and comfort, then there can be causes of fear and troubling; God is a Center
for rest, and a quiet Foundation, so that the soul can never be at rest until
that it come to rest upon him: It is the work of trust to cast the soul into
a fixing and settling condition: I do not say that the trusting soul is
totally freed from stirrings and shakings even in evil times; I A trusting
soul is a quiet soul and how?
know that our flesh which we carry about us is full of objections, and daily
troubles us in our quiet, but yet know, that though fears may materially rise
in a trusting heart, yet they do not victoriously work in that soul that is
truly trusting; the promise is, Thou will keep him in perfect Esa. 26. 3.
peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee; and again,
They that Psalm 125. 1
trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion which cannot be moved; and again, He
shall 112. 7.
not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. Hence
was it that David finding a mutiny within 43. ult.
his soul, he takes up the contention by charging his soul to trust in God;
O when other men's souls are under confusion and restlesnesse and moving within
them, As the trees of the Esa. 7. 2.
wood are moved with the wind, because they are hard bestead, when fears and
terrors do rack and rend their hearts in pieces, and all because they trust
not in God, then the soul whose trust is in the Lord, has quiet in spirit,
and he says, Why should Psalm. 49. 5.
I fear in the days of evil? he then sings over the forty six Psalm with
holy Luther.

to attain to David's pitch, and endeavor to be such that can truly say, In
thee is Psalm. 57. 1.
my trust, or as in another Psalm, My soul trusts in thee. Thus to do is
very necessary and comfortable, but yet of great difficulty; it is a hard thing
to bring the heart from creature confidence unto divine confidence, that a
soul should be beset with misery, and apprehend nothing but storms and
threatenings of destruction, and yet now to stay it self upon God, in whose
hand the cloud and calamity is, is a work both above, and against nature,
which that we may be brought unto, I will propound these six helps.

First, you must go to Six helps to trusting in God.
School to learn Gods name aright, They that know thy Psalm. 9. 10.
Name will put their trust in thee, says David: and in another Psalm he
says, How excellent is thy loving kindness Psalm. 36. 7.
O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings,

Now the name of God is The name of God what?
the Lords revelation of himself in his Word, and it does comprehend under it
all the glorious Attributes of God, together with the promises of grace and
mercy which he has made unto his The knowledge of Gods name what?
Church, and the knowledge of that name is no more then the informing our
minds and understandings in the truth and meaning of God in all his glorious
Attributes, and gracious promises, surely if the soul did once come to
apprehend God aright in the Attributes of his Wisdom, Power, Mercy and
Providence, and to look upon all the promises as absolute truths, and full of
goodness, it would not but be drawn into trust and confidence; God says in
one Psalm, I will set him on Psalm. 91. 14.
high because he has known my Name, the meaning is, I will see he shall be
safe because he has trusted in me; where we see that the very Trusting in God
called the knowing of Gods name and why?
trusting in God is called by the knowing of Gods name, and why so? 1. Because
in trusting we gain an experimental knowledge of Gods name. 2. Because by
knowing of his name we come to the trusting in his name, will any man trust in
him whom he does not know? surely God unknown can never be relied upon; I
must therefore make it my work not only to know there is a God, which is to
know him by name; but I must know him in his sufficiency of strength for
safety and defense, and as one that will graciously admit me into his
protection, I recoursing unto him in obedience and Faith, if ever my soul
shall draw into him in a way of confidence and dependence.

Secondly, get a friendly 2. To get acquaintance with God.
and familiar acquaintance with God, as ignorance so strangeness cannot rely
upon God, and it is not every ordinary acquaintance with God, but a special
acquaintance with him that does breed a dependence on him; A man must know God
by way of trial ere he will trust him, and a man Special acquaintance with
God what?
must have special intimacie with God, so as to see him a reconciled God unto
him in the face of Jesus Christ ere he can bring his heart to trust in him; I
say if a man can see God as his Father and best friend, even one twixt him and
whom there are no quarrels and differences, he shall with much cherfulness
of heart rely upon him.

Thirdly, set up Faith into 3. Set up Faith, into exercise and life.
exercise; the grace of Faith must not only live in us, but we must also live
by it, if ever we intend truly to trust in God, the life of sense weakens our
dependence on God; the life of reason sets up our dependence on the creatures,
but the life of Faith does quicken and raise up a strong dependence on God,
this is the dwelling in the secret of the Psalm. 91. 1.
most high, and the shutting up of the soul within the Esa. 26. 20
doors of the divine chambers.

I conceive thus much of the life of Faith; 1. It will make God that unto us
which our necessities do require him to be; even a rock, and Tower, refuge and
fortress, Because thou have made the Psalm. 91. 9, 10.
Lord which is my resuge thine habitation, there shall no evil befall thee,
where we see that Faith in working makes God an habitation. 2. It will draw
home the particular and the general promises of safety unto a man's self in
particular: Now the settling of the promises on the soul is the way to bring in
a man unto dependence; for it does let in or enter a man into the goodness of
God, hence Psalm. 119 114.
says David, Thou art my hiding place and my shield, I hope in thy Word, where
we see that David did make God his hiding place by hoping in his Word. 3. It
will entitle a man unto Jesus Christ, in whom all the promises are yea and
Amen: The way to come into God is Jesus Christ, and God is no farther an hiding
place to the person of any man, then he is united to Christ by Faith; It is
Christ that makes God our Shield and Tower, and so as Faith does work it self
upon Christ, it does work the soul upon God, for I cannot fasten my self
upon God, but in and by the Mediator upon whom my Faith is pitched.

Fourthly, lean not unto 4. The giving over a man's self. Pro. 3. 5.
selfe-policie and selfe-power: hence says Solomon, Trust in the Lord with all
thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding, surely we must empty
our selves of our selves, if ever we will be brought to trust upon God, what
man will be beholding to another so as to seek unto him and to cast himself
upon him, if he conceive himself to be selfe-sufficient? and surely this is
man's proud disposition, that he will be as little beholding to God for any
thing as he can, for he will try his own wits, and parts and friends in the
first place, and if he find in them relief, then he will stick and stay;
we see in experience, that no man commits his body to the Simile.
water till he find no ground for his feet to fasten upon; so that there is a
great deal of necessity for a man to deny himself, and to give over
himself, if ever he intend a dependence upon his God, at any time, for any
thing.

Fifthly, cast off the way and 5. The relinquishing of the way of sin. Job 22.
24, 25.
course of sin and profaneness by timely and serious repentance, If thou
return to the Almighty thou shall be built up, thou shall put away in iquity
far from thy tabernacle, then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of
Ophir as the stones of the brooks: yea the Almighty shall be thy defense, how
can a man expect safety from God, when he walks in a course contrary unto
God; can such imagine God will be the protection of their persons, who are the
provocation of his eyes; sure I am, this is the fruit of a life led in sin,
to keep off the soul from coming in unto God by way of duty and dependence,
I say, that the love and life of sin does dead and damp the heart in all
motions and actions unto God, and therefore it must be your work, to purge
your heart from all the love of sin, and study the way of giving over the
slavish service of sin, and then the way is open to God; the God on whom we
stay our selves, is an holy God, and we must resolve to be holy and reformed
persons; they shall call themselves Isa. 48. 2.
the holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel.

6. Lastly, settle all supplies 6. Setting all supplies an^ succors in God.
upon God; what we trust upon, we must make allsufficient unto us, now if we
have this skill to make God answerable to all our exigencies, and if we can
see that we cannot need or desire that thing that is not to be found in him in
an overflowing abundance, it would mightily enable us to make him our trust:
such who attribute too much to the stream, and take from the fulness of the
fountain, will never make their recourses to the fountain. Oh we have a full
God, who is Sun and shield, and exceeding great reward unto all those that come
in unto Him, and will never leave the soul destitute, which does depend upon
Him: which is the thing David desires, and is the last part,

Leave not my soul destitute.
Here is the true consequent of believing confidence, it makes a man to fly to
God by prayer, notwithstanding all troubles; surely we cannot 1. Trust in God
and praying to God are undivided companions Psalm. 62. 8
well divide the act of Faith from the exercise of Prayer, David in one Psalm
by way of counsel faith, trust in him always ye people, and power out your
hearts before him; and here he is upon the practice of his own Doctrine, In
thee is my trust, leave not my soul destitute: intimating unto us a true
trial of our trusting in God; it is then right and sound when it puts on the
soul to prayer, he does trust best in God, that does pray most to God, a
praying heart is an evidence of a trusting heart.

2. We must not divide the 2. Times of trouble ought to be times of prayer.
practice of prayer from times of troubles; troublous times are praying times;
then or never should Christians beset the Lord with requests, and power out
their souls unto Him; 1. the command is, Call Ps. 50. 15.
upon me in the day of trouble, and Jam. 5. 13
is any man afflicted let him pray. 2. David under his fears, and in the midst
of his troubles besought the Lord. 3. And the promise is, that whosoever shall
call upon the name of the Joel. 2. 32.
Lord shall be delivered: I am sure that Jacob applied himself to this
practice, and it prooved prevailing; Nations; Prayers is the most efficatious
engine, making way for the good and safety of the Church in all Ages, when all
policies and power have been at a stand, this has made way for peace and
safety; This, this is the little great thing that has overturned all plots,
blasted all conspiracies, and withstood all oppositions, it weakness enemies,
and increases friends, by ruling God, and overruling men: he wants not
Armor of proof in his house that has a praying spirit in his breast; I
conceive, did we pray more, we should fear less, for that which is our
victory with God shall be our conquest over men, Thou have Genesis 32. 28.
prevailed with God, thou shall also prevail with men, says God to Jacob: I
beseech Job. 15. 4.
you that you would be so Job 15. 4.
far from restraining Prayer before God, that you make it your daily work to
remember the name of the Lord, still crying unto Him and calling upon Him,
adding this to your practice, which was the James 5. 17. (...).
commendation of Elias, that you pray in your praying.

But come we now more narrowly to the matter of David's prayer.

Leave not my soul destitute, 4. Observations in the words. 1. The possibility
of having a soul left destitute.


That is bare and forsaken of divine help and comfort; Whence we Whence we
learn first, The possibility of having the soul of a Christian left naked and
bare of divine grace, comfort and assistance, there may not only be a
withdrawing of an outwardly supplying and upholding good, but of an inwardly
comforting and gracious presence, though the Lord does not totally destitute
and finally desert the souls of his, yet comforts and supports may for a long
time and in a great degree be withdrawn; Sion said, The Esa. 49. 14.
Lord has forgotten me: David Psalm. 70. 5. 25. 16.
is poor and needy in one Psalm, and desolate and afflicted in another; Alas!
how many of Gods dear ones do find this to be true, that to their seeming,
their God is gone, and comfort gone, and there is none to own them, and stand
by them: There is none to help, Psalm. 22. 11
says David.

Secondly, the misery of a 2. It is a misery to be left destitute.
divinely destitute and deserted soul; such a soul is a miserable soul, and
the misery of this condition, makes David to deprecate it, the absence of a
good temper does not make the body more miserable, nor the withdrawing of the
Sun the night to be more dark, then the leaving the soul destitute in
divine respects does make the soul sad and miserable: It Is misery to be under
misery, but in times of misery to be left unto misery, by Gods withdrawing of
himself from a man, makes the misery overmiserable: For a lame man to fall
it is misery, but when he is down to have his crutches taken from him, and all
to forsake him, it is the leaving of him in misery. It is a mercy to find
divine succor in misery.


supplies in times of misery, this is easing to the spirit, and the burden
will be the better borne and endured; this is chearing and reviving: the spirit
will not soon sink and faint under any trouble whilst God is with it, and all
its comforts are about it; the woe is to him that is alone.

Divine assistance and presence is to be sought.
should be after divine assistance in troubles. 1. A man shall never need a
God more in company and comfort, then when he is in, and under trouble, if all
the creatures leave us (as they may) yet till God leave us we shall never be
destitute; for God is all in all, for the relief of that soul with whom he
is present: besides, 2. the soul has many precious promises for divine supply
and succor in evils, and therefore he may be the more bold to put up his
request to God.

Leave not my soul destitute.
To conclude the whole.



Heaven, such shall do God, the King and the Country, little good service,
that have Feathers in their hatts, Armor on their backs, and Weapons in their
hands, wanting Grace in their hearts; though their oaths may be many, and
violence great, yet their strength is small, for they are destitute and
deserted persons.



The Narration of the virtuous Life and happy Death of Mistrisse Julian
Blackwell.
WE are this day The Application to the occasion.
met, according to the practice of the Saints in Scripture, to perform a duty,
and pay a debt to the remainder of our Christian Sister Mistrisse Julian
Blackwell, which is now to be laid with honor in her grave, as into a house of
safe custody, and bed of rest, to remain there until the resurrection; And
finding this to be the practice of venerable Cent. Mag. 4. c. 6. p. 45 5.
antiquity, to celebrate the Funerals of Christians, with the mentioning of
their just praises, you must give me leave (treading in Testimonium dabo
veritati non amicitiae. Ber.
their paths) to give testimony unto the truth, in speaking of her gracious
disposition, and virtuous conversation; only take two things along Securius
and sinceerius visa solent quam audita narrari Goff. vit. Bern. lib 1. pre ces.
with you; First, that I intend to speak no more of her then what mine own
knowledge and observation does lead me unto. Secondly, that my aim in this
Work is, to moderate the grieving spirits of those that were near unto her,
whose loss is great; and to yield unto you all matter of good instruction and
Christian imitation, seeing you know not how soon her condition may be yours.

And here passing over her descent, leaving that to the Heralds; I might begin
with her courtesy, modesty, and gravity in her outward course and carriage, in
which she did so shine, that she won much love from all such who well knew
her, and were themselves lovers of a courteous and sober conversation: Next I
might lay down before you, her fidelity, and love to her loving Husband, with
whom she lived in an unspotted way, avoiding that lightness, and looseness,
which is too too notorious and shameful in many of her Sex.

I might also further discourse of her tenderness, and love unto her children,
to whom she showed her self a Mother indeed, by seeking their good in the
best things, and furthering them to her power in the ways of holiness.

But leaving these, there 10. Things in her.
are ten things which I observe as notable in her, and worthy all our imitation.

First, God had made her 1. Tenderness of heart seen in four things.
a Christian of a very tender heart, and sensible spirit; as her natural
disposition was softly, so she had a spiritual disposition of softness:
there were four ways by which her tenderness of Spirit did appear.

1. She was apprehensive 1. Sense of sin.
and feeling of sins working and burden; the body of sin which she did bear
about her, as a body within her body, she made such a body of death unto her,
that with tears she would often complain to my self and others, of her
wretchedness and wearisomenesse under the same; a blessed temper, and arguing
spiritual life, to find and feel the contrary workings of sinful corruption
unto the workings of grace within the soul.

2. She was sensible of Satan's 2. Acquaintance with temptations.
temptations, and his strong workings against her graces and her comforts;
Satan was her adversary, and she knew what it was to have Satan to be her
adversary; (surely if God be a man's friend, Satan will be his enemy, and who so
have tender and gracious spirits, they cannot but be more or less sensible of
Satan's workings against them:) Satan did so often and sensibly disquiet her,
that she feared least she should at the last be overcome by him.

3. She had a sympathizing 3. Sympathy.
spirit; feeling the present conditions of the members of the mystical body,
whether in misery or in comfort; if the Church and Christians did rejoice; she
rejoiced also; if they were in sadness, she was in heaviness; in which
practice she showed her self a right living member; and I could wish that
there were not the failing of bowels this way amongst too too many of us. What
a shame is it unto us, that Churches abroad are bleeding, and many Christians
at home in misery and dying, and yet none in comparison do regard or feel the
same.

4. She had an undigesting 4 Risings against sinful vanities.
spirit; I mean a spirit that was full of painful gratings at the sight of
sinful objects, and that could not so easily swallow down those vanities and
courses which others do not so much as scruple at; to her dying day she did
abhor Popish and Superstitious vanities, and was much grieved that any should
take upon them to practice or maintain any thing that was contrary to Gods
Word, and justly scandalous unto Christians.

Secondly, God had given 2. Lovingnesse to the godly.
her to become very loving hearted unto the godly; if she saw in any but
aliquid Christi (that is, something of Christ) with holy Bucer, she dearly
loved them; the graces of God bestowed on them drew her affections to them;
making her greatly to delight in their company and conference; she often would
say to me, where is the pleasure that sinful societies can yield unto a
Christian? I am sure I can find no delight in being amongst them; O it is the
godly and such as truly fear God that are my delight, and that shall be truly
welcome unto my house, there are many Christians this day alive that can
testify her real love unto them a good pattern for us all to follow, we
should make them the men of our company and delight here, that are our
companions in grace, and shall be our company in Heaven.

Thirdly, she was large 3 Desires and cravings after goodness and amendment.
hearted in her desires after goodness, and good things: a little heart she
had, but low, which made her very greedy after, and desirous of grate such a
holy covetousness; and unsatiable thirst was implanted within her, that she
could never give her self satisfaction in any present measure of grace, or
actual performance of duties, but was carried with a vehement desire of
bettering or mending her self in both; out of that desire which she had to
profit and benefit her own foul, and to augment and enlarge her self in
graces and duties, Hierony^^i Epistolae ad Paulam, Marcellam and alia^.
(with those religious Roman Ladies of whom S. Jerome speaks,) she would be
full of holy enquiries, solid questions, and apt cases of conscience; God gave
unto her that excellent gift of improoving Christian acquaintance and Christian
society, for hardly could any good Minister, or able Christian come to visit
her in her health or sickness, but she would be pressing and putting of them
on to some soule-profiting discourse, by which she might both do her self and
others good; oh it is a blessed thing for Christians to be acting Mary's part,
and I could heartily wish that in this she might be followed in this City and
other parts, for I find this to be a common fault, that God puts into our
hands many opportunities of doing our selves good by the company of Ministers
and Christians, and we have no hearts to improove them; we think that when
we have feasted them, and for a time courteously entertained them, we have
done enough; Oh how often has mine ears heard her wishing, that she had more
power to believe, and spirit to pray and to obey; This Sister of ours, made it
her daily work to be treasuring up a stock of grace for another world, and
the nearer she was to glory, the more thirsty was she after grace. Surely
where those longings and thirstings after soul enlargement in graces and
duties are wanting, there may be a strong supposition, that spiritual life is
also wanting. For herein do artificial bodies differ from natural bodies,
that the one are capeable of extension, the other are not.

Fourthly, She was fearing 4. Fearful of her own standing and state.
hearted in respect of her spiritual and eternal condition: she did much
trouble her self about that one thing necessary, namely the settling of the
happiness of her soul both here and hereafter; she had an heart making
Heaven to be Heaven, and it was a great business with her, how she might be
sure to have Heaven when she left the world; she was not in the number of
those, who only then think of going to Heaven, when they see themselves ready
to drop into Hell; Neither was Heaven unto her an empty Notion, or going to
Heaven an ordinary matter; but a thing of the highest concernement; she knew
that she had a soul, and what it was to have a soul mistaken, or miscarry in
so great a matter as salvation; yea so serious was this Christian Sister of
ours in this maine business, that she would often suspect her own care, and
question her own evidences for Heaven, being ever and anon jealous least that
she should fail of Heaven at the last; This was admirable and imitable in
her, that she would be putting her self to the trial, that so she might see
and find her self to be Heaven proof, and judgment proof; and when upon
long reasoning and due trial, she could not put of from her self the
evidences of a gracious condition; out of a holy fear, she brake out into
these words; Sir, are you not mistaken in your trialls? or in my self? I pray
you to deal plainly and faithfully with my soul, do not make me to believe
that I am better then I am, or that my estate is safer then it is, remember
that you are Gods Minister, and you must give an account to God if that you do
not discharge your duty, in discovering to me the truth of things: Let me know
the worst of mine estate, for I desire not, neither did I send for you to be
slattered and soothed by you; O think of this all you that tie up the liberty
and authority of Gods Ministers when they come to visit you, who cannot endure
the settling of your spiritual estates by the searching of your souls.

Fifthly, She was bold hearted, 5. Zealous in spirit.
the fire of holy zeal was kindled within her spirit, and she was so far
from being ashamed of God and his cause, that as occasion was offered, and as
it became her in her place, she would speak for God, and plead for the power
and purity of His blessed worship and service: yea she kept that liberty to
her self (which many loose) namely, so to enjoy her best friends, that with
all she would wisely dislike and Christianly reproove what she saw or heard to
be amiss in them, which made such as well knew her, the more truly to honor
and love her.

Sixthly, She was Heavenly 6. Heave^ly mindednes.
hearted; and dead to the world whilst she lived in the world; she so minded
her country in Heaven, that she could willingly part with all the creatures
for Heaven, nay she had so ordered her affections and affairs, that she had
little else to do but to die when she was to die; well knowing that an heart
set into the creatures, is loath to make an exchange of earth for Heaven, it
was neither Husband, nor Children, nor Mother, nor Brothers or Sisters, nor
Friends that could stand in her way, to make her loath or unwilling to die;
they were all looked upon with a dead eye long before she died; it is a
glorious conquest to get victory over the world and the creatures before a man
dies.

Seventhly, She was public 7. Publikenes of spirit.
hearted: having her spirit set upon the times, both in the sins and sorrows
thereof, being so sensible of both, that she could bewail both; and would be
often in stirring up others to pray for Sions peace and glory. Oh how did she
rejoice when she saw any hopes of good toward the Church of God revived; and
she would be much cast down under the fears of national calamities, fearing
that her sins were the procurers of the same.

Eighthly, She was bearing 8. Patience.
hearted: God put her piety to proof, laying his hand heavily upon her in
much weakness, which kept her long under the Physicians hands, yet under all
gods dealings she was a pattern of patience, quietly resigning her self so to
the good will and wisdom of God, that she did not check or dislike God in
the course of his providence, but did acquit the Lord as righteous and just in
his way, and did let him alone in his works, being troubled at the rising of
impatiency within her; desiring chieflly that God would be pleased to make her
able to bear his hand, and to give her a sanctified use of his hand, which she
knew would be for good unto her.

Ninethly, She was stout 9. Stoutnesse.
hearted, which appeared in this, that she did not fear the king of fear,
death it self: I know that she was very sensible that the time of her
departure was at hand, for she apprehended more in her self, then the many
skillfull Physicians could in her body, she would tell me that they were all
mistaken in her disease, for she should not escape this sickness which was now
upon her; and though she did think much, and talk often of it, yet it was not
death it self that could daunt or dampe her spirits; she did no fear to die,
having the knowledge of this, that it was only death which could bring her unto
her desired home.

Tenthly and lastly, She 10. Confidence in death.
was confident hearted; her experience of God, and faith in God had raised up
her soul to such a trust, in Gods mercy, that finding death approaching, she
left of disputings with Satan, and fixing her eyes with much steadfastness on
Heaven, about the beginning of the Sabbath (which was the day of her delight
whilst she lived, and I make no doubt a token unto her of an eternal rest in
Heaven) she concluded her life with this saying, Death, Death, O Lord in thee
is my trust, which words of hers gave occasion to her loving Husband, to give
unto me that Text of Scripture to preach on at her funeral.

And now leaving her Application to the Auditory.
whose soul is made perfect in Heaven, and free from all sin and sorrow;
give me your patience from the whole Narration, to lesson you in these things,
that so you may 4. Duties.
depart hence with profit.

their poor souls.



Exempla maxim movent. Cic de Orat lib. 3.
actions: the Heathen man tells us, that good examples are of great force: and
sure I am, that among Christians this is a truth, that good examples are of
special use and profit, and such as we must be accountable for to God, as well
as for precepts; we cannot do greater honor to our religious Ancestors
deceased, then to endeavor to resemble them in goodness and godliness: Oh
that you would all resolve to go home being such as she was, and doing that
which she did of whom we have spoken.

yours which is uncertain and irrevocable depends eternity; and if ever you
will be wise for your souls, be wise in this, to make your life the only
providing time for Heavens eternity. And so much for the Text and the occasion.
*

FINIS.
Imprimatur

THO: WYKES.
July 30. 1640.

