SACRILEGE SACREDLY HANDLED.

That is, According to Scripture only.

Divided into two parts: 1. For the Law. 2. For the Gospel.


AN APPENDIX ALSO ADDED; ANswering some Objections moved, namely, against this
Treatise: and some others, I find in IOS. SCALIGERS Diatribe, and IOH. SELDENS
History of Tithes.

FOR THE USE OF ALL CHVRCHES IN general: but more especially for those of
North-Britaine.

DEVTER. 33.11. Bless, O LORD [Leuies] substance, and accept the works of his
hand: Smite through the Loins of them that rise against him, and them that
hate him, that they rise not again. Nec partis studiis agimur, sed sumpsimus
arma. Sacrilegis ^^^^ca viri^. TO THE MOST NOBLE, AND TRVLY SACRED Prince;
Defender of Christ's Faith, and Nourish-father of his Church, JAMES, by his
grace, of great Britain, France, and Ireland, King.
SEE, (gracious Sovereign) See, how many and great reasons, both from the
Argument, and the Author, do draw this Treatise to your Sacred hands. From the
Argument: A Sacred, and high subject; requires a Sacred and sound Judgment:
The Churches Sacred patrimony; a Kingly, Sacred patrocinie: And Sacrilege, a
proud and insolent sin; a Sacred and powerful scepter to suppress it. All
which, are only, and most eminent, in your most Sacred Majesty, SKILL, WILL,
and POWER.

From the Author: This seems to require a Sacred penman too: True. And
though I be not of the Tribe of Leui, yet I hope of the tents of Sem, how
Simple soever. Yea, behold what interest I have also in our Sacred David: Even
devoted to his service, by my parents, before I was; Thereafter, named in, and
after his Majesty's own name, before himself could know it; yet after
knowledge, confirmed: And in his H. Court, almost ever since, both nursed, and
schooled. And so is our David, the King of my birth; the Master of my service;
the father of my name; framer of my nature; and the Gamaliel of my education;
at whose feet (no, at whose elbow, and from whose mouth) I confess I have
sucked the best of whatsoever may be thought good in me: his just right
therefore, and my chiefest glory.

Becomes it not well then (SIR), where the Sovereign proves a Solomon; his
Courtiers prove Nehemiahs, (though sparingly here compared?) When He, is Pater
Ecclesiae, and Episcopus aulae, by authority proclaiming, and by practice
provoking unto virtue; they, to shun both ignorance and silence? Truly, it
goes never better, then when the Church Courteth it, and the Court Churcheth
it: for Moses and Aaron were brothers.

But to our purpose (SIR). When I consider, how God has made you, not only
our Prince, but even our princely Patriarch, our JACOB; delivering you from so
many Esaues, as he did Jacob, bringing you home again after your marriage, as
he did Jacob; and also, settling you in your Canaan, more, than he did to
Jacob: and again, seeing your Majesty performs Jacobs vows to God, viz.
Defending his faith; building his houses; but chiefly this, Of all that thou
shall give me, I will give the tenth unto thee, I had bin too to unworthily by
your Majesty named Jacob, if I should not, with my sword in the one hand, and
pen in the other, both Court it, and Church it; that is, build up, with our
Royal JACOB, the breaches of Jerusalem.

But the breach (SIR) is great; not only in Lime and Stone, but in the lively
Stones of Gods work, the Leuits themselves. Their Tithes are abstracted;
themselves distracted; and so, the Gospel contracted and confined, 2. These.
3.1.
that it Runs not, as it should. Your Commons pay Tithes; your Levites lack
Tithes; your Lords and Laics have been bathed in blood about Tithes. Your
poor laborers, may say with the true Israelites, Deuteronomy. 26.13.
J have brought the hallowed thing out of mine house: but they cannot say on,
And J have also given it unto the Levites. Why? Because there comes a kind of
Pirat Ships, with Acts of Parliament in their flags, and carry all away.

Your SKILL knows this (SIR) best of any; your WILL wishes it were mended; and
God has given you POWER to perform it. All three are promised in your
BASILICON DORON to your Son; Lib. 2.
and according to that promise, are all three, in some measure, begun already
by your self, in annulling in a part, that Vile Act of Whereby Tithes were
annexed to the Crown.
Annexation. Vile, your Mastie has most truly termed it: for it has made Vile
your Levites, and so, the Word vile in their mouths. Your Majesty has
annulled it, so far as concerns Bishops; Let it, and all the rest also
fall, as concern the Levites. Since you have settled your Aarons, in their
Ierusalems; Neh. 10.37.
Let not their brethren beg (as they do) in the cities of their travels:
they are all of one Priesthood; all of one Prince You have annulled
Annexations; Reuerse By which Tithes are erected in Te^porall Lordships, to the
Subject.
Erections. Your Bishops can inform SKILL; your Commons all attend, and call
upon your WILL; and of all Estates, enough ready to second your POWER.

I grant, your Majesty has to do with many Achans: but what are they to the
rest of Jsrael having God and Moses on their side? Let them appear at the
doors of their tents, and show Quo iure. Achan stole his; and theirs, will be
found little better: A Parliament (say they): but this treatise, (by Gods
grace) shall prove, that long before there was either King or Parliament in
Jsrael, Tithes were taken up for Gods perpetual worship; and so can never come
under the power of Prince or Parliament further, than by their Laws, to
enforce the payment of them according to Gods Law: So all is but stealth, or
robbery: for, Nemo potest plus iuris in alium transfer, quam ipse habet: The
Parliament then, never having power to dispose of them, The possessors must be
in mala fide. A Parliament maimed of the chiefest member, in a Kings younger
age, has forfeited Christ; and may not another Parliament perfect in all the
members, in a Kings full and perfect age, rectified by knowledge, again restore
Christ? In that Parliament Leui, the chiefest member, (and whom only, the cause
concerned) was not called; so, God was vnconsulted; Christ his Son,
forfeited; his Church spoiled; the King cousened; the Commons oppressed; was
not this a vile Act? One Parliament more then (SIR) for Christ's sake: it may
be, some will parle for Christ. Leui will plead for himself; he will show the
Law; he dare now say, Nolumus.

Much more might be said (SIR); though nothing more then your Majesty knows.
It suffiseth me, a poor (yet a trusty) Soldier, once to have cried, Courage,
to his King and Captain, in the day of danger: and I beseech God, that as many
may admire your Majesty for working it, as shall envy me for writing it. But
all must rest upon your Highness more ripe and Royal resolutions; wherein,
and in all the courses of your Long-wished life, I shall ever pray for all such
happiness, as best becomes

Your most sacred Majesty's most Loyal Subject, faithful servant, obedient
Disciple, dutiful God-Sonne: JAMES SEMPIL.

TO THE USE OF THE READER.
Twenty twelve months are near spent (good Reader) since I had studied this
Lesson, whereof I do here now render thee an account: a Lesson, I say, not a
Lecture, and so but to be read by entreatie, received as without authority,
and censured freely: for all are well-come that come well.

Two things would I advise thee touching it: The causes moving me to it, and
the course I hold in it. The chief cause was, his Majesty's both example and
authority, (as I have said to himself) who, the more Kingdoms God gives
him, the more careful he is to see the Kingdom of heaven replenish them: and
so, directing sometimes Commissioners of all sorts and Callings, for surueying
Christ's Sanctuary in his Kingdom of Scotland, I was for one. Amongst many
things reformable, we found one almost incurable: Sacrilege had sealed up
Ignorance in many places: Leui was fled to his Land, Nehem. 13.
because he lacked his portion.

Some, that had at first joined themselves to our Reformation (more for rapine
sake, as appears, then Religion) both Atheists, Papists, and some (in show)
Protestants, (a Sacrilegious trinity) as they pulled down the Churches, so
pilled they the Church-rents: laying this ground, The one shall never be built,
and the other ever beg. The Atheist, because he has No Religion, he must
have All the Tithes. The Papist, disliking the present Religion, thinks in
Conscience he may take Tithes in Custodiam. And the Third, renounceth
Ignorantia est matter pietatis; but yet protests, that Paupertas be nutrix
Religionis, both blind and beggarly rudiments: No skant of such Protestants.

As my soul may see joy, I sorrowed for this, being far from all hope of
gain, for I am no Leuite, and free of all malice, for I have no private enemy
(and I could wish, no friend) in the business. But when I saw their Sacrilege
so confirmed, as they could pick out more texts for a pecke of Tithes, then
(perhaps) for a point of salvation: and again, seeing the Prince so perplexed
to see his Churches planted: I was glad to go to School for my own
direction, finding never better grounds, then I received from our Divine David's
own mouth, viz. The Church had ever an inheritance (entitled Tithes) before,
under, and after the Law: whereupon may stand a goodly building. And this for
my Motives.

Touching the course then, I hold in it: I draw the general word (Sacrilege)
to the only point of Maintenance, and Maintenance again, to that only, which
Scripture calls Inheritance, viz. Tithes. The point then to be confirmed is,
Tithes inheritance, are due to the Ministry of the Gospel, by the Law of God.
Many doubt of this, as I both hear and read: but more deliver their
judgments, then confi^me it by good arguments; for in such case, Custom is no
Law, and Law is not humane, but depends only on God: (...). And for this
cause, do I not skumme the Fathers, or Antiquities, further then I find them
play upon the text, pro, or contra. Then, as I require not my reasons to be
received with the reverence of a Father: so I pray thee (good Reader) reject
them not, as the raueries of a child: for the one is neither author of lies,
nor the other of Truth. The Philosopher taught us better, To conceit truly of
all things, according as they are* for they are not what they are, because such
is our conceit of them. In Divine testimonies then, we are to consider, Quis
dixit, and Quid dictum, and so to acquiesce: keeping always that noble Boerean
custom, of Scrutamini Scripturas: not fide implicita, to believe all, because
such a **** aid so. In humane testimonies, we are only to weigh Quid, and quo
jure dictum, not Quis: for no simple truth rests upon this.

According to three ages foresaid, do I treat of the question: before, and
under the Law, in the first part: under the Gospel in the second. Objections
are brought for earch Period, as I have read or heard them, but most part
namelesse, for I seek to clear the Truth, not to be the Whetstone of
Contradiction: some objections, from my own private debating with my self:
all which, I have set down here, fearing other men might stumble at the same:
for the Spirit of doubting, is an earthly guest, and common: the Spirit of true
resolution, from above only, Truth being but One, and Error infinite. If all
doubts then be not here peculiarly answered, yet the grounds well held, will
answer all. The Town of Abe in Phocis, was preserved by Philip Macedo, when
he had destroyed all the rest, because the people of that Town were free of
Sacrilege. Now, if that Philip were to take a survey of our Towns, Boroughes,
and Abbeyes: how many Abbees would he find? What would he leave undestroyed?

The cause of men's carel snesse of this sin now, I take to be, that Time and
Custom, has given it such authority, that it is neither feared, nor admired:
where under the Law, and Poedagogie of the Jews, it was most-times, as
presently punished, as children whipped at school: Vzza struck dead, Vzzia
leaper; and Achan with his whole race, ston^d, or destroy^d for Sacrilege. We
take all (as the proverb is) To the long day: but then shall there neither be
place for Restitution, nor Sacrifice for purgation. Foresee (good Reader) and
farewell.

ANDREAE MELVINI IN AVTHOREM ET ARGVmentum Epigrammata.
QVestio quae argutos exercuit vsque Sophistas,
Imperiale diu, and Pontificale forum;
Disputat hanc acer sollerti Semplius art,
Hunc nodum and soluit: non secat ense, ferox
Rex nodum vt Phrygium Macedo. Quanto hic magis illo
Pellaeo Scotus vindice victor ouat?
In Sacrilegium, and Sacrilegos: Eiusdem.
QVod natura, quod Ars, quod Naturae auctor, and Artis,
Rerum auctori vno dedicat ore Sacrans,
Auri hoc sacra fames scelerato intercipit ausu,
Dum dirum expatrat, Sacrilegumque nefas.
Haud legum metus, aut Regum reuerentia tangit
Deuota immani pectora auaritiae.
Temnitis humanum ius, and mortale tribunal?
Diuinum en summo ius mouet arma foro.
En, Iudex sublime locat sub nube tribunal:
Aliger in flamma vindice tortor adest.
Vobis Sacrilegis obstructum est limen Olympi,
Tartarei and Ditis ianua aperta patet.
Eiusdem.
EST fluctus Decumanus; and est ouum Decumanum:
Et porta in castris quae Decumana fuit.
Sic rerum Natura parens, sic aemula rerum
Naturae Ars, opifex sic vtriusque Deus,
In Decumis ponens quae maxima, Maximo and illas
Dignas se Decumas segregat ipse sibi.
Quod sibi secreuit numen, quod vendicat vni,
Deberi, haud reddi hoc qui velit, ater homo est.
S. S. SONET. Of Sin, and Sacrilege.
ALL Sin seems sweet; all Sacrilege is Sin,
And of all Sins seems Sacrilege most sweet.
As serving for all lusts, cloth, drink, and meat,
And seldom ends where once it does begin.
Stolen goods seem sweetest: and what greater stealth,
Then cosen Christ by color of a Law?
And all his Levites livings to withdraw;
Curse to the Kirk, wrack to the Commonwealth.
The faithful child, he fears his Fathers rod;
He says, He swears, he shall not do it again.
But these pernicious persons, and profane,
They fear not, though they feel the plagues of God.
Poor Sacrilegious souls; Repent, Amend.
And prove not Achans in your latter end.
DAV: DICKSONI, In Sacram hanc Sacrilegij confutationem.
QVo decimas cumules? ad opes! and opes? ad honores.
Quo tibi opes and honor? quo mihi vita petis?
Ah nescis, nec scire cupis, quibus ista parentur
Res, decus, and vere uita beata, modis.
Qui se posse putat spolijs ditescere Divum,
Desipit; and rem augens, dissipat ipse suam.
Jacob. c. 5. v. 2.
Aerugo, en, nummos; vestes tinca; horrea vermes,
Consumunt; solus non tamen ista vides.
Decidet, iniustas per opes, qui captat honores;
Nam pennas Aquilae miscuit ipse suis.
Sint tibi opes; sit honos: miserum tamen esse necesse est,
Sejani infaustum quisquis equum retinet.
Malac. c. 3. v. 10.
Ergo vt and haec, atque his maiora, tibique, tuisque,
Perpetuo constent; read Deo decimas.
EIVSDEM.
CReditus Antaeus ferro inuiolabilis olim est,
Dum Tellus vitam, quam dederat reparat.
Cautior Alcides, vim fati vt perspicit, vlnis
Tollit humo caesum, and Pendulus, ecce perit.
Sacrilegam simili fato qua sacra profanat
Harpriam, peperit subdola Auaritia.
Saepe hominum haec telis cecidit, iam saepe reuixit
Matris open, and vacua est tandem hominum pharetra:
Sed Tu, tela Dei torques, super astraque rap^as
Matre procul (Macte,) haec qua pereat ratio est.
Aliud.
FAtere tandem, victus es
Quicuunque captus illice
Odore lucri, splendido
Sacra temerauisti dolo.
Fatere furtum candide,
Quod art, lege, vi, minis
Tectum volebas hactenus:
Nec amplius praetexe Ius.
Huc vsque iura ludere,
Et fraud Ius propellere,
Et lege Legem scindere,
Tibi licebat in foro.
Sed iustus orbis arbiter,
Tandem reclusit ius suum,
Et Sacra, iure vendicat
Sacro; quis audet hiscere?
Faults escaped.
PAge 41. line vlt. for Word, read World, p. 62. l. 10. for (...), read
(...). p. 64. l. 1. for new, r. mere. p. 69. marg. l. vlt. for Tithing, r.
Priesthood. p. 76. l. 20. r. at a Priesthood. p. 90. marg. l. vlt. for Vernus,
r. Vernas. p. 98. l. 17. r. May not Leuies hired servants labor Leuies lands?

In the Appendix.

PAge 11. for (...) read (...). p. 13. l. 23: for how, r. howsoever. p. 15. l.
7. r. such as are first. p. 16. l 19. for presently, r. presented. p. 27. l.
vlt. for leaving, r. leauying: and for enioyning, r. enjoying. p. 28. l. 8. for
either, r. rather. p. 38. l. 6. r. (...), and also l. 15.

SACRILEGE SACREDLY HANDled, according to only Scripture. First, For the Law.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. The Etymology, and subject of Sacrilege. Sacrilege here specially
meant of Tithes. Church maintenance divided, defined.
SACRILEGE, is from Sacra, and Legere; here, is to Gather, Etymology of
Sacrilege.
and not to Read holy things: for lack of reading, or at least of
understanding, increases this Gathering. And though a holy gathering both may
and must be, having God for the head-gatherer; his Ministry as his Officers,
for gathering his holy people to his heavenly foldes; his Patrimony to be
gathered by them, as the life of their labors: yet our Christian world so
ouerfloweth with heaps of unholy and godless gatherers, that Sacrilege now,
signifies nothing but filthy profanation of holy things.

To know this sin well then, we must first know, what are the sacred and
holy things, wherein he has his being.

Subject of Sacrilege.
By Creation, heavenly, Angels: earthly, Man, to his own Image. By Separation
holy, are such of all his earthly creatures, as are separated from profane or
common use to Gods service.

Things separat to this holy use, are generally five. First, A form of worsh p
to be done, answering How, or What. Secondly, Time, When. Thirdly, Place,
Where. Fourthly, Person, Who. And last, Maintenance for his calling Of all
these five is Sacrilege committed, whenever any point is withheld from the
use it is ordained for.

Sacrilege of Tithes.
withholding of Maintenance, the thiefe-exercise of men of our age, chiefly
where the light is greatest, and the Person greatest. Any Religion will rob
their Gods; but a Sacrilegious Protestant surpasses all: So that no man now,
in show more religious, then some who in substance be most Sacrilegious, (that
is) Sac-religi^us; for that Religion feeds best their soul, that fills
best their sack: A greedy kind of Gospellers, Pharisaically proud of their
profession, Luke 18.12.
all save one thing: The Pharisie vaunted that he gave Tithes of all he had:
they will not (if they can) give the Tithes of any thing they have. The Gospel
should be preached purely, therefore the Preachers live Poorly: Alms for
Maintenance.

Maintenance divided.
or from man's Liberality: from God, either Perpetual, or Temporal
Maintenance.

end of the world, Maintenance defined. Number. 18.20.2i.
provided for the whole Ministry of his worship in general; and called ever
in Scr^pture, Gods inheritance, viz. the first Tithing,

Temporal, whereby God provided in special for such a service, such an
Officer, and such a period of time: So were the portions of the Sacrifices,
etc. a part of Leuies Maintenance for his ceremonial service.

Maintenance flowing from Man, is, when (Gods inheritance being first set
apart) He separateth any thing from the common use to the Lord of all that he
has. Leuit. 27.28.


Of these two sorts of Maintenance makes Sacrilege his chief muster: which in
proper speech, in place of Sacrilegium, Holy gathering, should have said, Romans
2.22.
Sacri-furtum, holy theft: or Sacri-raptum, holy robbery. Paul's (...). And this
for his Etymology: follows his nature and Definition.

CHAP. II. Sacrilege defined, divided: Some objections answered.
SAcrilege (by Scripture defined) is, Leuit. 5.15. and 22.14.
A taking away Sacrilege Defined. Divided.


It is done either of Ibid.
Ignorance or knowledge.

If by Ignorance, it craved by the Law, both Restitution and Purgation.

For Restitution, Leuit. 5.16.
He shall restore that wherein he has offended, in taking away of the holy
thing: and put the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto the Priest.

For Purgation, He shall bring for his trespass offering unto the Lord, a
Ram without blemish, etc. and so the Priest shall make an atonement for him.

If it be done of Knowledge; that which is taken, and all that the taker has,
must be for the Lord as a sacrifice, for Restitution: and he with his whole
family stoned, Ios. 7. Act. 5.3. Prou. 20.25.
and burnt for a Purgation. So was done to Achan, not much unlike to Ananias
and Saphira. Yea, It is a destruction for a man to devour that which is
sanctified.

Then from this our Definition, we speak now of Maintenance, Inheritance,
Tithes: thus, Sacrilege. All Tithes, Inheritance, are consecrated to the Lord.
Ergo, All taking away of Tithes is Sacrilege.


Levites, and their Priesthood; and that Priesthood now wholly abrogated, and
so Tithes no more to be paid.

Respon.
Alas, here now they err, not knowing the Scriptures; Time, Ceremonies, in
what things.
they have not read the Scripture (as shall be Cap. 6. ad fin. and cap. 7.
proved.) And whereas they reckon Tithes amongst the Ceremonies of the Law,
here they understand not what they have read. For all the Ceremonies of Moses
Law were so ordained, as they did prefigure something to be done Gal. 4.4.
till the fullness of time was come. Heb. 9.10.23.
And stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal rites,
until the time of reformation. And were similitudes of heavenly things. All
these (we confess) were truly Legal Ceremonies, leading to Christ by a Heb.
7.16.28.
carnal commandment; and abolished in his Priesthood by an eternal oath: But
now, as all these ceremonies looked only to Christ, and lived only till he
came: so on the other part, Every thing that looked, or led us to Christ, was
not so ceremonial, nor yet by Christ abrogated: No, for this would shut up
both the Moral and Judicial Laws, yea the very Decalogue it self, under the
Ceremonial Law. But to give some other instance herein; Melchisedec looked to
Christ; yea, typed Christ as a Priest; Heb. 7.3.
yet Melchisedec continues a Priest for ever. So, if a thing may be typical;
and yet neither Legal nor Ceremonial; much more things that were never
Typical, as Tithes. Then we ask, What did Tithes prefigure in Christ? What
carnal rite were they, expecting reformation? What similitude of heavenly
things? In what place abolished? And by what things supplied? If no man
answer, we still say they have read, but understand not. Cap 4. lib 6. p. 94.
Edit. 89.
Fenner in his Theolog. most curiously notes the signification, of al Legal
things unto Christ, but in Tithes, although he offreth a signification (as in
other things) yet has he found none.

Yet some one seems both to have read and understood out of the same places,
Heb. 9.10. That seeing Meats and drinks were Leuiticall and Ceremonial.
Tithes were Leuiticall meats and drinks. Ergo, Tithes were Ceremonial.


Neither were all meats and drinks Ceremonial, Respon.
but only such as had a Ceremonial institution: neither Leuies Tithes meat
and drink, All Tithes are not meat.
for many things were tithed which might not be eaten, and were given him as a
maintenance for all his necessities: Number. 18.21.
And Jerome translateth the same place, In vsus and necessaria eorum separaui.

Neither were such Tithes as were their meat and drink, such holy meats as
the Apostle speaks of, Tithes, though meat, yet not Ceremonial.
which were (as is said) similitudes of holy things, arising from sacrifices
and Legal oblations, all abrogate by Christ Holy meats were astricted o only
holy persons: Leuit. 10.13. and 22.6. and 8.31
No stranger, nor hired servants in a Levites house might eat of them: And to
holy times and places: but Tithes once paid to Levy, Mark 2 26.
might out of his hospitality, be eaten by all persons, at all times, and in
all places of the Kingdom. But I pray, if Tithes had been so holy meat then,
why should profane mouths devour them so now?

Leui, a holy ceremonial person. For the place they prove thus, Deuteronomy. 12 6.17.
Ye shall bring thither your burnt offerings and your Tithes: And again, Thou
may not eat within thy gates the Tithe of thy corn, etc. But thou shall
eat it before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose. And lastly,
Mal. 3.10.
Bring all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house.
Those texts prove plainly, Tithes must be brought to the Temple: the Temple it
was a ceremonial place: Leui a ceremonial Priest, both by Christ abrogated:
Ergo, Tithes also ceremonial.

Resp.
All truly read, if as well understood: for as at first they took up Tithes by
distinction of times, they would now carry all by confusion of matter.
Therefore must we be a little more painful, to make them somewhat more perfect.

CHAP. III. Four sorts of Tithes, and each discerned from another by
Scripture. Objections answered.
TITHES in Scripture are first twofold, paid by Israel, and paid by Leui. By
Israel, Analysis of all the Tithes in the Script. to discern Tithes.
paid either to Leui alone, or to other uses, wherein Leui was also a partner.

To Leui alone, were paid Tithes, inheritance, yearly.

To other uses, Tithes were paid, yearly, or each third year.

Yearly, to the holy Feasts.

Each third year, for the poor, etc. of all these was Leui a partaker.

Tithes paid by Leui, were Decimae Decimarum, Tenth of Tithes.

Now this word (Tithes) being commonly taken by most men for Leuies
inheritance, whatsoever they read (by accident) of the other Tithes in
Scripture, they apply it (far amiss) to Tithes inheritance, and so carry all
away, Parsonage, Vicarage, Altarage: But to clear all by Scripture.

The first three sorts of Tithes paid by Israel, are orderly Deuteronomy. 14.
beginning at verse. 22. The first sort of Tithes.
Thou shall give the Tithe of all the increase of thy seed that comes forth
of the field, year by year.] He adds to whom and how, Number. 18.21. To Leui,
and, for inheritance. And Leuit. 27.30.31. he is special of what, All the
Tithe of the Land, of the seed of the ground, of the fruits of the trees, of
bullock and sheep, and of all that goes under the rod.]

Here now are those ordinary, yearly Tithes: the Natural, Ante Legem, sub
Lege, and post Legem.
Legal, and Evangelical maintenance of Gods worship: and are set down here
by Moses, (...), ever in the first room, and only privileged with that high
title, The Lords inheritance.

Three notes whereby to discern Tithes.
First, Of all.] Secondly, Year by year.] Thirdly, All places and persons.]
All those shall thou ever find to agree with (and only with) Tithes
inheritance: the restrictions import ever some Ceremony, as in their
particular collation shall plainly appear.

Ergo, Ceremonial: It is clear, that Tithes inheritance (as in the first
sort) were never all tied to the Temple, nor Jerusalem: because all the Levites
were not tied to Jerusalem, but lived abroad many of them for reading of the
Law unto the people every Sabbath day in their Synagogues, Act. 15.21.
and so must have had their sustenance where they served.

That they stayed not all still at Jerusalem, is cleared by their turns
according to their lots, 1. Chron. 24.5. etc. And All the Levites of the holy
City were 284. and the residue of Israel, Neh. 11.18.20.
of the Priests, and of the Levites, dwelt in the Cities of Judah, every one in
his inheritance.] Now, that they drew their sustenance in the places of their
service, it is also clear, Neh. 10.37.38.
That the Levites might have their Tithes in all the Cities of our travel,
etc. But the examination of the second sort will clear this more.

The second sort of Tithes Verse. 23. and Deuteronomy. 12.6.17.11. etc. Verse. 24.
And thou shall eat before the Lord thy God (in the place where he shall
choose, to cause his name to dwell there) the Tithe of thy corn, of thy wine,
and of thine oil, etc. And if this way be too long for thee, so that thou art
not able to carry it, because the place is far from thee, etc. Verse. 25.
Then shall thou make it in money, and bind up the money in thy hand, and go
unto the place, etc. Verse. 26.
And thou shall bestow the money for whatsoever thy heart desires, whether it
be ox, or sheep, etc. And the Leuite that is within thy gates shall thou not
forsake, etc. Verse. 27.


These Tithes cannot be Inheritance, seeing they agree only with one of our
three general notes proper thereto, viz. Yearly. They are not of All, but of
only Corn, Wine, and Oil, as verse. 23.] They are not for All places, but
only at Jerusalem, verse. 24.25.] And this exchange of them into money, verse.
24. for the longnesse of the journey, and difficulty of carriage, proves
clearly, that Tithes inheritance being of All things, could not be first
carried to Jerusalem, and thence back again, to be divided among the
dispersed Levites.

Lyra on Deuteronomy. 12.6.17.
Lyra and Iunius in Analysi sua contra quam priu^ cum Tremellio
others would confound these two verses, and make both but one tithing. But
mark how the text it self distinguishes them, verse. 22. Thou shall give of
All: Here, the Giver is the Israelites, the Taker then must be the Levites.]
Verse. 23. Thou shall eat, meaning the Israelites, as of before: So Giving,
Taking, and Eating, cannot meet In eadem persona. And Number. 18.21. Tithes are
called Haereditas vestra, meaning the only Levites: therefore the Israelites
cannot be commanded here, to eat them. And beside Scripture, we oppose to
Lyra, Josephus saying, Amiq. lib. 4. page 91. A. D.
Let the tenth part of the fruits (besides them that are due to the Priests and
Levites) which you are accustomed to sell in y ur markets (being reduced into
ready money) be spent in sacrifices and banquets in the sacred City.] And,
Besides the two tenthes which I commanded you yearly to pay (the one to the
Levites, and the other for your Festiuals) you shall for every third year
annex a third, to be distributed amongst the poor, to women, widows and
orphants. Cap. 1.7.8.9.
] Again, Tobit, another Jew also, pays them all three, as three distinct
Tithings: here therefore old Lyra begat a young error.

Malachi, Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, Genera singulorum, non
singula generum.
This universal note, All, must be All such Tithes as the Law appointed to be
brought up of each sort, not the whole Tithes of all sorts. This limitation of,
All, is so agreeable to precepts of Logic, and so frequent in practice of
Scripture, as it needs no proof.

2. Chro. 31.11.
Malachies Storehouse then, and Ezekias Chambers, were both one: the Chambers
were built for the great heaps of Tithes, the heaps were for the Feasts, the
Feasts for the Lords worship. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
And if this course had not been held, seeing all the males, poor and rich,
must have been thrice a year at Jerusalem, they had rather fasted then
feasted. Now the remainder of those heaps, were for those that either stayed
still at Jerusalem, or as came out of their Cities to worship at Jerusalem,
as Deuteronomy. 18.6. who all this time were not to live of the sale of their own
patrimonies abroad, Deuteronomy. 18.7.8.
but had a portion with their brethren staying at Jerusalem, and served as they
did, keeping each, one, both the Family he was of, and charge they were
appointed unto; as a Gershonite to a Gershonite, and so forth: the distribution
of those Tithes, was by chosen men to that purpose, appointed in that same
place, 2. Chron. 31.12. etc.
of the Levites themselves.

At the end of three years thou shall bring forth all the Tithes of thine
increase the same year, Third sort of Tithes.
and lay it up within thy gates. Then the Leuite shall come, Deuteronomy 14. Amos 4.4.
(still the Leuite) because he has no part, nor inheritance with thee, and the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are within thy gates, and
shall eat and be filled.

Now, seeing all inheritance is Yearly, and these Tithes but each third year,
they cannot be Gods inheritance. Whatsoever Ceremony may be in the time,
(tertio anno) yet the perpetual equity of those Tithes (ratione finis and
vsus) holds still. For as Lyra alleges them to have been instituted, for
preservation of the poor, from eating in necessity the meats of the Gentiles
Idols. So have the Apostles by diverse precepts provided for the poor, but
chiefly for those of the household of Faith: Gal. 6.10. 1. Cor. 16.1.
and late Writers hold this to answer those Tithes for the poor. This was
called afterward by Moses, Deuteronomy. 26.12.
The year of Tithing: because this third year increased one Tithing above the
other two. And such were Tithes paid by the Israelites, follows now.

The fourth sort of Tithes, paid by Leui, the Tithe-taker, Aaron, and his
successors, Highpriests: The fourth sort of Tithes. Number. 18.26, 28.
When ye shall take of the children of Israel the Tithes, which I have given
you of them for your inheritance, then shall ye t^ke an Heaue-offering of the
same for the Lord, the tenth part of the Tithe.

Behold here, Tithe-takers become Tithe-payers, and so these Tithes cannot be
the Lords inheritance, being defective in two of the general notes agreeing to
Gods inheritance, viz. Person and Place: in Person, Verse 28.
because they are paid by the Ordinary Officiar of receiving Inheritance,
Leui, to the only High Priest. In Place; Nehem. 10.^8.
And the Levites shall bring up the tenth part of the Tithes, unto the house of
our God, unto the Chambers of the Treasure-house. Now if all Tithes were
brought up to Jerusalem, to what end should he here command to bring up the
tenth of them again? All this is ceremonial.

But mark yet, Then it shall be counted unto the Levites, as the increase of
the corne-floore, or as the increase of the wine press.

Then Tithes inheritance, can no way be Ceremonial, for here they are to the
Levites, even as the Land was to the other Tribes: And Leui gives offerings, (
viz. as first fruits, Number. 18.11.12.13.27.29. and Exodus 22.29.
and so does Jerome translate this place, Primitias) out of his Tithes, as if
they were his very Barnes, his Wine Press, even as the other Tribes did of
their Barnes, and Wine-presses. Their offerings were all Ceremonial, their
Inheritances, not.

Ergo, So must Leuies Inheritance.

Domini est terra, and plenitudo eius: And the same peculiar interest, in his
own patrimony separated to his own service.

If they yet reply, The other Tribes were only Temporal, but Leui both
Temporal and Ceremonial, Ergo, So were Tithes his Inheritance.

Here a piece of sacrilegious Sophistry, to conclude from His Priesthood, to
Gods Patrimony. They are not of one nature, nor both the sons of one father.
His Priesthood bred only by the Law: This Patrimony, long before both Leui
and the Law. His Priesthood, brings with it only Aetatem; but this
inheritance, Aeternitatem. That sort of Priesthood was Leuies only, this sort
of Patrimony was his also, but not only his. And so, in the division of the
Land, God said not, This shall be Leuies inheritance: Number. 18.20.22.24.
but, I am his inheritance. And, I have given, not, I will give Leui all the
Tithes. They were but Leuies, secundario; they were, and are the Lords primo.

Having settled the Tenth of Tithes in Aaron, he subioyneth And ye shall eat
it in all places, etc. This, IT, cannot be the Tenthes of Tithes, as some
guess; but it must be Tithes Inheritance: For first, otho.
the Hebrew Pronoune is Masculine, and must be Relative to Prouentu^ area, in
the former verse, which (in the remainder) was Tithes inheritance, as the
learned may perceive.

Secondly, Ye shall eat, is spoken here to the Levites: but what reason had
they, to eat the Priests portions, which themselves were to pay them? Thirdly,
In all places, cannot agree with things once tied to Aaron, and Jerusalem;
unless we dream they carried them back again to all the places of their
residence, through the Country. The true meaning then is this: As the other
Tribes must first give God his Tithes, before they might use their nine parts:
so must Leui give to Aaron his Tithe before he put hand to Tithes his
Inheritance: And this done, Tithes Inheritance were accounted unto Leui, as the
increase of their own Barnes and Wine-presses, though they had none; and so
they might eat them in all the places of their travels.

Thus have we brought these confounded matters to a method, and sent each Tithe
to his own place. But wonder it is to see the strange subtlety of Sacrilege
seated once in the hearts of men, how they can allege those texts, Bring all
the Tithes to Gods house, to conclude this, Bring no more Tithes to the Lords
house: for doubtless, if it were not more for love of the Tithes, then the
Text, this Theology should never be so frequent.

CHAP. IV. Tithes not Ceremonial of their nature. How to discern a Moral
offering from a Ceremonial. Tithes a Moral offering.
Sacri, Sacra fames.
so that we shall sooner solue their Syllogismes, then dissolve their
Sacrilege. From the Institution of Tithes to Leui, they reason two ways:
First, from their Nature: Secondly, from their End. From their Nature, thus,
All offerings of the children of Israel under the Law, were Ceremonial. Tithes
(even Inheritance) were offered by Israel under the Law. Ergo, Tithes
Inheritance were Ceremonial.
And consequently, cannot be due to the Gospel. The Proposition they take. The
Assumption they prove thus, For the Tithes of the Children of Israel, Number.
18.24.
which they shall offer, as an Offering (some read, Heaue-offering) unto the
Lord, I have given the Levites for an Inheritance.

Tithes by nature, not Ceremonial.
We confess the Assumption truly read: But because of the diversity of
Translations, we must look unto the Original word, and distinguish it in the
Proposition. Two Hebrew words, Rum, and Nuph, are used by Moses in diverse
sorts of offerings: the first signifying to Heave, or lift up: the second, to
Wave, or shake to and fro. Sometimes these words retain their simple and
common signification, though the subject be sacred: sometimes they import a
mere Leuiticall Ceremony, tending and ending in Christ. For example, Exodus
14.16. Lift thou up thy rod, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.14. Lest thy heart be lifted up, etc.
Here is the first word without any Ceremony. For the second word, Exodus 20.25.
In building the Altar, a thing, Deuteronomy. 27.5.
both Sacred and Ceremonial, he forbids to lift up or shake a Masons tool
or instrument for hewing of it: Here was no Ceremonial end in Lifting, but
only God would have these Altars during the time of their peregrination, so
built, as they might be easily overthrown, and not serve for the superstition
of others after their departure.] Exodus 35.21. etc. Are both words used, How to
discern the Ceremony.
and in very Offerings, and yet import no Ceremony. For although the
Tabernacle once built, was a most Ceremonial Type, yet the peoples offering
according as they had, man and woman, gold or silver, silk or linen, as
materials to build it withal: here was no ceremonial offering perfected and
abolished by Christ: For why may not every Christian Moses, for building
houses to Gods worship, command their people, Lift up, or offer of their
substance to that use?

Their Ceremonial signification flows never from Exodus 29.23. etc. both words
are mixed for the lifting up, and shaking to and fro, Leuit. 7.34.
of the right shoulder, and the breast of the Peace Offering. Here concur, a
Priest, an Altar, an Offering or Sacrifice, all which were merely and only
Leuiticall Ceremonies: yea, Shaking, and Heauing, have there, their own
peculiar signification in Christ, as all Divines acknowledge. But what if these
words do not import this Leuiticall Ceremony, Number. 8.5. etc,
even in Leuiticall and Ceremonial Offerings? The Levites were offered to the
Lord in place of the first borne, by purification, expiation, shauing, washing,
sacrificing at the door of the Tabernacle, by the hand of the Priest, and so
the Levites are in the translations called, a Shake-offering unto the Lord:
Here are all things most Ceremonial, save only Shaking. For neither read we,
nor is it probable, that so many thousand men could be really shaken to and
fro, ad quatuor plagas mundi, as was done with the right shoulder and breast of
the Ram aforesaid. And if any man will draw Analogy from that Ceremonial
shaking, to the shaking and dispersing of the Levites through the four corners
of the Kingdom; then as the word is so, but Metaphorical, the matter is also
Moral: for Leuies successors under the Gospel are so scattered and shaken.

Moral offerings.
and a Moral. The Ceremonial, peculiar to the Leuitical Law, and performed
ever by a Leuitical Priest: full of rites, as Altar, Fire, Offering, Heauing,
Shaking, or some such signifying Ceremony, as is said. The Moral offering
also two fold, either to God only and immediately, or by mediation. Only to
God we offer out Prayers and praises, Hos. 14.2. Heb. 13.15.
The calves or fruits of our lips. By Mediation we offer to others, either for
Gods sake, or for Gods service. Act. 10.4.
For his sake, Thy alms is come up into a remembrance before God: Philip. 4
18. Act. 24.17.
A sacrifice pleasant and acceptable to God. Alms and offerings. To others for
Gods service, even those Tithes, Gods Inheritance, for all his officers,
offered long before that Ceremonial Law, continued so by that Law, and why not
also after that Law? No carnal Priest, Place, or rite here: for Leui did not
offer Tithes here to God in name of Israel, (as was the nature of Ceremonial
offerings) but received Tithes in name of God, as Inheritance, from Israel. All
Ceremonial offerings must be done at the only door of the Tabernacle: But
Israel offered these Tithes in all the Cities of their travels, as we have
proved. All Ceremonial offerings were due to the Only Priests: Number. 18.8. etc.
but Tithes are also due, (and as some think only) to the inferior Levites.
Offering then of Tithes here, is no other, then Abraham's giving to
Melchisedec, and Iaacobs vowing to give Tithes. They are called an offering,
because they should be freely offered, not craved, as the custom is to this
day even where Seculars are Tithers, who are called unto, cried upon, yet will
scarcely take them, having a resolution, as they rob the Lord, so to ruin
the labourer.

Thus we see, Offering, of it own nature, How Tithes are to be offered.
is a word for Gods worship in all ages. To offer Tithes then, is to give them
in such form, as God requires in all gifts, viz. Speedily, as Exodus 22.29.
With gladness, Ecclesiastic. 35.9. Not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God
loves a cheerful giver. 2. Cor. 9.7. Without murmuring. Deuteronomy. 26.14. And
finally, In liberty of the spirit, and liberality of the heart, as was
Abraham's giving of Tithes to Melchisedec. Genesis 14.20.

To make Tithes then a true Shake-offering, shake off the sacrilegious use of
them, and so lift up thy heart a pure Heaue-offering to the Lord, saying with
the true Israelite, Deuteronomy. 26.13. I have put the hallowed things out of mine
house, and given it to the Leuite, etc. Lest the Lord one day shake both thy
stock and thy Tithe, thy body and thy soul.

CHAP. V. Tithes not Ceremonial in their End: Two points of Leuies service,
and three degrees of Levites: for all which, and to all which, Tithes were
given in Inheritance. Sacrifices not properly Inheritance. The ^ge under the
Law concluded, and more ancient rights preduced.
End is now quarrelled, thus:

Whatsoever was ordained for the service of the Tabernacle, must [as the
Tabernacle it selfe] be Ceremonial.

Tithes (Inheritance) were given Leui for that service.

Ergo.

The very text is their Assumption, Number 18.21. Now God help Leuies successors,
that is, such as be of the Ministry now a days: for by this dealing, has
Leui been a hundredth fold in better case under the Law, then they be under the
Gospel. O Rich Aaron, Type for a time! And poor Melchisedec, Priest for ever!
A great pity, poverty should be perpetual. No remedy then, but up must the
Tabernacle, or down must the Tithes. For as to the preaching of that heavenly
Tabernacle, Christ: Tithes not Ceremonial.
it must go for Gra-mercy. Yet to say somewhat, lest we lose all, to the parts
of this their Ceremonial Syllogism, [for little, or no substance in it:] Both
Proposition and Assumption lack this word (Only) to conclude the question
aright. For to be tied to the Tabernacle: and not (Only) to it, will not make
a thing Ceremonial. For so shall we make the Decalogue it self Ceremonial:
for it was also tied to be read in that Tabernacle by Leui. Ceremonial then,
must be, Only with, or Only, for the Tabernacle. And if they say, Tithes
Inheritance are Only for it: then both Proposition and Assumption are false,
for two reasons:

I. The only Ceremonial service of the Tabernacle Leuies whole function. Two
points of Leuies service.


II. Tithes were given to the whole Tribe for their whole function. Their
service and function stood in two points, according to that Prophecy of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.10.
They shall teach Iaacob thy Judgment, and Israel thy Law: 2. Chron. 17.7.8.9.
They shall put incense before thy face, and the burnt offering upon thine
Altar. The first point we see is a scattered service, according to a former
Prophecy of Leuies own Father, I will divide them (viz. Levites) in Iaacob,
Genesis 49.7.
and scatter them in Israel, to wit, for teaching the people Gods Law, not tied
(Only) to that Tabernacle: Act. 15.21. etc. 2. Chro. 11.14.
For Moses in old time has in every City them that preach him, etc. This
point is General, Moral, and so, Perpetual: derived from the first Adam, and
by course prorogued to the second coming of the second Adam. The second point
of their function, To put incense, etc. A service indeed Ceremonial, because
tied to the Tabernacle Only, beginning and ending with Leui. Then, Moral
scattered services, crave ever a like Maintenance; and Ceremonial tied
service, the like also: and during the Law, one Officer, Leui, discharging both
the Moral and Ceremonial services, did eat of both sorts of Maintenance. And
this for proof of the first point: The Only Tabernacle was not Leuies whole
function.

The second point, That Tithes were given them for

Number. 18. Three degrees of Levites.
The Tribe of Leui being distinguished by order of Office, in High Priest,
Priest, and inferior Levites: he sets down in this Chapter the Office of
all, and the Maintenance for all. Their offices (mixtly) from verse 1. till 8.
from 8. till 20. their maintenance common to the Priests, but not to inferior
Levites, Nehem. 10.37. From 20. till 25. he sets down their common
maintenance viz. Tithes Inheritance proper to the whole Tribe: now because the
Levites were restrained from the portions of the Priests; Upon Deuteronomy. 12.6.17.
Lyra (and others) conclude, that Tithes here, are only for the inferior
Levites, exempting the Priests. But the text is ill taken up so; for from the
beginning till ver. 20. he treats only of the Priests Ceremonial service
touching Sacrificing, and of the Ceremonial maintenance, which arises from
the sacrifices, and offerings; in which, Inferior Levites had small handling,
and so as small a portion. But from 20. he sets down their Inheritance, by
the only name of Tithes. This for Lyras guessing, Anti 3. lib. 4. cap. 4. C.
and vita Joseph. fol. 534 I. in the English translation.
to whom we oppose Josephus, both a Jew, and a Leuite, yea of the Priests;
plainly allotting Tithes both to Priest and Levites. So to ascribe Gods
inheritance to the least officers only, has no better warrant then Deliria
Lyrae.

Tithes due to the whole Tribe. Number. 18.20.21
hear what the Scripture says. Abraham gave Tithes first to Melchisedec, even
a great Priest, before the Law. And under the Law, the Lord said to Aaron, Thou
sh lt have none Inheritance in their Land, I am thy Inheritance. And, I have
given all the tenth of Israel for an Inheritance, to the children of Leui.
Shall not Aaron the High Priest, and the children of Leui comprehend the whole
Tribe? Further, seeing the Priests here are debarred all civil Inheritance as
well as the Levites, why should they not live of the Ecclesiastic, as well as
Leui? Again, Neh. 10.37.38.
Nehemiah with the people made a covenant, to give the Tithes of their Land
unto the Levites in all the Cities of their travel; And a Priest, the son of
Aaron, shall be with the Levites when the Levites take Tithes. Some think this
Priest, the son of Aaron, was but an ouerseer of Leuies Tithing, that by
their portion he might know the true proportion of Decimae Decimarum, which
the Levites were to take up to Jerusalem, and give to his Father Aaron. I
rather hold, (with some others) that the Priests here, were partners with the
Levites in Tithes Inheritance: And that this Priest was not one single person,
(for how could one man ouersee all the Levites, Tithing at one time, in all the
corners of the Country?) but a Priest in each place, lifting for his brethren
Priests, as the Levites for theirs, in the Cities of their residence: for they
were mixed and dwelt together. But if the Priests had no part in these Tithes,
tell us whereupon they lived all that time of the year they remained at home
out of Jerusalem? They were divided in four and twenty Classes; each Class
served in his turn but for a Sabbath; so each Class came but twice a year:
so it seems they lived abroad some eight and forty weeks, and no part of
oblations or sacrifices might be transported, nor eaten out of Jerusalem.
Iudicent doctiores.

But here they object, Ios. 13.14.
The sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel, are the Inheritance of the Tribe of
Leui, as he said unto So this word, Inheritance, Sacrifices not properly
Inheritance.
makes no more for perpetual Tithing, then for perpetual Sacrificing. For
this, Tremellius wisely notes, this speech to be both Synecdochicall, in
putting Sacrifices, for all sorts of Offerings (whereof Tithes was one): And
Metonymicall, in putting Things consumed by fire, for things reserved from
fire. Again, seeing these things were only eaten by the Priests and their
Families, and only at Jerusalem, as all Scripture testifies; it is most
clear, that Sacrifices were not Inheritance for the whole Tribe. And 18. 7.
But Joshua explaineth all this in the last of this same Chapter, For the Lord
God of Israel is their Inheritance, as he said unto them. Mark these last
words, as he said unto them: This he said only in Number. 18. and there, only
Tithes are the Lords Inheritance, and that for the whole Tribe, as is said. The
very like Synecdoche, is in that speech of gisting the Tithes, for their
service, in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, where Tithes were as due, (if
not more) for their scattered service. But seeing the principal service of the
Law was Typical and Ceremonial, Moses had reason to talk in Typical and
Ceremonial terms, as by Tabernacle, to comprehend their whole service; and
that very justly, seeing all their service was discharged in, but not only in,
the Tabernacle. This Synecdoche is frequent to this word, Tabernacle of the
Congregation: for it being properly, but that place where the Priests served,
yet is it extended to Sanctum Sanctorum, where Aarons rod was, as in the
Chapter proceeding, verse. 4.7. compared with Hebr. 9.4. and Leuit. 10.9. and
Numb. 1.49. etc.

Leui said to have no Inheritance amongst their brethren, How Leui is said to
have no inheritance.
seeing both of their labors, and from their hands, they receive their Tithes;
and so, seem more to be mixed among the Tribes, then any one Tribe with
another? First, I think, because they had no such portion of the Land as they:
secondly, for the different prerogative of their portions and tenures; The
Israelites holding by a common and civil Law; the Levites, by a peculiar and
divine: Tithes were the Lords, and resigned by him, to Leui; the Lord, and
Leui, both must first be paid, before Israel can lawfully enjoy his: So is
Leui both the first, and the freest tenant: and such as held of Leui, were
always thought to have the better tenures; though now, all things go (...)
with him, that is, vpside down.

Neither was this tenth given to Leui, Leui not the tenth part of Israel.
because he was the tenth part of Israel, as others dream. For the Tribes were
twelve; and of all was Leui the least, by great ods. But if men may so much
altum sapere; favor that curiosity, that favors the verity: for one might
derive it better from a correspondencie to the ten Commandments, a chief part
of their charge; as who should say, teach ten to all, and take a tenth of all:
so both are perpetual, and proportional.

Leui then, being neither the twelfth, thirteenth, nor Number. 1.46. compared with
3.39. the people were 603550. the Levites but 22000. beside the odds of age
reckoned.
that that was not the cause of giving him the tenth: for then, the sixtieth
part should have been but his. A pitiful wonder it is, to see such learned men
allege such reasons. But what then was the true reason of this donation?
Observe it.

Thousands of years before the Law, are Tithes given to the Lord between
Abraham and Melchisedec; Genesis 14.20. and 28.22.
then vowed by Iaacob. Hereupon, more then an hundren years after, God
intimates to his people, Leuit. 27.30.
That all the tithes of that Land were his; his already; his long before; not
made his now. What needed all this, if God had only respected the general
provision for a tenth, twelfth or thirteenth Tribe? Might not Canaan have been
divided in ten, twelve, or thirteen parts, to the lesser Tribe, the smaller
portion, as God appointed, Number. 26.54.? And might not Tithes also have been
delayed till that time? But this thirteenth portion must be in the Lord after
another manner, then the Land of Canaan was the Lords. What? more care of Leui,
then of all the Tribes? Then of Judah, whereof Christ himself came? Yet observe.

Leui first a calling, before he gives him a condition: The Calling should
bring on the Condition.
Numb. 1.49.50. (for Aaron and his sons were taken up as Priests, Exodus 28.)
Even so is Leui, made the Lords more peculiarly then the other Tribes: All this
while has Leui no portion: the first news he hears, is, he shall have no
portion among his Brethren; only, I am his portion, says the Lord, Number.
18.20. and in the next verse, I have given the sons of Leui all the tenth,
etc. Then he subioyneth what moved him so to do, For his service in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation: and therefore Leui has no part nor inheritance
with his brethren, Deuteronomy. 10.8.9. So we see the only Calling brought on the
condition.

Neh. 7.94.
This rule was ever kept under the Law: he that could not prove his pedigree to
the Priesthood, he was debarred holy maintenance. It should go so under the
Gospel too: He that cannot give evidence of an inward calling, (his
Evangelical pedigree) should not be permitted, propter beneficium ambire
officium. That this was the true cause, and right course in Leuies maintenance,
it is evident by this, that he who committed Sacrilege, offended God Primario,
against the first Table: he that robbed any other Tribe, offended but in the
second Table; he spoiled not God: he was but, a thief the other, a
sacrilegious thief. Shall we clear it also by the Gospel? Romans 2.21. etc.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou which preachest,
A man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say, a man should not
commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Here we see in these three
points, he opposes one and the same sin, under one and the same names: but
then, Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? What a strange
change is in this opposition here, of Idolatry to Sacrilege? Paul proves
Sacrilege to be Idolatry thus, All covetousness is Idolatry, Col. 3.5.
Ephesians. 5.5.

Whereupon we justly infer this, Ergo, All Sacrilege is Idolatry.
Sacrilege being a coveting of Gods own goods, must be most Idolatrous.

So have we sufficiently proved, that, Tithes in no respect are Ceremonial:
and that Tithes and the Law were not twins of one time, as we proved from
Leuit. 27. But say they, Leuitic. smells also of the Law: for this see Chap.
9. Secondly, we show, before either Law was given, or Leui gotten, Tithes were
Gods by contract from Jacob, Leuies father. To this they reply, This was a Vow,
and Vows also smell of the Law: Whereof also Chap. 8.9. Thirdly, Tithes were
first of all the Lords, by most lawful, and powerful possession, passed
between Abraham, and that Priest of the most high God Melchisedec: Of whom
(with the Apostle) we have many things to say, which are hard to be uttered,
because men be dull of hearing: and that by reason, they be too quick in
Tithing. And this for production of Gods rights, we go now to examine the
pieces. And first, that which was first, viz. Our Possession.

CHAP. VI. Tithes at first given Really, and Royally, never matched with
Laics. Some Objections answered.
Possession: It goes thus, Genesis 14.18.
And Melchisedec King of Salem, brought forthbread and wine: and he was a
Priest of the most high God: And he blessed (Abraham) saying, Blessed art thou,
Abraham, of the most high God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth: and blessed be
the most high God, who has delivered thine enemies into thine hand. And
Abraham gave him Tithe of all. Here is a naked-like History to contain so
great Mysteries: relative to nothing before it, foretelling nothing to follow
it. It may be that Moses saw no more in it, then he set down: but
Interpretations are of God. Genesis 40.8. Luke 7.28. Lib. 2. cap. 4.
And The least in the Kingdom of God, is greater then John Baptist: whereof
afterward. Howsoever, Patent, and Possession all in one.
yet here have we our most ancient, and authenticke Patent, and Possession of
our Inheritance, Simul, and semel, action vnica. Mark therefore the dignity
of the Action, both in Substance, and Circumstances, and of that which flows
from it. For all is Real, all is Royal.

Time Royal, in two respects, First, Because it was many hundred years before
the law: A time of freedom, when as no precept did press any party to it.
Secondly, The particular time of the action is described by Royal
circumstances, verse. 17. viz. after that faithful Abraham redeemed faithful
Lot, by the ruin of four Kings.

Place Royal, verse. 17. For our Charter is dated in the Valley of Shaueth,
which is the Kings dale.

Romans 4.13.
Parties Royal, Melchisedec a King, and Abraham heir of the world:
Melchisedec, a Priest of the most high God: All p^sse on Royal points.
and Abraham, Patriarch of all the Faithful.

Witness Royal. The King of Sodom. verse. 21.

Recorder, or Clerk Royal, viz. Moses, Governor of all Gods people: Revived
by a Royal Prophet David, Psalm. 110.4. and re-established in the most Royal
days of the Gospel, Hebr. 7.1. etc.

May we not justly say here then, that Heaven and Earth entered a league? When
as the true Melchisedec, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, first King of Justice,
then King of Peace, blessed Abraham, and all his seed, the heirs of the
world. When shall this bargain have an end? On whose part shall it fail? So
long as Earth is inhabited, and by Abraham's offspring manured; so long must God
have his Inheritance Tithes.

Two Lessons here not to be neglected in the order Melchisedec, Justice,
Peace, Religion and Tithing.
goes before King of Salem, that is, Justice and Righteousness go before
Peace, and both go before Tithes, that is, without Peace, no settled Religion.
Then, Peace is the daughter of Justice, and Religion the Garland of Peace.
Wheresoever then the Just God procures us Peace, we ought to settle Religion
(in all points) peaceably. And where the Power and Peace is greatest, there
should Religion be purest, not Poorest For Religion once rent, Peace is
violated: and Peace violated, breaks the rod of Justice.

This course began here Abraham, our Patriarch and pattern, with Melchisedec,
so soon as by Gods Justice he was made peaceable from those Kings his enemies:
he hears Melchisedec, Gods Messenger, reverently: he rendereth him his due,
Tithes, thankfully: which two points, paint out to us generally, the substance
of all Religion. This before the Law.

This course kept Moses at Gods command, giving a Law, that when they should by
Gods Justice, become peaceable in Canaan, they should then have Religion
peaceable; only one worship of one God: and pay to his Officiars his
inheritance, Tithes. And this course followed all the good Kings under the Law.
So we would know, why this course may not also hold after the Law? For here
have we the Cornerstone of all our building, viz. That how soon a Priest is
named, so soon are Tithes named for his maintenance. So Tithes and Priesthood
in general (not Legal Priesthood) are twins of one time. They are of Nature,
Reciprocate: (that is) the one cannot be without the other: whereupon these two
things will follow: Tithes and Seculars never matched.
First, That no marriage can be, between any Secular person and Tithes.
Secondly, That so long as God has Officiars of his worship on Earth; so long
must Tithes be their Inheritance.

Melchisedec, (our first right) the world was some two thousand years old: and
all this while was God worshipped; yet all this while not a word of Tithes: And
why may not the last age of the world, worship God without Tithes, as well as
the first? And so Tithes be only the Lords Inheritance during the Law, that
first, and only, named them so?

Resp. First, here is a double question. One concerning Tithes, another
concerning their title, Inheritance. A general answer for both; all things
beginning together, The Decalogue came with the Law, but must not end with it
See part. 2. cap. 7. ad fin.
are not bound to end together: and touching the Law, it holds but in things
Ceremonial, for Quod Morale est. Mortale non est, read lib. 2. cap. 7.

Secondly, concerning Tithes, we must mark two things: First, As they are the
goods of men generally. Secondly, The precise number in quoto, as they are a
Tenth of their goods. And so, these first two thousand years, though the quota
pars, Tithes, for the first two thousand years.
was not (nominatim) defined; yet Res ipsa, were to the same end employed; and
so God still worshipped. Otherwise we may also conclude against all the other
four general points of Divine service: viz. God was not for two thousand
years worshipped, because, no Priest named, no times affixed: no place
designed: and no special form prescribed: and so by a like consequence, we
may live after the Law, without all these, as before it. But we say, all five
were then re ipsa, though more confused according to the time. The firstborn
then discharged the Priests office: and the best of all their goods served them
for Tithes. Genesis 18.19.
So Cain and Abel (the Church being then as in her cradle) were taught by
Tradition, before Law, Lib. 2. cap. 7. ad fin.
or by the Law of Nature, that whatsoever the Earth yielded unto them, a part
(yea a chief part thereof) was due to the Lords peculiar worship. And so
each of them brought out unto the Lord, according to his labors. Their Labors
even at first, went as large as did Church maintenance under the Law, out of
all the fruits of the ground, from Cains tillage: And of all the bestiall of
the field, from Abels pasturage. Now, he who can discern in these two
brothers, the Priest from the Laick, may as easily sequestrate their portions.
Moral and Ceremonial here, went all in a manner, confusedly. Tithes then are
(in quoto) precisely named, as soon as the Officiar (on whom they ever depend)
is precisely named: and both, long before the Law. And so for Tithes.

Now touching this title, (How Tithes may be held Inheritance) during the
first two thousand years, Have Inheritance.
seeing the Law only calls them so? To this we answer, It follows not, A
thing is not that which it is, because it is not named as it is. As to say,
Abraham was no Priest, because he is not called by the name of Priest: for
whosoever sacrificed as first borne, were Priests. It is usual in Scripture,
sometimes to name things peculiarly, before they be indeed so: as, the wandering
Tabernacle* and the Stone which Jacob erected as a pillar, Genesis 28.20.21.22. 1.
Sam. 1.7.9.
were both named House of God; but were not so, till Solomon built there the
Temple. And sometime again, things are in effect that, which they bear no
name of, till long after: as Melchisedec here, was a Priest of an Order; but
yet not named of an Order till David rose: and also Tithes, or that which
supplied their room, were not called (Inheritance) til the own fit time. Yet
that same right, which God had from al beginning in men's goods, was ever in
effect Gods Inheritance. And as the Mysteries of salvation began to be more
cleared (as here, where God presented to Abraham a Priest, (...)) so he makes
Abraham to offer his goods also Orderly, calling them at first, Tithes. And
again, at such times as the Land was to be divided, and Justice had begotten
perfect Peace; and that the name of Inheritance could be of use, and all things
(...); then (I say) did God claim his Inheritance; Leuit. 27.30.
declaring, that those goods brought out at first, by Cain and Abel confusedly;
and those Tithes, offered by Abraham distinctly, were both his Inheritance.
Mark that he but declares Tithes to be his Inheritance, without any precept:
for the Law made them only Inheritance to Leui, Number. 18.20. etc.
not to God: and unless we draw Gods right from the first beginnings (as is
said) we shall never find them the Lords by any other Scripture. And this for
Tithes, both in matter and title.

CHAP. VII. The word [Inheritance] makes Tithes due to all ages. Leuite,
Priest, Minister, words for all ages. God has a double inheritance. The
dignity of the Church Ministry of old.
Having found Gods Inheritance to have begun Tithes; Inheritance, what.
and the Law to have prorogued them so, till Christ's days, four thousand
years: How shall this Inheritance lose his virtue in Christ? It seems here,
that if we but understood our natural mother tongue, we might easily know our
heavenly Fathers will. For Inheritance has ever this prerogative, That it can
never be taken from the lawful Lord, but either by consent of the owner, or
by Violence. Tithes taken back by Violence (as are all now adays) may reap
Achans reward, when God pleases. As for Gods consent hereto; we will gladly
expect, either their proof, or our repossession.

Inheritance, again, is either Personae, or Officij. If Personal, then it
goes Iure Patris ad Filium If Official (that is) gifted by the supreme Lord to
any office or service, then it is Ius praedecessoris in successores. Tithes are
Inheritance both ways; Personal, as they are the Lords Inheritance, primo,
proprie and perpetuo. Official, as they are Leuies for the Lord, that is, as
they are by the Lord annexed in Inheritance to the Ministry of his worship:
which worship, though it alter in forms, yet never in substance, or Moral part
thereof: and therefore, the Moral maintenance must ever be one for all.

Now if they object, that Tithes being gifted to Leui, in Official Inheritance,
can stand no longer then Leui, and he no longer then the Law. We answer,
Tithes were at an Office and Priesthood long before him: and Leui, as it
signifies the Office, and not the Persons, notes all Ministers, in all
degrees, and all ages. So under the Law, all the Levites made up but one
Priesthood, though al Levites were not properly Priests: 2. Cor. 3.7.
and the Apostle comparing the Law with the Gospel, calls both a
Ministration, and both their Officers, Ministers, and the Moral service in
both, Act. 15.21. Matthew. 10.7.
Preaching.

But to derive the name of both Leuite and Priest by Esaias prophesying directly
of the days of the Evangelist, Leuit, Priest, Minister, are for all ages.
how God would work amidst the Gentiles, by the Ministry of the Jews,
(others then Levites) And they shall bring all your brethren (that is, Esaias
66.20. etc.
the adopted Gentiles) for an Offering to the Lord, out of all Nations etc. And
I will take of them for Priests and Levites, says the Lord. The special
performance of this was, when Paul was separated Apostle for the Gentiles, and
therefore he speaks plainly of himself, both as a Minister, and as a Priest,
and by Consequent a Leuite. Romans 15.16.
That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ, toward the Gentiles,
Ministering the Gospel of God, that the (Offering up) of the Gentiles might be
acceptable. So these are Words for all Worlds, and all worships, Leuite,
Priest, Minister: Ever such Priesthood, such Law. And Leui at first, Nomen
proprium, of one single man, the son of Iaacob: then, of a whole Tribe for
distinction with the rest. In the end, (that Tribe being separated to Gods
service) Leui becomes Officij nota: and so common to all ages: and therefore
may justly admit one common maintenance, as their Inheritance. And in this
respect, the Gospel succeeds to the Law, as the Law to Melchisedec, and
Melchisedec to the Priests of the confused age before him. This were enough for
our whole cause to defend it, if we were in Possessorio, but seeing we do but
plead for it, we must keep nothing back.

Inheritance pertaining to God in Scripture is twofold: His people, whom he
created to his own Image: God has a double Inheritance. Deuteronomy. 4.20. Heb. 1.2.
His Tithes, which he separated to his own service. Now in Scripture language,
Inheritance has a prerogative here, above the Civilly custom: for the Son
inherites jointly with the Father. And so as the Father created, the Son
redeemed his Inheritance: yea, Him God made heir of all things, and by him
also made the worlds. To come to Tithes then, what wonder that being
inheritance to the Father, they be also the Sons? Or shall we yet once more
kill the Heir, when the Father sends him in his Vineyard? But what if no
sooner the Fathers then the Sons? Shall he yet for all this lose his
Birthright? He is Coeternall with the Father. The Father never received Tithes
but by his Officiars, as first of all by Melchisedec. Then I ask, whether were
Tithes, Inheritance to Melchisedec, or not? If not, then had God no inheritance
before the Law, But the Law gave none to God, but only to Leui, and so God
has none at all, Number. 18, 20, 2^
unless we derive it from In principio. And again, to ascribe Tithes as
Inheritance to Leui a perishing Priesthood, and make them no Inheritance to an
Eternal Priesthood, is beside all reason. And to say, Tithes may be
Inheritance to Melchisedec so long as he lived, even as to Leui: Then I ask,
when ended Melchisedec? Heb. 7.3.
He had neither beginning nor end of days, but is likened to the Son of God,
and continues a Priest for ever: Ergo, He must Tithe forever. And the same
Melchisedec, in the same that he was the Fathers Priest, was also the Sons
Type. The Consequences are al good, but a fitter time shall bring further
strength, lib. 2.

Melchisedec, Dignity of the Church Ministry of old.

Vita Joseph, ad initium.


Royal (I say) in regard of the great odds between that, and this our age
now: For of old (as writes Josephus,) The true mark of Nobility was, to
derive a man's pedigree from the Priesthood: so Joseph was a Gentleman, because
ex sanguine Sacerdotali. And in our own time, the only best Tenure, and
Holding of Possessions, was to hold of the Church: But now all to the contrary.
For Rome has frustrate her Ministry of Matrimony, and we (at home) ours, of
their Patrimony. She can bring forth no wel-begotten children; and we, but
few well beneficed Churchmen. No Joseph's in her; and all Jobs with us: And in
stead to hold of the Church, we hold all from the Church. Both much amiss.

But we return to our Possession of Melchisedec, in which men may yet Justly
ask us, what proof we give of these two? Heb. 7.14.
That Melchisedec was of an Order, and that Order, Everlasting: for no such
matter in Moses History. Psalm. 110.4.
Take both then from David's Prophecy. The Lord has sworn and will not
repent. Thou art a Priest for Ever, after the order of Melchisedec. And here
we have more, That another must rise from that same order, as far above
Melchisedec, as he was above Abraham: who therefore must perform all things of
Melchisedec more at full; both Blessing and Tithing, as Priest; feeding and
Defending as King. But because this Prophecy is an obscure Commentary of
Moses History, we refer both to their due Interpretation, where plainer
Scripture shall chain all together, and that in the Worlds last age. This for
our first writ.

CHAP. VIII. Gods second right to Tithes from Jacobs Vow. Vows not all Legal.
Tithes in Quoto due by his Vow.
SVCH then is our Possession in this re-encounter Melchisedec and Abraham:
where al things passed upon such a reciprocal readiness and ripeness, (as
ruled both by one Spirit) both in rendering and receiving: that men would
rather think, they practiced points by custom, or performed duties of Law,
then any matter thus emergent de nouo. Abraham received reverently the Lords
Priest (...): Abraham, returned thankfully to him the Lords Inheritance,
Tithes, (...). So Abraham saw the Lords Day.

Our second writ was, our Contract and Indenture, past between God and Jacob.
Jacob saw as much (if not more) as Abraham, (for the Mystery of Salvation
increased always) and so he returned more then did Abraham. Jacobs Vision
Behold there stood a Ladder upon the Earth, and the top of it reached up to
heaven, and lo, Genesis 28.12. etc.
the Angels of God went up and down by it. And behold, the Lord stood above
it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, and the God of Isaac,
the Land whereon thou sleep will I give thee and thy seed, etc. Whereupon
Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, Jacobs Vow. Verse. 20.
If God will be with me, etc. Then shall the Lord be my God. And this stone
which I have set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house: Verse. 21. Verse. 22.
And of all that thou shall give me, will I give the Tenth unto thee: Not to
his son Leui. Mark this, Jacob vowed Tithes for him, and his whole Seed, to
God, (and in Abraham was Leui Tithed, says Paul, Hebr. 7.) and God gave them
to Leui. Now this Ladder was Christ, as all confess, even that via veritas,
and vita. Here Jacob goes a point beyond Abraham, To build houses to God.

Vow, men would turn all over to the Law. Vows not all Legal.
We answer, Al Vows are not ever of that Law, but even of Moral duties also,
as Esai. 19.21. And this Vow now in hand, concerns all ages, both under the
Law, and after, in all the points of it. But to answer briefliest and best, out
of this same text: I ask, might not Jacob as well vow for ever, Tithes to God;
as, that God should be his God? Further, God gives Jacob special approbation
of all the points of this Vow, chap. 31.13. I am the God of Bethel, for the
first point.) Where thou annointedst the pillar, for the second, of Gods
house.) And for the thi^d, Where thou made a Vow unto me, viz. to pay
Tithes*) So as Jacobs Vision was true, his Vow was lawful; and these doubts
be but idle dreams of Sacrilegious slumbers. To our purpose then.

Whom Jacobs Vision concerned, his Vow concerned. But his Vision concerns all
his posterity. Ergo, So does his Vow.
Jacob in graces, Jacobs Vow binds his seed.
so he should meet God in gratefulness. The Assumption is many ways clear
in the Text, but chiefly here: And in thee, and thy seed, shall all the
Families of the Earth be blessed: a promise as proper to the seed of Jacobs
Faith, as of his flesh; a mystery merely Evangelical, All the Families of
the Earth, Jew and Gentile. A promise of blessing as ample, and as far
reaching, as that first promise of the seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.15.
immediately after the fall of Adam. All then, that think to rise by faith from
that fall, or claim life by climbing this Ladder of Jacobs Vision, must be
tied to Jacobs Vow. This Vision then is heritable: the Vow heritable; and
therefore so long as any one point of the Vision is to be performed, so long
shall Tithes be Gods Inheritance, viz. till Christ's second coming.

Here then is this Vow, the very grandchild of Abraham's Possession to
Melchisedec; an action heretably descended, (for doubtless Isaac failed in
nothing.) Here also, have we a longer journey for Jacob, and his seed, then
from Beershebah to Haran, and so back again: yea, a longer then from Egypt
to Earthly Canaan. Our true Canaan, the end of our journey, is, the Kingdom of
Heaven: Jacobs iourneyes are types of our afflictions, by which we must go,
and come thither, as said Paul. Act. 14.22.
And because our journey is dangerous, long, and wearisome, therefore is our
Ladder (Christ) sent down to the Earth, by, and upon which, we must walk,
climb, and be drawn to that God above it. The Angels go beside up and down
to draw, and conduct us. God himself above ready to receive us; great
Moderator of the whole matter. O high, and heavenly.

Here some Hebrew writers include a mystery of the Jacobs Vow applied to his
Vision.
this whole action between God and Jacob, keeps a Trinall Harmony. God
calls himself, first, the God of Abraham: secondly, the God of Isaac:
thirdly, the God of Jacob. Three things he promises, first, To give him the
Land he slept on: secondly, To multiply his seed as the dust of the earth:
thirdly, In that seed to bless all the Families of the earth. Jacob meets
these three by a three-pointed Vow: First, That, the Lord shall be his God:
here is a general foundation of Religion for all his seed, and for all ages.
Secondly, He setleth the Circumstances, Place; That pillar should be Gods
house; a general ground also for all ages; for that typical Temple, and
Jewish Synagogues under the Law, and for our Churches. Thirdly, He annexeth
Tithes, Gods Inheritance, to his worship and Religion. Now, seeing all men will
admit the first two points to be perpetual, and bind Jacobs posterity, to
worship God, and to build houses thereto; how shall they be exempted from the
third point, in giving the maintenance?

Tithes in quoto, are not of the Law.
but not the same in quoto. I answer, Such Analogicall equities hold even from
the most Ceremonial things of the Law, to the Gospel: But such things as are
neither Ceremonial, nor clearly institute ad tempus, or arbitrium, bind the
things themselves upon us: and we have showed, that neither Type, Ceremony,
nor temporal condition fell upon Tithes: That they were not only, nor first
Legal. Indeed, if the only Law, and first the Law, had designed quot ^mpartem,
this dispute had been more doubtful: But seeing this Melchisedec, that most
Evangelical Priest, gave us the quote, seeing Jacob before the Law, as in a
perpetual Law, Vowed the quote: We see the Law is but a confirmer, and Leui
but an obseruer of that, which was long before freely doted, and for ever
devoted to Gods service. The Law gave but the same quote, to a Priest of
another Order, for his time: and shall that first, that Euangelical, that
Everlasting Priesthood, now revived again, come with dish in hand, and say,
Quod vultis mihi dare? And this for our Trinall harmony in Jacobs Vision and
Vow.

Now are some men much solicit, both here, and in the former point of
Melchisedecs Possession; What form of Tithing it was? Of what goods? Yearly
or no?

As for Melchisedec, the second part of this Treatise shall clear him. As to
Jacobs Vow, (which here we will end) Gods promises, and Jacobs performances
alike.
Such was Jacobs Vow, as was his Vision; and such were the performances on his
part, as were the performances of Gods promises made to him. Now God performed
not all the points of that Vision to Jacob in his own person (because not in
that nature promised): So Jacob performed not all his Vow in his own person,
for the like reason. God performed to Jacob himself, the best part of that
Vision, viz. the heavenly Canaan: and Jacob returns in his own person, the
best part of his Vow, viz. The Lord was ever his God. So his only seed enjoyed
the Earthly Canaan: and therefore his only seed paid Tithes, (...).

Thence is it clearly proved, Who are Jacobs Seed.
That Jacobs Vow concerned, as much (if not more) his seed, as himself. And if
they will yet a strict his seed, to his only flesh under the Law, because
after this, Jacob was called Israel; Genesis 32.28.
and the Israelites as Iaacobs seed, performed all: Let them remember first,
that the heavenly Canaan, was the principal end of Jacobs journey, and so his
Vow must stand, till his seed go thither. Secondly, Seed, here, is more of
his Faith, then of his flesh: for all the Families of the Earth, which here
are blessed in Jacobs seed, were not all of Jacobs flesh, Romans 9.6.
but even Iaphets seed coming home to the tents of Sem; The Gentiles called:
therefore, all subject by Jacobs Vow to Tithing. Such as refuse, let them
renounce both the ends of Jacobs Ladder, Heaven and Earth, and go to their
own habitation. And this for our Indenture.

CHAP. IX. The Edict of Tithes, (though in Leuiticus, yet) proved to be no part
of the Leuiticall Law: and so Tithes in all points (as the Lords Inheritance)
exempted from the Law.
Edict, and that very orderly: For God being possessed in T^thes by Abraham;
contracted by Jacob, (good beginnings, for a promise only of the Land which
must pay all) Now, after some four hundred years peregrination, for their
Faithes trial, by the fiery afflictions of Aegypts furnace, God intimates
unto them this public Edict: Leuit. 27.30.
Also all the Tithes of the Land, both of the seed of the ground, and of the
fruit of the trees, IS, (not shall be) the Lords. All in Leuiticus, not Legal,
or Ceremonial.
Though this be in Leuiticus, yet is it not of the Leuiticall Law, because it
contains no Precept, and therefore no Law: yea it is a plain exception from
that Leuiticall Law: For Moses treating here of the nature of Legal Vows,
and of what things the people might Vow, he tells them, Tithes were already
the Lords, long ago, and therefore they might Vow none of their Tithes. For to
what end? Jacob vowed them already, yet was not his Vow Legal or Ceremonial
(as is said) but Moral, as was his vowing, God should be his God. Further,
Vows of the Law, here are voluntary, at man's option, to do, or not to do,
Tithes not so. And as this place of Leuiticus, is but an Edict of Gods right,
so is it no right for Leui, for Leuies right came not till Number. 18. In which
also, he keeps ever the same method: first telling them, Tithes are the
Lords, verse. 20. and then, giving them to Leui, verse. 21.

verse. 26. he uses the like phrase of the first borne, as he does here of
Tithes, forbidding to vow any such, for it is the Lords: yet that same (IS) is
relative to a preceding precept, Exodus 13.2. Sanctify unto me all the first
borne, etc. But no such Law for the ground of Gods Inheritance, but
Evangelical Liberty, and liberality proceeding from the instinct of God in
man, or tradition to, and from the first man: because, Vt fides, ita fidei
opera, ex auditu. But the very Ethnicks, as Paul says, not having the Law, by
nature did the things of the Law: So they doted Tithes to their Gods. And thus
far for our Possession, Indenture, and Edict, proving clearly, Tithes to be
the Lords before the Law; with such evident conclusions, drawn from the
perpetual equity thereof, teaching Tithes must also reach after that Law: as
also the title, that God had from the beginning, in all men's goods, containing
the two first ages. Follows the last age of the word.

SACRILEGE FOR THE GOSPEL. THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. Christ, and his Apostles concerning Tithes. They did abrogate all
Ceremonial things.
GOD thus having from all beginning Transitio.
(as is said) not Moses Law, two thousand years: And this his right by nature
also defined, even (In quoto) to be a tenth part, four hundred years before
the Law: And these same, both Right and Quota, by Commandment and Law,
continued til Christ came, some two thousand years. Now are we to examine, the
Worlds last age, under the Worlds only Bliss, Christ: whether he has yet any
right in our goods, or not: and if a right, whether the same in quoto, or not?
The first, will no man deny: 1. Cor. 9.13.14
The last, makes most men ado. The Apostle clears the first, That the one
Minister must live of the Gospel, as the other did by the Law. But whether he
did intend the same (quota) in saying, Galath. 6.6.
Make him partaker of all thy goods, Hoc opus, hic laborest.

Leui then being the last receiver, and (so long as he lasted) Lord of a large
Inheritance, Leui dyed not without heirs.
Tithes: Our question is, How Leui died without heirs? Or what did Christ, the
Son, in putting Leui from his office of typing him, whereby his Fathers
Inheritance might not descend to the succeeding Officiars that Preach him? And
why these Beggarly rudiments, Galath. 4.9.
and that perishing Priesthood of the Law, had so rich a Patrimony; and the
glorious and rich Revelations of the Gospel, so beggarly a Ministry? For if
Christ (who changed both Priesthood and Law) had likewise changed maintenance,
this had been well. Heb. 7.11.12.
But since he has placed Priesthood for Priesthood, and Law for Law, why has
he not also put Maintenance for Maintenance. First then of Christ himself,
then of his Apostles: and that either by Deed, or Word.

Part. 1. cap. 1. ad init.
Christ's Doings in this his Spiritual Patrimony by Separation, was even like
that of his Kingdom on Earth. For although he was a righteous King by carnal
descent, and King of Righteousness by divine Essence, yet was he poorer then
the Foxes of the field, Matthew. 8.20. Act. 20.35.
or the birds of the air. So was it ever with him, Melius dare, quam accipere,
both ways. Besides, it was not the chief Lords part to take up his own
Inheritance, but his Officiars, to whom also he gave them, as Inheritance. So
did the only Ministry of both the former ages take Tithes, Melchisedec, and
Leui. That Christ did nothing against them, it is clear: for if they had
signified any Ceremony to be perfected in him, he had (doubtless) by some one
action, answered it, as he did the smallest of all Ceremonies: which being once
showed, Tithes are ended. This for his Deeds.

His sayings are twice recorded: First, Matthew. 23.25.
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye Tithe Minte, and Annise, and
Christ's ^ayings touching Tithes.
Judgment, Mercy, and Fidelity. Here he would seem against Tithes; but go
on: These ought ye to have done, viz. Judgment, Mercy, and Fidelity: and not
to have left the other, viz. Tithing. Now if we should infer upon this, That
so long as Judgment, Mercy, and Fidelity are in use, so long must Tithes be:
They will answer, That at this time, Moses Law was good, until Consummatum
est; therefore we leave this to the Apostles. Christ's second saying was; That
comparison between the Publican, and the Pharisie vanting of himself, I fast
twice a week: Luke 18 12.
I give Tithe of all that ever I possess, and yet Christ prefers the
Publican; wherein he condemns not the Pharisie for his paying Tithes, nor
fasting; but for his vain boasting, of his own works. These are all we have
of Christ.

Of all those, Sacrilegious Tithers take great advantage. Moses Law: So that
whatsoever Christ changed, he abolished; putting always somewhat in place of
it, as carnal things in Spiritual; Ceremonial, in Substantial; and perishing
types, in Eternal Verities. Now, one word in all the Gospel, either plain
text, or Consequence, against Tithes Inheritance? If nothing against it, then
says Tertullian, Quod non notat Scriptura, negat. But they reply here, Christ
said nothing for them in the Gospel. Ergo, Negat, quia non notat. It follows
not thus, unless they say, No Scripture speaks for them: and then they say
false, and therefore better said, Lex semel lata, non deleta, semper obligat.
Enough then for us, God at first taught it, The Law ordained it, The Gospel
never gain-sayed it. For we must not expect Christ as a new Legislator of all
our Moral duties: No, He came to perfect and abolish the Ceremonial Law,
Romans 8.1.4.
to fulfill, and make us able to answer in him, the Moral Law.

All Ceremonial things abrogate by Christ, or his Apostles.

John 4.21. Mark 2.28. and Mat. 12.8. Col. 2.16, 17.


in so far as they were Ceremonial. Against Place Ceremonial, Believe me,
the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem
worship the Father. Against Time, The Son of man is Lord even of the
Sabbath. So his Apostles changed it. And Let no man condemn you, etc. In
respect of an holy day, etc. Or of the Sabbaths.

Heb. 7.11.
Against Ceremonial Person, If perfection had been by the Priesthood of the
Levites, what needed another Priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec?
And, we see Christ chused Paul, and many other Disciples and Apostles, not of
the Tribe of Leui.

Against Worship, in manner and matter, Christ's once Sacrifice defaced all
theirs: Heb. 13.20.
Heb. 10. And, we have an Altar, whereof they have no authority to eat, which
serve in the Tabernacle.

Against the ceremonial maintenance of those ceremonial services, Colos. 2.16.
and Heb. 13.9, 10.
Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, etc. which are but a
shadow of things to come: But the body is in Christ: A precept for all sorts
of men. So Leui, in regard of those restrictions, a Ceremonial Priest, though
he eat also of Gods Inheritance, because he meddled also with Gods Moral
service in teaching his Law abroad; he could not make the Inheritance
Ceremonial, 2 Chro. 17.7, 8, 9.
nor defraud Melchisedec of his due. Only that which began with Leui, ended
with Leui.

And that all those foresaid five points had ever in Order and Time of the
points of Gods Worship.

Genesis 1.26, 27, etc. Genesis 3.15.


the Ceremonial Law taking chief hold of the latter; and so the Moral was
ever the former, and remains still, it is clear thus:

First, Worship, consisting before the fall, in a perfect obedience (...) God:
And after the fall, in those Euangelical promises of our Redemption, which with
their performances, now in Christ, are both but one, both moral and perpetual,
before the Law. The Typical worship, Genesis 4.3. Genesis 2.8, 16, 17 Genesis 4.3. Genesis
18.16, 17, etc.
both before and after the fall, came last. For doubtless, Adam, as God taught
him, taught his sons, before they sacrificed, Which in process of time came
to pass. Also under the Law, the first point in our Legal Priests commission
was Moral, To teach Jacob thy Judgments, etc. and then comes the Ceremonial,
Deuteronomy 33.10.
To put the burnt offering upon thine Altar. And now, Christ the body of all,
taught long before he came to his sacrifice. And last, after him have we
Teaching, without any sacrifice carnal, by the Popes favor.

Time, first Moral in a Sabbath, but thence were derived Genesis 2.3. Leuit. 25.
those Ceremonial Sabbathes of each seventh year, and the great Iubile of
fifty. And so the Moral yet remains a Sabbath, though not the same
Indiuidual day from the Creation.

Place. at first, every where, Moral; as appears by the Altars erected by
Noah and Abraham, in all their travels. Place began to be Typical, when
Abraham's Altar, and the offering up of Isaac, Genesis 13.3. 2. Chron. 3.1.
Jacobs Pillar, and Ornans Threshing* floor, Salomons Temple, were all in one
place, on the Mount Moriah. So had the Jews at first in each Cities
Synagogues, and we our Churches now, at liberty, as at first.

Person, first, in each Family, the first borne, or Foris-familiat in their
own houses: Quisque, Episcopus domus suae. They became Ceremonial, when
first, Moses and Aaron Levites: Exodus 4 1^, and 28.1.41. Number. 1.47.50. and
3.6, 7.
secondly, Leui resumed wholly by the Law. Now again, we end as they began,
Jew and Gentile alike. And so maintenance in like manner, as has been at
length touched before, ever following the person and his condition.

All must stand as Christ left them. Galath. 4.9.
Note then: First, That from the beginning all those five points came only of
God. Secondly, All five at Christ's coming, put off their Legal garments,
their beggarly habit of bondage, and took on the habit of Evangelical
liberty in Melchisedec. Therefore, as Christ left us them, we must still keep
them, 1. No adding nor detracting in Worship. 2. No astricting to Persons. 3.
No releasing from Time. 4. No limiting of Place. 5. No abstracting of
Maintenance.


CHAP. II. Paul in the general of Maintenance. Why he spared his power in the
special.
THus did Christ then, and thus he spoke. We Matthew. 10.25.
and It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master is, at one time chiefly.
Melchisedec was not as yet settled in Salem: that is, Righteousness, Lib. cap.
6.
or Justice, had not yet wrought Peace, and so Peace, not graced by Religion:
and unsettled Religion, could yield no settled Maintenance. This piece of comfort
Christ left them, Preach in every City: Ib. quo supra*
For the workman is worthy of his meat.

Their Sayings, are either in the General of Maintenance; or in the special
of Tithes: (yet once again Tithes, and even in the Gospel). Inf. cap. 4.


In the General, Paul is very much, and in many places: Many flourishes both
from Logic and Rhetoric: and on each flower almost, a swarm of Sacrilegious
Waspes turning matter of honey in Venime, 2. Pet. 3.16.
perverting them to their own destruction. Thus,

I have (says Paul) coueted no man's silver, nor gold, Act, 20.33, 34, 35.

Paul in the general of Maintenance.


nor apparel.

Yea, ye know that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them
that are with me.

I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to Support the
weak; and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how that he said. It is a
blessed thing to give, rather then to receive.

Gold, nor Silver, nor apparel, nor food, but work for all: and all Preachers
must strive to be Paul's, rather give then take; how then shall they take so
huge a thing, as Tithes? No, but worse then all this; for if some men may, 1.
Cor. 4.11.
all Preachers shall be Paul's, to have for alms, Both hunger and thirst: for
clothes, Nakedness: for Charity, Buffets; and for harboury, No certain
dwelling place; all this good cheer had Paul.

Augustine.
But here would that old Fathers saying do well, Distingue tempora, and
concordabis Scripturas. The truth is, that when, or where, we have the Church
as Paul had it, Why Paul spared his power. 2. These. 3.8.9.
that is, under Peregrination and Persecution; then must the Preachers be
Pilgrims, and Patients: and yet, Woe be unto them unless they Preach. So Paul
took bread of no man for naught: Why? Not (says he) but that we had
authority. Why then? But, because we would not be chargeable to any of you. But
why would he not charge, where he had authority to charge? 1. Cor. 9 12.
Nevertheless, we have not used this power, but suffer all things, That we
should not hinder the Gospel of Christ.

When Paul's example is to be followed.
Now take heed, for if taking of that which was Paul's due, would have hindered
the Gospel; doubtless, our men will rather renounce the Gospel, then render
the Tithes. Ergo, Paul's example were yet best, To forbear Tithes. For answer,
When we are in Paul's days (as is said) we must use Paul's deeds. A man may
seek his due on a wrong day. Paul was now but to plant the Gospel, and that,
both to Jew and Gentile, whose goods were already taken up for holy uses, the
one for obedience of Moses Law, the other to their Idols. Now if Paul should
have begun his reformation with Da mihi Decimas, he had made a planting
indeed, but with the top downward. But the Messiah being once well rooted in
their hearts, who doubts, but then, both Jew and Gentile, as true Israelites,
the seed of Jacob, would perform their Fathers Vow, to these new Priests and
Levites of gladtidings; specially, seeing they were to give nothing De nouo,
neither yet so much as of before, but only a part of that to a right use,
which of before they gave to a wrong? And if not so, do ye think that Paul in
a stablished Church-policy, and peaceable State, would have neglected this
authority, which here in so dangerous a time he dare insinuate unto them?
No, in such case Paul found Canticum novum, and could tell them, 1. Cor. 9.1.
etc.
He was an Apostle. He was free. He was a soldier, and therefore must have
wages: a Shepherd, and must eat of the milk: A planter of Vines, and must
eat of the fruit: full of allegories. And when all was done, alleged for him
the Law, comparing his Ministry with Leui, and for conclusion, Let him that
is taught in the Word, Gal. 6.6.
make him that teaches him, partaker; Whereof? Of all his goods. How sib is
this to Tithes? How like to that precept, Deuteronomy. 14.
And the Leuite that is within thy gates shall thou not forsake? Paul then did
but forbear, not forbid the power. His time was not yet come. But to answer
Paul by Paul, where should Paul lodge, if Timothy were not hospital? 1. Tim.
3.2. They must be content of food and raiment, 6.8. yet they must make others
also well to fair. Tithes then, are the fruits for Christ settled. The
Magistrates in Paul's time were not Christians; 2. Chron. 31.
on whose power (even under the Law) depended much the inbringing of Tithes
Neither were Tithes given Leui, straight with his service, neither yet with the
Law of Tithes. The Law came, Numb. 18. before they were come to Canaan long:
but Tithes came not till the whole Land was divided, and enjoyed in peace, they
not so much as entered the Land more then 50. years after all this. See Tremel.
Arg. on Number. and Joshua.

CHAP. III. Paul's General Doctrine, 1. Cor. 9. objected against Tithes: but
proved for Tithes.
Quota; what the special must be? Paul (say they) never meant Tithes: Why?
Because he is still only in general doctrine, drawing conclusions from
equities, 1. Cor. 9.
and examples: where, in Ten words, he might more easily have taken up Tithes,
if he had found it good: Again, the matter and ground holds ever; A
Maintenance must be. But the number most times includes a Ceremony; so now any
other proportion as 9.8. etc. may be now appointed as well as a Tenth part.

We answer, The special of Tithes was from their beginning good, til very
near Paul's Conversion; and therefore all his dispute must either end in Tithes,
or some other special. If in Tithes, then was it enough for him, to refer us to
the former generals of Scripture, whose special assumptions are so many times
mentioned. But if he had meant any alteration, then was he bound to a
plainnes: Act. 20, 27,
seeing he says, I have kept back nothing, but have showed you all the
counsels of God. And to prove his meaning must be Tithes, let us ponder a
little these his positions, till we come to plainer language.

He has here a double dispute with his Corinthians, one from equity of Civil
examples. The other, from authority of former Scripture.

From Civil, verse. 7. in three points: one from Warfaring, 1. Cor. 9.7.
two from Husbandry: all to one general end. Thus shortly.

No man goes to war without wages: Planteth a Vine We fight for you, we
plant you, we feed you. Ergo, Ye must furnish us, Wages, Fruit, and Milk.
This Syllogism will bring us to a double certainty, A Simili, first, of
Masters: secondly, of Means.

Of Masters, who is great Captain of the Wars: and who great Husband of the
Labors. Whereupon depends, who are Soldiers, and who laborers: and so, who
are true Debtors, who Creditors.

The great Captain, is he who sends out his Soldiers: Maintenance depends
on the Master. Luke 14.31.
The great Husband, he who sets his servants a work, not the Vines,
labored: The great Shephead, not the Sheep fed. This for the Masters.

For Means, What, and Whom to crave: What, for no soldier enters himself
waged, till he first know his wages. Whom, that is, either Immediate, or
Mediat. Immediate, the great Captain, and King that wageth him. Mediat, when
the soldier is cast over upon the Kings people, or Inheritance fought for: And
so in Husbandry, as Christ expounds his own parable of the Householder,
Matthew. 20.

To apply all then to our matter. Our great Captain is God, Christ, only: and
so our Great Husband. The Soldiers and Laborers, (not all Christians, for
these be his Inheritance fought for) are his Ministry, as here Paul says.
So I fight not as one that beats the air. Verse. 26.
The battle is continual, the labors endless, therefore the wages must be
perpetual: not as Civil wars and Wages, that have ends and vicissitudes: for
this Sacred Soldier must never leave his calling, Put hand to the plough, Luke
9.62.
and look back again.

The Immediate debtor of the wages, is God the great Captain: and therefore
when he called Leui, he said, I am (Immediately) thine Inheritance. Number. 18.20.
The Mediat Debtor, is Gods Inheritance fought for, his people: And therefore
God said, Verse. 21.
I have given Leui the Tenth of all Israel for his Inheritance. So these
arguments of Paul from civil similitudes, smell either of Tithes, or of
nothing.

Follows Paul's dispute from authority of Scripture. Say I those things
according to man? 1. Cor. 8.9.
Says not the Law the Here are his Positions twofold, one General, The Law
applied by Paul to the Gospel. Deuteronomy. 25.4.
another Special. The General is, It is written in the Law of Moses, Thou
shall not mussell the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the corn. Follows
his application, Does God take care for Oxen? 1. Cor. 9.10.
^ither says he it not (altogether) for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, it
is written.

Behold here, Paul says, this general precept of the Law was written
altogether for him and his brethren. Therefore, whatsoever portion of Gods
Inheritance was derived to Leui. being still in God, must be still for Paul
and his fellow-Leuites, laborers of the word: or shall we think, Paul alleged
the Law to conclude neither, Idem nor Eiusmodi? No: Leui made no bargain with
Israel; he had not his calling of them, and therefore not his condition by then;
and seeing now no man, Prince or people, can call the Ministry, no man must
measure their Maintenance: It is a mere clipping of Gods wings.

1. Cor. 9.12, 13.14.
Now come to Paul's Specials, Do ye not know that they (or things of the
Temple? The people in this case are never the masters: Ergo, They ought never
to modifie the servants means.
) And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Follows
Paul's application. So also has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Then yet he spares, But I have used none
of these things Now I ask, If Paul had not spared, but pressed these Laws,
what particular use could he make of them? Sacrifices he could not claim:
Ergo, Tithes, or nothing. But let us mark first here the force of his
comparison: then, the Phrase and Emphasis of his words. The comparison must
have this form, As Leui lived by the Law, so must our Ministry by the
Gospel. Leui lived of holy things by the Law. Ergo, Our Ministry must live of
holy things by the Gospel.


His phrase of speech, first in his Proposition, then in his Application. In
the Proposition he sets down two sorts of holy means, a Moral, and a
Ceremonial, described from the diverse sorts of the services for which they were
due. The Moral, by Ministering the holy things; a word for all ages, and all
places: and this he coupleth with words for Means of the like nature, viz. To
eat of the things of the Temple. Now (OF) is a Note of Inheritance: and he
coupleth here, holy things to the Temple, as Tithes were, Numb 18. with the
Tabernacle, because these places were then the chiefest where both services
were done, though not the sole places: as we have said at large. Lib. 1. cap. 5.

The Ceremonial service Paul painteth out in their own terms, Wait at the
Altar, and Partaker with the Altar: Now, Waiting, and, With, are notes of
expiring, as is the Altar. And to say, that Paul here, by both these members,
means only the Ceremonial Maintenance, were a double absurdity: First, A
Tautologick description of one thing. Secondly, A neglect of the chiefest point
he speaks of, Inheritance. Ministering then (...) in Word and Sacraments, is
only proper to the Gospel: 1. Cor. 9.1. and Romans 15.16.
Are ye not (says Paul) (...) my work in the Lord? And therefore only
(...), Inheritance is his due: Heb. 13.10.
not (...) to wait at the Altar, for we have an Altar, whereof they have no
authority to eat, which serve in the Tabernacle.

Paul's next phrase comes in his Application, So also the Lord has ordained; in
the preterit time, we only ask here, where, when was this ordinance given?
Paul gives no precept here, but only intimates the Lords alike ordinance
for both Law and Gospel: one and the same Lord gave it; at first to
Melchisedec, a Priest for ever, he gave it; To Leui for the Law he gave it;
from Leui to Melchisedec again he gives it. Then As Leui lived by the Law,
must we live ( says Paul) by the Gospel. Leui lived by a certainty of holy
things by the Law. Ergo, So must we by the Gospel have certainty.


Holy things must be certain.
Things namelesse, are nothing: and voluntary alms, uncertain, they cannot be
Inheritance to the Lord, and his Levites: Give God therefore his Tenth, or give
him a less number, and a greater matter: and above ten, is no simple perfect
number.

Paul then is wrong quarrelled for his vnplainenesse: He speaks like his
Master, when John sent to know if it was he or no; Matthew. 11.2, 3.
Tell John (says he) what things ye have heard and seen: So while they ask
Paul, Do thou mean Tithes, or no? He answers, They that ministered in the
holy things, lived ever of the holy things; and so must we live of the Gospel.
Such as are Christ's or Paul's, may easily discern their affirmative meaning.
But we shall hear better news anon, and even from Paul: Cap. seq.
Only remember, that Paul had nothing to do here to speak in the Quoto of the
Maintenance; but only to justify, that he and Barnabas might live
vnlabouring, as well as other Apostles.

Now remains their second assault from the Ceremony

Person, the Levites, were all Ceremonial, and so were their numbers, Classes,
Courses, all temporal or ceremonial. Numbers not always Ceremonial.


Time, The Sabbath, or seventh day, Moral yet, even quoad numerum: But the
Sabbaths thence derived of seven years and the Iubile, Ceremonial and gone:
with their Nouilunes, and so forth.

Forms of worship: as pares of beasts, or fowls, for sacrifices; Ten parts of
measures of fine flower, and such like, Ceremonial and gone.

Place, Where it was sole and unique, Ceremonial and gone.

Maintenance, Tenths for Feasts, Ceremonial and gone, both number and matter.
Tithes Inheritance, Moral in both. Not one instance we see to the contrary.

Secondly, say that the Quota were yet in balance; what would we do? Is not
whole mankind here divided? All are either Levites or Israelites: All must
take or give. Who then shall be Judge? The parties cannot: for who shall make
all of one mind? So many kingdoms, so many different conceits: as many
Provinces, as many different proportions. Refer it to the Churchmen, they
may prove covetous: To the people, they may be auaritious: yea say further,
that God had left his portion without proportion; could man proportion it
better for his own behoof? Ten is the last simple, full, and perfect number,
and so the smallest proportion in simple numbers, as is said. So we see, we
shall sooner divide Totum, then decide Quotum. But God only has judged, and
that by his only Word; and his Word, only Tithes for Inheritance. And this for
Paul's Doctrine and meaning in general; Follows his special of Tithes.

CHAP. IIII. Moses History, and David's Prophecy of Melchisedec, applied by
the Apostle to Christ. How, and how far Types are to be matched with their
Verities, by the example of Melchisedec and Aaron with Christ.
Non ens, as himself is namelesse) begins once more to talk, and even of
Tithes: and not to talk only; but Melchisedec, Abraham, Moses, are to him,
even as this day. Many suspect Paul, and it is not impossible: But howsoever;
his title is, To the Hebrews. But our Sacrilegious Segniours may justly deny
themselves, to be Hebreans: for the word, Sacrilege, is seldom (or never) read
in Hebrew. Yet Paul found out a fit Greek word for it, (...), Romans 2.22. Act.
19.37.
to spoil or rob holy things. But what is all this? They will deny
themselves to be Grecians too, and, I fear, to be Christians, before they
yield: they understand not Paul, he wrote not to them.

Here now begin our matters of Melchisedec, hard to be uttered, of that
everlasting Priesthood in his Order, by Moses nakedly propounded; by David
but obscurely expounded: here are all repeated, and to our own days applied,
by this new Joseph interpreting all. He therefore that has ears, let him
hear.

HISTORY. Genesis 14.18.
ANd Melchisedec King of Salem broughtforth bread and wine: and he was a
Priest of the most high God.

Abraham of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth.

(Abraham) gave him Tithes of all.

PROPHECY. Psalm. 110.4.
The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the
Order of Melchisedec.

INTERPRETATION AND Application.
FOr this Melchisedec was King of Salem, Priest of the most high God: Heb. 7.1,
who met Abraham, as he returned from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed
him

To whom also Abraham gave the

Without Father, without Mother,

Now consider how great this man was, Abraham gave the Tithe of the spoils.

For verily they which are the children of Leui, which Abraham.

But he whose kindred is not counted among them, received Tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the promises.

And without all contradiction, The less is blessed of the greater.

And here, men that dye receive Tithes, but there, he, of whom it is
witnessed, That he lives.

And to say as the thing is, Leui also which receives Tithes, paid Tithes in
Abraham.

Melchisedec met him.

Paul, in the special of Tithes.
and the last passage of all Scripture touching Tithes, yea our A and ^
reviving as by a circular course, our never dying Melchis. in our eternal
Verity, Christ: wherein almost each word may go for an argument; we must
therefore pierce a little more deeply in it, by help of the same Spirit, that
proposes it unto us: and that so briefly as may be.

First then of his End: next of his form of arguing in this Chapter.

The chief End of this Epistle being, to prove Christ our all-sufficient
Savior, King, Prophet and Priest, figured by the Law, whose Ceremonies must
therefore cease, he handles in this Chapter his Priesthood only.

His course in arguing goes from the Types to their Verities, in a most
perfect comparison, both in simili and diss^mili.

The Types are twofold: the one moral and perpetual; Melchisedec: The other
ceremonial and temporal, Leui.

Their natures are, either simple in themselves, or in Relation to their
Verities.

Their Simple nature is, that the Moral Type is noted here with no
Ceremonial action: (for no such thing had he in him) and the Ceremonial Type,
with nothing Moral, as he is compared here to Christ in simili: For though he
also Tithed, (a Moral action) yet it holds here but in dissimili.

Their Relative nature with their Verities, is of two Types how to be matched
with their Verities.
another, from the manner, or their Orders.

In matter, they hold both thus: Whatsoever the Types did (as Types) the Verity
must do, or answer, being rightly matched: as, Aaron sacrificed; Ergo, so
must Christ: Aaron sacrificed with blood; Ergo, so must Christ: But not, Aaron
sacrificed Bullocks; Ergo, so must Christ. Our Golden rule in this, is to go
no further then Scripture clearly leads us; and not, from silence of the
Apostles, or privative speeches to impose a positive sacrifice of the Mass
upon Christ.

In manner, or Order, they hold not so: Aarons and Melchisedecs Orders.
for whatsoever Christ did, answering to Aaron, yet that same did Christ, after
Melchisedecs Manner and Order, not Aarons. So, that [ONCE] recorded only of
Melchisedecs actions, signifies in Christ, EVER, and OFTEN to be done: and
that OFTEN of Aarons actions, signifies in Christ, ONCE only; yet that same
ONCE, ALL-sufficient, in Melchisedecs Order: For, Perfection, and Imperfection,
Perpetuity and perishing, are the Essential differences of their Orders. So
Christ in Melchisedecs Order, perfected both Orders: an heavenly difference,
and worthy to be observed, Hebr. 7.8, 9, and 10. chap.
being fully cleared by the Apostle, opposing that two thousand years yearly
offering of Aaron, to that One, and All-sufficient of CHRIST'S: And that ONCE
blessing of Melchisedec, of Abraham, to that Ever blessing of CHRIST, of
Abraham and his posterity. Our conclusions then go thus, through this Epistle,
from (...) in Melchisedec, to (...) in Christ: and from (...) in Aaron, to
(...) in Christ, for these are the Apostles own notes. Again, hundrethes of
Aarons, with thousands of his associates, thousands of years, and millions of
redoubled actions, bind but only Christ, and Christ, only once: they bind
not the Ministry of the Gospel, belonging to Christ's Priesthood. But
Melchisedecs one only blessing, designing his Priesthood, binds Christ ever
(...), and all his Ministry ever (...). May we not hereupon infer then, that
if Melchisedecs service bind our Ministry, his maintenance must also be due
to them? We see then, that Unity or Plurality, is not ever requisite to pass
alike between Types and Verities, either in Person or action: for One (as is
said) may argue thousands, and thousands, but One: otherwise we shall roue to
Rome-ward.

Medium, to draw on any conclusion from these Types to their Verities, it must
be (even as the Types) either a Moral or a Ceremonial thing: and the
conclusion must follow the nature of the Medium: for Aarons sacrifice, being
Ceremonial, cannot bind a Moral Conclusion on Christ or his Ministry: and
consequently, Tithing being used here, as a Medium of a Moral and perpetual
Conclusion, must it self be also Moral and perpetual: as by a true Analysis
of our Apostles purpose in the texts cited, shall plainly appear.

CHAP. V. This Analysis proves Christ's Priesthood more excellent then Leuies.
His proofs are, from the prerogative of Person, Blessing, and Tithing.
THe Apostle will prove in those first eleven verses, Melchisedecs Order of
Priesthood, (whereof Christ was the only High Priest, and perfection) to be
far above, and better then the Order of Aaron and Leui: and so in it self
only all-sufficient.

He sets down first his Priesthood, till the fourth verse, then the
Collation.

His Priesthood in two points, Function and Order. Melchisedecs endless
Priesthood.


His Function, verse. 1. He was a Priest, and blessed Abraham. He was also
accepted and acknowledged as a Priest verse. 2. Because Abraham gave him Tithes
of all. These two points are the sum and perfection of peaceably settled
Priesthood. For Blessing after this sort here, (being Real, and exhibitiue)
is the End and perfection of all Priesthood and Priestly Office: (for that
Legal form of blessing under Leui, Number. 6.23. is but as a prayer for
Blessing, as we yet use to this day, and had no Ceremony it.) And again, to
give Tithes (as did Abraham here) is the most proper testification of our due
obedience to Christ's Ministers, the very fruits of our faith: And this for his
Function.

Next verse. 3. comes his Order, Dignity and Excellency Without Father,
Mother, Kindred, Beginning, Ending, like the Son of God, Remains a Priest
for ever. Those strange notes must be applied and understood, as well of the
Priesthood, as the Person, and more of Christ the Verity, then his Type
distinguished from him, so that here is a new Antonomasie of Melchisedec for
Christ cleared fully by the Apostle. cap. 5.11. compared with 11.8.13.14 24.
For if we look to the persons, it is sure Melchisedec as such a man only,
was both borne, and dyed, but not as he is proposed for such a Priest, or type:
yea Christ the true Melchisedec, was borne, and dyed; Christus Sacerdos mortuus
est: But Christi Sacerdotium ne in ipsi morte mortuum.

Aarons perishing Priesthood.
The general Apodosis to this on Aarons part, goes thus: Aaron and Leui, had
Father and Mother, not only of their flesh; but latelier, even of their very
Priesthood and calling: they had beginning and ending, even in all things
wherein they typed Christ: imperfect therefore, and cannot be likened to the
Son of God, as is Melchisedec.

His Priesthood then consists in Blessing and Tithing: and his perfection,
in perpetuity of both: thou can not disioyne them. Then we descend by the
same degrees, thus; Melchisedec in Blessing and Tithing remains a Priest for
ever: like the Son of God, without ending, Beginning, Kindred, Mother, or
Father. And of all these points was Christ the only perfection: Ergo, He who
expects perpertuall Blessing from Christ, must appoint a perpetual Tithing
for Christ: as we shall hear more at large. And this for his Priesthood:
follows their collation.

Heb. 7.4.
Consider now how great this man was etc. Here Paul enters Melchisedecs
Priesthood more perfect then Leuies, using for all his middeses, only
Blessing and Tithing. The arguments are drawn from the circumstances, viz, The
persons Blessed, and Tithed: the form of the Blessing and Tithing: the time of
Blessing and Tithing.

In Person, he reasons first from Abraham* then from Leui himself. From
Abraham thus, Whosoever is greater then Abraham, Melchisedec greater then
Abraham.
is greater then Leui. Melchisedec is greater then Abraham: Ergo, Greater then
Leui.


The Proposition he proves thus, verse. 4. Abraham was a Patriarch; Leui but a
child, the fourth from this Patriarch. And verse. 6. Abraham had the promises:
Leui, (as all the faithful) enjoyed the promises only in the faith of
Abraham. So Abraham is greater then Leui.

He proves his Assumption. That Melchisedec was greater then Abraham thus, He
who Blesses and Titheth, is greater then he who is Blessed and Tithed.
Melchisedec Blessed and Tithed Abraham. Ergo, Melchisedec is greater then
Abraham.


The Proposition is the very 7. ver. of Paul in the text cited. The Assumption
is proved by Moses History: and here verse. 3.4.6. And this for Abraham's
person: follows from Leuies person: wherein let the Reader note that all
Paul's proofs are only from Tithing, thus, Greater then Leui.
He that tithed Leui is greater then Leui, Melchisedec tithed Leui. Ergo,
Greater then Leui.


This Assumption he proves verse 10, thus, All that were in Abraham's loins
when Melchisedec met him, were tithed in Abraham. Leui was in Abraham's loins
then. Ergo, Leui was tithed in Abraham: and so by Melchisedec.


Leui, All Abraham's seed Tithed in him. Ios. cap 7.
because Paul here had only to do with Leui as a Priest; Yet the force of
the Proposition fetches in all Abraham's Seed: Seed, I say, not only Legal,
but also Euangelical; not only of his flesh, but also of his faith. This for
Melchisedecs Tithing of Abraham. The Antithesis on Leuies part goes thus, Leui
Tithed but his brethren: Melchisedec Tithed Abraham, Father both of Leui, and
all his brethren; Brethren (as is said) both by flesh and faith; Ergo, All
still subject to Melchisedecs Tithing: And such as see not this, are too big
in flesh, too beggarly in faith. Follows the Circumstance in the Form of
their Tithing.

This point has this Antithesis.

LEVI. Verse. 5. They which are the children of Leui.

Which receive the office of Priesthood.

Have a commandment to take according to the Law.

Tithes of the people, that is, of their brethren.

Though they came out of the Loins of Abraham.

MELCHISEDEC. Ver. 6. HE whose kindred is not counted amongst them.

Verse. 3. Whose Priesthood is 16. after the power of Endless life.

Genesis 14. Had offered to him freely, and long before that Law.

Tithes by the Patriarch, of both Leui and his brethren.

In whose loins all his seed was both blessed and Tithed.

The chief note here is, that Melchisedecs form of Tithing before the Law
must be greater then Leuies Tithing by the Law: and so, Melchisedec a greater
Priest then Leui. For this action between Abraham and Melchisedec, proceeded
either from a secret instinct of that Supreme power, working in both, this
ready and religious reverence: or rather, that God even taught Abraham, (who
said, he would hide nothing from Abraham that he was to do, and concerned
Abraham). For (said God) I know Abraham, Genesis 18.17.19.
that he will command his sons and household, that they keep the way of the
Lord, etc. And this offer of Abraham's, was not in his free option: for as
Abraham, verse. 3. (...), He gave freely: so is it said, v. 6. that Melchisedec
(...), He tithed Abraham, as having authority. They strove in performing all
duties, and we in perverting. This for the two first Circumstances of Person
and Form; follows the Circumstance of Time in their Tithing.

CHAP. VI. Melchisedecs Priesthood more excellent then Aarons, because he is a
perpetual Priest. And this perpetuity, is proved, by only Tithing.
TIME, being an argument whereupon depends Melchisedec a perpetual Priest.
of both the Apostles cause, and our question; we will look more narrowly into
it. For were a Priest never so great, and his blessing never so good, what
avails it, if it ^^anish? The only Triumph of Melchisedec over Leui, is his
Eternity in all his endless Priesthood. Then if the Apostle prove his
Priesthood perpetual, he wins his cause: and in proving hereof, seeing he
uses here no other Medium, but a perpetual Tithing, he setleth our question.
And thus it goes.

A Perpetual Priesthood, is better then a Temporal.

Melchisedecs is Perpetual, Leuies was Temporal.

Melchisedecs therefore better then Leuies.

To prove the Assumption, he reasons thus, verse. 8. for Melchisedec.

He that takes Tithes and lives, is a Perpetual Priest. Melchisedec takes
Tithes and lives. Ergo, Melchisedec is a Perpetual Priest.
The Proposition is true, for life ever affirmed makes the Person endless,
and Tithing ever following life, makes a Priesthood endless.

No Priesthood without a Tithing.
Melchisedecs perpetuity, and Leuies temporalitie, is the eighth verse it
self, thus, And here, (that is, under the Law) dying men receive Tithes,
(viz. Levites) Leui died daily, one succeeded daily in the Priesthood to
another; and in end, they dyed from their Office: But there, He (that is,
Melchisedec) of whom it is witnessed, that he lives. Melchisedec neither
subject to vicissitude, admits companion, nor ever makes an end. In sum
then, a Priest, a Tithing: How long a Priest, so long a Tithing: Melchisedec is
for ever a Priest, Ergo, Must ever have a Tithing.

And this for the Analysis of these former Scriptures, and all that we have of
Tithes in the new Testament, and in conscience it is enough, if men had
conscience enough to consider it. But we will yet more amply apply all those
things to our present purpose.

Abraham and Melchisedec both types.
Melchisedec and Abraham, is on both sides Typical. Melchisedec Typed Christ,
the head and Master, and (as a Priest of God) all the Ministry belonging to
Christ's Priesthood. Abraham Typed all the posterity, the seed of his faith,
as well as the seed of his flesh.

They be both Types of things perpetual: Melchisedec, of Christ's Ever blessing
of Abraham and all his seed. Abraham, of perpetual Tything, for Christ in his
Ministry, for himself, and all his seed. The one gives Blessing that
takes Tithes: The other takes Blessing that gives Tithes: Giving and Taking
then, are on both sides, mutual and reciprock, both in Types and Verities:
Otherwise, there should be no correspondence between Christ's perpetual Graces
derived to us in Abraham, unless we be also bound to our perpetual
thankfulness in Abraham. And if Abraham can convey the promises of Christ's
blessing to us: much more may he bind his own practice, answering it, upon us.
These grounds then, give us a double argument, to prove Abraham's practice, a
sufficient promise, and obligatory of his posterity: the first is, from the
person taker, Melchisedec: the other, from the giver, Abraham.

From the taker, thus, Verse. 8.
Melchisedec takes Tithes of whom it is witnessed, that he lives. Now this
(witnessing) properly Word indeed, makes Melchisedec Type, live for ever, but
our Melchisedec Christ, after his rising, appeared to his disciples diverse
times, eat and drank with them, and in end said, Luke 24.48. Act. 2.32. and
3.15.
Now ye are witnesses of these things. So he rose, and reigns a Priest for
ever, and therefore is, He, that takes Tithes, and is witnessed to live.

May I not justly say then? (I will, and before God, I Tithing the only proof
of perpetual Tithing.
for proof of this perpetual Priesthood, drawn his conclusion from Tithing,
rather then Blessing, (though both will conclude a like:) because all men gape
greedily for the blessing, but be very sparing of Tithing. No man will deny
Christ to be a perpetual blessing Priest: but like nothing of his perpetual
Tithing. And yet the Apostle says not of Melchisedec, He blesses and lives,
(though it be most true,) but, He takes Tithes and lives: By Blessing he
proves his Maiority, verse. 7. but by Tithing, he proves his perpetuity verse.
8. And yet, both Tithing would prove the Maiority; and Blessing the perpetuity,
if Paul had pleased. Is not this done then of purpose? Then if Blessing must
hold, being neglected in this conclusion: how shall Tithing, conclusionis ipsum
medium, be rejected? If both were away, then were he not Eternal Priest, but
Eternal man only: for nothing can argue Eternity of Priest hood, but some
Eternal Priestly action: Now all the actions recorded of Melchisedecs
Priesthood, are only Blessing and Tithing, the former, the Essence: the
later, the maintenance of his Priesthood: and of these two, Blessing decarded,
and by only Tithing is concluded the perpetual Priesthood of Melchisedec: Is
not this done of purpose? And if, Tithing and Blessing, be not both of one
nature in Time, the Type cannot be perfectly Eternal. And if we shall search
the Apostle to the very marrow, we shall find no other use of this Proposition,
Melchisedec takes Tithes and lives: and whether thou prove Tithing from
living, or Living from Tithing, all is one: and one thou must choose, for the
Apostles words must not be idle. So long then as Leui lived, he Tithed, Ergo,
so long as Melchisedec lives, he Titheth: But Melchisedec lives for ever,
Ergo, must Tithe for ever. That Tithing and Living, must dye and live together,
is clear, by the Verbs used by the Apostle, in both the types, as (...) of the
Leuits, in the present time (notwithstanding they were dead and gone) therefore
must (...) be supplied in praesenti, to Melchisedec, seeing he presently
lives. These Propositions then are all reciprocke, Melchisedec Blesses and
lives: Ergo, He Lives and Blesses. Again, Melchisedec Titheth and Lives.
Ergo, He Lives and Titheth.

Leui lost his Tithes, because he died, (not so much in Why Leui lost Tithes.
Death then in Leui must be applied to the same thing, whereunto Life was
applied in Melchisedec: else, the Antithesis were not Ad idem: Priesthood
then, in both, is Subiectum, of life and death, an endless Priesthood, a
dying Priesthood. For Melchisedecs re-entrie was not at the death of every
single Leuitical Priest, but at the final death of the whole Priesthood: The
change of Law, and the change of Priesthood. Leui then, the Priest is dead,
and dyed with Christ, but not the Person of Leui: for doubtless many thousands
of the Tribe of Leui, lived long after Christ, and perhaps do to this day, as
the other Tribes, though without certain note of distinction: and although
they could be distinguished, yet could they not challenge their former
Priesthood: Their Priesthood therefore is dead, not their Persons. Indeed
the daily dying of the Highpriests, one after another, is the Apostles chief
proof of the imperfection of their Priesthood, even while it was good by Gods
Law: Verse. 23.
they were many in one Priesthood, because death suffered them not to stay. He
remains for ever, and therefore has an endless Priesthood.

Neither lost Leui his Priesthood (as some guess) as Why Leui lost his Priest
hood.
when as both Priest and Priesthood became Mercenary, (as the Macabees, and
Josephus History bear record) and therefore the Law changed, and the
Priesthood translated justly from Leui to Judah: No, it was the course and
counsel of God, yea his revealed decree from all beginning, for the salvation
of mankind, that these Priest-hoods should be subject to these Periods; so
that Leui, had he lived never so lawfully or legally, yet must he have left
the place to his Master, Melchisedec: though his sins had not deserved it,
his soul had desired it. And Leui learning this, may yet be admitted to
Melchisedecs Priesthood, wait on the Altar, challenge his Maintenance, not vi
Leuitica, but virtute Euangelica; he must either accept the Office, or pay the
fees. Sweet and heavenly mysteries, to such as be of humble and sanctified
hearts.

Leui then is dead, and no man denies it; Melchisedec is risen, and some men
believe it: but that he rose to take Tithes, most men laugh at it. We will
assay therefore first, after Leui, and from Melchisedec, to draw them upon
Christ: secondly, to derive them from him, to his Ministry.

Paul having in the first ten verses compared Melchisedec with Aaron, The Type
applied by Paul to Christ, Anagogice.
both as Christ's Types: He proves, verse 11. the weakness of Aarons
Priesthood, because it was needful that there should rise, (...) from Aaron,
both in Person, Tribe and Order: But from Melchisedec, in Person only, not
Order. Then verse. 13. comes on the maine Conclusion by an Anagogicall
application, binding these prerogatives of Melchisedec considered in the simple
nature of a Type, by a relative force on the Verity Christ. (...), For he of
whom these things are spoken, etc. I think, (...), cannot be sufficiently
expressed, by [Of whom] for this is true English for (...), as chap. 5.11.
(...), Of whom we have much to say. All then that is said (...) Of Melchisedec,
is here by the Apostle inferred and transferred (...), to, unto, and upon
Christ. The construction of (...) here with the Accusative case, signifies
motum, removing, or conueyance from one point to another: So was Melchisedec
but Christ's Attorney here, to take seasing of his Patrimony; and so must it
not remain still (...), but return (...). All these prerogatiual Prepositions
end ever in Christ, as first, (...), and (...) For whom, and by whom all things
were, Heb. 2.10. Secondly, (...), and (...), In whom, and to whom, all must
rest, and be referred, Colos. 1.16, 17. Thirdly, (...) of whom, all things of
Melchisedec were spoken, Heb. 5.11. And lastly, here (...), on whom, all
rights, titles and possessions prefigured by his Type, must be transferred for
ever. Then we reason thus from Paul's grounds, Whatsouer is spoken here, (...),
of Melchisedec, typically; is transferred (...), unto Christ, his verity.
Tithing is spoken of Melchisedec typically. Ergo, Tithes must be transferred
unto Christ, his verity.


Let any Christian show wherein this doctrine fails.

But here they say, there is much made of nothing: Tithes, why touched hereby
Paul.
The Apostle intended not here to prove Tithes due; but to settle Christ's
Priesthood as perpetual. And so say I to. Doubtless he never doubted that
Tithes were due, (neither doubted they, with whom he had to do); therefore he
takes it, with them, pro confesso, and uses it as his only Medium, to
resolve their doubt, of the perpetuity of Christ's Priesthood, He takes
Tithes, he lives. Ergo, An eternal Priest. Leui was but a dying Tithing
Priest. All things recorded of our Melchisedec are still truly affirmed in
praesenti: He Blesses, he Titheth, he lives, his sacrifice endures for
ever. Of Leui, not one of all now true: And when he even lived, all were not in
all respects true: for he daily dyed in Person, and in end died quite from his
office, therefore in both imperfect. His actions were daily redoubled; and
where ever repetition must be, there can be no perfection, Our Melchisedec, had
never a fellow, made never a default, therefore All-sufficient. This for drawing
of Tithes upon Christ.

How Christ is said to take Tithes.
we laid for a ground chap. 4. That whatsoever the Type did, that must the
verity also do: Ergo, Seeing Melchisedec took Tithes, Christ must take
Tithes: But Christ never Tithed, etc. For answer, Christ takes Tithes now,
even as his Father took them before him, viz. by their Officers. What was
Essential in the Priesthood of Mechisedec, that Christ performs ever really,
viz. Blessing. But Tithing, is only a propriety, (not of the Essence) of
Priesthood; and so binds not the verity in his own person: for a workman
is not defined by his wages. So in this point, the Law of al similitudes must
have place, nullum simile, in omni, simile. And seeing Christ takes alms,
being given to the poor: may he not take his own Patrimony by his own
Officers, whom he has made his Ministers, his Ambassadors, putting the word of
reconciliation in their mouths: 2, Cor. 5.19.20
and so his Inheritance in their hands? Thus far for the APostles arguments
from the person taker, Melchisedec: Follows from the giver, Abraham.

CHAP. VII. Perpetual Tithing proved also by Abraham's deed; A comparison
between Melchisedec, Leui, and our Ministry. The Conclusion of the
lawfulness of Tithes.
MELCHISEDEC then Takes Tithes and Lives. Abraham binds us to Tithes.
Therefore the Apostle tells us here, That Abraham with his whole seed,
must be the Aequiualent giver, lasting as long as Melchisedecs Priesthood; and
so, Abraham gives Tithes and lives.

That all Abraham's posterity make up the person of the Giver, it is thus
cleared, And to say as the thing is, Hebr. 7.9. (...).
Leui also which receives Tithes, was Tithed in Abraham. Then if Leui was
Tithed, I hope, the other eleven Tribes, his brethren escaped not free. But let
us hear; why was Leui Tithed? Because he was yet in the loins of his Father
(Abraham) when Melchisedec met him. Then, all that dare call Abraham, Father,
(even as well that issued out of the loins of his flesh, as that are entered
in the fellowship of his Faith) are all here in Abraham Tithed. Flesh brings
in the whole Tribes: for they issued out of his very loins, as did Leui:
Faith, includes all the Families of the Earth, as Abraham's seed; whereby the
poorest Lazarus leapeth to Abraham's bosom. And, that Faith, has no less
force here, then Flesh, it is clear by the fourth and sixth verses, Abraham
the Patriarch was Tithed, who had the Promises. Then if he be a Father of our
Faith; let him be also the Father of our thankfulness: If we be Blessed in him;
let us also be Tithed in him: else our faith is but dead; and he is not our
Father.

But what if the seed of his Faith, be more bound then the seed of his only
Flesh? Romans 9.7, 8. Seed of Faith more bound to Tithes, then Seed of Flesh.
Says not Paul, All are not Israel, that are of Israel: neither are they all
children, because they are the seed of Abraham, etc. that is, they which are
the children of the flesh, are not the children of God: But the children of the
Promise are counted for the Seed. Then seeing Melchisedec blessed Abraham our
Father, who had the Promises, Hebr. 7.6. If we will pass for sons of the
same Promises in him; we must be bound in him ever to return our
thankfulness to the Ministers of these glad tidings: and so (...) binds
(...).

Abraham's giving of Tithes to Melchisedec, Abraham's Tithing was more then once.
this one time, did not bind the posterity, but rather redeem them from
further Tithing. I answer, then his posterity could not have been Tithed
under the Law. To this they reply, a special law brought on that Tithing for
Leui; and came not by virtue of Abraham's deed: I yet answer, (as often
before) the only Priesthood brought Tithes to Leui, because they were a
Priesthood long before him; but a Priesthood so far different from his, as
Leui without a special law could not challenge Tithes as his due. Besides, that
matter between Melchisedec and Abraham was in those days so shut up from man's
understanding, as no man could fetch any conclusion from it: for till Paul
applied all here, it was doubtful to the Ancients, whether Abraham gave Tithes
to Melchisedec, or Melchisedec to him: So, perishing Leui could not serve
himself heir to perpetual Melchisedec, and therefore the Law was needful for
that age. But now, seeing the Apostle has so perfectly cleared these clouds
unto us, that Leui Titheth and dies, Melchisedec Titheth and lives, what
needs us a new Law? It would but stain the prerogative of our Priesthood,
and antiquity of our title. So if Abraham had by this one Tithing, delivered
his posterity from further Tithing: neither had God drawn a Law of Tithing
upon them, neither had Paul revived Tithes to the Euangel.

But say it had been but one Tithing for all: then must Abraham for all: and
then, Tithing ever answers Blessing.
where are we? Let us not lose glad tidings, for glad Tithings. Lyra says
prettily, Vt omnes in lumbis Adae peccauerunt, ita omnes in lumbis Abrahae
decimati sunt. Blessing and Tithing are by Moses coupled to the Priesthood,
and by Paul, Tithing once more, then blessing, and that in the very point of
perpetuity: Then, Quos Deus coniunxit homo non separet.

Further, if that Once, in Melchisedec argue not (as is said) perpetuity, then
dying Leui, shall resemble more a perpetual Priest, then living Melchisedec,
which is quite contrary to the Apostles mind: for Leui Tithed near two
thousand years: and who will not think two thousand years liker Eternity,
then one hour? Therefore, Once, is Endless life: and Often, Heb. 7.16, 25.
is carnal commandment, as the Apostle terms them. And so Melchisedec takes
Tithes and lives.

The Apostle had for him to urge this argument Leui, then the other Tribes,
Leui bound to pay Tithes to Melchisedec.
because Leui was a Priest, and therefore the Tithe taker, and so might seem
exempted from paying Tithes to any: whereas the other Tribes in their own
persons paid Tithes to Leui as a Priest, even as Abraham did to Melchisedec
the Priest: But Paul tells them, that this Tithing must be meant of
Melchisedec, which even Leui himself must pay, but could not, during the Law
of his own Priesthood: therefore we may justly hold Leui as Melchisedecs
deputy, till the days of correction. For to say as it is, Hebr. 9.10.
even Leui was an Officer of Christ's, his (...), pointing out his coming: so
no Tithing whatsoever, but one way or other, it has a relation, and his
perfection, In, and to Christ; and so Melch. still lives and takes Tithes:
Rebuffas de Decimis.
as one notes prettily, Decimae erant ante Legem, sub consilio; In lege sub
praecepto; post legem, in liberate Spiritus. So living Tithing goes ever with
Melchisedec; and dying Tithing with Leui: but in all, Tithes ever Gods
Inheritance. So soon then as Leui lost his Priesthood, he lost also his title
in Tithes, and became tied to pay Tithes to Melchisedec, as his brethren
Tribes, and as both Jew and Gentile, embracing the Euangel.

Paul has kept in the matter of Maintenance: Summa of Paul's doctrine touching
Maintenance.
he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and so, al his general Epistles were
written to them, save this one to the Hebrews. The Gentiles never embracing
Leuies Priesthood, could not be bound to Leuies Tithing, they knew it not:
Therefore Paul having instructed them, in the Rudiments of Christian Religion,
teaches them their duty touching Maintenance in general, and yet alleged
the generals of the Law, as we heard from 1. Cor. 9. and to the Galath. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the Word, make him that teaches him, partaker of all
his goods: A precept as heavy, as to have said, Give him a Tenth of all thy
goods. And though Paul here did not settle the Medium, Sup. cap. 3. ad fin.
nor name the Quote, yet Nature teaches (as is said) that it must be at the
option of neither party; and what better means for a midst, then to have our
recourse to that course which God himself kept in proportioning that portion
for his service both before and under the Law? But here, writing to the
Hebrews, very Jews indeed, who were fully instructed in all the points of
Moses Law, and stuck too much to it, he uses Tithing, as a chief argument
to confirm them in the Al-sufficiencie and Eternity of Christ's Priesthood,
applying that most mystical and hid history (even from them then) of
Melchisedec and Abraham's Blessing and Tithing, unto Christ the Verity: It was
even Christ our true, Melchisedec, of whom (...), these things were spoken: He
Blesses, he Titheth, he lives: a fit and timely argument for the Jews, who
were already well acquainted with the Medium of his Conclusion; But for the
Gentiles, unfit and untimely: unfit, because it had bin (as we speak) to prove
obscurumper obscurius: untimely, because Tithes were ever (as is said) a most
orderly Inheritance, never able to be exacted, but where both Church and Civil
Policy, are peaceably settled in Gods obedience: and yet in Paul's own days,
where Tithes could not have place, the proportion for the maintenance of the
Gospel, went a great deal higher, for every true Christian sold what he had,
brought it to the Apostles feet, and all was made common, a sore Tithing: yet
this lacked not Sacrilege, Act. 4.32. and 5.1.
as we see in Ananias and Saphira, who kept back a part of theirs: but they
paid well for it. This was indeed, to make the Preachers partakers of all
their goods: But I hope any man yet will rather agree to a Tithing, then to
this, or rather to nothing, let Melchisedec, Mo^ses, Paul and God himself, say
what they list.

Neither did Paul write this to these Hebrews, as expecting, Paul's meaning to
the Hebr.
for that time was not come (as is said); they were poor new converted
Christians, even those for whom Paul had gathered that collection, in Achaia,
Asia, and Rom^: Paul only (as is said) would draw them from Leui to Christ,
and that in the power and prerogative of Melchisedec in all things belonging to
Leuies Priesthood, specially, Blessing and Tithing. They knew Tithes were due,
but not due to Christ: this Paul teaches them. Let every Christian balance
these arguments, in the scales of an upright conscience, fixed, and settled on
the word of God; and accordingly, dispose of his affections.

Comparison of Melchisedec, Aaron, and Christ.
and their verity, Christ! Grace is joined to Eternity; and Law and Bondage
brought to an end. Melchisedec, Christ's first, freest, and most perfect
Priestly type, and kingly too, met Abraham freely without law, and before Law;
and as a King, fed him; as a Priest, blessed him: all in freedom. Abraham
again, (in whose loins, we were all then both fed and blessed) like a
thankful soul, met also freely the free graces of God in Melchisedec,
likewise before Law. And so Christ our true Melchisedec, not commanded, little
expected, least of all deserved, freely meets Abraham and all his seed, ever
feeding and blessing to salvation, and therefore must all we, the seed of
Abraham's flesh and faith, return to him, 2, Cor 5.19.20
and to those, in whom he has put the Ministry of reconciliation, Tithes
freely, not as Legally coacted. And this for Grace and Eternity.

Now, between Melchisedec and Christ, interuened another solemn and great
high Priest also, Aaron: But how? quite after an other order and manner: long
after both Melchisedec and Abraham: all in bonds, called, commanded: his very
sacrifices brought by force to the Altar: nothing freely. And so Abraham's
posterity ga^e him the like meeting, Tithes by force of law: Bondage, and
bonds on both sides.

Grace then begins, and Grace ends. The Law coupled Melchisedec to Christ.
The Law goes between, as a bond, coupling Grace to Grace, Melchisedec to
Christ. And so Melchisedec as Gods Priest, and Christ's type, with the
Ministry of Christ's Gospel, make up both but one point, in the Office-worke
of our salvation: Even as, an Evening and a Morning, Genesis 1.5.
made up but one day in the Creation. Christ was but as in dawning then: he
shines now. In Melchisedec he put the Word of benediction, in his Ministry
he has put the Word of Reconciliation. Melchisedec typed Everlasting promises
in Christ: his Ministry preach everlasting performances in Christ. Now, glad
promises, and glad tidings of their performances, are but one: and therefore
their maintenance justly one, Tithes Inheritance.

Leui, a link of the same chain also; a Priest of the same work in effect:
though different in form: a Remembrancer, for supporting the weakness of those
days, interuening between the promises and the performances, typing, and
foretelling by numbers of rites, and thousands of times, Christ's coming in
their carnal sacrifices, till they poynted him out, as by a fingerly
demonstration: whom our Ministry now Preach in a heavenly contemplation. The
doors of Faith in those days were much, their Eyes, Hic est: and so trust^es
Thomas, must first put his finger in his side, and then believe. The doors of
faith in our true Melchisedecs days, are most, our ears, by hearing: and so,
even Abraham believed, hic erit, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness:
And he saw the day of the Lord, and rejoiced: But we, Hic fuit, and
therefore, Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believe. So the
general end of all, is one: and the general Inheritance for all, still one.
Leui was under the Law, as a tenent at will, remoueable: Melchisedec, and
Christ's Ministry, as Freeholders: Oaken-tenants. Diversity of Orders made not
diversity of Inheritance. Tithes and Priesthood came and go together; not
Tithes, and Leuies Priesthood: and therefore must not end, till all
Priesthood end; for Melchisedec yet lives a Priest, and takes Tithes.

See part. 1. c. 6.
To that question then made, part. 1 cap. 6. Why the last Order once settled,
must never be left.
The answer is evident: We must never fall back from Order to Confusion, nor
from Substance to Ceremonies. This were to go back again from Canaan, to the
Fleshpots of Egypt: from Heaven to Hell. Why may we not serve God without the
Tables of the Law, as they did two thousand years? They had the Image of that
Law by nature, and partly (doubtless) by Tradition: so were they, both by Law
of Nature and Tradition, prepared to a Tithing, as fell out between
Melchisedec and Abraham. The first age was a time of confusion, the people had
no rest, Deuteronomy. 12.8. etc.
and so small order; but being once past Jordan, they must not do as of before.

Now are we past all the Bondages in Christ, and must not go back again to the
Bound-Ages of the world. Otherwise, we inuert the whole method both of Creation
and Redemption. Creation began from darkness to light: Evening and Morning
made a day: Redemption, from falling to rising: from beggarly rudiments of the
Law, to the rich revelations of the Gospel, from perishing types to eternal
Verities. And the Gospel again, in it self still growing, Heb. 5.13.14.
from milk for babes, to strong meat for men of age. We must ever grow, never
decrease. Therefore Christ, the first Author of Grace, and perfection of all
grace, has not cast all again in the Chaos of Confusion.

Then seeing Nature at first freely doted; The right of Tithes concluded.
Grace ensuing distinctly defined; Jacob instructed in grace, solemnly vowed;
Law succeeding, strictly commanded; the Gospel reviving, has by reasons
^enued; the Primitive Churches, by practice restored Tithes for Gods worship:
Let us ever hold, that Tithes are only the true Inheritance of the Church,
flowing immediately from God, to his Ministry in all ages: as we defined
them, part. 1. cap. 1.

The sum then of all the proof from the Circumstance of time, is, Whatsoever
is due to an eternal Priest, is perpetual by due. Tithes were, and are due,
to Melchisedec, an Eternal Priest. Ergo, Tithes are perpetually due.


And by Consequent, this Priest being the High Priest of the Gospel, Tithes
are due to the Gospel.

CHAP. VIII. The time of Melchisedecs first Tithing. Four doubts in his
posterities Tithing. To whom, from whom, whereof, and for what uses Tithes are
to be taken, and employed. And if Princes may Tithe. (...), what.
TITHES thus settled as the Churches true Inheritance: How long Melchisedec
Tithed.
First in Melchisedec, and Abraham our Fundators: Secondly, in their succeeding
posterity. In Melchisedec, touching the time and continuing of his Tithing:
and of what things he got Tithes. Once he got, sure it is: and this Once, in
all his actions we have found ever obligatorie of the posterity, typed in
Mechisedec and Abraham. It continued not, because we read never that Abraham,
or any of his, met any more with Melchisedec; and so hereafter, Abraham never
met with so good a Priest as himself. Here then was but a Nuncupation, a
Fundation of Priesthood and Maintenance (...): All things began to be Orderly
with Melchisedec: But to be of Melchisedecs peculiar Order ( viz. Eternal) this
ceased on earth, from this time, til the law in his order, both came, and
ceased; and Christ the perfection of this Order and all Orders, came. So, of
Melchisedecs Order we have but two Persons; Melchisedec, Type and Priest:
Christ, Verity, and High Priest. Again, it could not lasts for Tithes (as is
said) require necessarily, settled Religion. Abraham was here a stranger among
Infidels. He gave Tithes as he found the Priest; let us do the like. So
here, Grace prepared the way to the Law, by Gods good order, because Grace
must deliver us from the Law by the same Order. Now, whereof Melchisedec got
Tithes, because it concerns also the Posterity, we will there answer it. And
this for the doubts in our Fu^dators.

To whom Tithes due.
To what persons given? From what persons taken? Of what things taken? And for
was uses? In all which, having once found the Person giver, viz. God, we shall
easily find the rest: for he gives for all respects. And, That only God gave
Tithes; It is clear first, in that action of Melchisedec and Abraham; whose
doings though they passed in the prerogative of (...) and (...), without either
recorded law, or like example; yet no man will deny, but that their calling was
powerful in the Spirit; and so far above Law, as this one action was a Law for
ever. Again, God having here given. Tithes to his Eternal Priest; under the
Law he also gives them to his Temporal Priests and Ministers. So we have
here two lessons. First, Tithes are pendicles of Priests, not of Princes. For
though Melchisedec and Christ were both Princes and Priests, yet are Tithes
only annexed to their Priesthood, Heb. 7.

But to be plainer, and neither wrong Prince nor Priest, How Princes may Tithe.
Whether may Kings take a Tenth for their necessities? Another, Whether Kings
may take Tithes, Gods Inheritance, Decimam Sacram, from his Church or no?

For the first, they will allege, 1. Sam. 8.15. And we see Princes daily lift
(lawfully) subsidies of all proportions, 10. 15. for maintenance of their
estate: yea our bodies, our lives, are liable hereto also. But wonder it is,
that some learned should allege this place of Samuel, Pareus in Heb. 7.
as a surrender of Gods right in Tithes, unto kings after Leui; seeing Samuel
speaks here only of the Kings of the Jews, such as lived jointly with Leui
under the Law, Perkins in Jude.
who neither did, nor durst touch Leuies Tithes. Kings then may Tithe: but God
must Tithe. Never religious King thought otherwise: nor, never King had further
authority: for if any, then doubtless, under the Law: But there, Hezekiah our
best and rarest example, sets down a pattern for all his posterity. He
commands his people to pay Tithes to Leui, according to the Law, 2. Chron. 3^.
he makes no new Law: he questioneth with the Priests and Levites anent the
heaps: he causes build chambers for the heaps: but puts never his hand in
the heaps; he leaves that to the distribution of the Levites for whom they
were ordained: For our Patro-Latrons were not then hatched. Neither mean I,
but that a Princes need may be such, that Leui in duty may and must yield him
a portion, as the Priest gave David the Show bread: 1. ^am. 21.6. and Mat. 12.4.
but let it come by Leui, for avoiding of Sacrilege. But why our Scottish
Levites can so little help their David, Cap. vlt.
a Prince of so rare both Reformation, and Religion, shall be quickly known.

Kings, no fundators of Tithes.
No, doubtless Gods Law led our forbeares, Christian Kings, and Churches, so
to do. For at first, Tithes were either Moral or Ceremonial. If Moral, Then
all Kings are but Hezekiahs, commanding to pay them according to the Law. But
if Ceremonial, then it is no less superstition now to restore them: then it
was Sacrilege then to refuse them. For nothing that typed Christ as a
Ceremony, may be revived after Christ in his Church.

The persons owners then in both Melchisedec and Leui, were only
Ecclesiastics, Priests and Levites: all those to whose charge the Ministration
of Gods worship was in any sort committed, Filij Prophetarum. Whereof it must
follow, that all and only the Ministry of the Gospel must live by Tithes. By
Ministry, I mean not, only the Preacher of the Word, but also all and
whatsoever inferior Officers, having warrant for their special callings in the
Church, else we have not both Priests and Levites, 2. King. 2.3.5. and 4.38
42. and 6.1.
as Esaias prophesied of the days of the Gospel. And this of Esaias must signify
Priests by Church-calling, Cap. 66.21.1.2 9.
Ministers: not generally as Peter terms all Christians, a Royal Priesthood.

Our Preachers answer to the Priests
but only the inferior Levites, I see no warrant for it. For if it be for
their different Sacrifices from ours: the name will never import the service
out of the own period of time: but still such Priest, such Sacrifice:
otherwise it should bind a carnal Sacrifice on Melchisedec the Type. We
answer those Priests then, Genere, not Specie. Again, the inferior Levites,
were by Calling as Ceremonial, as Priests: And our Preachers labor in Word and
Sacraments, resemble more the Priests services, then that of the Levites (...),
says Paul of the Priests, 1. Cor. 9.13.
very competent to our Ministry (...). Romans 15.16.
And the Gospel has also the own inferior officers, who may better answer
to the inferiors of the Law. Then, All of Church-Calling, must live by the
Church-Kitchin.

Away then with those Laick Bishops, Parsons, Priors, Patroni, are Latrones.
Patro-Latrons.
But if the Church-Inheritance must go by the presentation of Laics, then let
Lordships go by the presentation of Levites. So shall we have on both sides, a
perfect Hurlyburly-gouernment, till each have his due. Tithes are the Churches
Inheritance flowing from God: Then, in general, no man can present them: and
in particular, Hezekias (as is said) left the distribution to Leui himself.
Gods end, and Man's, are here quite contrary. God gave Leui a Maintenance from
himself, and free of man's option, to be lifted before man should meddle with
any thing, to no other end, Hebr. 13.17.
but (as Hezekiah said) That they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord,
not to please the Lord or my Lord. That he should not stumble at such a
huge-stone, as, How shall I live? That they may d^e it with joy, and not with
grief. Deuteronomy. 33.9.
He must misknow Father and Mother, Brothers, his own child, when Gods cause
is in hand, as he did, Exodus 32.27, 28. Philip. 3.8.
He must count all things dung for Christ's sake. But man's end is, to asseruile
the Gospel to his vile appetites. And what greater argument, to make a man
speak, as they please? Then to be able to make him to eat as they please. It
is a sore sub ferula; when Leuies portion was not given, every one fled to his
Land, Nehem. 13.10. And this makes now many a poor Leuite (yet weaker then
poor) engage the Gospel for his dinner. And this pride against Gods
Inheritance, makes many a Gut-Gospeller, sell his own inheritance to buy
Tithes, and in end is turned out of both. And this for the persons owners of
Tithes.

Abraham in paying Tithes to Melchisedec, What persons must pay Tithes.
was a type of all his seed, of his flesh, and of his Faith: then no flesh can
escape. The Law commanded all Israel to give Leui Tithes: and Leui himself
escaped not Melchisedec. All, for whom Leui served in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, paid to Leui. Therefore all to whom Christ is preached, pay
Tithes to Christ's Ministry. There is but one Dichotomie here of the whole
world, either an Israelite, or a Leuite. An Ecclesiastic or a Laick; saving
our Mungerall Gospellers (as is said): the next head shall make this more
clear.

Abraham gave of ALL, What things to be Tithed.
Genesis 14.] Jacob, Genesis 28. vowed to give of all that God gave him. The Law, in
the time of the dividing of the Land, sets down chiefly, that which
comes by, and of the Land, viz. Tillage and Pasturage: and these Tithes are
now commonly called Praediales Decimae. Decimae praediales.
But Jacobs Vow, and Abraham's practice teach us, that (All) includes as well,
all trades, as all persons: for every man is not a labourer of ground, a Cain,
a keeper of cattle, an Abel. The Jewish Repub. went no further for that time;
But the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 7. verse. 2. gives first, Of all, and
verse. 4. (...); which most men interpret Spoils. Where, I wonder why some
learned quarrel it as improper: Deuteronomy. 20.1, 2, 3.
seeing one point of Leuies office was to encourage in time of war: And
seeing of the battles and of the Spoils, 1. Chro. 26.27.
they did dedicate to maintain the house of the Lord. Seeing God is by special
name, The Lord of Hosts. And seeing the Ministry of the Gospel, yet serves
much at war, where huge armies have no calling but the wars: shall all be
exempted from Tithes? No, every man as he gains, he gives proportionably,
and these are called Decimae Personales: Decimae Personales.
and such in effect were all Abraham's Tithes: for his, came after a battle,
not after Tillage or Cattle. And this personal Tithing is cleared by the
Apostle, saying, Let him that is instructed in the Word, (this will bring in
every soul having goods, and receiving instruction) etc. And if not so, the
one half, if not the best half of the world, shall go free, for all men's
goods stand not in Tillage or Pasturage: All then must either pay, or be paid
for: for servants, children, and such like, come not in count, but householders
and Foris samiliats, as Deuteronomy. 26.13.

But God has laid a course of such perpetual equity and equality in all
points, and for all persons, that nothing can go wrong, if we go not from it.
Al persons must pay, therefore no emulation for exception of persons: All
things, as their increase is, must pay, so Gods service shall lack nothing
necessary. Once a year pay: so no man is prevented, nor precipitate: for the
years revolution, gives a recreation to all, and whatsoever Trades.

And albeit Abraham said to the King of Sodom, that neither his, nor his:
Neither had Abraham, so much to give of his own for the time, as of these
Kings and Lots goods, whom he delivered, and of these others Kings goods, Genesis
14.
whom he overcame, as the History bears. Now if he gave Tithes for their
goods, it must be Spoil: for all came to Abraham, Iure belli: And if Spoils,
then battles and wars are obliged to Tithing: If wars and soldiers, what
trade can escape. And though we say, Spoils, it excludes not Abraham's own
estate, even by the text: for first, Genesis has, Of all: secondly, Heb 7.2.
(...), Of all things. So, if Abraham had, he gave: But verse. 4. Paul adds,
(...), of purpose (as it seems to me) to oblige war as well as peace, to
this most solemn Nuncupation of Tithes, to the Eternal Priesthood of
Melchisedec.

Abraham, Give me the persons, Sodom a thankful soldier.
and take the goods to thy self: We have two things to mark; first, it
seems, the King of Sodom had no ill meaning, to grudge at Abraham's giving
Tithes to Melchisedec, as most men understand him: for he had no reason, seeing
Abraham had restored to him, all his people and goods, yea, even himself to
himself. Chrysostom seems to take the place better, applying it to the
thankfulness in the King of Sodom, who seeing God work for him, by Abraham's
hand, what himself could not do; and seeing Melchisedec, the Priest of
Abraham's God, seal up this victory in so powerful, and solemn manner: the
King then said to Abraham, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thy
self. If we should say here, Ambrose making 318. Vernus of Abraham, types of
these 318. Bishops of the Council of Nice, stretches the text much further.
That the King of Sodom might serve as a type of the Gentiles, called to the
Faith of Abraham, who were never of Abraham's flesh; it were no great
absurdity: for Sodom here, being but Lots neighbor by dwelling, is made
Lots brother in blessing: he enjoyed fully the temporal blessing of the
present victory; he heard effectually the future blessings of Eternal
felicity sealed up in Abraham and all his posterity, Flesh and Faith; and so,
even for Sodom himself, when he should take him to the tents of Sem: And
should this man, who had lost all, both souls and substance, and again got
all, grudge for a Tithing, seeing even then Gentiles themselves gave Tithes to
their own Idols? No, It agrees better with the nature of this eternal and
heavenly mystery, that such Gentiles as by Lots society, were brougnt within
the compass of Gods blessing, should also be enrolled in the book of
thankfulness for Melchisedecs Tithing. Therefore (...), may well be
interpreted, Spoils.

Secondly, we mark, that this speech of the King of Sodom thankful to Abraham.
for after Melchisedec had received Gods part, the King bids Abraham take
the rest of the goods To himself; whereby he seems to acknowledge, Tithes in
such cases due; and to acquit Abraham's losses, by a true liberality, for his
present delivery. Courtesy bound Abraham to refuse the Kings goods; but
Conscience commanded him to give God his own goods: and so, they both
acknowledged their common victory of their common purse; and the best of this
purse, was Spoils, Ergo, (...) may yet be Spoi^es.

But it is not much used to signify Spoils, XII Object. Sol. (...), what.
and properly it is but The tops of the heaps:] What of all this? May not
these heaps be sometimes Spoils, purchased as well by battles and wars
abroad, as possessed by peace in barnes at home? And Steph. says first,
Capitur pro primitijs manubiarum quae Dijs offeruntur: and proves it by diverse
authorities. Again, Primitiae victoriae, id est, manubiarum ex victoria
reportatarum: And was not Abraham here after victory? Again, At vero D.
Paulus, aut quisquis est auctor Epist. ad Heb. (...), non pro manubiarum
primitijs, sed pro ipsis manubijs vsurpauit. If this sense seem strange, the
Author is strong: and this is no sole example of Paul's using of words in a new
sense, (though never without a new reason) as for example, (...) is taken by
all for, to come: yet Paul, Act. 20.29. (...), after my departure. Casaub.
The Fathers long after Paul, framed many words to a new sense, as (...) for
the Eucharisty it self: by Dionosius: (...) for (...) by the Council of Nice:
(...) from the Church, to the only Clergy, and Church of late, from the
flock, to the only Pastors, all which Scripture never knew: And might not
Paul in the power of another spirit, use (...) to signify Spoils, in so fit a
time, as after a battle, and in so far a reach, as to fetch in for ever,
every soul to pay Tithes to the everlasting Priesthood of Melchisedec?

Tithes for what uses.
First Melchisedec got them (as is said) as Priest only. Many would tie them to
many common works, as building of Churches, Streets, and Hospitals: But look to
the Law, there is no such condition in the gift to Leui: it went only, for his
service in the Tabernacle, not for building the Tabernacle. Moneys due to the
Priest, were exempted from repairing of Gods house. Kings ever builded and
repaired Churches, 2. King. 12.16. 2 Chro 24 5. and 34.9. 2 King. 22 4.
of their own goods and the peoples: and the Levites keepers of the doors,
gathered by the Kings command, monyes for these works, of all their brethren.
As for the poor, the Law appointed for them a special Tithing each third
year: 1. Cor. 16.1.2.
and the Apostle, an ordinary collection each week, besides a daily care of
them recommended to all Christians. Of all this is cleared, that the Church
Patrimony, was not tied to these uses: howsoever I do confess, a thousand
times better so employed, then as most part of Tithes be now adays. So Tithes
may be, (not must be) so employed.

CHAP. IX. Why Tithes seem too much for our Ministry, and how to mend it.
Comparison between the Romish Church and ours: Christ and the King both
cosoned.
But thus shall the Tithes, fair exceed the proportion Why Tithes too much for
our Ministry.
chiefly here in Scotland. But the conformity hereof must not grow from
imparing Gods rents: but increasing his servants, which in most places are too
few. Parishes so many miles in compass: One Church only, if any: alike
Preachers, 1. Chron. 23.1, 2, 3.
this is all. Any wonder here the Tithes be too much, where the men be so
few? It was not so in Israel, where eight and thirty thousand Levites above
thirty years old, served the Ministrrie of the Law: and the Ministry of the
Gospel, in as large (though not so fertile) a country with us, not to mount to
four thousand in all. What if every large peopled Parish had two Churches?
Each Church, two Preachers? With Deacons, Porters, Musicians, and all such like
inferior Officers, as the Church-seruices require? And all live by
Church-rents? Should not God be better served? Souls better nourished? And
the people no more burdened?

Leui should be but richer: then let him be the more liberal, the more
hospital. Let him support Prince and Country: Church and poor, as has been
done heretofore. O! But, Ecclesia peperit diuitias, and filia deuorouit matrem.
True, in Popery, where having not only Tithes most Legally exacted, but a
great number of old legal offerings, and new additions, they become so, Secular
Princes. But in the purity of the Gospel, 1. Pet. 5.3.
where Decimare, not Dominari, is permitted, there is no such danger.

Comparison between the Romish Church and ours.


Respons: Chaste they are not: Wives they have not: and children they want not.
We grant we have wives: so had Leui: and yet, to have a wife, was no Ceremony
with him: though Popery has abolished it, and takes other men's wives in place
of it. As to our children, they differ only, that theirs are bastards, ours
Lawful. And I have often seen Romish bastards, better in bonis, then any of
the other sort. And though our children be (as seldom) provided for, yet does
not this endaunger our Church for wealth: for our children succeed to it Iure
patris, not Predecessoris: possessione, not professione, not as a Pope to a
Pope: a Cardinal to a Carnal. And if it be lawful to have wives, then more
need is there of mantenance.

Yet again, to avoyde all partiality in these points, I confess, first, That
there may be (in some respect) too much wiuing in a Church Ministry:
specially where the patrimony is so much impared, Matrimony might be better
spared: And seeing Lords and Lairds, have measured Leuies maintenance so, as
will scarce prove meat to his own mouth, the less his burden were, the
greater were his liberty in his calling: But the difference between the Pope
and us is, that Nature conformed to Gods Law, leads us: Man's Law, abridging
Gods, enforces them. If we enacted affirmatively, that all Ministers must
marry: as the Pope does his Negative, That none shall marry: I think it were
aeque peccatu^ vtrinque Leui was bound to marry: for, his only loins could
breed a Legal Ministry: but now, Jew and Gentil are a like sib to the
Gospel: the only spirit begets a Minister.

Secondly, I confess, That there is no greater Sacrilege, Leui himself
plays the Limmer, Leui Sacrilegious, is worst of all.
that is, when a Bishop, or a Minister, inhaunceth all Bishoprics, Abbacies,
Priories, whatsoever is deuouted to Leuies Inheritance, appropriating things
due to the seed of their calling, to the seed of their carkas: to their only
sons, what is due to their successors. If our Church have any such, the Lord
turn himself all in Eye, to find them out, and all in fire to purge them out:
Achans, Achans.

But let us hear Bellarmine sound his bells: This Law Bellarmines belles
against Tithes.
because it did not oblige ever from the beginning.

Ans. Obliging from the beginning, is no sure note of things Moral and
Perpetual: for then the Jewish indiuidual Sabbath must have been Moral, for
it was at the very beginning, but continued not till the end. Again, Incest,
did not at the beginning so strictly oblige as now, shall we therefore hold it
for no Moral precept? or alterable now? Moral then is, whatsoever beginning
at any time before Christ, remains also after Christ: Otherwise the Decalogue
shall not be Moral: Romans 7.7.
and if we flee to the Law of Nature, we have proved Tithes also by the Law of
Nature.

Another bell of Bellarmines: As the Law said, Leui must have all the Tithes in
Israel: So said it, Leui must have no Inheritance in Israel: And so the
negative, must be Moral as well as the Affirmative; but we see many Ministers
borne to Inheritance, and purchasing Inheritance, neither due nor descending to
the Ministry. Ergo.

This is a two edged sword: one against the Pope, whose chair makes him as
great a Prince as any in Israel: Let Baal plead for himself. Judge. 6.32.
Another edge, against our Ministry, who though they bring no other
Inheritance to the Ministry, then the Gospel gives; yet they provide for
their children, which Levy did not. I answer, first, for the children: Leui
did not provide for them, because he needed not; for God had provided already
sufficiently for him and all his. How Leui may have Inheritance.
In general, I answer, If this Leuiticall Law had bin our first ground for
Tithes, as it is but a branch of that general, whereby both they and we claim
Tithes, then Bellarmine had had some color of his conjunction of the Negative,
and Affirmative, as of one nature. And yet by his leave, That Negative was
peculiar to that only Tribe, in the division of that Land: but the Affirmative
of Tithes, flowing from our first Pattern and Patron, Melchisedec, was common
to all Nations, as was his Priesthood. For no Nation (save this) was enjoined
to divide themselves in twelve or thirteen distinct Tribes, and so to divide
the Land among them, and kept themselves still distinguished one from another:
and no people (save this) had one only Tribe, reserved wholly and only to the
Ministry: Therefore the Affirmative must be Moral, The Negative, Temporal.

I confess, the Equity of this Negative teaches clearly, Sacred and civil
callings distinct.
and the World; Priest and Prince, should ever remain distinct; which two the
Pope confounds, and all such as do join sacred and secular public callings
in one person. Yea, I say further, though a man be borne to secular Lordships
and Offices; and thereafter called to the Ministry, yet must he live as
having no inheritance; that is, he must abandon all that public and civil
calling in his own person, as Negotium huius seculi, discharging that by
others, and so derive it to his lawful posterity of his flesh, himself
standing fast by Christ's plough: he must not plow with the Word, and harrow
with the World.

The Law then is not the patent of our possession. Melchisedec is our Pattern;
Melchisedec is our Patron; Melchisedec gave our Patent, Melchisedec took our
possession. The law (as is said) served the own time: It coupled Melchisedec
to Christ. Great was the difference, between the Law and the Gospel, both
touching Calling and Maintenance. The Law, tied all, and only Leui to the
Calling: and so were his children, both successors to his Office, and heirs of
his Tithes. In the Gospel, the Spirit only directs all. In the Law, only
Israel Gods people: only Leui, Gods Priest; and as they had an external
calling, so he gave them a carnal Maintenance, bound to their blood; for the
Priesthood went by pedigree, Neh. 7.64. But the Gospel, touching descent
personal, in all circumstances is free, calling (after the manner of
Melchisedec) Internally: and so gives the maintenance to the Sent, not to the
Descent. No man's seed astricted; none debarred: Jew and Gentile. The patrimony
and parentage, meet never under Melchisedec; and therefore Leuies Laws, are
for Leuies self only. For seeing our flesh has no part with Leui, it were
hard to debar us that ordinary natural care, which God allows all parents
over their children. The moderation here must be (as is said) Ne implicent se
negotijs huius seculi; 2. Tim. 2.4.
not to hunt with Esau, forgetting their calling. Before both Law and
Melchisedec, the first borne had both the best portion, and were also Priests,
by practice: then if a man now, borne to secular possessions, having both wife
and children (which both has bin, and may be under the Gospel, but never could
be under the Law) be called to the Ministry; must this man either renounce
his means or his Ministry? May not Leuies Lands, and keep Leuies cattle?
This were a beggarly rudiment indeed. A man then may enjoy his means, and the
Church censure his moderation.

Number. 26.^4. and 33.54. 2. Chron. 31. Neh. 13.13.
So did God in the division of Canaan, give that Tribe most, which needed most.
So were Tithes by Leui taken, and by Leui distributed according to their
courses. To command the people to pay Tithes; was Opus Regum: but to divide
them, Vix Regium. Equity then, not Equality must lead the balance: for many
circumstances, may make one of the same calling, more or less chargeable then
another. The extremities to be avoided, are Hunger and Surfeit. Want kills
the Prophet, and Riches makes his graces roust.

But to speak at home now: Say that our Levites Leui charge not, Laickes
ouercharge. A shame of shames! Our Pulpits preach Christ: Our Parliaments
forfeit Christ: and our poor Commons pilled, under color of paying to Christ.
The trick of it was, Christ and the King both cosened.
That Tithes were upon the sudden found unfit for the Church, but very fit for
the King, (for the time as young as our Reformation): All must be annexed to
him. So was he, (but not long) both King and Priest, a new Melchisedec: He
Tithed once, (if once) but never more. For as they scorned Christ, they scoffed
the King, conueying straight from his one hand, what they put in his other. So
they found the King Minor; they made the Churchmen Minor: and shut them both
up in the Order of Fratres minimi. Now the Tithes being gone, we must have (for
the fashion) Lords of the Plot, Lords Modefears, booked stipends, but nothing
like Gods book: Gods book gave Leui substance for shadows: our Lords give
Leui shadows for substance. God commanded such, Leuit. 27.31.
as would redeem their Tithes from Leui, to add a fifth part more above the
Priests valuation: Our Lords give Leui a fifth part of his own Tithes,
according to their valuation. Abraham gave Tithes of all the Spoils; and we
make Spoil of all the Tithes. And these forty years bypast have not
sufficed to tell us Quotum, quantum, nor quomodo, Christ's Ministry may be
maintained, Tithes being abstracted. A confusion, arising only from rejecting
Gods conclusion: and so much the more confirmed, that their travels are still
turned upon Tithes. Tithes they will not give, yet out of Tithes they must give
what they list give. So we have, pro Sacri-lege, Sacrilege legittimated.

2. Chron. 31.
And now, our Hezekiah, whose age and knowledge inform him unto reformation of
those their errors; while his Highness begins to question with his Levites
touching their heaps, (or rather hopes of heaps) and would willingly remove
these Tobiahs from the Church-chambers. Alas, he finds Achan the best part of
Israel: Nehem. 13.4.
many Ierosylites, few true Israelites: Robbers, not Restorers of Leuies
portion. Romans 2.22.
Hear O Heavens! and hearken O Earth! Esai. 1 2. Ier. 5.9.29. 2. Chro. 24.22.
Shall I not visit them for these things, says the Lord? Or shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Doubtless: The Lord look upon it,
and require it. Amen.

(...).
AN APPENDIX ADDED OF NEW, ANSWERING SOME OBJECTIONS moved, namely, against
this Treatise: and some others I find in later Writers: as that noble learned
SCALIGERS Diatribe de Decimis: and Mr. JOHN SELDENS History of Tithes.
THIS Appendix (Dear Reader) arises from two Reasons. First, diverse doubts
moved by a Religious and learned Gentleman unto my self, after h^e had long
ago perused this Treatise. Secondly, from some other doubts which I have read
in that Noble and learned SCALIGERS Diatribe de Decimis: and in Mr. JOHN
SELDENS History of Tithes, published this present year. Of both which I was
bound to take notice for love of the Truth, and all that love it: holding still
for my End, Edification; and Charity, as my way to it: for he that walks not
so, he may well speak Truth, but not Truly.

The first were sent me in these words, as follows.

Sir I have perused your Sacril ge, wherein I reverence great Learning,
judgment, quickness and dexterity: such, as I know not, if any shall come
after, to handle that subject better: so that I marvel not, that *** became
superstitious touching it. Yet for my better satisfaction, and to quicken your
quickness yet further, I have observed some things to be recommended to your
consideration and resolution, as doubts to me: chiefly in the second part,
which many ways imports the first as relative to it.

CHAP. I.
. II. In the second part.
Galath. 4.9.
WHy (say you) had these Beggarly Rudiments, and that perishing Priesthood of
the Law, so rich a Patrimony, and the glorious and rich Revelations of the
Gospel, so beggarly a Ministry?]

Object. Because their riches and forms are very diverse, if not flat contrary:
as consisting the one in show, the other in substance: the one altogether
spiritual, the other much earthly. And Beggarly is spoken by the Apostle in
another sense, for they were that way not poor.

Answ. I take Beggarly just as you do, with the Apostle there: but on the part
of the Gospel, I take it for Poverty. But what reason can be drawn from
their rich showing Rudiments, and rich assured maintenance, to make the
substance of the Gospel be shut up in uncertainty of sufficient maintenance?
Again, their rich Rudiments (that is, Typical glories) had the own rich and
like maintenance too: but their Patrimony (in this Treatise being only Tithes
Inheritance) was also rich and certain, and more due to them, for their
scattered services abroad in their Synagogues, then their Ceremonial and
Typical Temple-rites, as we have proved, Part. 1. cap. 5.. 2. and 3. Should
the Gospel also be frustrate of this? So as it can neither tell what, nor whom
to crave.

As for example: Some Parishes with us, do yield for Parsonage Tithes some
fifty chalders of victual, which we may value at five hundred pound sterling.
Such a Lord or Lord) forsooth) must be Parson by virtue of that Vile Act of
Annexation (as his Majesty terms it. Basilicon Doron.
) So Tithes are still made Inheritance, but by Gods Law, to Levites; by Man's,
to Lord and Laics. But what, and whom now shall the Lords Parson, the Leuite,
crave? Surely the Lord-Parson will (perhaps) give the Lords Parson a tenth part
of the Lords Tithes, and this he assigns him to be levied of such a tenth
part of his flock, as they may agree upon: and so, the less benefit, the more
credit; for he makes the poor Parson, half an High Priest; and gives him in
lieu of Decimam, Decimarum Decima^. And as his Lordship divides with him the
profits, so does he proportionally, his Flock: for he receives this tenth
part, but from the tenth part of his flock; whereas by Paul's doctrine, 1. Cor.
9. Galath. 6.
the Parson is to eat of the milk of his whole flock: And, He who is
Catechized must make him who Catechiseth partaker of all his goods: So such as
pay their Tithes to their Pastor, hold themselves more properly his Flock,
then such as pay him none: and yet all pay to the full. Is not this a Beggarly
Ministry, both in means and manners? If then we will have Tithes, why not as
the Lord ordained them? They will say by Positive and National Laws. But such
Laws a^ first gave them to holy Church, till this Vile Act came. If we will
have no Tithes, then what shall be the Medium, and whom shall we crave? or,
who has power to settle it?

. III.
CHrist neither did, nor said any thing against Tithes, as in that Tithing of
the Pharisie, of all he had, etc.]

Object. Neither was it a fault then, but the Ordinance of God: neither is it a
fault now, though not therefore a Necessity.

Answ. If once it was Gods Ordinance, it must still be so, till it be by a good
warrant removed. Yea, would not even the whole Ceremonial Law be yet in force,
if it were not by God himself removed?

. IV.
IT is most true, That seeing Christ has not brought in a new Maintenance, he
has not abrogated the old.]

Object. To make this argument good, it behooves to be understood of the same
office; in the same people, places, and all cases concurring.

Answ. It holds as well in the Genus as the Species: for so long as there is
a Priesthood upon earth, so long must it have a Maintenance: Ergo, either the
ol^, or a new. And that old Maintenance was no otherwise Leuies, but as Leui
was a Priest; and at a Priesthood long before him: Ergo, seeing that same
first Priesthood lives yet after Leui, why should it loose the old
Maintenance? So I say in this case, Christ did not only, not abrogate; but
could not so much as change the Maintenance, because his will to the contrary,
was figured, in, and by his Type Melchisedec. For though Christ changed the
Priesthood, yet he changed not the Maintenance: Why? Because he but changed
that only Priesthood of the Law: and Tithes were the Maintenance of
Melchisedees Priesthood before the Law; which Priesthood Christ here
perfecteth, not as he perfected and fulfilled the Law, by abrogating a great
many things of it; but, by restoring this Priesthood to his full perfection:
and so, would change nothing, but confirm all things, belonging to it at
first: and were not Tithes, one? Was Abraham so idle in gifting; Jacob so
superstitious in vowing; Paul so officious in applying Tithing, Dying, Living,
differently in Melchisedec and the Law, as we may yet wipe Tithing quite out of
our Text?

Ibidem.
NOw, one word in all the Gosp l, either plain text, or Consequence, against
Tithes Inheritance: if nothing against it. Then says Tertul. Quod non notat
Scriptura, negat. And to reply, Non notat Euangelium decimas dandas, ergo
negat. It follows not, seeing, some Scripture notes them: and so, Lex semel
lata, non deleta, semper obligat.]

Object. True, quibus lata, and quomodo.

Answ And quibus here, must be Sacerdotibus; not Leuiticis solis, but omnibus.
For by the Law of Tithes here, we meant their general extent, beginning from
Melchisedec downward, which we draw even from the Gospel also, as Cap. 4.
following.

. VII.
ANd so the Moral (Time) yet remains, A Sabbath, though not the same
Individual day from the Creation.]

Object. And why may we not also have still a Maintenance, though not the same
means, and quotum.

Answ. If ye admit of my ground, the same quotum kept in the Sabbath, will
bind the same quotum in maintenance. Still a seventh day, though not the same
seventh: so still a tenth, though not a Legal, Judicial, or Leuiticall tenth.
And we know the Apostles changed the Sabbath, but not the Maintenance?

In CHAP. II.
. II.
PAul forbear Tithes, because he would not be chargeable, 1. Corinthians. 9.12.
and that because he would not hinder the Gospell]

Object. How is that proved to be the cause?

Answ. It is the very Text it self.

Object. And though he would not be chargeable, but dispensed rather with his
right, yet should he not have declared what was his right? As he dispensed to
take any wages, but labored with his own hands; yet he spared not to tell
them, The labourer is worthy of his wages. Ergo, Though he dispensed with
Tithes, yet he might have told them that Tithes were his due.

Answ. First, consider, that Paul here is not teaching of purpose, the point
of Church-maintenance, nor never did, but only stuck to the first foundation
in Melchisedec, as Hebr. 7. But here, he only disputes this, that He and
Barnabas had as much interest in the matter of Maintenance, as other Apostles;
for which, he only presses the general analogies of the Leuiticall Law. But
in all this Treatise, I grow by degrees, which would be well observed. Again,
Wages, import no quote, till they be defined: and Numb. 18.31. the Tithes we
stand for, are called the Wages of the Levites. Then, a reason why you admit
the word Wages, and refuse the quote Tithes, being both in both Testaments. But
for example; say, That a Preacher should call to all, or some one of his flock
for Wages, Maintenance: Were he not fully answered with quota pars is yours, if
he could not answer it? Then let him yet urge Paul's best general, Give me a
part of all your goods: Still he is answered with quota pars? And in
satisfaction of Paul's general, he may tender unto him a general part of All,
and yet scarce prove one good meal; so the poor Leuite may have a long Lent,
with many fasting nights, and Paul literally (though not liberally) answered.
The poor Leuite thus loses Totum, for lacking his quotum. To have recourse
here to quotes by Stipulation for a sufficient Maintenance: first I answer,
where says Paul so? yea, where says any Scripture so? Secondly, You must as
well respect quo modo, as quotum: there is even a mystery in the Modus. So,
though you give double, and not AS God appointed, you mar all. The mystery
is this, That as the means were made sufficient, so the manner was most
sweet, in that mutual relation of Giving and Taking on both sides. He, must
teach all, and each: Baptize (...) and (...): Catechize all, and each: Gal.
6.6. He must (...), and (...), Watch and give account for their souls, Heb.
13.17. Comfort and pray for all, and each, Iam. 5.14. So, They again, must
give him, all, and each of them a part of their goods: and no one Judas bear
the bag for all. Each household must say, I have brought the Hallowed things
out of my house; and I have given it to the Levites: not to a Lord, to give the
Levites. This has God squared to Tithes: This could never be so perfectly
practiced on both sides, under the Law, as now, under the Gospel. This can no
wit supply, much less surpass.

In CHAP. III.
. I.
THe special of Tithes was from the beginning good till very near Paul's
Conversion* and therefore all his (general) dispute must end in Tithes, or some
other special.]

Object. Why a Special? there is no necessity in the world for it.

Answ. If Paul took from us a special Maintenance; must he not give special
for special? must he leave us a Black-patent never to be filled? Wages that
cannot be counted, cannot be craved.

Ibidem.
IF Paul had meant any alteration, then was he bound to a plainness: seeing
he says, I have kept back nothing, but have showed you all the counsel of
God.]

Object. Then should he have spoken plainly of Tithes, where he speaks of
Maintenance: but this he does not: Ergo, he meant not Tithes.

Answ. The Counsel of God here is to be understood, only of things de nouo:
not that Paul was to repeat plainly the whole Counsel of God, already
revealed, and of Nature, Moral. But remember still, Paul's plainness is yet a
coming, Chap. 4. part. 2.

In CHAP. V.
. IV.
MEchisedec tithed Abraham, Father both of Leui, and all his brethren: Brethren
(as is said) both by flesh and faith: Ergo, All still subject to Melchisedecs
Tithing. And such as see not this, are too big in flesh, too beggarly in
faith.]

Object. Quick: But is it also solid? It is but the Priesthoods that are
there compared, Melchisedecs with Leuies: Christ's with it of the Law. For Leui
in this is not the Type of Christ.

Answ. But these Priest-hoods are compared in the points of Blessing and
Tithing, peculiar to only Priests. And it Leui (in this) as you say, was no
Type of Christ; then Tithes in Leui were not Typical: if not Typical, not
Ceremonial: Ergo, ever Moral: (for their Judicials, meddled not with it.) But
the truth is, Melchisedec and Leui were both in all their doings here
recorded, very Types of Christ; but of diverse Orders, that is, Natures. And,
the Endless Order of Melchisedec, in Blessing and Tithing, is by Paul
transferred on Christ, as is there proved.

In CHAP. VI. Against the Title.
Perpetuity of Melchisedecs Priesthood, proved by only Tithing.]

Object. Not: But Greatness proved by Tithing and Blessing, verse. 4. and 7.
and Perpetuity in verse. 3. Without father, without mother, and as the Syriak,
Whose neither father nor mother are written in the Genealogies, etc.

Answ. And, is not Tithing in verse. 8. joined with Time, in their Dying and
Living.

CHAP. VI.
. II. Against the second Syllogism.
HE that takes Tithes and lives, is a perpetual Priest. Melchisedec takes
Tithes and lives. Ergo, etc.]

Object. The Argument seems not so, but thus: He that lives is greater then
he that dies. Thus in effect, Both Priests, Melchisedec and Aaron, but who
greatest? He that lives, He that took, He that blessed. Both Priests, is
taken pro confesso, or proved by David's testimony; not by taking of Tithes.

Answ. Seeing our point here is of only Time, and that you yield, He that
lives is the greater Priest then he that is dead, giving the prerogative to
the time present: Why place you the prerogative of Tithing and Blessing upon
the preterit time again? For in bonis, praesentiae quaeque semper optima: So
God calls himself, I am, still; though he both was, and shall be. Even so,
though it be true, that Melchisedec decimauit, Tithed, Blessed in the preterit,
yet that momentary praeterite in that one only Tithing, can have no
prerogative, over Aarons Present, and two thousand years standing: and how
shall he be a greater Priest that Took, then he that Takes? seeing you make
him that Lives greater then he that Dies? these cannot both hold. Neither can
you imagine how to make him a Priest for ever, by this text, unless he
perform for ever, such points as are in this text recorded proper to his
Priesthood: and these are only Blessing and Tithing. To divide these, I
think verily it goes against all the course of these texts. But I still
submit my self, and more of this afterward. And albeit David's Prophecy
proved him a Priest yet Paul here proves even the performance of that
Prophecy, from two proprieties of all Priesthood, Blessing and Tithing;
competent to no Calling, but Priesthood, and so, Reciproke with all
Priesthood, else, how should we more have applied that Prophecy, then Moses
History, Genesis 14. if Paul had been silent?

CHAP. VI.
. III.
ABraham typed all his posterity; the seed of his faith, as well as the seed
of his flesh.]

Object. True: in matter of Justifying; not in this. In this he but
represents his son Leui by the flesh, with whom only the comparison is
institute.

Answ. Even in both. The text says, verse. 4. Abraham the Patriarch gave him a
tenth: and verse 6. He Tithed Abraham, and Blessed him, having the Promises:
and verse. 9. He Tithed also Leui (...), the Tithe-taker, not as having the
Promises (...). Not that I mean, Leui belonged no way to the Promise; God
forbid, but that (...) and (...) are here the proper correlates, and not (...)
and (...). Then let us weaue all these passages in one web of truth. The
Woafe goes thus disioyned, in Tithing the Patriarch; and Blessing him that had
the Promises: but the perfect web must be thus, Melchisedec both Tithed and
Blessed, the Patriarch having the Promises. In the second verse, He first
Blessed, then Tithed: for that is the right Order, first to give them
Spiritual food, before you exact their Carnal. A sore check to such
Sacrilegious, both Levites, as do not, and Laickes as cannot, give the milk
of the Word, and yet will devour the milk of Gods Church, appointed to that
end.

In the fourth verse, Tithing comes, without (naming) Blessing. And verse. 6.
Tithing goes before Blessing. Verse 8. Tithing again, alone: and also verse.
9. Then (say I) what more reason is there here to separate Tithing from the
Patriarch and the Promises, then to separate Blessing, seeing all three are so
syllogistically wouen and interlaced?

Or shall we divide Abraham's Patriarchship from his Promises, and bind the
first to his Flesh, the second to his seed by Faith? But Paul tells us
plainly, That God made Abraham a Father of many Nations: Romans 4.
and in the verse preceding, That the Promise might be firm to his whole seed,
not only the seed of the Law, but also to ohe seed of Faith. Then seeing his
Fathership reaches even to all Nations; we know, the Nations came not all of
Abraham's flesh. Ergo, They must leap with Lazarus in his bosom, by Faith.
Ergo, Both Flesh and Faith; Law and Gospel; Leuite and Laicke; Peace and
Wars, were here Blessed and Tithed in their Father Abraham, by that Priest
for ever, Melchisedec. If then, we be justified with Pavl by Faith, in the word
and work Blessing; why not also, with James, by works, as witnesses, in the
word Tithing?

But to clear his Fathership better to whom it belongs. Neither are they all
children, because they are the seed of Abraham, etc. Romans 9.7.
That is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of
God; but the children of the Promise, are counted for the seed. Here is
Abraham's Fathership tied only to his Faith in the Promise, and divided from
his flesh. But here (say you) he represents but Leui his son by the flesh,
with whom (Only) the comparison is instituted] First (as is said) not only
flesh: for then, the only Flesh had here been blessed in Abraham: and so
Melchisedec, not a Perpetual, but a Carnal type of Christ. Secondly, Though
it had been only the Flesh, yet not only Leui: for the reason of Leuies
being Tithed here, is as true of all the Tribes, as of Leui: for all were
alike in Abraham's loins, as Leui: and if we frame not the Proposition
general, thus, All that were then in Abraham's loins, were tithed in Abraham;
Leui can no more come under the Assumption then the rest. The cause then, why
Leui only here is specified, was, that his case was harder to include, being
Tithe-taker, then his brethren, payers: and to subject him, being a Priest, to
the Priesthood of Melchisedec: as at length is noted. Cap 7.. 5. As to the
comparisons, remember there be two; one of Melch. with Leui, and this stands
wholly in dissimilibus, and so all removed from Christ, the Verity of them
both: the other, of Melchisedec and Christ both of one Order, and so, all
things spoken of Melchisedec in the fifth eleven verse. are transferred to
Christ, verse. 13.14. etc. and more then an illustrating comparison, it is a
demonstratiue conclusion, a Typo ad Veritatem; then which, no Scripture
yields more frequent or forcible.

CHAP. VI.
. V.
THe Verbes used in both the Types: as (...) in the present time, of Leui,
notwithstanding they were dead and gone. etc.]

Object. Not yet Leui dead and gone: for in the Apostles days diverse Priests
were still among the Jews.

Answ. How I understand this, is sufficiently set down, Cap. 6.. 6. Dead and
gone they were even then in Law, though not yet buried; as all the rest of
their Ceremonies. And if Paul had not held them then for dead, He had not
written this Epistle, thrusting out Leui in this whole seventh Chapter, and
reviving the Priesthood of Melchisedec, and Chap. 8.13. proclaiming both
Priesthood and Tabernacle to be finished, (...). In that he says a new
(Testament) he has abrogate the old: now that which is disanulled and waxed
old, is ready to vanish away.

Ibidem S. V.
THerefore must (...) be supposed in praesenti, to Melchisedec.]

Object. Wherefore must it? No nec^ssitie in Grammar will crave it. And the
reason you subioyne, seems not of consequence, to wit (Seeing he presently
lives) since Tithing now (...) not the point the Apost. urges, but being
greater. Also, the verb which the Apostle himself subioyneth, is not a
present, but a preterit (...) and (...); which testifies clearly, if he had
expressed the verb which falls to be repeated to (...), he had expressed it
in the same preterit time, and not in the present. Whereof this also may be a
witness, that verse. 9. in one and the same clause speaking of Leuies Tithing,
he uses the present participle (...): and speaking of Melchisedec, he uses
the foresaid preterit, (...): as though he would say, He (Leui) that now
takes Tithes, was then Tithed by Melchisedec.

Answ. This argument is but Grammatical, and so, but probable: the Conclusion
must rest upon the point of Divinity. And Si quae non prosint singula; iuncta
invent. Yet my Grammer-grippe was thus grounded, that in one and the same
enuntiation, Grammarians usually put all in the same Case, Number, and Times:
and seeing here, verse. 8. Paul has two words (and so all) in the present time
of Melchisedec, I held it good Grammar, that those that were subaudite, in the
same verse, should be of the same times too: specially seeing the truth holds
alike in both. In sum, thus: Aaron dying, Blesses, Titheth: Melchisedec
Living Blesses, Titheth. (...) then, Here, is not referred to the day of
Paul's writing this, but, to the Law and time of it: and so the preterit verbs
had marred nothing in Aaron, if it had pleased the Apost^e to use them; nor yet
the present verbes applied to Melchisedec.

Where you say the Apostles self subioyneth preterit verbs; that is, but in
the 6. and 9. verse. in the former, proving Melchisedec a greater Priest then
Leui, because he Blessed and Tithed a greater person then did Leui: and in the
latter verse to prove, that even Leui himself was then Tithed by Melchisedec.
But here verse. 8. where his greatness is only proved from Perpetuity in
Dying Tithing, and Living Tithing, here (I say) Paul uses only verbes of the
present time; for perpetual things must be ever present. So Paul was
Grammatical enough in both. Now, to his Theology.

Albeit those preterit verbes, were only proper for Melchisedec the Type, who
only once Tithed Abraham; yet, seeing these verbes de praesenti (...), are
only perfectly true of Christ the Verity; they must (I say) bind Tithing in
praesenti upon Christ. If not so, I would feign see clearly out of this 8.
verse. how Melchisedec has any prerogative above Leui in these notes Dying and
Living, joined with Tithing: for if we do bind all these things upon the
only Type, then we lose the Verity, Christ: and as for the Types, Leui (as
is said) Tithing two thousand years, surpasses that Melchisedecs one days
Tithing in the prerogative of time. Further, in v^rtue of Christ the Verity,
though not yet then in the flesh, yet may he be said even then in Melchisedec
his Type and Attorney, to have Tithed Abraham; and by his Type Leui, to Tithe
under the Law; as now, when he is gone up to the Father, to Tithe under the
Gospel (as is said) Chap. 6.. 10. So Tithing and Blessing are ever in Christ
de praesenti, how the particular practices in his Types pass de praeterito.
And so is he in all things (...). And David's Prophecy proves all these true,
even of his Priesthood. For the preterit, He has sworn. For the Future, And
will not repent. And f^r the present, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the
Order of Melchisedec. So Christ before his Incarnation, was, now is, and ever
shall be, a Priest: and therefore, all accessorie to that Priesthood, (though
not Eiusdem Ordinis, and Ordinationis) must Bless and Tithe: even as did the
Inferior Levites, who were not properly Sacerdotes, yet ex Sacerdotio Leuitico.

But verse. 13. (as is said in the Treatise) clears all. (...): I pray, how
will you exclu e Tithing from (...), seeing it is relative of all these things
urged in the whole preceding verses? I confess, there be different degrees of
the points compared; and Blessing, is above Tithing, but the one must not
thrust out the other, Hac oportet facere, and illa non omittere: yea, Tithing
is the very Handmaid of Blessing: for none may Bless as Gods Minister, but
he may also Tithe for his Maintenance. So, though Tithing had been out here,
it had come in! therefore seeing it is in, and (in the proof of time) only it
in, I pray put it not out.

In CHAP. VIII.
. I.
ONce Melchisedec got Tithes: and this Once is obligatorie of the posterity.]

Object. It was not so much as obligatorie in these same persons to do the
like; how then can it be obligatory of the posterity? Abraham is not obliged
here, to pay any more Tithes at any time after; why then his posterity, to
pay, ever and yearly?

Answ. Because (as is there said) Melchisedec and Abraham are Types here of
things ever to be performed under the Gospel specially. And things daily to be
done, have in their Types but one representation; and yet that Once, is Ever,
in their Verities: So we noted, that all things of this nature, are ever true
in praesenti, in Christ; He Lives, Blesses, Intercedeth, Titheth, etc. But
such typical actions as must be daily repeated in the Types, and so, by one
only action of the Verity, wiped away: there, plurality in the Types,
argues singularity in the Verity: and so, are ever true in the Types (for
their time) in praesenti: but in the Verity, only perpetual in praeterito. As
Aaron daily sacrificed, not, Christ daily sacrifices: and so forth in the
like. The diligent disgesting of what is there written, would (I think)
answer all such doubts.

In CHAP. VIII.
. II.
Whose doings, tho they passed in the Praerogatiue of (...); and (...),
without Law or like example: yet no man will deny, that this one action, was a
Law for ever.

Object. Yea, who will not deny that it can be a Law, for ever? Seeing it is
without Law; how can it pass as a Law? Seeing, without example, how pass for
example?

Answ. Nothing can be said to pass for a Law, and example, but what is without
preceding Law and example. And no examples pass for Laws, but such are
first, from (...) and (...) Authors. Secondly, In things imitable by the
posterity. Of both these was this meeting of Melchisedec and Abraham, and all
the actions recorded between them.

Object. You subioyne this for the reason, Because their action was powerful
in the spirit; and so, far above Law.] But I say, how above Law? By, or
beside Law, I grant: and therefore, not a Law.

Answ. My words are, So far above Law, as this one action proved a Law for
ever.] As indeed, all things of the Promis, have the prerogative above things
of the only Law: And the Law was even founded upon this action, not this on
the Law. And tho, the Law had never come, yet this action had obliged all the
se^d of Abraham, to this mayntenance for Gods Ministry. God must ever even
from Melchisedec this Type, have a Visible Blessing and Tithing Ministry: and
Abraham must ever have a seed, Gods Church, to be Blessed and Tithed.

Ibidem.. IV.
Tithes, either Moral or Ceremoniall]

Object. Why? is there not a Third member of the division omitted? To wit,
Civil, peculiar to that people. Neither did Princes accept it, of Necessity,
but followed it by Imitation.

Answ. There be indeed three sorts of Jewish Laws. But that Third, medleth not
with the Priesthood: And seeing both the Moral and Ceremonial take hold of
Tithes, I therefore justly divided Tithes between them. And if the Judicial
Law, had also had a third and Civil Tithing, yet, the very title of my book,
tyeth me only to a Sacred subject, which no Civil tything can be. As for
Princes, If Tithes be Moral, who dare abrogate them? and if Ceremonial, who
dare Imitate them? Ergo, Princes worthily, were imitators ex Necessitate, not
Arbitrio, of Gods Ordinances.

Ibidem.. VI.
Object. Now these whom ye call Patro-latrons, (that is) laye-Patrons: If they
intromet not with Tithes, but Present men to trial, why should ye so account
of them? It seems themselves have given the Tithes, reserving the power of
Presentation: why should the Condition be separate from the benefit.

Answ. Remember, I did not undertake to dispute this question from humane
practice, but from Divine precept. And so, I still say, God, and not they, gave
us Tithes for maintenance of his Ministry, and so their Patronage is of the
by: I pray you, give any example or Law for this in Scripture. If you but
imitate Scripture, yet keep the general course of Scripture in disposing the
means for Gods Ministry. God, before the Law had first an extraordinary
Ministry for his own special worship in the first borne of the Familyes
Again before the Law, they were presently orderly (...) in Melchisedec: He
was Gods Priest, He took Gods portion, Tithes. Thirdly under the Law, God also
reserved the Calling resumed the same Maintenance, and presented, himself the
Person, Leui: all which being stablished, the Person only, brought on the
Calling, and the calling the maintenance. Here God was in all, both Pattern,
and Patron. But now the case is altered, for the Lay-Lord Patron, must have a
hand both in his Calling and Maintenance. In his Calling, because (howsoever he
have before this, a general investiture* as apt (at least) to Preach,) yet this
Lord, has power to design him Pastor of such a peculiar flock and Parish,
unless the Clergy pronounce him incapable of the Ministry wholly. Yet who
knows not, but many reasons may debar a Minister some Parishes, tho not
from all? all gifts not fitting all places. In Maintenance, he gives him the
Tenth of Tenthes (as said is sup. page 3.) And whereas many times the Patron
proves Popish, he provides us just such Preachers; either such as can do
nothing tho they would, or play the Bon-compaion, if they could. Who has not
seen this? ut as for your If they intromet not with Tithes, I would feign know
such (full) Lay-Patrons: sure, it is not, or else, they cannot.

Ibidem.. VII.
ABraham, in paying Tithes to Melchisedec, was a type of all his seed: of his
flesh, and of his faith.]

Object. The type is not so institute here, nor so explicate; therefore how can
it be so extended?

Answ. Is not this a mutual typical action (as there is proved) between
Melchisedec and Abraham? Is he not propounded as Type of his posterity, verse.
4. under the name of Tithing even a Patriarch? Is he not expl ca e for such a
Type in verse. 9, where Leui is brought in from Abraham's loins; Do not the
Promises in Abraham make all Nations his sons? Therefore it is no further
extended, then Paul intended. Paul calls neither Melchisedec nor Abraham by
name of Type; yet he proves both to imbring and bind other persons after
coming to the performance of things by them then represented; Ergo re apse,
Tipes.

Ibidem.. VIII.
THings paying Tithes, Tithes are either Praediales, or Personales.]

Object. Where are these found?

Answ They be as vocabula artis, now common to all writers: but their
foundation is from Scripture precept, practice, and Analogy. But more
afterward.

Object. Then these Tithes here paid, being all of Spoils, to Melchisedec,
can prove no Tithes but of spoils: and so not praediales.

Answ. Because this doubt is more amply urged by M. Seldom, we refer it to
the own place.

In CHAP. VIII.
. XIII.
WHere many would tie Tithes to common works, as building of Churches, Streets,
Hospitals: No such condition in the gift to Leui: For, for the poor was
appointed a several Tithing every third year, under the Law: and the Apostles
ordinance of weekly collection, etc clears that. Yet Tithes might be, though
not, must be, so employed.]

Object. This seems a contradiction: to be ordained for the Ministry; and
may be otherwise employed: for that were, to employ them otherwise then God
has ordained.

Answ. You see, I spoke that but comparate, better so employed then as they are
now. And if they should be so employed, let it come by Leui, not man's Law: For
being once his, he may, (nay in equity he must) support King and Country, and
all charitable works.

In CHAP. IX.
. I.
With Porters, Musicians, etc.]

Object. Shall these then be Churchmen? or are Musicians counted among Paul's
officers? or if not counted, shall they have Tithes Inhiritance?

Answ. They may be all very well Churchmen. And as to Musicians or Porters, De
Minist. Eccles. gradi. c.
I distinguish with Sarauia, There is Minister Euangelij, and Minister
Ecclesiae: the first, be only such as Paul points out, Ephesians. 4.11. having
power of public ministration of the Word and Sacraments. The second, may
comprehend all such as in all ages may be found necessary for the well being
of the Church, and things concerning it; whereof Paul for his time numbreth
Deacons, Widows, and the like. Now, that Musicians are so far necessary, we
have Christ's example in singing Psalms publicly after the Supper: we have
the perpetual practice of al Christian Churches ever since, except where no
fingers can be had. The like of Porters, necessary in Nature it self: also
Beadels, and the like. Is it not as meet then, that Leuies portion (being
sufficient) maintain such as must attend and assist him; as to give Laics the
Tithes, and ouercharge the Church with a new provision for both Leui and his
substitute servants? May not Musicians be so far a Seed for singing Psalms in
the Church, as other schools are held Semina religionis, and as Divinity
Colleges, be held Semina Ministeris; such as were Filii Prophetarum, under the
Law? 2. King. 2.3, 5. But all these I noted, not to give a Church-politie of
mine own, but to show, how Leuies portion, though fully levied by him, had
vents enowe to disperse it self; being well used. And though it be in some
sense, and of some Churches truly said, Ecclesia peperit diuitias and filia
deuorauit matrem; yet I see no reason why Laics should devour both Matrem and
Filiam.

And so much (Reader) for satisfaction to those doubts moved by this religious
gentleman: whose pains argue his sincerity; and his fair dealing, his
charity: God grant all men the same spirit, that aspire to clear the truth.

Next comes the second part of our Appendix, arising from doubts I meet with
in that Noble and Learned Scaligers Diatribe de Decimis; next, in M. Ioh.
Seldens History of Tithes.

SCALIGER and SELDOM, jointly.
THat learned Noble, Scaliger, does far otherwise divide Tithes, and also
apply them then I have done part 1. Cap. 3.. 1. The same does Mr. Seldom also.
But in their particular applications, the one again as far differs from
the other; and I from both.

Let no man think I do glory, in differing from these men. no, I only (for
the Readers use, and ease) in simplicity yield my reasons, why I now think, as
at first I wrote.

We all agree then in the general of a Dichotomie; but not all from the same
grounds. I mike two Tithes, one paid by Israel, an other by Leui: induced by
the diverse Natures of the paiers, ever so divided in Scripture; to wit, the
whole Eleven Tribes under the name of Israel, as payers; and the only Leuits
as Receivers, for my first member: and Leui, the Receiver in the first, as
paier in the second. They divide them only, in a first and second Tithing, as
Scaliger alleges, Tithes (says he) are only considered, In Diatriba. pa.
69. lin. 4. edit Paris. M.DC.X.M. Seldom cap. 2. 1. ad sin.
as they are paid by the laborers, not by the Leuits.] But seeing himself (and
all) find this other Tithe paid by Leui, clear by Scripture; and seeing his
own Titie goes De decimis in Lege Dei, why must they be only considered in
the Labourer? and not rather in their l^rgest extent as Gods Law lays them
open Otherwise, his Title, yea, his whole Diatriba, should have said, De
decimis a solo colono pendendis, and not generally, In lege Dei; seeing himself
has found one Decima in Lege Dei, quam non pendebant coloni. Therefore the
ground of my first Dithotomie, is good in Scripture. This for the general.

In particular, they both, bind up my fourefold Tithing, in two: but not both
after one manner: Scaliger, will have my third Tithe, for the poor, to be all
one with the first, for the Leuits. And Seldom, will have it all one with the
second, for the Feasts. But as I have herein Seldom against Scaliger, so (I
hope) Scripture against both. First then with Scaliger, who thus deduceth the
matter.

Scal. page 63. lin. 13.
The first fruits, (says he) and offerings being paid, and given to the Priests
out of the whole bulk of their increase, then of that which remained, was
given the Tenth to the Leuits. Number. 18.21.25.26.27.28. This was called (...)
Tob. 1.7. Of which tenth the Leuits gave a tenth to the Priests.]

This is indeed the first Tithe which only, is called Inheritance, and
acknowledged, for the first by all But it seems to me, there has b^n much
(I dare not say, mistaking in so great a man, but at least) misprinting in this
Edition after his death, when I consider his places brought for proof hereof,
both from Canonical Scripture, and Apoc^ryphe. From Canonical, having quoted
Number. 18.21. (which truly sets down the first and only these first Tithes
inheritance;) he joins with it, verse 25.26.27.28. Which, are merely for
institution of Decima decimarum, paid again by Leui out of that first Tenth,
to Aaron. The simplest eyes will discern this by the Text. From Apocryphe, he
quoteth Tob. 1.7. speaking only of Tithes paid by himself to the sons of
Aaron. Now all these go directly against Scaligers own grounds, who will have
all Tithes (and therefore, this first Tithe most of all) only considered, as
they are paid by the Laity or Laborers, to the inferior Levites only:
whereas Tenthes of Tithes were not paid by the Laics, but by Levites to
Aaron: and also these first Tithes in Tob. to the Priests; Seld. cap. 1.. 2.
lin. 6.
Whereas both Scaliger and Seldom will not have the Priests to receive any
Tithes immediately from the Laics. Compare (Reader) consider, and then conclude.

Next, page 64. lin. 7. Scaliger says, Hactenus detraximus primum Therumam
maiorem de corpore fructuum, deinde de residuo decimam secundam: Therumam
quidem Sacerdotibus, decimam vero Leuitis.]

Now this Decimam secundam, should have been Primam, otherwise, it is both
against Scripture, and Scaligers own account too: for in the very next line he
calls them, (and rightly) Theruma magna, and Decima prima. And Decima secunda
is immediately set down in his next words, De illis (to wit, that remained
after the first Tithe) rursus altera decima deducebatur, quam vocabant, (...),
Tob. 1.7. de qua, Deuteronomy. 14.22* 23. Leuit. 27.30, 31, 32, 33. Hanc (secundam)
decimam cum prima confundunt multi, etc. And so distinguishes (truly)
between the first and second Tithe, so that there must be some mistaking, or
(as I think) misprinting here. And yet, his places quoted here for Decima
secunda, from Deuteronomy and Leuit. are not proper for the purpose: for that 22.
verse. of Deuteronomy. is understood of the first Tithe Inheritance for the Levites
only; and the 23. verse. of the second Tithe for the Feasts; as the 28. verse.
of the third Tithes for the poor: So this only Chap. of Deuteronomy. of all the
Scripture, has only gathered in one, the whole three so^ts of Tithes paid by
Israel, to whatsoever ends or uses: only Decima decimarum paid by Leui, being
here omitted, and supplied in only one place, Number. 18.25. etc. all this is
cleared in our first Part, Chap. 3.. 1, 2, 3.

As to Leuit. 27.30. Also all the Tithe of the Land, both Of the seed of the
ground, and Of the fruit of the trees is the Lords.]

It goes harsh to a strict this verse to the only second Tithe, as Scaliger
here brings it. For all Tithes, both the first, and the tenth of Tithes,
were also holy unto the Lord, and c^mprehended in this verse. As for the next
v^rse, touchi^g the Redemption of Tithes, by adding the fifth part, which
Scalig^r and Seldom, Scal page 65. lin. 3.
from the Rabbis, apply only to the redemption of this second Tithe for the
Feasts: yet (I say) it must not limit that (All the Tithes) in the former verse.
to only this second Tithe. Seld. ca. 2. 11
And where Mr. Seldom out of Iarchi appl eth this Redemption to all those
second Tithes, which are commanded to be exchanged in money for the longnesse
of the journey, Deuteronomy. 14 I see no such either coherence, or analogy from
Scripture, nor in the best Interpreters. And seei^g we must in many things
renounce the Rabbin, so here, if their alleged practices, be not clear in
the Precept, they must be of the By. For in such cases, Non exemplis, sed
legibus viuendum: Humane practice, must not encroach upon Divine Precept, but
conform it self to it.

Scal. page 65. 2 medio.
Aga ne, Primam enim decimam] That the First Tithe (says Scal:) was accustomed
to be brought up by the laborers to Jerusalem, to the chambers of the Temple,
we have a clear place. 2. Chro. 31 5, 6, 11, 12.] And at the end of the page,
he cites again, Tob 1.7. to prove it.] But (as we at first said in our
Treatise) this is both without precept, and impossible: yea, dissonant from
Scaliger himself, as before is noted. For albeit diverse sorts came by command
to Jerusalem, as the second Tithe, and Decimae decimarum, yet it is hard to tie
all, of all sorts, to the Temple, out of this place, 2. Chron. Again, why
shall this place be restrain^d to the only first Tithe; seeing in the verses
following till the 20. Aaron, Priests, and the Levites, are made alike
partakers of those heaps of Tithes laid up in these chambers? Whereas Scaliger
and Seldom affirm, that Priests had no Tithes from the laborers; but only a
tenth of the Tithe from the Levites. And if this first Tithe was (as they hold)
only due to inferior Levites, why yet must they be carried (All) to
Jerusalem, seeing the tenth man of these Levites, abode not at Jerusalem? but
came and returned by their courses. And seeing Scaliger affirms, page 64.
lin. 1. That the Levites might dispose of their Tithe, in all places (even)
without Jerusalem; and therein differed from the second Tithe, that must be
carried, and eaten at Jerusalem; Why (say I) must this first Tithe be also
carried to Jerusalem?

Now as for that other place, Tob. 1.7. (...), To the sons of Leui, as
Scaliger reads it, page 66.67.] First, It is yet very hard, to astrict it, to
the inferior Levites only; seeing all Priests were also Leuies sons.
Neither is ever (that I know) Sons of Leui; Tribe of Leui, or The Levites,
restrained in Scripture, to the only Inferior Levites: without limitation of
some circumstances clear by the Text. The most general grounds we shall
examine, till others bring better. First, it is the custom of Scripture, to
entitle alike, all the children of the twelve Patriarchs to their Fathers. And
touching Leui in particular, Number. 1.47. etc. Levites, and Tribe of Leui,
comprehend all: But cap. 3.6. The Tribe of Leui, is only meant of the
Inferior Levites: because Aaron and his sons were taken up for the Priests
office before, Exodus 28.3. and here, the Levites are given (verse. 9.) to Aaron
and his sons, who were also Levites: here is a clear limiting circumstance.
The like, Number. 8. and 18.2.6. But Number. 26.57. The number of the Levites
extends to Priests and all: verse. 58. Families of Leui, to Priests and all,
to Aaron himself. But as to Tob. 1. (which is by Scaliger brought, to prove
the first Tithe to be carried to Jerusalem) I can find neither Vatabl.
Francos: Basil: Compl. Steph. ex Pagnino: old Latini: English trans. All,
read. (...).
Greek nor Latin, old or new Translation, that reads (...), save only the
Roman Greek: all the rest, (...): and of the two Hebrews, one reads (...),
the other (...), but both condemned by all, so not to be trusted. And if,
(...), then not to only Inferior Levites; for Aarons sons were all Priests.

But if by [Leuites] they understand only the Inferiors to be the Leauiers,
admitting also the Priests to be interessed in Tithes Inheritance with them; I
move no dispute: for as they were Inferior, so, both in Calling and
Maintenance, they meddled with inferior services: which also gave occasion for
choosing of Deacons under the Gospel. Act. 6.3. But if Seldens meaning be, M.
Seld. c. 2.. 2. and Ren. page 454. ad init.
wholly to frustrate the Priests of any portion in Tithes Inh ritance; Then,
consider what was said of this, part. 7. cap. 5.. 2. adding, from Nehem. 11.
how they brought by lot but one man of ten to dwell at Jerusalem, the nine
parts living always abroad in their Cities: Seeing then, only the tenth man
stayed at Jerusalem, and that Tithes were their Inheritance, why should this
Inheritance be all carried up, and so nine parts again down, (like
Post-wages) according as they came and went by their courses.

Leuite then, Number 18. from verse. 20, to 25. having no clear limitation nor
distinction in the text, must include the whole Tribe, in their gift to Tithes.
Verse. 20. He first debarreth Aarons Inheritance with Israel: verse. 21, and 24.
are (...), Causals, as all translate For, For (says he) I have given the
children of Leui (even Aaron, and all) another Inheritance, All the tenth of
Israel. Therefore, seeing one and the same reason debarred all (by expr^sse
name here) from that Civil inheritance; the same reason (that is, this Sacred
inheritance) must be alike, one, and the same, to all. And (I pray you) mark
the course and coherence of these texts; Thou Aaron shall have no (Civil)
Inheritance in Isra^l, verse 20. For, verse 21. I have given the children of
Leui, all the tenth of Israel What was this to Aaron, that He must want his
Inheritance, because the only inferior Levites had got an Inheritance,
unless Aaron go as a child of Leui, in that reason? And Joseph is plain,
That Tithes were given for Levites, Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 4. C. Engl. and in Vita
Ios.
and Priest, and Tribe, Neither took I Tithes that were due to me as Priest,
from such as brought me them. If men apply these to decimarum decimae, first,
Joseph was not now at Jerusalem, whither these Tithes must been brought.
Secondly, Joseph was no High Priest. Thirdly, I never read those Tithes under
one single name, but still, Tenthes of Tithes. Otherwise, the Priests had no
Tithes Inheritance at all in Israel. For their Decimarum decimae were not
Tithes of Israel, but of Leui; and Leui in these accounts, is no more an
Israelite. Indeed, the Materia prima of both, is one, to wit, the Tenth of
Israel g uen to Leui, whereof they again gave the other tenth; but in Person,
Place, and End, they wholly differ: and in these only differences stands the
true difinition, of what is M ral or Ceremonial; Perpetual or Temporal in them.
Then the text gives us those two Syllogismes: first, All Tithes inheritance,
are paid by Israel to Leui. ver. 21.24 Tenth of Tithes are not paid by Israel
to Leui (but by Levy to Aaron. 26.) Ergo, Tenth of Tithes are not
Tithes-inheritance.


Again, The children of Leui, had this inheritance given them: All Priest,
were the children of Leui. Ergo, All Priests had this Inheritance given them.
And for confirmation, Deuteronomy. 18.1.


The Priests of the Leuits, and all the Tribe of Leui, shall have no part nor
inheritance with Israel, but shall eat of the offerings of the Lord made by
fire, and his inheritance. And Ezech: 44, 28. The Priesthood is their
Inheritance. And Iosu: 13.14. Only to the Tribe of Leui, gave he no
inheritance. Ergo, as the whole Tribe was frustrate, so the whole Tribe was
supplied by this new inheritance, Tithes. But if we distinguish not according
to other Scriptures, those Offerings, from the proper Inheritance, we shall
confound all: for many oblations might the Priests and their males only, eat
of, and no inferior Leuit: some, might not remain uneaten till to morrow; but
all, tied to the Temple only, and Jerusalem. So such Priests (to wit, nine for
one) as lived dispersed, could not live by those oblations: So those oblations,
were not their inheritance. They must have no inheritance with, or among Israel
(says the text:) yet must they live mixed with, and among Israel; therefore
their proper Inheritance must run dispersed with and among Israel; and not
confined to so small a part of Israel, as only Jerusalem. But says not Paul
plainly, Heb. 7. The sons of Leui receiving the Priesthood, have a command,
to Tithe the people? Is not here the command of Tithing directly given to the
sons Priests, and to take from the people. Ergo, Tithes are inheritance to
Priests as well as Levites. And yet Master Seldom, Reuiew, pa: 454. in it
would prove from this same place of Paul, that Priests were not partners in
these first Tithes.

But what if this decima decimarum were not properly and primo due to the
Priests, as Mr. Seldom seems to avouch; but to the high Priest. The text bids
directly, give it to Aaron the high Priest. Numb: 18.26* 28. The beginning of
the Chap: from ver. 8. to 20. he ioineth ever Aarons sons with himself, as
partners of all the oblations of the other Tribes: but in this offering of
decima decimarum* we read, no such compartnership: not that I doubt but the
sons of Aaron, this Ceremony being performed, might thereafter partake in,
and by him, of this offering; but the reason and Analogy of this, (in my
judgment) is, That as all the Tribes having Barn and wine press, must pay
first, that first Tith inheritance to the tribe of Leui, before they durst put
hand in their nine parts remaining; so, the Tribe of Leui, must out of his
inheritance give a tenth also, answering his Barnes and Wine-presses: But to
exempt all Priests from this, were first, to exempt the best, (though not the
greatest) part of that Tribe^, from acknowledging God by an Offering, as did
the rest. Secondly, It gives Leui a prerogative above all the rest of the
Tribes, void both of precept and reason.

The Earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof: So the possessors of it,
acknowledge God by giving their Tithes; Tithes, are yet a degree more holy to
the Lord, being made the general Inheritance of his Ministers, and Leuits:
but, Their Tenths again, holiest of all* proceeding from an holy Person the
Tribe of Leui; out of Holy Barnes and wine-presses, the Tithes; to holiest
persons, the Highpriests; at only holy Place, the Temple. Now, if it be
asked, how Aaron shall pass here, who is still the Receiver? I answer, Vltra
Summum, Nihil; And as Aaron had that transcendent power, only he to offer that
yearly expiatory sacrifice for Prince, people and himself too: so, by the same
power, might he, receive in name of God, the offerings of all subordinat to
him; and for them and himself (...), fulfill and perfect all those points in
his own person. And so, albeit the other Priests (all those points being duly
performed) might eat and partake of this Offering, in the prerogative of
Priesthood and Sonne-ship of Aaron, yet, prima instantia, and in mounting the
scale of this precept, they are but Offerers, not Receivers.

You see (Reader) how loath we are to loose our interest in Tithes even from
the Law: but remember still, the law is neither our whole, nor sole ground.
Then let me ask, Who gave Tithes to Melchis dec? Abraham What calling was he
o^ here? Secular or Ecclesiastic? M. Seldom says, Both Abraham and Jacob,
must be Priests also, when they paid Tithes,] True: He was; but not in the
propriety of this action; M. Seldom cap. 1. 2. ad sin.
but only as considered apart: just like (...), and (...) in the Categories,
that in climbing, are but Species, and coming down, Genera: yet not so full
as so neither; this example fitteth better the subord nate Priests of the Law,
all of one Order, of one Nature: But Abraham and Melchisedec were never of one
Order of Priesthood: so, though Abraham in one respect a Priest, paid Tithes;
yet here, as Priest, he paid none. At this time, he was not so much as a
Priest in priuilegiis primogeniturae, b^ing the tenth in Linea recta from Sem,
(now Melchisedec:) and so he paid a tenth as a mere secular sprigge of Sems
root. For in this Priesthood by Primogeniture, was neither Order, Ordination,
n^r Subordination, Abraham then here went for a Secular, a Prince, a Patriarch:
having the Promises, Blessed, and Tithed; but not Blessing or Tithing. Next I
ask, whether this solemn and most ancient action between Melchisedec and
Abraham, should direct the after coming Law in the like generals; or if that
perishing Law should rectify this euerstanding action? doubtless, we say, the
former. Then, seeing even this Priest of God, took Tithes even of Abraham the
Father, and in his loins, of all his seed; why shall the Priests under the
Law be debarred from Tithes coming from Seculares? Here then, we have the
Priest, the first proprietar. The Levites therefore under the Law, were but as
the Priests servants in leaving; not the sole owners, in enioyning. And so
much for the first sort of Tithes, whether they went all to Jerusalem, as Scal.
affirms; or were due to only inferior Levites as I take M. Seldom to say.

Of the second sort of Tithes, for the Feasts, we have no question with
Scaliger, therefore we follow him to the third sort.

Scal. Seguitur apud Tobiam.] It follows in Tob. (...) I gave the 3. Tith, to
whom it was meet.] He calls it a third, which is either to be called. Of the
third year. For (says he) it cannot be called a Third which is one with the
First, Scal. page 67. post med: and 68. ad med:
] and again. pa: 68. So, (says Scal:) This Tith in the 1, 2, 4. and 5.
years, was called prima decima; but in years 3. and 6. was called The poores
Tithes, etc. For in the 7. year was no laboring, and so, no Tithing.]

I answer, Why not both a Third Tith; and of the Third year. The Scripture
gives us the year; and why should Scal: cite Tobie for proof of his first
and second Tithes, and disclaim him in his third Tithes, all in one verse?
Again, what proof brings he to make the first and second Tith both one, in
the third and sixth years, and to divide them again in the first, second and
fifth years? For seeing Scal: will have them (as they are Levites portion) the
first, third, and fifth years, all carried up to Jerusalem; how lived the
poor then all these years? And seeing he will have them for the poor these
other two years, (here M. Seldom pleads for me.) How should the Levites and
Priests have their liue-lode of these two years? And I hold this for a ground,
that so long as the end remains, M. Sell: cap: 2. 3. p. 14.
so long remain the means devoted to that end: But Leuies service, being the
end, for which these first Tithes were devoted, admits no intermission, but
is yearly the same: Ergo, so must his means be yearly the same. If it be
replied, that Leui is the first enrolled even in these five and six years with
the poor.

I answer first, Leuies means is here strangely abridged, by encroaching of
Strangers, Fatherless and Widows; where he was at first one and all, now is
he but the first partner; and yet must he abate no point of his service:
whereas God ever supplied all such wants, as in that Sabbaticall cessation of
laboring the land, the sixth year yielded three years increase; but no such
matter for this fourth and sixth year: the partners, but not the portion is
increased. So Leui may abound strangely in the one but beg strongly in the
other; for all the beggars are thrust upon him. Secondly, Was not Leui also
enrolled for a partner in the Festival Tithes? yet will not Scaliger for this,
frustrate him of the first Tithes: And yet Iunius will, making first and
second, one. So have we of three Tithings, a threefold confusion, from three
learned Authors: Iunius the first and second, one. Scaliger the first and
third, one. Seldom the second and third, one. Which makes me rather simply
cleave to the words of the Text, then thrust in commentaries for the overthrow
of it; or practice against precept.

And observe, there is never danger in distinguishing these points* but ever in
confounding. For if we distinguish not that Text, we shall confound all three:
At the end of three years thou shall bring forth, all the Tithe of thine
increase of the same year, Deuteronomy. 14.28
and lay it within thy gates. If we give this word All his largest extent; then
we must confound all, in All: all three must be but one, which all men deny.
Therefore we must still distinguish; and if so, then those three verses, Deuteronomy:
14.22.23. and 28. speak of three diverse Tithings, seeing of Tithings. Which
Josephus most clearly distinguishes, The English translation reads all,
making it, a third Tithe, each year.
(...), etc. One, to the Levites, another to the Feasts, yearly: a third joined
to these each third year. Is not this a fair witness for our foresaid Text?
And against Joseph and Tobit, Seldom brings but Targum and Talmud; Mayor vter?

Another Text; Deuteronomy: 26.12. When thou have made an end of Tithing all the
Tithes of thine increase, the third year, (which is) the year of Tithing,
etc. Why should this third ye re, be termed The year of Tithing in the Text,
(since no year was without a Tithing safe the Sabbaticall) unless a new
accrue of Tithes came this year above the rest; as most, and best
i^ter^r^ters, with Joseph and Tobit, do hold? And seeing it brings a new
End, for Fatherless, Widows, Strangers, and all Poor, why not also, a new
Tithing? There is neither reason nor Analogy, to call it The year of Tithing,
because two Tithes in other years distinguish dare now confounded: much less,
because three new partne^s are thrust on one man's portion; Laics on Leuies. I
confess I could never yet give a reason why, this poor man's Tithe was cast
upon a third year, seeing they were at all times to be sustained: but for the
distinct natures of the Tithes themselves, I think verily a simple eye may
discern it.

Mr. SELDOM.
THus much for justifying in general, a Third Tithe each third year against
Scaliger and M. Seldom: and that the first and third are not one, with Seldom
against Scaliger Now, that the second and third are not one, as Seldom would
have them. So with that reverence I owe to both, and respect, all owe to the
Truth: I will simply set down my reasons, and humbly submit my judgment, etc.

But, seeing M. Seldom, both by his Title (The History of Tithes) and by his
Preface fully disclaimeth, Page 1.
it to be written to prove that Tithes are not do by the Law of God, etc. I
have no reason to suspect, much less to account him as an adversary of my
Position: The most is, he may doubt (and so do many of great note) but he,
who ingenuously doubts, may (when God pleases) find resolution.

But seeing he often advises all that shall write De Iure diuino, to be well
advised, I am, among others, hereto generally invited: Reuiew page 452. cap. 2.
and it may be, specially, (though tacitly) too. For (says he) Hitherto could
I never see any Christian that has fully taught what was considerable in the
general payment of Tithes among the Jews. The Noble and most learned Ios.
Scaliger, did not every way accurately enough teach it, although in a simgle
Treatise he purposely undertook it. How sufficiently among us, others do,
that slothfully and ignorantly (without his help) while yet their end is to
write of Tithes, talk of a third Tithe here, and a fourth Tithe, and indeed
they know not what Tithe.]

Whom M. Seldom here means, I know not: I confess, my papers have been long
pilgrims in both Kingdoms: and that, as the matter is from Scripture, so,
that Method is only mine own, borrowed of none, but the better if it be true.
So, it be^ame me well, by this Appendix, even to take counsel of M. Seldom,
and tender up the reasons of my opinion; which I have hitherto done jointly to
him with Scaliger, so far as they handle one point. But whereas he taxes all
of Ignorance that have not used Scaligers help; himself lets us see, in
the third Tithe, that if we had all used Scaligers help, we had been all
still in Ignorance: and it was most true. So we had all need, one to help
another, and all call for Gods help, for clearing the Sacred mysteries of his
own Word.

Now we are to hear M. Seldens opinion in disposing of this third Tithe. The
Talmud affirms (says he. Cap. 2.. 3. ad finem.
) That in the third year, after the first Tithe, they paid the third, the
poor man's Tithe; the second ceased, or was not paid; or the poor man's Tithe,
was in stead of the second Tithe.] I answer, as of before, Tob: and Joseph.
said the contrary.

Seldom. Neither can that in Tobit, Ibid page 15. init.
touching the payment of the second Tithe every year, be otherwise well
understood, then for Every of the two years, unless that text be wholly
contrary to the known practice of the Jews Canons.]

Whether Ios. and Tob understood the truth of practice is one question: but
that they both speak plainly my way, is no question.

Seldom. So then every third year, Page 15.
the Levites at the Temple missed their second Tithe for their Feasts and
Loue-dayes; the same being charitably and by divine ordinance, spent at home in
the gates of the husbandmen.]

Surely, I cannot well construe this Section, in course of true Divinity; For,
if M. Seldom mean, that the Feasts were yearly kept, and the Levites yearly
went up and waited, and yet wanted their wages; surely it goes harsh: Both
serve and sterue at once? For they could not have them at Jerusalem, seeing the
text (and we all) agrees to lay this Tithe up within the husband-mans gates:
and the Feasts might only be kept at Jerusalem. But if he mean, that the
feasts ceased also each third year, and so Leui stayed abroad attending his
portion with the poor from the husbandman; this were worse: for sure it is,
These holy Feasts being appointed by God, for parts of his own worship, and by
so many several precepts yearly to be performed, Ter quotannis, and by all
the males of Israel at Jerusalem, and being p efiguratiue of Christ, admitted
no intermission of time, nor change of Place: Ergo, not of Maintenance.

Ibid.
Seldom. Neither does the second and this poor man's Tithe differ in substance,
but only in circumstance.

But these Circumstances are the Formal substance it self, as we said before.
But go on to the proofs.

Ibid.
Seldom. The division of both, is exactly the same; and the persons appointed
for the eating, are upon the matter so too.

What is here meant by Division, I know not: but sure, the Persons shall be
found different: as follows.

Ibid.
Sell en. For as the Levites, ministering in their course at the Temple, were to
have part in the Feasts made of the second; so were the Levites and the poor
in the country entertained with this of the third year.]

But the second Ti^he for Feasts, touching Person, The Husbandman is commanded
to eat; He and his household again to eat; sell, and buy, and eat. Deuteronomy.
14.23.26. And the Leuite thou shall not forsake: But the third Tithe, the
Husbandman is not named to eat; but to lay it up, for the Leuite Stranger, etc.
verse. 28 and cap. 26. the Husbandman is commanded to give that Tithe to the
Leuite, etc. So the Persons much differ in both Tithes.

Ibid.
Seldom. The Place, where the bestowing was, makes their difference.]

And is not that enough? seeing the one must be carried to Jerusalem; the other
must not; but laid up at home: So neith^r Place nor Person one. But the End is
the most powerful distinction, the one for Gods Holy Feasts and Ceremonial
worship; the other only ad Charitatis officia, for the poor: and the Leuite,
in all, still one.

Seldom. This is fully confirmed to me by the Septuagints translation of Deuteronomy.
26.12. thus, When thou have ^nded the tith^ng of all the fruit of thy ground,
in the third year; The second Tithe thou shall give to the Leuite, and the
Stranger, etc where plainly, you see, the Poor man's Tithe is expressly
called, The second Tithe, which justifies our Division.]

And yet, may not Tobit (half a Bible-booke) as well, yea better justify my
division, agreeing with all the Hebrew texts that we have; as the Septuagints,
a contrary, who are held but translators even of Tobit? Go the credit by
Antiquity, it is Tobits; if by personal dignity, Tobits: by Scripture
Analogy, Tobits; by Natural reason, Tobits. And what reason to call this
third Tithe, The poor man's Tithe, as all do, seeing Leui is the first it is
allotted unto; yea, which Scaliger will have all one with Leuies first Tithe?

Seldom. Doubtless, they there in stead of Shenah hamaigsher, Ibid. page 16.
that is, The year of Tithing (as the text is) found in their Hebrew copies,
shenith hamaigsher, which they took for the second Tithe; knowing that in
truth that place meant no other.]

But how shall we know this, that their Hebrew copies did bear the words so?
we have none of them now. And were their authority neu^r so great, shall we
rely rather upon their unknown copies, then the Authenticke received text?

Seldom. Diverse passages in their Translations are upon such differences; and
they oftentimes give thence, Ibid
a kind of Commentary, as well as a Translation.]

So are they in many places both different and defectiu^; And if they knew so
well (as you allege) the true meaning of that place of Deuteronomy. as they would
eue^ rectify so, that text; why did they not also either conform Tobits text
to it in reading, or reconcile them by Commenting? Is not this of Deuteronomy: the
only place which distinctly points out these three Tithes? Yet the Septuagint.
make the 23. verse. but as an Exegesis of the former verse; and so turns both a
Feasting, and turns the Levites to fasting. Shall this go for good coin too?
or for a Shekle of the Sanctuary?

Ibid.
Seldom. Neither is it ill context, that shenith of the foeminine gender should
be joined to Ma^^sher of the masculine: It is not without frequent example in
holy writ.]

This frequencie should have been showed by some few: specially in the very
word in q estion, Maigsher, which is so frequent in Scripture, and yet (I hope)
never so mixed. No doubt, but all Languages have their own Anomalies, but by
confusion of a gender, to confound two Tithings, such context destroys the
text.

And so much concerning our Division of Tithes, differing from Scaliger and
Seldom, under the Law. Follows concerning the Gospel, with Seldom only.

THE HISTORY OF TITHES WRITTEN BY MASTER IOH. SELDOM.
CHAP. I.
IN this matter of Tithes, M. Seldom, intending no more then an History, to
relate (as it were) all things, but judge nothing, as Chap. 7. page, 174. has
so painfully and learnedly performed it, as I who can add nothing to it, will
detract nothing in, or from it.

Mean while, I must crave pardon, in following his History (so far only as
Scripture carries him) to diue a little deeper in the true Mystery and End of
things: lest the common and careless Reader (by the naked name of History)
might conceive there were no more in it, but Hodie mihi, cras tibi. For though
M. Seldom has given us veram Historiam as he found it recorded; yet, haec ipsa
Historia non est vera: but leaves dangerous insinuations, and prejudicial
impressions in Ius diuinum: and therefore, as He said justly in his
Title Page, -- Sumpsimus arma
Consilijs inimica tuis, Ignauia, fallax.
I may as truly say here -- Sumpsimis arma
Consiliis inimica tuis, Historia, fallax: but in rem non personam.


IT was well therefore observed by Learned Antiquity, that in Scripture texts
for most part, four things may be, or must be, considered.

First, History, that is, a simple narration of what is done.

Secondly, Artiologie, that is, The Reason why such things, were so, and so
done.

Thirdly, Allegory, that is, When one thing is picked out to point at another,
by some mystical signification: as are Types of their Verities.

Fourthly, Anagogie, that is, a forcible Conclusion, transferring all things
represented by the Type, in, and upon the prefigured Verity: which last, (as
Prophecies and Revelations) are never perfectly perceived, till they be fully
performed.

All these four points foresaid, are most considerable in the matter of our
question, specially in Melchisedec and Abraham's practice, and Jacobs Vow,
before the Law: and in David's prophecy, and Paul's application, after the Law.
The only naked and simple History is in Genes. 14. IT, and all the other
three, are fully in Hebr. 7. There begins he w th (...), For, this
Melchisedec, etc. he was even likened to the Son of God, verse. 3. and remains
a Priest for ever. Here then, the Cause of this meeting of Melchisedec with
Abraham, was, To point and paint out the Eternal Priesthood of Christ: the
Allegory of his names and offices, he explaineth in the first three verses.
His Anagogie and Conclusion he has verse. 13. as we have at length observed.
The like may be applied to Aaron, and all Types, keeping ever true Scripture
limits in all. To our purpose then.

Abraham, M. Seldom cap. 1.. 1.
gave Melchisedec Tithe of all etc. but what that All was, is not clearly
agreed upon: it is taken to be, Of all that he had, as the ordinary Gloss of
Solomon Iarchi there interprets, and so expressly are the Syriaque and Arabique
translations of the new Testament where this is spoken of. But it is hard to
conceive it of any other, All that he had, then All the substance, or All the
Spoils that he had by that expedition. So did Josephus, and the Targum
understand it, etc.]

Here we find two different opinions. The first, that no Tith of Spoils are
here meant. To this we have answered, par. 2. chap. 8. 1. The other is, That
M. Seldom here will have nothing Tithed but Spoils, both are too restraining.
As for the Authorities here alleged for both opinions, two for each, I hold
the first two brought by M. Seldom, for All he had, as good as the other two,
for All only Spoils. We go on.

M. Seldom. Ibid.
And, to free it from all doubt, (says he) The holy Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, first using the text of Genesis in those words, (...), The Tithe
of all, after a f^we words interposed, explaines it by (...), The Tithe of the
Spoils; as if he had said (...), The Tithe of all the Spoils.]

But why must either those two be joined, or the one abridge the extent of the
other? Paul here, expl^ineth all things, but restrains nothing. That they
cannot be joined, ^is clear: For Paul's first (...), has not only a few words
interposed, (two whole verses;) but is also divided from (...) by a conjunction
(...), and a d fferent preposition (...): the former whereof, is a plain
enlarging of that (...) as who should say, Behold how great this Melchisedec
was, to whom Abraham the Patriarch gave a Tithe (...) even of the Spoils. So
Spoils, was specially brought in, in this last, which might have seemed
doubtful in the generality of the first. But that other preposition, (...),
cannot admit a coniunctiue reading of both, for that were, (...), which is
still more d^iunctiue: and to ^core out both Conjunction and Preposition thus,
(...), It were but a Caption a Diuisis ad Coniuncta: ^co^ing out All in
Genesis; All in Jacobs Vow; and All under the Law, by coupling All here,
(making leape-yeare of so many li^es) to only Spoils: a sore Spoil indeed:
a mere Sacrilege: So Paul rises still from degree to degree: first, He gave
him a Tithe Of All: second, even of the Spoils: third, Melchisedec Tithed the
Patriarch, that had the Promises, fourth, He Titheth and lives, fifth, He
Tithed even Leui the Tith-taker. Of all which, nothing must be lost, nothing
confounded. Not then, A Tithe of All, and a Tithe of the Spoils. but A Tithe
of All, yea even of the Spoils.

For all Types, and of all, chiefly this, must have ever the largest extent of
sense that Nature or Analogy can afford them. They be fundamental things, and
so, must bear all that can be truly built upon them. This Meeting then
between Melchisedec and Abraham, being a mutual Type of all things that might
concern Priesthood (...), it must be extended, to whatsoever might be
afterward intended, both for Blessing and Tything proper to all Priesthood
(...), Law, and Gospel: all Times, all Persons, all Things, for all Ends, as
at length before. To Tithe only Spoils, then with M. Sell: here, were to cut
off the whole grounds of the after coming Law for Praediall Tithes. And to
Tithe no Spoils with others, were to cut off this very Text, and that of
Paul's, Gal. 6.6.
enioyning him that is Catechized, to communicate al his goods with him that
Catechiseth him: for many are Catechized that have neither Tillage nor
Pastorage. All Predial Tithes, are in a sort, Personal: they discharge even the
Persons laborers: but all Personal Tithes cannot be held Prediall. Yet both
are here in the Prerogative of this Tipe.

Then, If Abraham had, sure he gave; else, He, was not Tithed; if not Tithed,
not Blessed. But he had nothing, save what he brought back, says Targum: This
is doubtful; yet let it pass. All the question now remains but de modo
habendi. It came by War, yet His it was, and His most lawfully: then Abraham
as he met with Melchisedec, Had; it was now, His: Ergo, Abraham gave of His
own. Corns, Cattle, Trades and all Trash, did answer all, both Prediall and
Personal Tithes that ever could fall forth hereafter: They were the true
Typical increase of all Barnes, and all Wine-presses; of all Peace, and
Warre-trades: else our Type is naught, and but a naked, (yea, a very idle)
History. And such as could draw those three hundred and eighteen of Abraham's
household servants, to Tipe these three hundred and eighteen Bishops of the
first Council of Nice would never have refused this extent to this Type,
Ambrose.
in tam lucida vtriusque Testamenti. (...).

Now, that this mixed Tithing, Prediall and Personal, was in use even under
the Law, it seems clear in that of the Pharisee, Luk: 11. (...) (says he)
(...). I give thee Tithe of all whatsoever I possess. Will any man say, that
this one, or all Pharisees, were laborers or Pasturers? or astrict (...), to
only Tillage and Pastorage? Did not Jacob Vow, to give God a Tenth, of all
that God gave him: Then, this Vow binding his posterity, we must either say,
God gives us nothing but Prediall things, which is false: or we must pay of
Personal things, as he gives us them. It goes sure as properly for all
Trades, as all Ploughmen. And every soul (having) is bound to say with this
Pharisee (...). It holds both in (...) and (...) what the Law did build must
have for foundation, Abraham's practice, and Jacobs Vow.

To astrict this Typical Tithing then, to only Wars here, and only Spoils
were to give the Blessing also to Wars and Spoils only: and so to make
only David, and not Solomon, the seed of Abraham the Patriarch here Blessed
and Tithed, turning that Royal word, Beatipacifici, in Beati polemici. But the
current of our Text (as we first observed) is quite contrary. The Tither here,
was first King of Righteousness; then King of Peace. In a word, of War and
Peace, and so, Tithed Abraham after a War, in Peace. So, though all came as
ex praeda; yet did they answer, praedia. Whether we march a Warfare in our
Conquering Word, Dieu et mon droict; If God maintain Our Right, he must not
loose His own right: or be we settled in Salem, with Beati pacifici, we must be
also, Decimati pacifici. Melchisedec must Bless and Tithe Abraham and all his
seed; the King and all his subjects: no exception.

M. Seldom chap. 1.. 2.
The next passage of Tithes is in Jacobs Vow, etc. as in Gen: 28.22. This Vow
(says Josephus) Jacob performed upon his return 20. years after. Into whose
hands he gave his Tithes, appears not. But the chiefest Priest of that time
was his father Isaac, etc.]

How far even this History of Jacobs Vow, is to be enlarged, and couched
under his grandfather Abraham's example we have noted at la^ge, part: 1. chap:
8. 3. But whether he performed any point of Tithing as Josephus says, or to
whom, I dispute not. Sure, Tithing was but one branch of three, in that Vow,
and all three, neither were fully and personally by Jacob performed; nor
intended that in him they should end. Good, Reader, remember them from the
former places, for avoiding repetition. I see no necessity of exacting any
precise performance either of Abraham's practice, or Jacobs Vow, before the
settling of their posterity in Canaan, and the coming of Christ. And as for
Priests, Ad Philadelp:
there was never any after Melchisedec (...), till the Law came; and so, what
hope of Tithes paid (...)? all these were but (as Calvin well terms them)
Nuncupations of Tithes.

Sem then, as Sem, cannot be Melchisedec. They may be one, (as I hold they
were) in person, but not in Type. Sem had father and mother; end and beginning:
and so Fathered Christ. Melchisedec was (...), and so Figured Christ. Of the
propriety of his Order, there was only himself (...); and Christ the only
(...), which only is true Scripture lang^ge So Sem could beget (and did)
diverse Primogenit Priests, but Melchisedec no more Melchisedecs. And in this
respect I care not though Ignatius hold Melchisedec for a Virgin, Ad Philadelp.
though Sem was not; and yet both, one Person.

But for such as will abolish Tithes, as merely Popish, they must first prove
Melchisedec a Pope. For Tithes are older then Peter.

In CHAP. II.
THat Tithing of (...), Every Herb, M. Seldom cap. 1.. 7.
which is spoken of in the Gospel (and observed by the Scribes and Pharisees)
was never commanded in Scripture, nor by their Canon Law requisite, according
to the opinion of their Doctors, who restrains the payment of Tithes to thy
increase, spoken of by Moses, and comprehend not Herbs under that name. They
deliver indeed that by Tradition from their Fathers, all things growing out of
the earth, and fit for man's meat, are Titheable, etc. But it seems (says
Seldom well) that for this payment of Herbs, the Pharisees were of the truer
side, from Luke and Matthew allowed by Christ.

Here now is proved our Historia fallax, by M. Seldens own consent: Therefore,
Out of M. Seldens just observation here, against Talmud would I ask leave to
affirm, that the proofs from Talmud in others points of Tithing alleged by
him, or Scaliger, are not to go for sure grounds, seeing himself has found
them so erroneus in this: And that it is no sure course of arguing the true
intent of Precept, by the sinistrous extent of Practice. For although we had
not here Christ's latter approbation of that Tithing, against the records of
Rabbis, yet the very Precepts themselves being well pondered, will include all
such Herbs, and much more.

For even that place, Deuteronomy: 26.12. Thine increase; Who taught the Talmudists,
that increase here, must signify only Man's meat? Why should not Tithing be
extended in this Text, to all Increasing? And Leuit: 27.30. All the Tithe of
the Earth, of the seed of the Earth, of the fruit of the Tree, is holy unto
the Lord] Is there not much seed of the Earth, that is not man's meat? Seed
here, is not only what by our Sowing comes; but also whatsoever, by Gods
firsts Blessing of all Creatures, bringing forth the kind. History of all
times confirms this, for Hay, Hemp, Oats, Mines, Quarries, and the like,
have been subject to Tithing, as Seldom has observed; yea, even his
Ruticilia, Ruta caesa. Chap: 1. 1 et chap: 4.. 2. And true Analogy warranteth
History; For the Tribe of Leui was to be supplied in every their necessity,
out of all that the Earth yielded the other Tribes for their necessities. This
made Ierom interpret that of Number: 18. In vsus et necessaria eorum separaui. All
the Tithe of the Earth again, may well enough include all Trade-encrease, even
where no Seede-encrease is: The Earth, bears All: both us; and for us. So,
whatsoever the Earth brings us by way of Increase yearly: of that, we owe a
yearly portion to God, out of a tenth proportion. And in this sense may we
say. Vbi Nummus nummum gignit: nummus nummum soluet, as Seldom has well
observed in the State of Venice, where no Prediall Tithes are; and therefore,
Selicha. 7.. 3. page 164. Chap. 7.. 3.
Personal due.

Now come we to M. Seldens History, of the Opinions touching the Right of
Tithes; the third Article of his title; handle in his seventh Chapter 3, etc.
and concerns most our purpose.

The chief question (says Seldom) among the Divines, comes to this, Whether,
by Gods immediate Moral Law, the Evangelical Priesthood have a right to
Tithes, as to their Inheritance in equal degree, as the Lay man has to his
Nine?

If ever Tiths were due by Gods immediate Moral Law, they must be ever so,
this is sure. Then our recourse must still be, in examining, by what Law,
Tithes were at first due. All Priesthood (...) had ever Tithes; Before Law by
Practice, Tradition, Instinct of Gods Spirit: Under Law, by written Law,
agreeable to the former practice. Whether both those were Moral, Judicial, or
Ceremonial, we shall hear anon. And so, what ever prerogative those Laws
gave the Priesthood above the Laity, the same still remains. The Tenth was
ever first to be paid; else the nine parts were not the Lay-mans. Ibid.


Or if (says Seldom) they have Tithes only as by humane Positive Law, and so
given them for their spiritual labors, that is, in brief, Whether by
original distributive justice, or by commutatiue, they are payable?]

How Kingdoms are by their own Laws Positive, seetled in Tithes, is one
thing; and how they should be another thing: And their so great differences
among themselves, argues infallibly, that they have varied from the true
foundation. As to Justice Distributive and Commutatiue, they hold alike also
from the beginning, even in Leui under the Law: all had the tenths for their
Spiritual labor, distributed unto them; and so has the Gospel now. As for
that Title, Humane Positive Law, we must have a good ground to prove, how
Divine Positive Law, which only doted Tithes to Leui, did resign them under
the power of Humane Positive Law for the Gospel. Here be strange odds.

Ibid.
But the first opinion was (says Seldom) That the Tenth considered, quoad
quotam partem, etc. is due only by Law Positive and Ecclesiastical; but quoad
substantiam suam, or Cleri sustentationem, etc. it is due by the Divine Moral
Law. And to the purpose of this distinction, they interpret the Leuiticall
commandments of Tithes quoad substantiam, and quoad quotam. The quota being
but a Judicial, or (as some will) a Ceremonial Law, etc]

And what a strange Distinguo is this, to divide the Tenth, and quota? as if
both were not one, The strongest Mathematical imaginary abstraction cannot
separate them. Maintenance indeed generally (and so is their meaning) may be
free of a quota; but a Tenth cannot. But who taught them that Maintenance was
Moral Divine; and the quota, but Positive and Ecclesiastical? Find they any
such tricks in the two Testaments? What Positive Law gave Tithes to
Melchisedec?

M. Seld ib. page 157. ad finem.
Because (forsooth) the Maintenance (say they) of the Ministry in General,
is Moral, or Natural, there being (according to consideration of it se far)
the very Character of it written in the Tables of men's hearts; that is, that
Spiritual laborers are to be rewarded with temporal bounty, as every
labourer is worthy of his hire. But quoad quotum, it is but a Judicial or
Ceremonial Law, etc.]

Here have we, three Laws to ponder, and to couche our Tithes under some one
of them. Tithes to be Ceremonial, is but a Ceremony; and as soon done as
spoken: no man ever durst offer a proof for it. To be Judicial, they cannot,
First, because, that practice of Abraham, and Vow of Jacob, can never be
brought within the compass of the Jewish Judicial Law: no, I say further,
within no Law, merely, or only, Jewish. Consider it well.

Yea, Tithes Legally enacted, (as I do think) cannot be properly Judicial:
For their Judicial Laws (properly so called, and without mixture) did
concern chiefly their Civil Commonwealth, and so, all the Tribes alike. But
the Law of Tithes, went in favors of only Leui: a Law proper and peculiar to
the Priesthood, before, and then to: to (All Priesthood) Melchisedechicall
and Aaronicall: Evangelical and Legal. Now how can either Melchisedec or Aaron
come under the Judicial Law? It is more then I have yet observed, if the
Judicial Law gave any order for the Priesthood: yea, the Change of the
Priesthood, made a change of the Law, Heb. 7.12. Melchisedec changed both
Priesthood and Law: not from what it was at first in that Typical action
between Melchisedec and Abraham; but from what it was under the Law: the other
he renewed and revived. The Law then follows the Priesthood; and therefore
the Judicials, are no Judges of things Sacerdotal and Sacred. Such Priesthood
then, such Law. A Temporal and Ceremonial Priesthood, Temporal and
Ceremonial Laws pro rata: such was the Priesthood and Law Leuiticall; in
many things merely Ceremonial; and so gone for ever; in all things Temporal;
and so, in some things, revived, renewed, and restored in that first perpetual
and Evangelical Priesthood of Melchisedec. Aeterna aeternis aptanda, is a
received Maxim.

Ceremonial then, and Judicial are gone. There rests but Moral: and so, if
the enumeration of the three Laws be sufficient, and the remotion of the two,
true; it follows, Tithes must be Moral But to Morallize yet a little more
with them, What shall this Moral be? some will have it all one with Natural,
that Character in our hearts: as if the Decalogue were but a second edition of
this Moral or Natural Law. We may safely, yet we need not, yield to all
this. For take him in his true Etymon, and Moral will be, but, whatsoever
concerns Manners. Now every particular point of good Manners has not a
perfect Character printed in our (fallen) hearts: Else, what say we to
Polygamie, so long of old tolerated; so much yet and in so many parts held
for no sin? What say we to Paul's Concupiscence which he says he had not
known, but by the Law, Romans 7.7. Then, Moral and Natural are not wholly one.
And was it not a very Moral and Mannerly duty from Abraham to Christ, to pay
Tithes for the maintenance of Gods Ministry? How then, it came to be not
Moral or unmannerly with Christ, let Schoolmen, Canonists, Ciuilians,
Common-Lawyers, Et quot quot Sacri sacra fame laborant, give good reason for
it, and I am satisfied.

Moral then, in that tripartite division of Laws, is much better ascribed, to
whatsoever thing is brought under a perpetual Law of God, never after to be
abrogated, although the perfect Character of it be not imprinted in our corrupt
Nature. Let us say then of Tithes, We had not known them, but by the Law, as
Paul said of Concupiscence; yet let them have the like continuance as that of
Concupiscence; else, give us a Legal limit of the Law of Tithes from
Scripture. But if Law should fail; what say you to Melchisedecs Priesthood;
and Abraham's practice; David's Prophecy; and Paul's application? all these were
of Grace, and the Promises; not of the Law. Thus far for Moral.

Now let us consider of this Character by Nature in our hearts, they talk so
much of. It is Natural (say they) that the labourer have his wages; the
Ministry a Maintenance: but the quota is not of Nature, but Positive Law;
Ergo, An eleventh, ninth, or less, or more part may be assigned, as well as a
Tenth. I answer, It is most true, that Nature is most lively instructed with
the Generals of all things; and the more she draws ad Indiuidua, the more
erroneous she proves. And touching this point of Commutatiue Justice, it is
so Natural, that the very beasts, yea savage beasts, have acknowledged it, by
true Retribution. But is it not also a Character of our Nature, to draw all
Wages, to their quota? or is there any doing in Nature, till this be done?
Then, where Nature so bends, and cannot bind of it self, whatsoever may, or
has power to settle Nature in these particulers, must be for ever the only
stay of Nature; and Nature never trusted to it self afterward, more then at
first. To the point then.

All Wages are due by a Wager to a Waged: Wagers and Waged here, are either
God, with his Creatures; or his Creatures among themselves. Creatures in this
case, have no power over the quota, but ex mutuo pacto: and so, Nature can
never define it, for all, and ever: but must vary after all Circumstances. But
between God and his Creatures (as our question now stands) God only has
power of all: Who shall serve; How they shall serve; For what they shall serve:
The quota, is first Gods, Leuit. 27. who dare refuse it? Not Abraham, not
Israel, not Abraham's seed. Then God gives this quota, to his Ministry,
Melchisedec, Leui: who dare except? These be the true Positive Laws,
enlightening and rectifying our dark and crooked Nature, to which we must ever
either cleave, or show where our Nature has prevailed against them: and how
we have brought the Creator under mutuum pactum with his Creatures. No, he
Wageth whom he will, for his Wine-yard: He gives the Penny, the quota, for his
wages: he that came first to work, excepted but proudly and idly against him
that came last: A penny for all: a Tenth for all; It is not at our option.
Though France, Spain, Italy, Germany, the whole world, make any other Positive
Laws, they make but so many Lawless Positions. Such Histories, cast but
humane mists, over Divine Mysteries, if we trust too much to them.

Again, although by Order of Nature (as Schools speak) the General of Wages
goes before the quota; yet in Scripture Method, and point of Time there, you
shall find the very quota as soon, if not sooner, then Maintenance in
general. Our first is still, that of Abraham, Tithe of all; here is the only
quota. Our second is, Jacobs Vow, Tithe of all; again the very quota. Our
third is, the succeeding Laws, all the Tithe of the Land is the Lords, Leuit.
27.30. Again, I have given Leui all the Tenth in Israel, for his Inheritance.
Is there any thing here, but the quota? first the quota? and still the quota?

But this quota ( say those Clerks as Seldom relates it) being but a judicial
Law, M. Seld. ib. page 158.
proceeds now in the Gospel by Ecclesiastique Doctrine, and only per vim
exemplarem, or by imitation of the Jewish state, ordered by the Almighty; and
not per vim obligatiuam, or any continuing force of it under the Gospel. And
that the Church was not bound to this part, but freely might as well have
ordained the payment of a Ninth, or Eleventh, according to various
opportunity.]

First, we have said, (and I hope, proved) already, That the Law of Tithes was
no Judicial Law. Secondly, those Divines do us great wrong, that take no
notice of Tithes, but as they go out by that Law; peculiar to the Jewish
state; excluding both that most excellent, perpetua l, and Evangelical Type of
Tithing, in Melchisedec and Abraham, revived, and confirmed by Paul now to the
Gospel; and also, that euerbinding Verb of Jacob, for Tithes Of All; both
which, were the grounds of the Law, but branches of no written Law, if not of
Nature, Moral, divine instinct, and Tradition from a Principio.

Our Vis Exemplaris then, should be derived from our own peculiar Examples. A
Priesthood and Tithing before that Law; The very selfsame Priesthood under
the Gospel after the Law: and yet they will thrust out Tithing as only
Jewish, though the Priesthood belong also to the Gospel, and Gentiles. But
say, we had no more, but that Vis Exemplaris from the Judicials of Moses:
whence, I pray you derive you your Exemplar virtue, of taking Tithes, and then
giving them back to the Laytie, by Impropriations, Annexations, Erections,
Compositions, Assignations, Infeodations, Patronages, and all that Hotch-potch
of Hells hatching. Did ever the Judicial Laws of the Jews give you any such
Vis Exemplaris? They gave Tithes to the Lords Levites; but you, to Lords,
Laickes; ^ye for shame. Indeed it is Vis vix Exemplaris, a Violence without
any Example.

And that Scripture examples in such cases, do bind us, is clear by all
Scripture. The Acts of the Apostles, are all, but Examples; yet all, bind the
Church in things incitable and ordinary. Christ, in washing his Disciples
feet, said, He left them an example. Yea, Paul speaking of things to be
avoided by us, says, those things were written for Examples to forebeares and
admonitions to us, 1. Cor. 10. But to speak home, In things ever and ordinarily
done in Gods service before Law; ever under Law; and ever to be done till the
end of the World; as is Maintenance for Gods Ministry; what shall bind us, but
the continual Practices and Precepts recorded for our use in the Book of God?
Shall the Church then (as they speak) without either example, or Law, wander
in the wilderness of her own wantonness: and because God from all beginning
has ordained a Tenth for himself, and his Ministry, She, She (forsooth)
will give him, a Ninth (but no fear of this) or Eleventh, or what She likes.
What a proud insolence is this?

But alas! When we shall ask those Doctors, what they call their Church
here, that may so at her fancy dispose of the quota for Gods Ministers; how
pitifully shall they be plunged in the puddle of their new Positions? For if we
speak in precise Scripture Language, Church is often taken for the Flocks
considered apart from their Pastors; but never for their Pastors apart from
them. If they make this their Church, then they give the only people the power
of appointing the quota, being the party obliged to pay. Now this is against
the very Character of Nature they talk so much of. If by Church, they vnd
rstand the Clergy, the Ministry, (as usually is now done) This were to give
the only Labourer power to prescribe his own Wages, against the Character of
Nature too. If they join both parties for the Church; then it must go ex
mutuo Pacto: But this Pactum sends God a packing, who is the only Master
Wager, Master of the Waged, and Wag s too; who takes first to himself the
Wages, and th n by the Calling, conferreth them on his own Ministry. So, to
conclude, He that will defraude God of his Tithing; frustrate let him be of
Gods Blessing.

As for that second opinion in Divinity, M. Seldom chap. 7.. 4.
from the Schoolmen, That Tithes were mere Alms, etc. related by M. Seldom;
I think verily, such Schoole-Diuines merit no better Alms, then to be turned
for ever in Fratres Mendicantes, who having so far strayed from true
Divinity, as they have even lost the common Principles with Brutish
Naturalitie, which (as has been said) will even use a kind of Commutatiue
Justice, and retribution. Though they quite the quota of Tithes; yet why cast
they off that Character of Nature, and Maxim of Scripture, The Work man is
worthy of his Wages? Then, if Gods Wages, No Schoole-Almes: and if Alms, no
Wages.

M. Seldom cha. 7.. ver.
The third Opinion (says Seldom,) is of those, who agree with the Canonists,
that the right of the quota of Tithes, is immediately from the Moral or Divine
Natural Law; some impudently urging a commandment given to Adam; others of
them prouidently restraining all their Arguments to such grounds for the
conclusion, as many may be had out of Abraham's example, referred to the
application of it in the Epistle to the Hebrews; but others also not
circumspectly, taking in the Leuiticall Commandments of Tithes, for their most
sufficient authority.

Here have we three grounds alleged Historically, for proof of Tithes to be
Divine, or Moral. I begin with the last, and so, upward, because I mind to
speak most of the first, as M. Seldom does. Touching the Leuiticall Law, I
knew never any (writing directly of this subject) that set their greatest
force from Leui: at lest, not I. Touching the second ground, from Abraham's
example, (add also, Jacobs Vow:) applied in the Epistle to the Hebrews,)
wherein indeed stands our maine force and which, both in our Treatise, and
this Appendix we have urged (Simply, as God has furnished) I am sorry M.
Seldom did not as amply Historifie the reasons drawn from it, as he has done
for the first ground, being but weak: and that he gave not also his own
verdict of it, (which I hope had been with the Verity) as he has done
against the first ground thus.

M. Seldom Ibid.
For the first kind (says he) that talk of Adam; I think indeed, that in
the time of this light of learning, none have durst uenture their credits upon
such fancies. Yet, that it was some opinion that had at least in pretense many
authors in the Church of England in the blinder time of our Auncesters; I
thence collect, for that in a penitential made for direction of Priests in
auricular Confession, and written (as my Copy is) about Henry the the sixth, the
Priests examination and advise upon the point of Tithing, is thus expressed.

Have thou truly done thy Tithings and Offerings to God and holy Chirch? Thou
shall understand that at the beginning of the world, when there was but O O
man, that is to say, ADAM, God charged him that he should truly of all manner of
things give God the tenth part, and bad him that he should teach his children
to do the same manner, and so forth all men unto the worlds end. And for as
much as there was that time no man to receive it of him in the name of holy
Church, and God would not that they should have but nine parts, Therefore he
commanded him that of every thing, the Tithe part should be burnt. I find that
afterward Adam had two sons, Caine and Abel, Abel Tithed truly and of the
best, Caine Tithed falsely and of the worst: at last the false Tither Caine
slough Abel his brother. For he blamed him and said that he Tithed evil,
wherefore our Lord God accursed Caine, and all the earth in his work. So ye
may see, that false Tithing was the cause of the first manslaughter that ever
was, and it was the cause that God cursed the earth. It is literally
transcribed as I find it.]

This for that penitential. But whereas Historiall equity required, that the
allegations for both parts of the question de iure, should have been, equally
related; The alleging of so weak grounds as this, Chap: 10. pa. 273.
and that Tale of Austen the first Bishop of Cant^rbury, in Coniuring at a
Mass of two dead persons for the none payment of Tithes, made the Clergy, and
many favorers of Ius Diuinum, suspect M. Seldens judgment therein. Whatsoever
reasons moved him to silence in the stronger arguments, himself best knows:
but what he of himsel e ingeniously protests herein, I charitably believe:
and have therefore more boldly added to his History, my opinion de iure, both
which being mixed, I hope, shall both sat^sfie him, and setle others in the
truth.

But to say some thing for this Penitential, if it find but a favorable
construction, the matter in the maine (touching Tithes) being a Truth, though
it be not in each point Demonstrable, yet in many, it is very Probable: and so
neither wholly ly Impudent nor blindness. To trod Tithes then up as near as
may be, even to Adam, from the Law: Consider first, Tithes are given Leui by
precept, Numb: 18.21. God gave them, as His, of before; for in the twenty
verse he said, I am his inheritance. How then find we them in God? Leuit:
27.30. All the Tithe of the earth, etc. I S, (not shall be) the Lords. IS,
imports yet a former Title: And we find long before. Tithes of All, Vowed
by Jacob. This was no Legal Vow, that is, pendens ex arbitrio, but Moral, as
he even then Vowed, God should be his God, then Jacob must yet derive it from a
former Moral ground: This found Jacob of three Generations standing, in his
Grandfather Abraham's payment to Melchisedec. See how near we creep to Adam?
We are like Ianus already, on both sides of the world, before and after the
flood, if Sem was Melchisedec, as Selaens self seems to hold. But how came
Abraham by this? Either (sure) by a present instinct and Revelation with
Melchisedec; or either, by Education and Tradition from God and his forebears:
For as in the destruction of Sodom, God said, Genesis 18.17.19.
Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? etc. For I know him that he
will command his sons and his household after him, that they keep the way of
the Lord, etc. Now, seeing God here, (in this present action, against that same
Sodom whose King Abraham had of late delivered, and paid Tithes on the point
of his victory,) professes that he taught Abraham how to behave himself, and
how to instruct others, in matters of Gods service; What Impudency, or
Blindness is it, to ascribe also that Tithing after that victory, to proceed
from Gods instruction, and Fatherly Education from Family to Family? And if God
taught Abraham, so far now come in the world; shall we think, he neglected
to teach his immediate son, Adam? Or that Cain and Abel brought forth In
process of time their sacrifices, as by a present Revelation, and not either,
by a preceding Instruction? doubtless, that same Process of time, argues
evidently a Training and Education in Gods worship: Fides ex auditu, ever
Ordinarily.

Neither was this Penitential, the first, nor only warrant, ascribing this to
that time. M. Seldom cap. 1.. 3.
For M. Seldom had observed even from Tertullian, that Cains Offering was not
regarded, because, quod Offerebat, non recte diuidebat. The Text gives us a
sure warrant, that Cains offering was wrong: but whither in quoto, or modo, or
both, we have freedom of Conjecture. I would think, he erred in all. He was a
stiff-necked lewe, in his manners: a Niggard-hearted Jew, in his portion. And
seeing even his Septuagints (whom else where he so much urges in this
question) read that of Gen: 4.7. in that same sense of not dividing aright the
quantity; let us either trust them so far here; or not be tied to them
hereafter in other Scriptures.

Things then being so, I had rather partake of this Penitentials (alleged)
Impudency, and Blindness in urging a Truth for the Church; then of such
Divines, Impudent, and Imprudent boldness in purging the Church of Tithes,
without either Law, or example of Scripture.

And so much for M. Seldens Historical relation of the Divines opinion
touching Ius diuinum in Ti^hs. The next thing I find co^siderable, and
concerning my grounds is a Counsel he gives, by way of two questions, in his
Reu. his 1. question thus.

Now, me thinks (says he) He that argues for Tithes from the Mosaicall
Laws of Tithing, had need more specially, M. Seldom Reuiew: pa: 455. lin. vlt:
then any I have yet seen has near done, examine which of the two kinds are
due in the Evangelical Priesthood. Why not the second as well as the first?]

If by First, and Second, he means (as I take it) the first Tithes due for
Leui his maintenance; and the second Tithe due for the Feasts, according to his
own division: then the reason is clear why the first must be due, the second
not, to the Gospel. The First Tithe, not from only virtue of Mosai^all Law,
(as often has been said) but taking it in with better company we may well
make up this Syllogism.

Whatsoever was given as maintenance of both the Melchisedecian and Leuitical
Priesthood must be also the maintenance of the Evangelical Priesthood. But
Tithes were given as maintenance of both the Melchisedecian and Leuiticall
Priesthood. Ergo. Tithes must be also the maintenance of the Evangelical
Priesthood.
The assumption is clear for Melchisedec. Genesis 14. and Heb. 7. and by the
whole course of the Law, for Leui. The Proposition is strongly connected,
because, the Melchisedecian Priesthood directly includes the Evangelical.
Otherwise, we overthrow the whole Tipe and Verity both: We turn all to a
naked History of Genesis 14. We belie David's Prophecy, Psalm. 113. We disclaim
Paul's Aitiologie, Allegory, and Anagogicall application of all, to Christ, Heb:
7.

But that that second Tith, cannot now have place, is clear, because
Principio, Obiecto, Fine, that is, in all respects, they were merely
Ceremonial: having for End, these typical Feasts abolished by Christ: for
Place, only the Temple at Jerusalem. For Persons, the Jewish householders were
the chief eaters. All these, are not only mortua, but even mortifera for our
times.

M. Seldom. Ibid.
His second question is. And futher to consider also, how the payement of Tithes
from the Laity to the Priests of the Gospel, succeeds the payment from the
Levites to the sons of Aaron.]

To this, I have (I hope) proved. That Tithes are given for Inheritance, to the
whole Tribe of Leui, as well Priests, as Inferior Levites; and so, though the
Inferiors might be, the servile receivers and leauiers, yet the whole
Priesthood was partner in the maine: so, the Jewish Laity, paid their Tithes
even to the Leuiticall Priesthood. As for the point of Succession in this,
First, the Levites paid only decimam decimarum, the Tenth of Tithes, to
Aaron, not to Aarons sons, (as we have proved.) Now this Tithe was merely
Ceremonial, being first an Heave Offering; 2. tied only to the High Priest in
Person: and 3. to Jerusalem for Place. Ergo, not due now. Secondly, no proper
Succession of the Gospel to the Law: only tempore; neither in Person
astricted to a Tribe, not in the same nature or Order of Priesthood: the true
Succession is Melchisedec to Melchisedec, where all things past, (...), of the
Promise, not, Romans 4.13.
(...), Of the law: and so (...) brings in (...). The intervening Law, was
but as a drop, (yet of Divine water too) in the bottom of a basin, appointed
for a time to distinguish, to divide, nay, rather to draw on, and join two
streams of approaching Grace, the Promises, and their Performances: which
meeting, this drop was quite swallowed up by their fullness; what it had of
the first Fountain, common with those two Streams, Natural, or Moral; that
was still retained, being only graced with new Evangelical garments: What it
had in the property of a Partition wall, Rites, and Ceremonies, all euanished,
as Mercury from the fire. So Tithes, Inheritance being of the first Fountain,
common, Moral, to all these Water-workes of Gods worship, and therefore mixed
with that Drop of the Law, could never be dried up, but recover so much
greater strength by the meeting, of those two Streams, as the Performances,
surpass the Promises: and the Gospel, the Law.

But (says Seldom) these considerations can only be, M. Seldom. Ibid.
where the knowledge of Fact proceeds. For without distinction of these
several Tithes, any argument drawn from them, may soon be found a gross
fallacy, that may both deceive him which makes it, and those whom he teaches.
Let the ingenuous Reader think of it.]

Of this position, would I feign have a better reason then I can perceive for
our question: for who will think that the truth of Divine precept must rely
upon knowledge of Fact? specially when the Fact must be trusted to Fabulous
authors, in many things. Indeed, when the Fact is recorded in the Tables of the
Precept, there may a man argue reciprocally a Causis ad effecta; and contra:
But to bring in Talmud, Targum, M. Seldom, Reuiew. p. 55
and Gemara, to teach us, from what they say was done, what should been done
by the Law, it is, (in my judgment) quite out of square. For first, I may
justly doubt if their relation be true, because we all have found them in some,
erroneous: viz: in Tithing Herbs, as aforesaid: and in confounding the Lords
frequent Precepts of keeping so many holy Feasts yearly; and thrice a year;
in a Leape-yeere each third year; and so making the Tithes for Feasts; not
paieable each third year. Certainly, if I believe those men in any thing it
shall be more for reverence of the Text, then their Tales.

Secondly, though their relation of the Fact were true in their times; yet
might it be much degenerate from the former ages. Buxtorfus, de opere ^almudico.
For the eldest of them wrote (as some hold) but at the Captivity of Babylon:
and there writes (as we have them) but collected, and received hundreds of
year since Christ.

Thirdly, Facts truly recorded, do not always argue Laws truly ex^cuted:
Else the two Highpriests at Christ's time, must be good in Law, because true in
Fact; and not condemned by any reproach in Scripture, other then tacitly in
the meaning of the Law at first given. It is true, the not distinguishing of
one Tithe from another, has made men confound all, and take the Moral for the
Ceremonial. But whence, I pray, shall we draw our true distinction? from the
Text, or Talmud? Whether shall the Text tell Talmud, what Tithes were to be
paid; or Talmud tell us, what Tithes the Text should have enjoined? So Tithes
are by Scripture most clearly distinguished; and by Talmud merely confounded.

Thus far (Reader) have I, for thee, trod the paths of Mr. Seldens History
of Tithes, adding my own Simple judgment De Iure: Both may stand together, in
regard of my plain Positions from Scripture, for the one; and his own
Protestations, that he meant nothing to the contrary, in his History. Yea, I
ascribe it to Gods special providence, that He, and I, should at one time, as
twins from one belly, both come forth together: and that I, who (as I take
it) was by conception, the Esau, and elder brother in this business, yet, in
our birth, should prove a Jacob, catching his History (as it were) by the
heel; lest the incurious Reader (as is said) by too hot hunting the wild
History, might defraud Jacob, that is, the Promises, and Gospel, of their due
Primogeniture in the Right of Tithes.

My last advice then is, That howsoever Historical variety may delight thine
ear; yet let only Scripture-Verity lead thine heart, and direct thy
Conscience to the Conclusion in things pertaining to God: to whose Blessing I
do recommend these my Labors, for thy Edification. Amen.

(...).

