AN ESSAY OF DRAPERY OR THE COMPLETE CITIZEN Trading Justly Pleasingly
Profitably


By William Scott

Neque nihil, neque omnia dicenda sunt LONDON Printed for Stephen Pemel and are
to be sold at h^^ Shop upon Lon. Bridge 1635



AN ESSAY OF DRAPERY: OR, THE COMPLETE CITIZEN. Trading Justly. Pleasingly.
Profitably.


By William Scott.

Neque nihil, neque omnia dicenda sunt. LONDON, Printed by Eli, All-de, for
Stephen Pemell, and are to be sold at his Shop upon London Bridge near the
Gate. 1635.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL Mr. GEORGE SCOTT ESQUIRE.
Reverenced Uncle,
I Have long run upon your score, so long, till Vsura superat sortem, the
interest of your love exceeds the principal of mine abilities: Yet rather than
prove a Banckrupt, I will compound and pay you as I may, though it be but
Vnciatim. I would I could say with that Servant in the Gospel, Sir, have
patience, I will pay you all; which seems impossible for me. I must borrow of
your patience and protection, while I present you with this in part of payment:
Ex merando me magis onero. Bernard.
so striving to disingage my self I run further into debt. I pay not this to
free my self for, Senec.
Qui, quo sit liber gratus est, haud gratus est; nor to procure engagement from
you: Durand. Sent. lib. 2. d. 27. q. 2.
for Prius debitum solvitur quam meritum acquiritur. You will not wonder what
business my Citizen should have with you a Counselor, for you know he cannot
be complete in his actions, unless grave Counsel be his Director. Yet you may
wonder how my young years dare venture to instruct others. Brutus soliciting
Statilius to adhere in the Conspiracy against Caesar, was answered by him, that
he allowed the enterprise to be just, but disallowed of the men that should
perform it My subject you will not dislike: but that I a young Citizen should
treat of it, perhaps you will not allow. You may say to me as Isaak to Jacob,
how have thou found it so soon my Son? The Learned lament the loss of those
Books which Brutus wrote of virtue, because they account it a goodly thing to
learn the Theorick of such as understand the practice well; they and only
they are fit to write of affairs, whose own hands have bin employed in the
conduct of them. That I have managed business, may authorize me to write of
it: but since I have not done it long, may make you question whether my
Writings Will Be worth the reading That Augustus which had been supreme Judge of
the world when he was but nineteen years old, would have another to be thirty
before he should be thought a competent Judge of a Cottage or Farm. Yet I
hope I need not ask leave to think that he who at twenty years has not
given some token of his sufficiency, will hardly do it afterward it is a true
French Proverb, Si l'espine non picqu quand nai,
A peine que picque jamai:
A thorn unless at first it prick,
Will hardly ever pierce to the quick.


Hanibal and Scipio lived the greater part of their lives with the glory they
had gotten in their youth, and though afterward they were great in regard of
others, yet were they but mean in respect of themselves. Let this excuse my
youths boldness, and let your goodness pardon his presumption, whose All if
that be any thing, you may claim as your due and arrest for your service.

Your Nephew humbly devoted WILLIAM SCOTT.

TO THE READER.
IT was the chiefest commendation of Socrates, that he turned all his acquired
knowledge into morality; of whom one said, he fetched Philosophy from Heaven,
and placed her in Cities. Him I try to imitate, wherein if I write nothing but
words I write what the Title of my Book promises, a trial an Essay: supposing
you to be a Citizen I now say the less, because I will not anticipate my self
in speaking that at the door which I can but repeat in the best room of the
House.

Wealth with peace of conscience be multiplied unto you.

So prays Your Well-wisher William Scott.

AN ESSAY OF DRAPERY.
IT is a happy thing for a man to go through his affairs without Injustice,
which he cannot do but by bringing his spirit into liberty, In omnes ejus
actus contemplationem suam mittens, contemplating upon all his actions: so by
due consultation, and discreet action, he may live justly, pleasingly,
profitably.

Hot youth running without consideration, and giving time no leisure to do any
thing for him, runs unjustly and troublesomely, but catches nothing, or
nothing durable. And a dul-spirited man not taking occasion when it is ready,
misseth his advancement, yet has his trouble too; both these trust to Fortune,
the Goddess of rashness, and sloth: both falling, Imperitia fecit casum,
their unskilfullnesse has effected their destiny. The first course of the
three is the best; the second and third may rise, but it is not certain; the
first cannot but rise, the order of his actions being set down in his decree
that made him; thus it is in all Professions; thus it is in Drapery, the
foundation whereof is Honesty: He cannot be a good Draper which is not first
a good man, Conscientiam suam aperiens, semperque tanquam in publico vivens, se
magis veritus quam alios, opening his conscience, living as if he were allwaies
in public, rather fearing himself then others; by this he raises himself
above and beyond all fear, contemning the blows of Fortune: His wisdom
without this will be erroneous, his policy will be knavery; yet honesty
without wisdom is unprofitable. Wisdom is the beautiful and noble
composition of him in his words, his actions, and all his motions, Si oculis
ipsis cerneretur, mirabiles amores excitaret sui, could the eyes see her, she
would stir up wonderful love; by her he does emancipate his spirit from
unjust subjection, unto things out of his calling not necessary: though no
knowledge is unfruitful; yet the course of a general knowledge being too
long, the knowledges most pertinent to himself, are to be chosen, which he
shall hardly end before his course be ended; so much there is to be known of
his trade and about it; of his commodity, as it is cloth, and as it is his
cloth, and so lives by it.

For the first, as no humane action is delivered to the World without many
circumstances, so no cloth without them; there is no circumstance in it but is
a step mounting the understanding to the true value of it, Caeca regens filo
vestigia: by laying the circumstances together, the body of an action is fully
known. In cloth is to be considered wool, the matter of it, whether it be
course or fine, which are qualitates tangibiles, perceived with the exterior
sense, the touch, the eye: but seeing is more conversant about color, which is
qualitas visibilis, of which anon.

Coursenesse is a quality of parts well compacted, difficulter cedens tactui,
giving way to the touch, hardly arising from dryness; those sheep that bear
it, being very dry or growing remote from the kindly moisture of the brain.

Finenesse is a quality of soft parts, Facile cedens tactui, giving way to the
touch easily, arising from moystnes, those sheep being moist that bear it, or
growing upon or near the forehead, thus for qualities of the matter: there are
qualities of the form too.

Thickness: Parts habens multas constrictas and cohaerentes, having many
parts bound and coherent.

Thinness: Parts habens extenuatas, having extenuate parts not solidly
compact as the other: both are made by the accession and decession of the
matter.

Now Feeling, which is Potentia sensitiva exterior, the outward sensitive power
seated in the Nerves, expanded through the whole body between the skin and the
flesh, apprehends these qualities, with their several degrees, and carries
them to the sense interior.

The Visible quality is color, which is Extremitas corporis perspicui, the
extremity, the outmost part of a perspicuous body, or it is the motive of that
which is perspicuous in act; it is a quality in Cloth of obscure original, it
is the splendour of it illustrated by light, having seven species, whereof two
of them are the extremities of color, white, black; the one arising from the
multitude of light, the other from the paucitie of it: these are as it were
Parents aliorum, all other colors are from these, mingled in a mean or
unequal proportion. Of equal mixture (according to Gerrard Malgnes) is
green, but Aristotle and all the Philosophers have taken red, for the equal
mixture of white and black all other colors are made of this mean, and one of
the extremes: yellow is two parts of white, and one of red; orange tawney has
two parts of red, and one of white; green is of more black and less red;
purple is of more red and less black.

These being the original colors, how they should amount to our great number,
I know not; unless the dyers fat sometimes working ill, he to make amends
invents new names. All colors are objects of the sight, which is the exterior
sense, Percipiens oculis species colorum, perceiving with the eyes the kinds
of colors, and offers them to the sense interior. But the eye it self is of
no color, for if it were of any one, all things it could look upon should be
of the same, as we see by experience, if a colored glass be held before the
eye. Next for quantity. Weight is the quantity of the matter, Measure is of the
form; which two controwling each other, the number of both must decide the
difference, the number of Weight shows the substance, which is too often
abused by increasing the number of measure, that both be according to the
Statute is desired by those who would buy good cloth good cheap. These
circumstances with others considered, the Judgment which can bona and mala
distinguere, puts a difference between good and ill, co^pares all with the
pr^^^ and so makes bargains, (...) inverting the end of Trade, which should
be for the good of both parties. But whither do I go? Diogenes at a Fair
full of those things which curiosity calls necessary, proclaims his abundance
such, as not to need them; So may these be thought potius subtilia qua^ utilia,
rather curious than necessary: I therefore spend no more time upon them. Thus
he considers his commodity, as Cloth. Now as his Cloth in trading; with which
that he may carry himself, Justly, Pleasingly, and Profitably, I descend to
particulars: yet some one trade as ^^ell as another shall have (...) rest in my
discourse.

THE COMPLETE CITIZEN.
I Define him to be a man whom seven years service having made a Citizen: now
just, pleasing, profitable ways, have made complete.

He shall live justly.
SAint Augustine makes mention of a certain Jester, Trin. lib. 13 cap. 3.
who undertook to tell the people what they all most desired; standing up he
said with a loud voice, vilt vultis emere, and care vendere, you will buy
cheap, and sell dear: Vili vello emere and ^are vendere, commune quidem est
sed tamen est vitium commune. August.
to do so, as it was in his time, so is in ours common, but a common vice,
unless it consist in certain limits. That Justice may be kept in prizing
commodities, the common estimation of wise Good-men is to be followed; upon
some the Law has pitched a price, which may be diminisht, not increased;
because that price was set in favor of the buyer, of all which with their
sorts, it is impossible for Law to determine the value; yet the Civil Law
says, that is the just price of commodity, Sitanti vendatur, quanti vendi
potest, if it be sold for so much as it can be sold for; that is, says Ame^us,
De Consc lib. 5. c. 48.
quanti vendi potest communiter, for how much it can be sold commonly; the
affection or profit of this or that particular man not considered: But where
taxation or common estimation cannot, there seclusa fraud, without deceit, the
judgment of the Owner must set the price. A Contract must be made according to
the equality of the thing; and that must be measured by the price that is
given. For as time is the measure of business, so is price of Wares. If the
price exceed the worth of the thing, or the thing exceed the price, the
equality of justice is taken away; that both agree is the just rule of trading,
against which deceit is opposite, decipere est unum ostentare, and aliud
praeter opinionem infer, to deceive is, to make show of one thing, and bring
in another, beside the opinion of the party; by which more is given for Wares
so sold, than they are worth: taking less for them then they are worth, a man
deceives himself: to prevent which, my discourse of his living profitably shall
endeavor. S^n.
His rule was peremptory, that said a wise man will not deceive, neither can
he be deceived; So was his profession of honesty and wisdom, loud who chose
this Motto, fallere vel fallires odiosa mihi, to deceive or be deceived, is
hateful to me.

Augustine (and who not) met with many that would deceive, but never with any
that would be deceived. To deceive others, is worse than to be deceived, as a
sin is worse than a cross; not that all deceit is a sin. Lucius approaching
the boat wherein Athanasius was, Eusebius.
whom he pursued, asked for him, and was answered by him (who was known to
Lucius by name, not face) that Athanasius was hard before him, if he made
haste he might overtake him; who being violent in his pursuit, mist
Athanasius. Thus the Arrian Persecutor was deceived by the truth spoken with
wisdom and a good conscience: but that deceit which is against justice toward
others, I shall now speak against: this stands more in the wills, than wits of
men. This is first against nature; one Serpent does not sting another, and the
Fishes of the Sea devour none but those that are of other kinds. O humanae
malitiae detest^nda (...) ferae par^unt, aves pascunt, homines in^^iantur,
^tsaeviunt. Cyp. Ser. 6.
But the greatest evils that come to man, come from man. Homo homini Lupus,
one Man is a Wolf to another. The Lions spared Daniel, the ravenous Birds fed
Eliah: but man exercises cruelty against man. Secondly, this is against civil
Society; for the preservation whereof, it is necessary that men converse safely
together, without fear one of another. Therefore one said well, the first
foundation of Justice is not to hurt, the second to endeavor to procure the
common benefit: thirdly, Vita Christiana est been faciendi, et male patiendi
disciplina.
it is against Christianity, which teaches a man so much charity and patience,
as to be ready to do well, and suffer ill. It was prophesied, that in the
time of the Gospel the Sucking child should play upon the hole of the Aspe,
Isai. 11.
and the weaned child should put his hand upon the Cockatrice his hole.

Fourthly, it is theft.

Themistocles espying a dead body richly adorned, passed by, but called to his
Companion, Toll haec, tu enim Themistocles non es, take up these, for thou art
not Themistocles, he could not stoop so low as to gather Gold out of the blood
and dirt; but he stoopes lower, that plucks it from the living, and commits a
double theft, robbing himself of honor, and the other of the means of life.

Lastly, it is odious to God.

It is the will of God, that no Man oppress and defraud his Brother, These.
1.4.6.
for the Lord is the Avenger of all such. And to good men, even to the Heathen,
they counted no profit lasting which was got by fraud. Romany artibus,
virtute, opere, armis, vincam (says one amongst them) I will overcome by the
Roman Arts, (viz.) Virtue, labor, Stobaeus ex Theopomp.
and Arms. In Athens it was a custom, that when men bought or sold any thing,
they came before the Magistrate appointed for that purpose, and there took a
solemn oath, that they had not dealt fraudulently, nor used any deceit. I have
heard of a Turk that having bought Cloth of an Englishman, wherein was
enclosed a great sum of money, unknown to both parties: and finding it, made
many Journeyes in quest of the Englishman; at length meeting with him, unaskt
restored the money. Are Heathens just, and art thou a Christian unjust? Quid
prodest vocare quod non es? What does it profit to call thee what thou art not?
It is said of the Jesuits, nihil praeter nomen retinuerunt, they have retained
nothing of Jesus but his name; and of the Popes, Qui Bonefacius, malefacius,
qui Pius impius, qui Vrbanus rusticus, qui Innocens nocens; He that was called
good doer, was an ill doer: who was called Holy, was wicked: who was called
civil, was uncivil: who was called innocent, was nocent. And I would it might
not be said of many Christians, that they are but so in name, having good
words, not answerable works; supposing more of Gods hearing, than his seeing.
But let these know that many eat that here, which they digest in Hell
hereafter.

If Dives was sent into the fire for not giving his own, Si in ignem mittitur q
inon dedit rem propriam, ubimittendus est qui invasit alienam? Aug.
whither shall they be sent which take that which is another? If he go to
hell which gives not, whither shall he go which takes away?

Flattery.
are many: as Flattery, Dissimulation, Lying, etc. of which in their order.

There be some whom Gain will transform into all shapes; Flattery.
let the Customer look how he will, they like a Looking-glass will have
something in them like him. The old Law would not allow the Swan for man's meat;
his feathers being white, his body black. Neither are those fit to deal with
man, whose pretenses being fair, have foul practices: these Flatterers are
the Aves Gaviae of the time; Which Birds, when Alphonsus King of CICELY lancht
from the shore, flew about the Ship, he causing meat to be thrown forth,
they fled when they had taken it: Thus it is with me (says he) my Flatterers
having received what they expected, withdraw their obsequiousness, and return
no more, Nisi nova munera Esuriant, unless they are a hungry for new benefits.
Divines say that, with the Hebrews: Verbum blandiendi separare significat,
flattering divides a Man from himself, he thinks himself otherwise then he
is. A house divided cannot stand; which some unjust ones considering, by
flattery part a Man's judgment from his will, and so deceive him. Oil powered
upon the Gras-hopper kills it, Vinegar revives it, Sic multos occidit adulatio,
quos justa sanat reprehensio. Flattery kills those, whom just harsh dealing
with does heal: But it is not always so in the way of Trade. Some Customers
will grow dull and displeased, if they be not often whetted by a Flatterer;
downright honest speeches discontent them. For this cause, as the Apostle
said; Be angry, but sin not: So I say, Flatter, but sin not, if that be
possible. Yet it is my opinion, that amiable looks and fair speeches will go
far enough, we need seek no by-ways. Flattery is the corruption of truth,
a thing as pernicious, as truth excellent. Among other things this is one the
Flatterer is known by, Non imitatur amicittam, sed praeterit, he does not
only imitate friendship, but goes beyond it.

Emaus, he made as if he would go further, to stir up their desire of his
presence; what ever he pretended, he intended to stay with them that night.
If a man pretends a long journey by being booted and spurd, but intends to
return suddenly, to see what those whom he puts in trust would do; if he
had gone is no sin: whereas if he had said he would have gone such a
journey, and not performed it, had been a lie: Simulata aequitas est duplex
iniquitas, quia et simulatio est et iniquitas. August.
But woe to them which dissemble to an ill end: these have the voice of Jacob,
but the hands of Esau; they are smooth in their words, rough in their actions.
Let them know that Ter peccat quise bonum illi simulat, cui faciat male, he
sins thrice that counterfeits himself good, to whom he may do ill: consider
Absalon that Masterpiece of Hypocrisy; he well knew to be within a Nero,
without a Cato; he had Linguam pictam, a painted tongue, but not supplicium
pictum, a painted punishment. Behold him hanging on a Tree, as unworthy of
Heaven or Earth: Behold him thrust through with three darts, as worthy of a
treble death. Triplici dignum morte.
These dissemblers like the Polypus can take all colors to deceive, but how
cowardly a humor is this, and besides servile: he that dissembles, must have
still a fearful eye upon himself, Nemo potest diu personam far fictam:
cito in naturam suam recidunt quibus veritas non est Sen.
lest he be discovered; his mystery is poor, for he is ere long found out,
and then not credited; all he speaks is held Apocryphal. O how excellent a
thing is freedom! there is no better life then to live according to a man's
nature, resolving always, Lingua calamum in cord tingere, to dip the pen of
the Tongue in the Incke of the heart, speaking but what he thinks; to do
otherwise is impiety, yet to utter all he thinks is eminent folly.

Dare to be true, nothing can need a lie,
A fault that needs it most, grows two thereby.


Lying is pernicious to humane society: for silence is more sociable then
untrue speech; it is the worse because so various: if it had but one visage,
there were some remedy for it, a man might take the contrary to it for truth:
that which is good is certain and finite (says Philosophy) there is but one
way to hit the mark. Evil is infinite and uncertain, there are a thousand
ways to miss it. It is reported of certain new Indians, that they offered
humane blood to their gods, but none other then what was drawn from their
tongues and ears, for an expiation of the sin of lying; as well heard, as
pronounced; even those that use this vice, most conceive the baseness of it,
counting that the extremest injury that can be done to them in word, to
reproach them with the lie: Aug.
Facere non pudet, dicipudet: they are not ashamed to lie, but to be called
liars. The tongue is connexed by veins to the brain and heart; by which
nature teaches us, that it is to be governed by the intellect, whose seat is
in the head, so that it may agree with the heart: A man deceived through
error, may pronounce this or that falsehood, thinking it is true which is no
proper lie; for in a lie, Semper sermo discentit a mente, the speech always
differs from the mind; Contra mentem ire.
which the word Mentiri imports: to speak falsehood, thinking it truth, is to
lie only Materialiter; to speak truth, thinking it is not true, is to lie
Formaliter; but he that speaks false, thinking it false lies (Materaliter et
formaliter) atque ideo perfect mentitur, (says one) in the matter and form,
and therefore lies perfectly; thus lie to save our lives we may not, much
less to save or increase our wealth. Memorable is the example of that woman in
St. Hierom, mori scivit haec virago, mentiri nescijt, she knew how to dye, she
knew not how to tell an untruth. In a strait where money or Justice must be
lost, Perde potius pecuniam, ne perdas Iustitiam, rather loose money then
Justice. Falsum nihil dicere licet, aliquid autem vertacere aliquando est (...)
Aug.
Lying then is to be banished: but this rule must be observed; as we may not
lie, so we need not speak all the truth. Augustine makes mention of one
Fi^mus, who when he was asked to tell where his friend was, lest he should be
delivered to his enemies hands, said he would not tell; Nec mentiar, nec
prodam, I will neither lie, nor betray him. This man was firmus nomine, sed
firmior men e (says Augustine,) Constant in name, but more constant in mind.

Oris inquinamenta, Polluters of the Mouth, swearing must be spoken of: when
the rest will not serve turn, it is common to add oaths: and indeed what
sin so heinous, which he that makes haste to be rich is afraid or ashamed to
commit? Quis metus aut pudor est unquam properantis avari? Iuve. Sat. 14.
But what need I say any thing against this, but the Commandment, Thou shall
not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless which takes his Name in vain. Lex haec unica, Christianis omnibus
instar mill concionum sit. (says Augustine.) This one Law should be to all
Christians as a thousand Sermons. All oaths are not unlawful; we may swear,
sed praeeat lux, let the light go before us. But how horrid a thing is it to
call God to bear witness to trifles and lies! for Quid aliud est jurare, quam
Deum testem invocare, (says Augustine.) What is it to swear, but to call God
as a witness? If this were considered; many would not, as they do, make
Rhetoric of an oath, taking delight in that which moves Gods displeasure.

To forswear is a greater sin than to swear; for the Apostle does not say,
Fratres mei nolite perjurare, James 5.12.
sed nolite jurare, My Brethren, do not forswear, Falsa juratio exitiosa est,
vera ju ratio periculosa est, nulla juratio secura est. Drex. orb. Pha. Cap 27.
but do not swear. Would thou be far from perjury? swear not: false
swearing is deadly; true swearing is dangerous; not to swear at all is secure.
Those that have worshipped stones, have been afraid to swear falsely by them; Et
tu non times Deum praesentem? and do not thou fear that God which is every
where present, which sees all things generally without exception, Generaliter
sine exceptione, evidenter sine dubitatione, immutabiliter sine oblivione.
evidently without doubt, immutably without forgetfulness?

Let me tell the Swearer in the words of another, Et si seras, severas tamen
exolvet poenas, though his punishment may be deferred, yet it shall be heavy.
Besides all other curses, this is one; Iis maxim nunquam qui jurant, creditur.
the swearer is not believed he will certainly be false to man, which is not
true to Gods honor. O matchless folly! that men should through open slewces
let their souls run out for nothing.

Patemus undique Deo, God sees that which man cannot, they pervert Justice: but
man will discover them too. I have read that Ferdinand the Emperor possessed a
great number of Watches wherein he much delighted; it pleased him once to put
this his variety of speaking Gold upon a Table, as if he would expose it to
sale. Going a side, one that stood by, driven by a desire of stealing, or
occasion, stole one of them: which the Emperor espying with an oblique eye,
called him to him, and held him in various discourse, till the Watch striking,
discovered the hour and his theft. He which deceives with unjust measure may
well apply this; what he has done, has a tongue to discover him when it is
moved by a true hand, and a just measure: which done, Sua se prodit
conscientia, nec scipso judice absolvi potest, his conscience does betray him,
and though himself be judge, he cannot be absolved, habet conscientiam and
conscium, he has a witness within, and another without. By this time he
blushes, where I leave him with restitution to repent.

Oculos comprimo, and omnia ubique plana sunt, I shut my eyes (says he) and
all things every where are plain: like this man are these which cannot believe
but there is danger, yet fear it not; they know Gods presence, but not
reverence it. It is to be lamented, that men have too dark, shops: but more,
that they have too dark minds; let them remember who it was which said, There
is nothing hid which shall not be made manifest. A shop may be too dark, and
it may be too light: therefore it is, or should be so ordered, that least
Commodities be sold too dear, shops shall not be too dark; and lest they be
sold too cheap, they shall not be too light.

It is ordinary to prey upon the Sellers occasion to use money, or the Buyers
to use the commodity: but this should move pity, not cruelty. Pliny says of
the Lion, parcit semper subjectis, and shall man be so unjust as to do less?
or if man, far be it from a Citizen, who conversing with most men, should have
most humanity.

Guiana, when they promise any thing, will deliver a bundle of sticks equal to
the number of days or months that they appoint, and for themselves will have
another bundle of the like number: every day or month they take away a stick;
when all is taken away, they know the time of their appointment is come. Thus
careful are they in observing their time, but how negligent are we! It was
well said by reverend Jewel, (the Jewel of his time) O nos miseros qui
Christiani dicimur! hoc tempore gentes agimus sub nomine Christi. It Is our
misery, that we are called Christians, yet live like Heathen under that name:
but here it were well if we could gentes agere do like these Heathen: they
which are so backward in payment, are like ill Singers says one) they should
be sent to the compter, a good Singing school for them to learn to keep better
time in.

Zeno Catticus, that he had a servant taken in theft, whom he commanded to be
slain; pleading for himself, he said the Fates had appointed he should
steal. I and that you should suffer too (quoth Zeno) so for those that break,
and that out of policy to deceive, let them prove the appointment of it, their
punishment is sure enough, designed. Was there ever any of these, but it might
be said of him, Sensit opus he felt the smart of it? he may seem to prosper
for a time, and we may wonder that the way of the wicked should do so; but
Divinity it self will answer us, there is no peace to the wicked; if no peace
no prosperity. Yet some there are whom I must pity, (not enveigh against) the
violent blasts of cross accidents have blown them down, they would pay every
man his own, but cannot; of these I must say, as Augustine in another case; it
is not so much to be considered what they do, Non est considera^ dum quid
fac^^nt sed quo animo et voluntate.
and with what mind they do it, it is with grief enough. These are those
broken ones into whom Charity must power the balm of Comfort; they have broken
estates, and broken hearts.

Offic lib. ^.
as Cicero honestly.

If a man in time of dearth bring a Ship laden with Corn, and know that there
are a great many more Ships coming within few days; if he dissemble this,
taking advantage of the present want, to sell his Corn at too high a rate, he
is condemned for hard and unjust dealing: so a consideration of what cases do
lessen and increase the price, does here offer it self.

There is as much injustice in selling commodities too cheap, as too dear:
D'vn petit ruisseau sort souvant une grande viviere.
the beginning of the evil may seem small, but the end is great, says the
French phrase.

cheap as the English Merchant, which must spoil his trade; the decay of the
trade into Russia came by this means.





care in selling them thus being the greater: not to do so, is to undervalew
the labor and care of the whole profession.

Lastly, commodities may be sold dearer for time, then ready money: sale is a
perpetual alienation of the property for a price; but that that price should
be alienated for a time, is not the most ancient nor most true way; it should
be paid upon the receipt of the wares, which so paid may by industry be
increased, not paid; thence follows a sensible want of what might have been
gained, which the buyer in conscience ought to recompense; and the seller may
take, if the other be not poor, or a looser by the wares thus bought: I have
heard and read words against this, but not arguments.



thus occasion of selling them again; they must be sold cheaper, lest many
thousands, as it may fall out, suffer detriment by them in buying them at too
dear a hand.

Merces oblatae vilescunt, prosered wares grow cheap yet this is no sufficient
reason of lessening the price, unless the thing thus sold be little profitable
to the buyer; or such as he would not buy, but because of its cheapenesse, or
buying it, rather respecting the seller then himself.

price is to be lessened. I might insist upon some other petty cases lessening
and increasing the price, but let this suffice: all contracts must tend Ad
bonum ipsorum contrahentium, to the good of them which make them. So shall all
injustice be avoided. That my Citizen may do so: I desire that he may never
forget, that God is Totus oculus, all eye; and so must see all his Actions.
There is a figure in Rhetoric called Conversio, resolving many questions with
one answer, which St. Basil uses thus: his Disciples sought who amongst them
was most often angry? who was most slow to divine service? whose mind most
often wandered at Prayers? Qui non semper cogitat suarum actionum, and
cogitationum inspectatorem esse Deum.
He answered all at once thus; he that does not always think that God is the
beholder of his thoughts and actions. So if it be demanded; who is a flatterer,
dissembler, liar, deceitful person? I answer, he who thinks not that God
takes notice of his doings.

He who remembers this, will live Justly, and that God which sees him do so,
has a blessing for him; surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come
near him; he will draw him out of many waters, as he did Moses; he will keep
him safe in the midst of many waters, as he did Jonas: so trouble shall not
hurt him, he and his seed after him shall prosper.

But unjust wicked deceitful ways are so common, that I must say nothing of
blessings, they must sleep a while; Mercy go aside, Peace return to the God
of Peace, and not be spoken of. There is Judgment with thee O Lord, with thee
there is ruin and subversion, with thee there is battle and famine, with
thee there are snares, plagues, storm and tempest, fire and brimstone, and
therefore thou shall be feared. Thou art as a Cart pressed under the sheaves,
Praegravatum oneri, loaded too much, and that Vsque ad stridorem, till thou
make a noise, till thou complain of it: and that daily by thy Ministers,
that thy noise is Gemibundus stridor, uttered from them with dressed sighs: but
if any oppress thee thus, it should not be London, for whom thy mercy has
done so much, that they are quieter in their houses, then their friends abroad
in their Castles; they have many Conduits to convey Comforts to their Souls,
which others wa^der many leagues for. Thy mercies toward them are new and
strange, and their peace which includes them all, has an Eve upon it: if God
be Subter, under, which is no fit place for his Majesty; Me thinks he should
not be Subter vos, under you of London, my words will not be regarded: I
therefore speak from the mouth of David; Psalm. 107.
God turns a fruitful Land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein: and from Augustine, Civitatis eversio, morum, non murorum casus.
the ruin of a City is not wrought by the walls weakness, but the Citizens
wickedness. Livy has observed, that Rome began to lose all, when sin
abounded amongst all. In Gellius mention is made of the Horse of Sejanus,
called Sejus; this Horse a goodly Horse to look on, but whosoever owned it was
still unfortunate: such a thing is Injustice, fair to the eye; but he prospers
not that uses it. Intramuros hostis.
The enemy is within the walls: this enemy is Injustice, but shall that be
found in Sion? if the same things be there that were in Sodom, how then shall
not God do to one City, as to another? or shall there be any difference
between the one and the other? but that it shall be easier in the day of
Judgment for them of Sodom, then for them of Sion: the more grace Sion, the
more grace London has received; the more fearfully for her sins shall she
be punished and tormented. But lest I be censured for putting my Sickle into
the Divines Harvest, I turn this discourse into a Prayer; beseeching God to
guide my Citizen so in the way of Justice, that he may follow him who said, Ego
sum veritas, I am the truth: let him endeavor to be with him; truth in words,
not knowing how to deceive; Truth in thoughts, not knowing how to be deceived:
Truth in deeds, conforming his Actions to the Divine will; following him thus,
which is the truth; he follows him which is the way too, Et illa vi^ quae
ducit ad vitam, and that way which leads to life, to a good life here, to a
better hereafter.

So I come to my second thing.

He shall live Pleasingly to Himself. Others.

BUt how shall he live so to himself? Philosophy professes sorrow to be
natural to all conditions, pleasure is but a stranger. in pleasure, it quickly
vanishes: so he tastes of happiness, but drinks deep of misery, according
to the French Proverb; Lo ma^vient par livres and (...) va par onres.
evil comes by pounds, but goes away by ounces: the best condition of this
life has bin so undervalewed, that even wise men have said; had man bin worthy
to have known what life was before he received it, Nemo vitam acciperet si
daretur scientibus.
he would have bin loath to have accepted it. This made Seneca embrace death,
as his deliverer from misery, saying, as he bled to death, Scalpello aperitur
ad illam magnam libertatem via, with a penknife is the way opened, to that
great liberty. The Mexicanes thus salute their Children coming out of the
Womb; Infant, thou art come into the World to suffer: endure, suffer, hold thy
peace. They observed the condition of all men to be full of trouble: And I
have observed that the condition of a Citizen is full of trouble, more then
ordinary. As no man has pleasure or profit without the price of some evil, so
he pays a greater price for them, Dij nos hommes quasi ^ilas habent.
then most men do. God makes men his Balls; and of these Balls, who is more
tossed up and down then the Citizen? He never rests: thus his state seems
miserable. But nothing is so which custom has brought into nature: every
milk soppe can swim in hot bathes; (...)
but he is the man, that can endure violent Tides, and still swim aloft. In came
intravimus Civitatem, ubi his legibus vivitur. We have entered into the City,
where we must live by these Laws: to desire Freedom from all trouble is
vain, yet that my Citizens trouble may not be so great, I now endeavor.



Arithmetic, and a right way of keeping Books; by these a great Trade may be
drawn into a little compass, bringing forth that with pleasure, which the
nature of most could not do without excessive pain.

Socrates, a Sentence of great Weight. If he study the liberal Arts, he must
do it superficially; so as not to be swallowed up of them, lest he be
brought to say with Ovid, I can utter nothing but Art.

Quic quid (...).
Of all bodies politic, the Lacedemonian built by Lycurgus, was the best;
which often overcame Athens, yet never boasted of Learning. And it is worth the
noting, that Rome for the first five hundred years flourisht by Virtue, not
Learning; whereas now decayed, it has more Learning, little Virtue. And have
not our times seen those which have had almost all Aristotle and Cicero in
their heads, to be the worst, in the execution of business? Policy when it is
natural, works free and quietly; it is without noise, whereas the other is of
an ambitious clamor. I speak not this against Learning; for a Citizen may use
her, so she be not imperious, but assistant: yet let me say, that Discretion,
which is above Learning, does sufficiently in able a man to improve in all his
affairs, what ever he is or has, to the best advantage; the other stands in
Contemplation, this is busy in action. It Is neither Wit, Wisdom, Learning,
Art, liberal, or illiberall; but that which shows how to govern them all
conveniently, and every other thing with them, like Iphicrates, who was neither
Legionary, Soldier, nor Archer, nor Targeter: but one who could rule and use
all these.

Again, let him not have too great a care of the future: Future things shall
in their times become present, therefore the care of the present suffices. It
was said at first, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread. He
did not say (says Augustine) In solicitudine and cura, in solicitude and care;
we may be careful, but our care must not have a kind of sickness with it,
like that of covetous men. A good Bishop could have preached against this humor
a whole hour together, and have said nothing but beware of Covetousness;
Amorus est mundus et diligitur, t^tas ^i dulcis esset qualiter (...)?
it is a wonder to see what anxious thoughts men have, and all for the world,
which is bitter, and yet it is loved: but how would it be loved, if it did
become sweet? What extreme care do men take to increase their wealth? Yet it is
worth knowing, that this care has not success; for Divine Providence will not
be bound by our provisions; those have been most quiet and prosperous in their
Actions that have been ready at hand to apprehend the present occasion with
alacrity: a man may be careful for to morrow with content; if too careful,
he misseth it: to be negligent in our affairs is a defect; to dwell longer
in them then will serve for due deliberation, and firm resolution, is excess;
both disturb our peace. As the Emperor would add City to City, Country to
Country, Nation to Nation: so men strive to join hundreds to hundreds,
thousands to thousands; thinking that when their proposed estate is acquired,
they can then rest; O fools, they may do so before if they please; for every
man is rich, or may be so if his mind hinder not: that man is truly wealthy,
which wanting a great estate, wants not a mind which does not desire it.

they should, some things before they should, and some things trouble us which
should not. It is strange to consider that most of our trouble should arise
from most small causes, and that accidents should touch us more than the
principal. The Robe of Caesar troubled Rome more than his twenty two stabs,
and the lesser circumstances move us more many times than the Subjects
themselves: in all these we are all so miserable, as we think our selves; how
quietly might we then live, if finding our selves disturbed, we lie not
swelling in our passion, but get up to the top of our reason, and fall into
some contrary qualification. So the Dolphins at the beginning of a Tempest,
which arising from the bottom of the Sea when it is troubled with hot
exhalations and vapors, mount up to the top of the water for refrigeration.

Democritus promised to resuscitate Artaxerxes his dead friend, upon condition
that the Inscription of his Tomb might be the names of thirty men that had
lived to the twentieth year of their age without grief; they sought thirty,
but found none. I might promise the like impossibility upon condition, that I
might see the names of thirty Citizens which have traded twenty, nay ten years,
whose Books are without some debts, which they never hope to see discharged:
but what of that? Quid miraris bonos viros ut confirmentur, concuti? Why do
thou wonder that good men are smitten, to be confirmed? Our Savior showed his
glory in Tabor but to three, and those his Apostles: but why was there no
Centurion, no Publican? or why not all the Apostles? There was a world of
people saw him on the Cross, and good reason for it (says one) Prosperitas
vix ullis, Crux and afflictio innumeris solet prodesse, prosperity scarce
profits any, the Cross and affliction does many good; and therefore
Bonaventure said, he had rather go with Christ to Golgotha then to Tabor.
Shall a man be weary of his life, because it is accompanied with trouble and
losses? no, our Savior (our Head) was crowned with Thorns: Heu male
convenient delicata membra sub spinoso capite.
Oh how ill do delicate members agree with a Thorny head. When Marcus
Aurelius, and others his Soldiers and Citizens of Rome wore Garlands to
testify their joy publicly: One of them a Christian wore his Crown upon his
arm, not head: saying, Non decere Christianum in hac vita coronari, that it
did not become a Christian to be crowned in this life: a man must suffer
losses, At tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior ito quam tua te fortuna sinet.
Virg.
but let him not be so unwise, as with vexation to debar himself of rest,
when even his tears cannot recover a loss, or recall time: make things ill
done, better, we may; to make them not to be at all, requires more than humane
strength or finite power. Actions once past may admit a correction, not a
nullity; why then should losses trouble a man, or make his heart not his own?
'Twas well said of one; who has himself, has lost nothing.

all. Versa est in cineres Troja, Troy is turned into ashes. Suppose my Citizen
broken; he has endeavored to prosper, but divine providence has not seconded
his care, which is a question; he has surely neglected some means, he has
bin an ill husband, and spent too much time and money in vain: let him have my
advice before my comfort: I would have him, though he leave himself worth
nothing, to pay every man all their own; or if he compound for a part, let him
resolve to pay all, and endeavor to be able.

Here Is his comfort; by suffering he shall overcome, Romani sedendo vincunt,
the Romans overcome with sitting still: his soul because his intentions are
sincere, is quiet, sits still: And by how much the more quiet, by so much the
more strong. Great aspersions lie heavy upon his name, great sorrow lies heavy
upon his soul; now patience being added to give him, and Sic vinci est
vincere, so to be overcome is to conquer. His blessings which he had before,
were of the Lord: how then can he want, who by patience keeps him that gave
them? He that has taken away, can give more: what wicked Cain said of his
sins, they are greater then can be forgiven, no Christian may say of his
losses; they are greater then can be given: God can bless above losses, so he
blessed Jobs latter end, more then his beginning. Perhaps he had not seen
fortunes both faces before: now providence sends adversity to make his wisdom
greater, Quae nocent docent, which the Greeks express elegantly, (...), we
grow wise by our blows. Illustrious Hanibal having long time been conversant
in war, did boast thus of himself, and that deservedly; Age, Prosperity, and
Adversity have so instructed me, Vt rationem sequi quam fortunam malim, that I
had rather follow reason then fortune: he had never attained his height of
wisdom, had he not been thrown down, that he might rise strengthened. My
experience, which is not of much more then seven years standing in the City
has furnished me with examples of those, who have fallen from a mean estate,
and risen to a greater; which are examples not of falling, Exempla non
cadendised sicecideris resurgendi. August.
but of rising, in case thou fallest. He was a wise King that would be
pictured swimming, with this motto, Luctor, non mergor, I strive, I am not
drowned. And the famous Admiral Chabotco would be symboliz'd by a ball, with
this inscription, Concussus surgo, being smitten I rise higher.

But above all examples take this: our Savior calling to Saul, said, arise,
and stand upon thy feet: as if he had said (says one), Ideo te dejeci, ut
fortior surgeres, I have therefore thrown thee down, that thou might rise
more strong. And this was the voice of that great Apostle, Cum infirmor, tunc
potens sum, when I am weakened, I then grow mighty: This I speak that he may
do his soul good, that he may by his affliction rise in his Religion, Rarae
fumant seiicibut arae.
as well as in his estate; men are seldom Religious in prosperity: he
therefore, and only he gets by his breaking, that is after it more humble,
more pitiful, more mortified, more given to prayer, Fori^ auper, intus dives.
and the like duties; doing thus, if he be poor without, he is rich within,
Nostrae facultates and turum ^hristus, (...) abundabis. B^^. L^p. tom. 2.
Habet intus quo gandeat, he has that within him, whereof he may rejoice. Our
wealth and gold is Christ come to him and you shall abound with true riches. He
now breaks off his former careless way, Et mutatus mutatum invenit, and finds
God that was angry before, to be now kind. Nothing but his sinning could keep
off Gods blessing, now nothing but a continued serious repentance breaks off
sinning; which repentance with the whole course of piety, I advise may not fall
short, but reach out as far as the blessing expected: for that falls not upon
the beginning of a spiritual grace, but the latter end; he and only he that
endures to the end, shall receive the Crown. Nothing can lay claim to the
eternal blessings of God, but perseverance, which is the eternity of man. If
thou would then from the loss of temporal blessings, get those which are
spiritual, if thou would by Jacobs ladder clyme from the blessings of Earth,
which are the foot of it, to the blessings of Heaven, which are the top of it;
Remember that upon that ladder were Angels ascending and decending, but none
standing still; therefore persevere.

Non conturbabit sapiens publicos mores, nec populum in se novitate vitae
convertet.
yet they run from it to prophanenes. Superstition and Schism, are both bad;
the one erects an absolute Tyranny in the minds of men, the other gives way to
all looseness. He was a wise Statist that said, he had rather have a man an
Atheist, Papists call the true way (...), the Nove^lists Formality.
then either of them, because he seldom petturbs states, and is ever most
wary: but to our purpose, let his Religion teach him to have his soul still
panting after Heaven, stealing up thither in the midst of business, as if he
were there ever more conversant, whence he looks for a Savior. Man is made
De terra and ex terra, in the earth, and of the earth, non tamen ad terram, nec
propter terram, sed ad Coelum and propter Coelum, (says one) but not to the
earth, or for the earth; but to Heaven, and for Heaven. He whom no business
should put out of our minds, is in Heaven, Resurrexit non est hic, he is
risen, he is not here: Look for him in the Church, you shall hear of him
there: look for him by invocation, and a conscionable diligence in thy
Calling, and the holy Ghost will show him there: and when thou have thus found
him, he will take thee up to Heaven, to reign with him there. Saint Chrysostom
m and Hierome wonder at the Eunuch mentioned in the eighth Chapter of the Acts,
He was a Barbarian distract with many businesses he read: and though he did
not understand, yet he read, and that in the way in the Chariot: Si talis in
ipso itinere qualis in quiet domi fuisse credendus est, if he were thus
devoted in his journey; how would he have been in quiet at home? if he a
Heathen did thus much upon the way; shall not we Christians do much more in
our Shops? to mind the affairs of the soul, is the way to prevent
distraction, not to further it; as Physicians say of sorrow for sin, it hurts
not the heart as worldly sorrow does: so I may say, it is worldly care, not
this care that troubles our peace. So much of his living pleasingly to himself.

He shall live Pleasingly to others.
Which that he may perform, he must be assisted by behavior: without this,
his other qualities will not help him. It cannot but be distasteful to any
man, coming into a Shop, when he sees a man stand as if he were drowned in
phlegm and puddle; having no other testimony of his being awake, than that his
eyes are open. It is expected that the outward carriage should promise what is
within a man.

Except liberality, courtesy is more regarded of men than any virtue: it pays
a great deal, yet is never the poorer: it satisfies every man, yet lessens not
the Stock: it is a good Character of a good nature, and it has been observed
that few men have risen to great Fortunes, which have not been courteous.
These small ceremonious matters win great commendations, because they are
continually in use and note; whereas the occasion of a great virtue comes but
seldom. To use these not at all, is to teach others not to use them, and so to
diminish respect: they have in them a certain well-becomming majesty, if they
be used without pride or affectation. To make no difference in the use of
them, to a Lord, and a Ploughman kissing their hands, and bowing as low to a
Chamber-maide, as to her Lady, is uncomely. It was well said of one, Corpus
animum tegit and detegit, the body, the outward carriage of it covers and
uncovers the mind, which should be to some more open, to some more hid. Let my
Citizen then use Ceremonies, but not with affectation, neither let him use them
too often. He cannot comprehend great matters, that breaks his mind too much
to small observations.

But there is an inward thing, which unless it be added to these, makes them
all nothing. A Schoolmaster had in his place of exercise, a Glass, wherein
he caused his Scholars to behold themselves. If they were comely, he would
tell them what pity it was that goodly bodies should be possessed with
defective minds: if they were ill-favored, he would tell them they should
make their bodies fair, with dressing their minds handsomely.

If the behavior and countenance be good; the adorning the mind, doubles the
excellency: If ill, it will make it good, when a man's mind performs what his
body promises not.

His mind must be stuf't with sufficiency to produce pleasing discourse,
wherein he must not be so lavish as to hinder his observation, and become
tedious to him he deals with. To speak all he can at once (as if he were
making his Will) is not the way to please: the best way to do that, is to know
how to be silent; and when he speaks, to let his speech not be accompanied
with vehemence: his words should flow from his mouth, so that it might be said
of them, they are non tam verba quam mella, not so much words as Honey. And I
would have these words tied to his Commerce, for therein his Customer will
commonly take more delight to hear, than he to speak. All he speaks of,
that must be true: However the Dress be, Truth is constantly the same; it
still keeps the same Splendour, that if it met with masculine and true
elocution fitted to the matter and circumstances, is praise worthy: but note
that it always gives more grace and luster to the speech, than possibly it can
borrow from it. Yet because men are most taken with pleasing words, let them be
discreetly chosen, and properly applied: For as speech makes a man more
excellent than a Beast, so eloquence will make him more excellent than other
men: but to this must be added a grave natural action, wherein a man may see
the visage, hands, and members of the man to speak with his mouth; and thus
persuading his Customer to the liking of his commodity, he must put on the
same liking himself; for putting on the same passion he would stir up in
others, he is most like to prevail: Yet in as much as he is to deal with men
of diverse conditions, let him know that to speak according to the nature of
him with whom he commerceth, is the best Rhetoric.

I must needs condemn the using of one phrase to all men, and the mistrusting
of every man's senses with, do you hear Sir, and to tell every man he will
make a word; as if he would be thought an augmenter of learning is vain: but
if he means to speak his mind, at once I wish him so to do, for that is the
old and the best way. He that sold Abraham the field for burial, asked what he
would, and had it; but the custom of our times is contrary, Et quod censuetum
praesumitur esse justum, and what is usual is presumed to be just: yet I
desire every man to use as few words as possible he may; so the way of making
bargains, may in time be brought to the first and best state.

I shall not tax the ordinary phrase, what lack ye; it being great policy,
for a man to entreat for his own necessities, by asking others what they want;
but the too common use of it sounds harsh. I would not have a man's throat
worn like a high way, let him step a little out of the common Road: but taking
heed of the other extreme, he must not become a wilful maker of compleme^ts,
and so a tyrannous torment to his customer, who will count him for a man of a
troublesome spirit, if he find him infected with impertinent ceremonies.

To his superior, his words must carry much humility in them; to his equals
familiarity, which because he shall be sure of from them, must be mingled with
a little state.

To his inferiors familiarity too, but not too much of it, lest he breed
contempt; yet his words may carry a great deal, for with inferiors he shall
be sure of reverence. To conclude this, that my Citizen may deal pleasingly
with all men; I would have him be a good Linguist, getting so many Languages,
and those so well, that if it were possible, every man he deals with, should
think him his Countryman. These observations are necessary to his profit;
for he shall hardly get by that man, whom he cannot please.

So I come to my third part.

He shall live Profitably. to Himself. Others.

To Himself.
IT cannot be denied but outward accidents conduce much to a man's Fortune, as
death of others, occasion fitting virtues; but most commonly the folly and fall
of one man, is the fortune of an other: no man prospers so suddenly, as by
others errors: Serpens nisi ser^en tem comederit, non fit Draco.
therefore Daemades the Athenian needed not to have condemned a man of the City
for selling necessaries, belonging to burialls, saying, his great profit could
not come unto him without the death of many; for what man almost profits, but
by the loss of others? Was not Romes rising by the ruin of her neighbor
Cities? do not most Traders thrive by the licentiousness of youth? the
Husband man by the dearth of Corn: the Architect by the ruin of houses, the
Lawyer by contentions between men, the Physicians by others sicknesses? this
is not contrary to the general policy of nature; for Physicians hold, that the
birth and augmentation of every thing, is the alteration and corruption of
another; God takes from one, and gives to another; but let no man desire it;
for the Commandment is, thou shall not covet: there are then and must be
external causes of a man's rising.

But there is some hidden virtue, which must bear a great stroke in the
business. Solomon says, he that considers the wind, shall not sow; and he
that looks to the clouds shall not reap: whereupon says one; a wise man
will make more opportunities then he finds.

Is the maine thing which raises a man's estate without him, or within him?
Quaeritur.

Livy tells us of Cato seuior, that he was so well accomplished in mind and
body; that in what place soever he had bin borne, Quocunque loco natus esset,
fortunam sibi facturus videretur. Livy.
he could have made himself a fortune. There are then open virtues which bring
forth praise; but hidden and secret ones which bring forth fortune.

Certain deliveryes of a man's self, which have no name; like the milkie way
in the sky, which is a meeting of many small stars, not seen asunder, but
giving light together, for there are a number of scarce discerned virtues,
which make men fortunate.

why ill success should follow upon the mature deliberation of wise men, was
answered thus; they were Masters of their deliberation, not of the success of
their affairs. Timotheus the Athenian, when he had in the account, It was the
Spartan resolution, Ad mota manu fortunam invocare. Judge. 7.20. The sword of
the Lord and of Gideon; the one as Conca, the Fountain, the other as Canalis
the Conduit.
he gave to the State, often interlaced this speech; and in this fortune had no
part: it was noted of him, that he never prospered afterward. Divine
providence must have it is due, there is no rising without it: laying both these
together, the question will be resolved thus; a man's industry with Gods
blessing upon it, is that which makes him fortunate; both have force in the
business; it is clearly false, that one does all, and the other nothing. The
advice of wisdom then, is not wholly to settle our selves to one, for they
mutually attend each other.

It was the plot of Joseph's Religion to preserve him honest, Virtute duce,
comite fortuna.
that he might remain fortunate: Therefore the first thing that I advise to,
that my Citizen may live profitably; is that he be sincerely and constantly
Religious; so he may expect Gods blessings upon his labor, to which I proceed.

If a man should at every weeks end consider with himself, how he has spent
it, how many hours might he reckon up, which he cannot tell how he bestowed,
besides eating and drinking? how many needless Items would he find given to
sleep? Item seven nights, Item perhaps seven half afternoones, besides
half hours, and quarters, at unaccustomed times; had those men for whose
great estates the World has had them in admiration, kept eight a Clock hours;
fame had never had them upon Record: as indeed I never knew a perpetual
bed-presser so much as mentioned, but to his disgrace. Adam in the state of
Innocence, must dress the Garden, and after it was said, in the sweat of thy
brows, thou shall eat thy bread; the precept is Labor, and there is a reward
annexed to it; therefore Solomon said, see thou a man diligent in his
business? that man shall stand before Kings.

Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures
everlastingly, (says our Savior) Should we hear of labor, and not of
Everlasting life, we should be discouraged: so, should we hear of labor,
and not of profit, we could have little comfort in employment. But shall we
think Providence has nimble feet, if ours be slow? Shall we eat and not work?
shall we think with the Lillies (which neither spin nor labor) our clothes
will grow upon us? God forbid: or shall we think the labor of others shall
suffice for us? no, let him that will take the profit, take the pains. Selim
the first, had reason to say, that he thought victories gotten in the Masters
absence, not to be complete: as it is in Military, so in Civil affairs; and
that man may blush for shame, who puts off his business to his Servants, doing
nothing himself, but by thoughts and verbal direction.

Julian the Emperor was ashamed any man should see him spit or sweat, because
he thought continual labor should have concocted and dried up all such
superfluities. Thus he a Heathen testified his hate to idleness; and shall we
whom Christianity has taught that we came into the world to labor, sit
still? I speak not this against a man's employing others in his affairs, when
their burden is too heavy for him: but I would have a Master do, as well as
direct; for nothing does more derogate from his respect, than that he lets his
Servant be sole Master of his Trade, while he is but Master of the Servant,
and in the mean time being a slave to an idle disposition, is less honorable
than his Man. He must labor, but there is Labor importunus, and non
opportunus, the first is too solicitous, the second is out of its time; both
these must be avoided. For the first, Male cuncta ministrat impetus, force
gives all things ill. The Lions rore, yet they suffer hunger, while the quiet
Sheep have a Shepherd to provide for them; a too sharp intention hinders the
wise conduct of business. Ipsa se velocitas implicat, unde fostinatio tarda
est.
He that is hasty, stumbles, and is stayed, whether he will or not. Velocity
does entangle it self: whence it comes to pass, that haste is slow, an over
ardent way in dealing is never without many indiscreet actions and wrongs: Even
in play, he that is carried with an earnest thirst of gaming, troubles
himself: and the more he troubles himself, the more he loses. He that
walks moderately, is always with himself, and directs his business with
the best advantage. Therefore one said, well, let us stay a while, that we may
make an end the sooner. The deliberate man is always ready for a new change,
festinat lent, he makes haste, yet goes slowly. I would have my Citizen
diligent, but not passionate: they deceive themselves, which think businesses
are not well done, unless they be done with tempest and clamor.

For the second, there is a time to eat, and a time to drink, a time to
sleep, a time for recreation as well as for labor. Labor may be as meat, Et
data non a^to tempore vina nocent. Ovid.
which out of it is time does hurt, not nourish: but above all, let us not by
labor commit Sacrilege, we must not make our souls feasts movables. Gods
time is measured out by inches, ours by else: since he has so little allotted
him, let us not take from him any of that. How can we expect Gods blessing upon
our day, if we serve not him upon his Day? Nay, if we will be blessed in the
week day, let us pray in the week days, Ibi nunquam res humanae prospere
succedunt ubi negliguntur divinae: there humane business does not succeed
well, where divine is neglected.

Let us not omit that time of public prayer which the Church has appointed,
let not our labor be so out of time, as to take up that time: O Tempora, O
Mores! What a change is here! in King Edwards time, Sixth.
when our Land was delivered from that Fogge of Egypt; with what joy, Nil adeo
magnum, nec tam mirabile quicquam principio, quod non minuu^t mirarier omnes
pau latim.
readiness, and thanksgiving did the people come to hear the Liturgy in
their own tongue? but nothing is so great or admirable in the beginning; of
which men do not lessen their admiration by little and little: Now men come to
it, as if preaching were against praying, we shall have more Pillars in the
Church, than men. It is well that it is said, Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. Had the promise been
tied to a greater number, those few that are sometimes assembled might doubt of
success. No question but the times might prosper as well as ever they did, if
our Temples were filled with praying, as well as preaching, as they have been.
O the wonderful sweetness of Divine Letanies, where many hands and hearts are
lifted up! hands in purity, hearts in piety! hands in good works, hearts in
good thoughts. Who is able to conceive the unspeakable value of public
Services? of these sacred and heavenly Evaporations? they are more than the
breath of Spices; they are none other than the Emissions of Paradise, when the
Organs are blown, and the Cymbals make a noise; when the voices are heard, and
the whole Quire of Religious men do fill the air with loud cries, and vocal
symphonies of devout and patheticall invocations, then do the Spices flow, the
Odours are burnt, Apocal. 8.4.
and the smoke of our Incense goes up before the Lord from the Angels hand. To
labor, when these Prayers are to be performed; to labor at such a time, must
needs be out of time: so labor, if it be not importunus, nor non opportunus,
my Citizen may have profit by it: these things considered, let him endeavor to
grow rich. They report of the Birds of Norway, that they fly faster than the
Fowls of any other Country; by an instinct they know the days in that Climate
to be very short, not above three hours long, and therefore they make the more
haste. Let him learn of the Fowls of the Air, which know their times, and
considering his lives shortness, let him be the more industrious. Let him
labor and consider it is for wealth, Dives liber, honoratus, pulcher rex
denique rer^m Hoc Epi.
the monyed man is the mighty man: Honor, Liberty, and Royalty attend on
Riches; Logic fails, Rhetoric faints, when Gold pleads the Cause. Orpheus
his Harp, Amphions Music, Virgils Muse, Tullies Tongue are silent: Quamvis
non angina correptus, sed argentangina corruptus fuerit Orator. Plut.
yea Thundering Demosthenes will complain of the Squinsies, if money forbid him
to play the Orator: they only despise Riches, which despair of them; like the
Fox in the Fable, cursing the Grapes he could not reach. Divitae ne malae
put^antur; dantur bonis; ne summae, malis. Aug.
not evil in themselves, it may become a good man to labor for them. The
Poor and the Rich meet together, and the Lord is the Maker of them all,
(says Solomon) The holy Ghost has placed Lazarus so poor in the bosom of
Abraham that was so rich, to show that Rich and Poor, if they be indenizon'd
in the Kingdom of Grace, have an equal interest in the Kingdom of Glory.

labor for them.

Aristotle is not to be taxed for making Riches necessary for some of the
Virtues: they are out of all question, Bonum unde facias bonum, a good by which
thou may do good.



Lastly, let the consideration of that grand Senator, the Lord Mayors Dignity,
with his Brethren the right Worshipful Aldermen show, what a man in time may
come to, if he be industrious in his Calling.

Senators ought to be rich, for these Reasons.





Animal periculosissimum Rex pauper, to have a poor Governor is a great
plague. Thus let the Honor which any man may be called to, move him to get
Riches; the means is ordained, together with the end.

In the reign of King RICHARD the first, in the year of Grace, 1188. Sir
HENRY FITZ-ALLEN, who was the first Lord Mayor of London, continued in that
Dignity four and twenty years, and beside him many have held the place 3. or
4. times.

But excellent policy has now so ordered, that every year shall have a new
Major. Majores Magistratus sint perpetui, annui atque ambulatorij minores,
says a good Politician. Let the chiefest Magistrates be perpetual, the lesser
yearly, still removing. Besides other reasons, this is none of the least.

It encourages every man to labor, when his merits may be so Crowned; but
ambition must be avoided: there is a two fold way to honor, Direct when God
calls; Indirect when man seeks for it without his warrant. Let my Citizen mind
the way, as well as the end: let him not run to honors, but expect them, not
as one who seeks them, but deserves them.

It is not now the World, where a man shall bear the token of his desert about
him; virtuous men are not now so honored, that they may by triumphs imprint
their actions deeply in men's memories; nor is there such an equalness in
States, that all men's actions should be seen, with the like Judgment; and
indeed it were pity it were so now, for pride would ruin all in a moment:
Marcellus dedicated two Temples; the one to Virtue, the other to Honor, and
made them so, that none could enter into the Temple of Honor, but he that had
first gone through that of Virtue: my Citizen must not be ambitious, if he would
be honored, he must be virtuous as well as rich: why he must endeavor for
riches, has been showed. So I now proceed; as I would have him labor, so let
not his labor be overlong; there is a difference between providing for a man's
self and family, and doing nothing else: the affairs of the soul, the
refreshing of the body must be looked after, beside the public good has some
interest in every man's time.

The labors of less then the third part of the World, maintain all the
World: how many live idly? almost all women, which are half of the number;
or if women be employed, in their stead men be idle; put to those candid men,
and great men; then add the last and worst sort, the great number of beggars,
and you shall see that few labor, and of those, few be well employed. If the
labor of less then the third part maintaynes the World, less then the third
part of my Citizens time, one day with an other, will be sufficient for him;
unless his private affairs be extraordinary, or he be employed in the
public.

But before I speak any thing of his getting by his endeavor; let me say
something of his spending. I would have him think it more honorable to stoop
to petty savings, Plutarch says of Cato, that he held this for a maxim.
then to base gettings; let him imitate the thriftie King of France, who
thought it no discredit to tie a knot in a broken point, and reweare it.

'Twas only for Widows and Orphans to sufferany diminution in their estates.
Let him not haunt Taverns too much which is the Epidemicall fault of the City;
I know it is not company, but want of discretion in the choice and use of it,
which overthrowes a man; but besides needless expenses; Apollo will not keep
him company who makes Bacchus his chief God.
how can that man be fit for business, who makes his body a continual quagmire?
The refined wits of the separation, love brotherhood, not fellowship: we may
with the Apostle love brotherly fellowship, so making use of both, yet drink as
they did in the Primitive times, thinking Deum esse per noctem memorandum, that
God is to be remembered in the night, as well as in the day.

In mea patria venture est Deus (says one) in my Country the belly is the God;
and is it not so in ours? What infinite sums of money are sacrificed to it,
in procuring the Earth, the Air, the Sea, to center at one Table, making
Table-clothes like Peter's sheet, including creatures, clean, and unclean?
Our Fathers were they alive now, surely they could not tell the names of our
needless variety of dishes, without the help of a Kitching Dictionary; they
would wonder that Art should keep School in the Kitchen, and that the palats
of these times should be so ingenious.

I must not speak against good housekeeping; that cost is not vain, if the
poor may eat thereof: but Hospitality is now not known; the men of these
times were borne since the death of it.

answered, Haec laus metallorum, non hominis, this is the praise of the
metalls, Ornamentum est quod ornat, ornat autem quod honestiorem facit.
not of the man; that is the ornament of a man, which does adorn him; but that
only adornes him, which makes him more honest: I am not sumptuous says Seneca,
sed nemo aliter Romae vivere potest, but no man can live otherwise at Rome. O
why do we deceive our selves says he? the evil is within us, visceribus
haeret, it cleaves to our bowels, the fault is our own. Because I would not
be so tedious as to mention other expenses: Let me advise my Citizen only
with Seneca, to endeavor to have Plus vtalici quam viae, let him have more
provision for the way than of the way. Saint Bernard preaching the Funeral
Sermon for Gerardus the Steward of his Abbey at Clare Vallis, among many
commendations, gives him this: that he was Magnus in minimis, great even in
little matters, his care and circumspection extending to the smallest atome of
affairs: let my Citizen imitate him. Happy is he that deserves the title,
Fidelis in minimo, he shall be made owner of a great deal. Let him save any
thing he can save, without hurt to his conscience, or loss to his credit.

Crossing the appetite, as it is the way of Virtue, so the way of profit.

Thus I have opened the passage: let me now lead him into the way of profit.

Cunning is a crooked Wisdom: let him shun that, and take that wisdom which
is direct, which is not without honesty, nor ability; which teaches, that a
true knowledge of the parties with whom a man deals, is first necessary. He
must understand their nature, humor, inclination, designments, and
proceedings: so the nature of business in hand must be known too. A
superficial knowledge of it is not enough, a man must penetrate into the
inside, and see things in themselves, with the accidents and consequents that
belong thereunto; joining both these together, it will be easy for him to
profit, if according to the diverse natures of the persons and afaires, he
change his style, and manner of proceeding; Non se mu tat sed aptat.
as a wise Seaman, who according to the diverse state of the Sea, and change of
winds, does diversely turn his sails and rudder; knowing every man's nature and
fashions, he may lead him; knowing his ends, he may persuade him; knowing his
weakness or disadvantage, he may awe him; if the quality of the business be
understood, to the finding out of which, every man's own observation must be
set a work; which if it be diligent, will bring forth more then the best
writer is able to utter.

His words I would have to be few: Quod geminas aures, es quod natura dat unum,
nos docet audire plurima, pauca loqui.
It was well advised by Cleanthes; to one who entreated him to instruct his
son, he said, be silent; for beside the advantage he has of a talker in
having all he knows without paying of him any thing for it: silence is also
more becoming, and instructing: did all men think alike, secrecy were not
necessary; but since the speaker and expositer utter and receive with different
minds; speech cannot carry her meaning always just as a man would have her;
therefore a man must defend her impotency by keeping her in: otherwise he may
let loose many prisoners, which will betray him to disadvantage: let him
remember the Italian Proverb, La lingua del Savio e ascosta nel suo cuore, the
tongue of a Wiseman is hidden in his heart.

Those servants which are about a man must be enjoined secrecy. It is well
their Indentures mention it, and it were better if they did more regard it. I
wonder that the Barbarians generally do not deprive those Servants they employ
near them, of their tongues, as well as their privities: me thinks they
should be as jealous of their secrets, as their lusts: but the better wisdom
of the Turks is to have certain Mules to perform their executions. Scilla
found where Athens might be attempted by Flavius, that had the talking
disease, the Flux of words.

Next I would have my Citizen more wise, than to let his wife know of his
Affairs; every Man's experience can tell him of the mischief done by Women's
talking, without my citing Histories for examples.

If he do impart his secrets, let him know they cannot be kept secret,
unless committed to a few: this is an infallible precept, lay your estate (if
need requires) upon many, your thoughts and weighty intents upon few; among
many you shall hardly find one so honest, who will not abuse them to his
particular profit, if he know them. Tattling was once a safeguard, where the
Geese preserved the Roman Capitol by it: but such examples are very rare in
History.

Of his speaking let me deliver this: he must take counsel with himself
first, and then speak. I never knew a man better himself, or others, by those
words which came forth rashly. Let even the least circumstances be weighed; as
you would choose what to eat, Orbum per os ingressurum examinas, cur no^gr^ssu
rum per os verbum? Aug. in Psalm. 51.
so choose what to speak: thou examinest the meat that goes into thy mouth, so
examine the word that comes out of it: for this may work greater Tragedies
without thee, then that within thee.

But to proceed, let him which desires his actions should go forward with a
profitable success, deliberate upon them: the wisest say a man must consult
slowly, and execute speedily, deliberate with leisure, accomplish with
expedition, sometimes the contrary is practiced with good event, Subiti
Consilijs, eventu faelices, sudden in Counsels, happy in success: but this is
seldom, and by chance; according to which we must not direct our actions; as
he must consult with himself, so with other; (because no man's wisdom is
sufficient for all businesses), yet so as he ask, what is best to be done,
without telling what he will do; suffer not their counsel to go through with
resolutition, and direction, as if it depended upon them; take the matter back
into your own hands, to make it apeare to the World, that the final
directions, (which because they come forth with prudence, and power, are
resembled to Pallas armed), proceed from your self, and not from the
authority of your Counselors; but consider with whom you deliberate,
Clarissima sente^^^^, confide paucis, It is an excellent sentence, trust few.
Conside nulli, trust none, is a sentence too, but too strict; to counsel is
the best office of a friend; but let him be a friend with whom you counsel;
Om^^a cum amico delibera, (...) de ipso prius.
deliberate of all things with thy friend; but first of him; look that he want
neither of his two proper qualities, honesty, sufficiency. For the acting of
things, duly consulted upon, times and seasons must be well observed:
precipitation is an enemy to business, and the Stepmother of all good
actions: affected dispatch is a most dangerous thing; it is like that which
Physicians call predigestion, which is sure to fill the body full of crudities
and secret seeds of diseases: therefore measure not dispatch by the times of
employment, but by the advancement of the business.

If the case require the help of an other in a man's affairs; let him embrace
the use of his virtues, and officious service ableness; let him use him, and
his abilities so long as they may be used upon good terms, thankfully, and
respectively; remembering that the labourer is worthy of his hyre.

In some cases my Citizen may mingle profit with honesty, and enter into a
composition with both: he must never turn his back to honesty; yet sometimes
go about and coast it, using an extraordinary skill, which may be better
practiced then expressed; something which may be done openly, must be done
secretly, because of the misconstruing world; but this is a good rule, avoid
unjust ways, and of just ways, take those that are most plausible.

It is necessary, my Citizen defend himself, by this buckler, distrust, which
is a great part of prudence; it is even the very sinew of wisdom, for a man's
self to take heed of all men; the nature of the World induces a man to this,
which is wholly composed of lies, fraud, and counterfeit dealings. Opimius being
dangerously sick of a Lethargy; when some would share his goods, before the
breath was out of his body, his careful Physician caused his money to be
powered out before him, and bid him awake, Vt vivae vig^^a.
that he might live; so distrust will cure a Lethargy, of a sleepfull man it
makes a wakefull one, and so keeps out poverty; a man must trust few, and
those known by long experience, and distrust must be disguised; for open
diffidence inviteth as much to deceive, as an overcarelesse confidence; Seneca,
Multi fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli; many fearing to be deceived, have
taught how to deceive; whereas often a professed trust has taken away a desire
to deceive, by obliging fidelity; every man would be credited, and a belief of
his honesty, does many times bind him to be honest; a professed trust then does
well with a conceald diffidence. In the practice of which he must be very
circumspect, for I cannot warrant it in all cases to be just.

From this so ordered distrust, proceeds a comme^dable close commodious
carriage, which in matters of less importance, must for a man's credit sake
sometimes be laid aside; so with applause he may deal closely in matters of
weight; curious subtleties are no more so, when they are once discovered.

Let him not keep inferiors so distant, that he cannot afterward employ them
at his need: It was the wisdom of a French King, to do any thing to win that
man to him, which might benefit or hurt him; let him be liberal in his words,
so he bestows favors which cost him nothing; let him be free in his deeds, for
a benefit is the Father of a benefit. It was observed of Sejanus, that he could
not have bin advanced, without an infinite number of men obliged by his
favors; yet here let his discretion direct him, for small benefits are easily
forgotten; great ordinarily surcharge: some ungrateful ones neglect them, and
some would not there should be any, to whom they may account themselves as
debtors, wishing nothing more then the death of him that has done them good.

In conversing with equals, let him profess himself to be less then they;
let him be courteous and affable to them; for they that are so, will find their
enemies to be greater friends to them, then natural brothers will be to men
high minded.

If he deal with superiors let him make what use he can of them, but not
trust in them; among all mortal things, there is nothing more fading then that
power which has not support from it self; it is common for that man to be
unfortunat, which depends upon another. Let him endeavor by good courses to
win speedily the opinion of all honest men, which much imports to the
shortning that way, which guides to an eminent esteem: so let him strive to be
in his rising, assisted by many; other wise, he will find himself oppressed with
age, before he be rich, or well known.

Thus let him be diligent in the Quest of riches, and credit; but not
over-violent and long; he knows not how to begin to enjoy, which knows not
how to make an end of having: therefore let him be content with what he may
have, for abundance is not the end of evils, but the mutation. If doing these
things, he miss of wealth and esteem, let him not miss of virtue; for
though every fortune fail him, it is no mean fortune to be virtuous.

There is Sancta avaritia, a holy covetousness, let him never be satisfied
with doing good to his better part; I would have him think, that by every man
with whom he shall trade, he may benefit his mind something. If those which
trade with most men did so, we might wonder more at their wisdom, then we
do now at their wealth.

Thus my Complete Citizen shall live in his calling; that is a man's proper
calling, for which GOD has fitted him with ability. Secondly, it is his
calling, if he came to it by the ordinary way, of the place wherein he lives:
in stead of diverse sorts of men which I might here tax, I will instance but
one.

Many Petitions have bin put up to the high Court of Parliament, for the
suppressing of those brokers, which deal in cloth, and other commodities; the
reason of which alleged, I know not, but imagine this.



the City, a seven years Apprentiship, having been most of them before
Tailors, Tapsters, or the like, which is the cause of a third evil.



Thus I have showed how my Citizen shall live profitably to himself in his
way: but himself is too poor an end for an honest man's actions: let him not
be right earth, which only stands fast upon its one Center, whereas all things
which have affinity with the Heavens, move upon the Center of another, which
they benefit therefore.

He shall live Profitably to others.
FIrst, to his Wife. We are taught by the light of nature, that In Familia,
prima cura Vxoris habenda sit, in a Family, the first and chief care should be
of the Wife; she is a great Officer in the little Commonwealth the House; she
is I know an impediment to great enterprises: the best works of merit have
proceeded from the unmarried, which have sought eternity in memory, not in
posterity: and in regard of liberty, Quaeritis uxorem fu giat cur ducere
faelix? hoc sine jactura neminis ille nequit.
the unmarried man is most happy. Some have said wittily, and in my opinion
devoutly; marriage fills the earth, and virginity Heaven: but others have
better said, how should Heaven be full, if the Earth were empty? or how should
the earth but be empty without marriage? which the best Commonwealths have so
esteemed, that they have freed him from taxation and Offices, that had many
Children, but punished him for an unprofitable member that lived long single.

It is commendable for a Citizen to marry: but since his negligence may be his
Wifes undoing, let him live so profitably to her, as by his discretion to
direct her.

The ancient Heathen used to place Mercury by Venus, to show what need the
affections of marriage have of the rule of Reason and wisdom to order them.
God cast Adam into a heavy sleep, Genesis 2.
whilst he made him a Wife of one of his Ribs: upon which one moralizeth very
well thus: the affections ought to sleep about this work, and reason to wake:
as in the choice of a wife, so in the governing of her when she is chosen.

As he married, or should have done, respecting his posterity, and the
Commonwealth: so now he must not let her spend too much, lest his posterity rue
it, or he be disabled to do good to others.

Among many faults of Shee-Citizens, their pride stands as a Saul, higher by
the head and shoulders than the rest; not that it is greater, or more common
than their secret sins, but more seen; and so with less danger I may speak
against it. Do any of them bear the mind of Philons wife, who being demanded
why she alone went so plainly apparelled, made answer, that her Husbands
virtues were ornament sufficient for her.

For redress of their pride, let Husbands show them good examples by going
plainly themselves: so they, if they have any goodness in them, will be
ashamed to do otherwise; if this will not do, let them be restrained.

Let not a woman rule, it is the counsel of the Apostle, Let wives be subject
to their husbands, he considered that the woman ruled, nay overruled so ill at
first, as that it were pity she should be permitted to rule again. Le^
(...) uxorious man, who will ^et his wife do any thi^^ rather than displease
her, S^^iens ju dicto debet amarecon ^^gem, non affectu
harken to St. Hierom; a wise man must love his wife with judgment, not with
blind affection.

As he may not dote on his wife, so let him not be bitter toward her:
opprobrious terms and dealings have made women do that which otherwise they
would never have done. Clytem nestra being injured by her Husband, fell into
adultery, and consequently slew him.

Let him walk honestly toward her, let him be to her, as he desires she
should be to him. Culpa libido fuit, poena libido fuit, was said of one; I may
say the same of two: the lust of the one being the fault, the lust of the other
may be the punishment. Let him bear with her infirmities, remembering that she
is the weaker vessel: Vira viribus, mulier quasi mollior.
let him practice lenity, not severity; clemency, not tyranny; otherwise a good
woman's patience may be turned to fury: if she do not perform such business
as he puts upon her, Patientia nimium laesa fit furor.
with that wisdom he expects, let him bear with her; he was a wise man that
expected no more wit from a woman, then to know her Husbands bed from a
strangers. If he perceive her angry, let him bear with her infirmity in that
also, and not be angry, at the same time, for a house divided cannot stand.
Socrates was the more able to converse quietly with perverse persons abroad,
hearing with patience daily, thescolding of his Zantippe at home.

Let him be willing and endeavor to be able to instruct her; it is not only
necessary that he walk with his Wife as a man of love, but before her, as a
man of understanding: It is monstrous to see the head stand where the feet
should be; and a double pity, when a Nabal and Abigail are matched together;
but if thou have a Wife whose wisdom needs none of thy instruction, thank GOD
for her; Pro. 19.14.
Houses and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers, but a prudent Wife is of
the Lord.

Lastly, let him show kindness to her at his death: one makes mention of a Law
among the Romans, Ne quis haeredem faeminam faceret, nec unicam filiam, Civi.
Dei lib. 3. Cap 21.
that no man should make a Woman or his only daughter heir; I know not what
Law can be devised more unjust than this.

God himself has said, If a man dye and have no Son, Number. 27.8.
then he shall turn his inheritance to his Daughter; and Divinity which has
taught men how to love their Wives, has taught them to provide for them; but
discretion must teach to leave them no more then enough: for we often see a
man's enemies enjoy that which he has labored for; how much good might those
many thousands (which many Citizens have left), have done to the poor, to
Hospitalls, to Schools of Learning and Religion, to repairing of Churches, and
other good uses, if they had not bin given to silly ambitious Women, which can
do nothing with them, but buy the title of a Lady! As he shall live
profitably to his Wife, so to those of whom he has the charge, Children, and
Aprentices; Dionysius meaning to reveng himself upon Dion, who made war
against him, caused his son to be brought up in riot and wantonness; this
labor many save their enemies, and do it themselves, proving miserable
Governors, of dissolute young ones; what hope can the City have of those
youth, the debauchtnesse of whose lives has not been prevented by good
education? Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu. Hor.


Few good Citizens sons become good Citizens themselves; they know those ways
of spe^ding, which the Father never knew; but not his ways of getting, and
saving; as Cicero's son, they are like their Fathers in nothing, but in name.
To redress this, let youths wilfulnes be restrained; they should not know they
have a will in their own keeping; but in the charg of those which are above
them.

Quaeritis Aegistus quare sit factus adulter? in promptu causa est, desidiosus
erat Ovid.
Let them not be idle, in doing nothing they learn to do ill; it was good
policy in the Romans to let their youth learn nothing sitting; the best
Commonwealthes have allowed them Theaters, and spacious fields, for them to
exercise their gymnicks and exercises in, and the best Republiquists have
allowed those youths whom they had in their tuition, time to perform them.

Let them have good examples showed them: I may say of most of them, Vel in
poculum impingunt, vel in puellam; and I would they did it not by example;
Cicero exacteth an extraordinary knowledge from his son, because of his
hearing, and conversing with C^atippus; and we might expect great virtue from
our youth, if those that govern them would walk virtuously.

In the next place, he shall live profitably to the poor.

Art thou a great man, and would make thy greatness known? make it known by
thy gifts. Marcus Antonius said of the Roman greatness, that it was not so much
discerned by what it took, as what it gave: if occasions of doing good be not
offered, seek for them; It was St. Augustines advice, Emamus occasiones, let
us buy occasions of doing good; merciful works are, Pro sacrificijs, imo prae
sacrificijs, accepted of God as sacrifice; yea more than sacrifice. Anthony
Prince of Salern a liberal man, being asked what he would leave himself,
answered, Quod dedi, that which I have given; Parcus quasi par artae quia sicut
arca tenaciter omnia custodit.
but avaritious men think they lose what they give. When they beg in Italy,
they use this phrase, Fate ben per voi, do good for your selves, Foeneratur
Domino qui miseretur pauperis, he that gives to the poor, Aug. in Psalm. 36.
Sermon. 3.
lends to the Lord. Qui prohibet te esse foeneratorem, jubet te esse
faeneratorem, so he that forbids thee to be an usurer, does command thee to be
so; To conclude this, Aug. Hom. 7.
let all covetous wretches consider Dives, desideravit guttam qui non dedit
micam, he that denied a crumme of bread in his life, was denied a drop of water
in hell: alas what are 10000. Rivers, or that whole Sea of water to that
infinite world of fire? yet Dives, unhappy Dives, who wasted in his life so many
tuns of wine, cannot now procure water enough, a pot of water, a drop of water
to cool the tip of his scorched tongue. In the last place, let him live
profitably to the whole Republique. An Ant is a wise creature for it self, but
a shrewd thing in an Orchard or Garden: and certainly men that are great
lovers of themselves, wast the Public. My Citizen must then with reason
divide between self-love and society; Non nobis solum nati sumus. Cicero.
so walking profitably to himself, as he hinder not the good of the
Commonwealth, but further it.

In performing such actions as tend to the public good, it is to be inquired
how he shall proceed.

Hanibal in Italy by his vices did the same thing which Scipio in Spain did by
his virtues: Machiavel Lib. 3 Cap. 21.
the love of the one, the fear of the other, produced one effect. But we
Christians are taught, that evil may not be done, that good may come of it:
besides our experience shows us, that no profit is permanent, which is raised
by wickedness.

All honest means are to be used in advancing the Common good. I will insist
upon no more but two.



Scilurus having many Children being about to die, Plu. apo.
gave them a bundle of Darts, bidding every of them try in their order to
break them; they tried, but could not while they were bound together; himself
taking them asunder, Facile confregit omnia, brake them all easily: So it shall
be with you (says he) Si concordes eritis, etc. if you agree together, no man
shall hurt you: but divided, you cannot prosper: so it fares with a City, their
safety depends chiefly upon Unity and mutual conjunction of the Inferiors,
Discordia et seditio omnia opportuna in sidiantibus faciunt. Curt.
with the Superiors; and of these one with another, discord and sedition makes
all things fit their purpose, which lie in wait to prey upon the City, or the
wealth of it.

times they do.

It is strange, that Cloth-workers, Plaisterers, and other inferior Trades,
should in their policy this way, exceed those of a higher rank. It is
probable, that scarce one of these Artificers in five, could have been
employed three days in a week, without their laudable course of restrayning
every man to one or two Apprentises in his appointed time; which has wrought
this effect, that none in these Trades so ordered, can (unless the fault be
his own) complain for want of work.

In taking many Aprentises, a man's secrets lying upon many, shall soon be
discovered; and it may be to his great disadvantage; thus he hurts himself,
but hurts the public chiefly.

A man that has had a good stock to begin with, being brought to decay, is it
not a thousand pitties, that having paid a sum of money at his initiation,
and discharged all required duties in the City, shall be forced to beg or
starve in it, of go out of it for a living?

Again, many a young man which shall not have, or has not for the present a
sufficient stock of money or credit to begin with, is it not pity that he
should leave the City? yet while men may have what number of Aprentices they
please; it shall be very hard for either of these to find employment.

To redress this, let few Aprentices be taken, and those for longer time then
ordinary: It Is pity that every child with whom is given a great sum of
money, should be bound but for seven years, which expired, he must needs be a
Master before he be a man; so the splendour of the City will be dimmed, and
boys stand in shop doors, in the places of personable men; which is an
inconveniencie, almost as great as the former.

These things considered, let the common good of all be rather endeavored,
then the particular of a few: Every private man is a servant to the Common
wealth; it is a great disproportion, that the servants good be preferred before
the Masters; but a greater, when the little good of the Servant, shall go
against the great good of the Master; which is as to set another man's house on
fire, to roast a man's own eggs.

But fearing my prolixity may offend my Reader, I am willing to end; so for a
conclusion, I propound the Words of our Savior, Negotiamini, donec venero,
Trade while I come: Let my Citizen remember his coming, and so let him trade
now, as he may be able to give an account of his trading hereafter.

Perlegi librum hunc, in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate imprimatur,

Ex aedibus Londin. Feb. ult. 1634. SA. BAKER.


