CHRIST'S Counsel to his languishing Church of SARDIS. OR, The dying or
decaying Christian, with the means and helps of his recovery and
strengthening.

BY OBADIAH SEDGWICKE, B. of D. late Preacher to the Inhabitants of S. Mildreds
Bredstreet, London

(...),

2 Timothy 1. 6. Frustra velociter currit, qui prius quam ad metas venerit
deficit,

Greg. mor. l. 2. c. 40. LONDON, Printed by T. B. for L. FAWN, and S.
GELLIBRAND, at the brazen Serpent in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1640.

To the right Worshipful, Captain Nicholas Crispe Esquire, and Mistress Anne
Crispe his pious consort, To Master Samuel Crispe, and Mistress Katharine his
virtuous wife, with all the rest of the Parishioners, my loving friends, the
Inhabitants in Saint Mildreds, Bredstreet.
My dear and worthy friends,
SAint Bernard with a very apt phrase, answered a special friend of his,
challenging of him in the streines of affection, thus, O scrutans renes et
corda Deus, etc. quod diligam illum ex dono tuo and suo merito, tu scis and ego
sentio, quatenus autem diligam, tu scis, ego nescio, (that is) Oh Lord, thou
who know and searchest the inmost closets of the heart, that I love my
friend, thou know it, and I know it: how much I love him thou do know,
but I do not know. The same I apply to my self and all of you; if suspecting
my affection to you, because of my departing from you, Lord, thou who know
all things, thou know that I love them, and I know it, how much thou only
know, but I cannot express.

You were a people (of all that hitherto I have lived with, and of all that
ever I preached unto) of the most general union with your selves, and of the
most liberal and unwearied affection to your Minister; the maine scruple many
times to me, was, lest diverse of you should out-stretch your measures.

All the respects which you owed and showed to my Ministry, and all the
encouragements which you heaped on my self, I do now the second time
publicly acknowledge: and as my thankfulness presents it self to you all, so
in special manner to you, much honored Captain, and your worthy wife, by
whose good opinion and affection I was (through Gods mercy) brought unto that
place: you have so advanced your favors both to my self and some friends of
mine, that I do most gladly embrace this present occasion of public testimony
and acknowledgement; not that it is sufficient to clear all accounts, but
only that you may know, kindenesses long since given, are never lost in a
thankful breast.

My desire for you all is, that ye may be saved, and my desire to you all is,
that ye would seriously answer the many precious and heavenly opportunities of
Gods grace; it is not only a vanity, but a danger, a danger both extreme and
sure, to dally with our souls: God has sown much seed by many of his
servants among you, and believe me, he expects an harvest, we cannot answer
great means with great sinfulness or little goodness. To whom any thing is
given, of them something is required, (even the man of one talent was made
accountable) but to whom much is given, of them much shall be required. My
dear friends if ye be wise, be wise for your selves, be good indeed. You
honor our ministry, and provide well for your own eternal good; when you
go into an holy way, and go on in that way, the sight is incongruous, and the
account will be sad, when Ministers doctrines are very heavenly, and peoples
conversation are very earthly and sinful; a melting heaven and a hardened earth
meet ill. At length let us see our sermons and pains in your lives; we preach
and dye, and men hear and dye; we preach out our health, our strength, our
lives; Oh that our hearers would take pity on us, and mend their hearts and
ways. If we boast that our means are greater then others, we must tremble
also to think if our accounts, before God should prove worse then others.

Therefore for your parts, as you have begun, so with all alacrity and
industry, continue and persevere. Our life is short, duties many, work daily,
and reward sure and enough. An eternity with God should make us good, and keep
us doing, and hold us faithful, and make us fruitful. To the everlasting arms
of his protection, and to the perpetual influences of his grace and mercy in
Christ, he commends you all, who is, to you all,

Your much obliged and affectionate friend, OBADIAH SEDGWICKE.

To the Reader.
IF thou expectest in this Treatise what is curious and branched over with art,
spare thine eye any further travel, it is not here* divine doctrines serve
rather for the stomach then the palate. In preaching these Sermons, I followed
Saint Cyprians directions to Donatus, to make choice not of Diserta, but
Fortia, I looked very little at harmony which might take the ear, but most of
all at energy, which might reach the conscience.

I know well that there is a lawful and seasonable use of learning, I am not
of his mind who would have Preachers study no book but the Bible; only this,
Ministers (if I mistake not) must consider their auditors, and then and there,
use their choiser learning, when and where it may not amaze, but profit; when
all is summed up, this will be found the most comfortable truth, no Preacher is
so learned, as he who can save souls.

And now if thou please, read the work, and receive this counsel from me;
above all, strive for spiritual life (it is thy greatest honor to be good)
and when thou have obtained it, take heed of dying, the dead man and the dying
Christian, are two sad sights; it is woeful either to be a brand falling into
hell, or to be a star falling down from heaven: the rising sun is more and
more beautiful, but the waining moon is more full of spots and darkness:
though all may not be lost, yet his shipwrackes are high who has lost much in
his jewels, and almost all in his comforts: no more but this, keep heavenly
things as thou would keep heaven it self.

Thine in any spiritual furtherance, OBADIAH SEDGWICKE.

CHRIST'S COUNCIL to His languishing CHURCH.
REVEL. 3. 2, 3 verses. Be watchful and strengthen the things that remain,
which are ready to dye, for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and repent,
etc.


THe author of this Book was JESUS CHRIST; the penman was John the Apostle,
the matter of it, is generally mysterious; the persons whom it concerns are
the seven Churches in Asia, but the scope of it extends to all the Churches,
succeeding the Apostles to the end of the world.

Ephesus (the first of these Churches) is taxed for apostasy; Smyrna (the
second of them) is encouraged to constancy; Pergamus and Thyatira (the third
and fourth of them) are charged for permission of some idolatry; Sardis (the
fifth of them) is deeply questioned for hypocrisy; Philadelphia (the sixth of
them) is commended for fidelity, and Laodicea (the last of them) is condemned
for neutrality or indifferency.

In this Epistle to Sardis, you have,

1 An inscription: 1. To whom? unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis.

2 From whom? He that has the seven spirits (*) Christ, who has manifold
abundance of spiritual gifts and graces in his own disposing, and imparts
them by his spirit.

2 A description of that Angel and Church; what they were,

1 In semblance; Thou have a name that thou live, q. d. so thou boastest, and
so others imagine that thou an furnished with vitals for doctrine and
discipline.

2 In substance; but thou art dead, q. d. there is no such matter, thy Gold is
but Tin, and thy piety but formality: the powers of truth and grace were
extremely fainting and languishing, and as it were expiring.

3 A direction of them what to do, the which direction is,

1 General, Be watchful or awake: no reformation without diligent and serious
consideration.

2 Special, where,

1 The matter of it, Strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to dye

2 The equity of it, for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

3 The manner of performance of this direction expressed in two particulars.

1 In remembrance of the good truths, or rather of the manner how they once
received and heard them, amplified with a special exhortation to hold them
fast,

2 In repentance of all evil, especially of their hypocrisy and languor, (And
repent.)

The matter is so large which might be insisted on, as that I know not well
where to pitch, I shall only be able (as reapers do in the full field) to cut
down many particulars, and leave the binding of them up to some one more
skillful harvest man: take them thus.

1 That people living under evangelicall teaching, may yet be but in a decaying
and dying condition (the things that be ready to dye.)

2 That spirituals are to be succored and strengthened if once they grow
languishing and dying, (strengthen the things that, etc.)

3 That the estate, though visibly fair to the eyes of men, yet it may be
really imperfect in the eyes of God, [I have not found thy works perfect before
God.]

4 A right remembrance and retention of original truths, are the way to revive
a dying christian, to fetch him again. [Remember therefore, etc.]

6 Spiritual decayings do require spiritual repentings: [and repent.]

I begin with the first of these, viz.

Three things premised.


1 There are three sorts of people who may live under the preaching of the word.

1 Some manifestly profane, who are stark dead, there is neither the
substance, nor the semblance of any heavenly life in them.

2 Others are cunningly hypocritical, whose leaf of profession seems to
live, but secret core of corruption convinces that they are dead.

3 A third sort is of such as are vitally good, there is a spiritual life
truly implanted in them, and a profession in some measure answerable thereunto.

The proposition I understand even of this latter sort, that even these may be
in a dying condition.

a This dying disposition properly consists in a manifest decay of spiritual
principles; for look as when a man is dying in a natural way, the vital
principles of Calidum and Humidum are notoriously impaired; so when a Christian
is dying in a spiritual way, those principles of heavenly life within him, are
exceedingly sinking and failing, and decaying: there is not that strength, nor
that activity, nor that assiduity in the spirit or heart of man, as formerly,
cum laesis facultatibus, as a man goes with lame legs, and a sickly body, so
he walks with wounded principles and a languishing pining soul.

3 But if you will have the point in a more ample manner, then know that a
Christian may be dying partly,

1 In profession, his very A Christian may be dying in seven things.
leaves may wither; that visible forwardness of zeal and diligence, that
wonted presence of his at the ordinances, they may admit of an extreme
sluggishnesse and remissness; he may grow a stranger to God.

2 In conversation: His hand may shrivell and disflourish: that former
association of himself with the people of God, may now be no delight, and
profitable discourses of heaven and of holiness, may now be much laid aside,
there may now drop no such waters from his fountain, and very little good from
his society: his candle may burn darkely, and with a very imperfect and
loosing light.

3 In affection, that flame of love and sea of desires, and Eden of delight,
may like a great fire be reduced to a few coals and cinders: Christ puts the
Ephesians in mind of their first love that it was left, Revelat. 2. 4. Revel.
2. 4.
though not absolutely for nature, yet eminently for measure, and S. Paul
upbraideth the Galathians for that strange coolness in their affections to
his person and ministry, whereas at the first, their zeal was so forward, as
that their very eyes Gal. 4. 15. were at his service. Gal. 4. 15


4 In duties which may now be chopped off by intermission, or wrought out with
voluntary distractions, either none, or rugged, done with a kind of formality,
coldly, chilly, carelessly.

Heretofore no time was too long, no diversion sufficiently excusable, no
praying satisfying without lamenting compunctions and groanings of spirit, or
without some more fervent violence and wrestling with God.

But now this and other duties are like a pulse hardly felt; words suffice, and
almost an opus operatum is enough.

5 In judgment, that whereas formerly the mind and understanding were looking
to the Polestarre) with much admiration and delectation taken up with the
meditations of God and Christ, and divine truths and ways. Now vain objects
are doted upon poor, inferior, transitory delights and profits, take up the
lodging, and so fill the soul, that it becomes almost a stranger to holy
contemplations and meditations. It has almost lost the relish of the studious
thoughts of God, or Christ, or salvation.

6 In gifts or parts, which through too much indulgence to carnal ease or
affectation of worldly greatness or defect of fit employment, may like a
sharp sword, grow rusty, or like standing waters in a poole, be almost drawn
dry and empty.

7 But which is the mainest and worst of all, the Christian may be dying in his
very graces; as the health of man may admit of eclipses, and the very life of
man may admit of sownings and faintings,

Partly through want of exercise, partly by not administering succor and
strength unto them by a constant application of the ordinances, partly by
harkening unto some sinful temptations.

So that now repentance may become more difficult and unable, and godly sorrow
can scarce be discerned for that extreme hardness of heart, and faith can
scarce find the way, or make any use of Christ, and the promises, but the
gates of unbelief seem to possess the soul.

Yea, the fear of God may now not so restrain and awe, and the love of God
may not so prevail and excite, as they have done in former times.

But you will demand what may be the causes of this dying condition?



1

The people of God are sometimes tasting of poison, they are tampering with
unsound doctrines, which as they do infect the judgment, so they do abate
their spiritual principles and abilities. The Apostle was afraid that he had
lost his labor, and spent himself in vain to those of Galatia, that they
were even leaving their hold in Christ, and what was the cause of it? Surely
some false Apostles had leavened them with error about circumcision, and the
observation of the law. When the judgment is corrupted with any error, then
truths are not of that power with the soul, and where truth loses in
authority, there grace will loose in its strength and efficacy.

2 Some deadly wound is given unto them; you know that a man may dye, not only
by a draught of poison, but

There are things which do fight against the soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
and not only fight against it, but wound it; nay not the soul and conscience
only, but likewise our very graces.

Sinnings do not only prove a troublesome wound to the conscience, but
likewise a killing and dying wound to our graces; if any thing in the world
extinguisheth or abateth our graces, they are our sinnings, which are to graces
as water to the fire. But now even the people of God do many times hearken to
some baser lusts and viler commissions (as you know in David and others) and
when sin has got any favor in the judgment or affection, it is like a
disease which will not off without a manifest breach of health and strength;

3 Some deadly neglect; with the plants in respect of the sun, which live or
dye, flourish or decay upon their conjunction (if I may so speak) and Grace is
not a life and strength it self. Minuit supra vires alimenti penuria, said
Fernelius, l. 1 de morb. causis.
neerenesse with its heat.

So our souls, yea and our graces live by that conjunction which they have
with God; if we keep not to him close and near, but draw off, what do we but
draw off from the principle of our being and conservation?

4 Inconsiderate toleration of particular evils; not a timely expurgation of
them.

ordinary distempers, turn into deadly diseases, and so it is with particular
corruptions (admit they be such as we are pleased favorably to call
infirmities) or any other sins, if they be not quickly expelled and reformed,
they may bring us near the gates of death: one sin may bring on another, or
the same sin may steal unto a strange degree of strength, so that a person
(unawares) is languished extremely, and whence comes this? not only from an
inconsiderate admission of sins, but also from an untimely correction of
sin.

The soul should presently have physicked it self with, first a right
apprehension of the greatness of the evil in the beginning: secondly, speedy
humiliation before the Lord: thirdly, fervent supplication for mercy, and more
strength: fourthly, resolute reformation and abandoning of it.

But the neglect of these has brought the soul into a spiritual languor, and
perhaps into a deep consumption of graces.

5 Defect of frequent examinations: though at our original and first
conviction of sin, and a sinful condition, we are very tender and
circumspect, and ever and anon feared, and overlooked our spiritual
conditions, whereby we found singular additions to our graces, yet after a
while, after Christians have got over the pangs of the first birth, and have
procured more peace and comfort, (as if a gracious soul would thrive of it
self) they are generally apt to keep on the course of obedience, but think
it superfluous, at least not so necessary, often to search, and view, and
fannow themselves. And what now befalls them? surely two great evils, viz. that
the estate and operation, and acts of sin, are not so strictly eyed: secondly,
that the estate of their graces is not so well known and guarded against
special motions and temptations, whereupon it often falls out that the poor
soul is reduced to great streights and leanness, the man cannot pray as
heretofore, nor find that love to God and Christ as heretofore, nor have that
delight in the ordinances, nor do that good in society, nor receive that
profit, nor feel that mournfulnesse of spirit as heretofore: why? he did let
and suffer his spiritual estate to run on at hazards, and the less searching
of heart, the less strength of grace always.

6 Defect of solemn humiliations in extraordinary fasting and prayer. Those
means which beget our graces, are likewise ordained to preserve them, and as
the use of singular means confers more power and life to our graces, so a
cessation in the use of them, proves an exceeding decay unto them: it is as if
you should take away the pillars from the house, or the rain from the earth.

Now this is certain, that extraordinary times of fasting and prayer, they
have been blessed with power from heaven to make the strongest temptation and
corruption to fly, no sin is able to stand before them: and so likewise they
have been blessed with an answer of singular enlargement and addition to our
spiritual estate: oh how cheerfully, how tenderfully, how much more fully and
fruitfully is thy soul enabled after those duties rightly performed? but
Christians grow very strangers to these solemn duties, either totally omitting
of them, or slubberlie performance of them, and therefore they get not that
strength over spiritual corruptions, nor that fruitful supply to their
graces, and consequently slip into dangerous languishings and decayings.

7 Inactivity in our places and relations, is another cause of spiritual
languishing and decaying. health, so likewise too much rest may cause extreme
sickness, because therein the superfluous humors are not carried or breathed
away, and the spirits and natural heat are not stirred up to perform their
proper functions.

It is even so with Christians, in respect of their graces; if they let them
lie still and dead, they will quickly grow weak and dying; though their life
be an implanted by an operation of Gods spirit, yet it is preserved by an
operation of our spirits; therefore grace is compared to fire which must be
stirred up and blown: He who will not use grace, will quickly lose it, or
decay in it.

But Christians many times employ not their graces, they do not any good with
them, they do not stir up their hearts to believe, to lay hold on God, to call
upon him, to walk before him, they do not lay their knowledge, their zeal,
their love, etc. in their particular relations; but live together, and do no
good together, meet together, and provoke not one another unto further
holiness.

8 Lastly, all perturbations or excess in passions, cause a languishing, V.
Fernel. l, 1. de morb, causis cap, 18, p. 198.
and therefore they observe in nature, that immoderate fear, or grief, or
anger, or joy, or agony (which consists of anger and fear) or desire or care;
all these, or any of these by their immoderation, do check the spirit and
natural heat, immarcescere spiritus and calorem, and consequently diminish
health and strength. And surely so it is in the spiritual condition; all
inordinate affections are the empayrers of grace, whether it be desires of the
world, or delights in it, or fears of men, or grief for losses, etc. but I
cannot now enlarge.

name only, but are totally dead; or if we do live, whether that life of ours
be not grown so weak, that we are almost dying.

Reasons to move you to search your hearts in this particular, are these.

1 Many among you (who Three things.
profess and have a name, and I hope, the truth also of grace) do not get on,
you do not make progress, you have not advanced your selves in your
spiritual condition.

Though the Lord has given you plentiful and rich means, yet what you were
many years ago, the same you are now: a man may say of you, as we do of our
friends, whom we see perhaps once in ten years, that they look, and are just
as we found and left them then. So many of you, after many years preaching
and hearing, are just as you were, have not attained to any further perfection
in holiness.

Now it is an ill symptom, this; for a staying heart is seldom otherwise then
a decaying heart. Creation, though perfect at once, yet it is not so with
sanctification; the old saying is, Non progredi est regredi, grace is either
getting or losing,

2 Many persons express palpable decayings; all who know them, can see and
say, how strangely they are altered; they are scarcely known now to be
Christians, but by the judgment of the most favorable charity, who formerly
have been very forward even to exemplarity. The judgments of men are so
altered with fond opinions, their strictness of conversation is so strangely
slack'd into that which they themselves were wont to call a licentiousness of
walking, there is such a dumbness grown in their families, and withal there
is such a chillness come upon their affections; oh where is that thy former
zeal, and love, and joy, and pity, and brokennesse of heart, and flames for
Christ, and desires of strength and assurance, and circumspection to please thy
God?

3 Though we be not dead Christians; yet if we be dying Christians, it makes
our condition very evil, and very sad.

1 Very evil, no man can Evil. 1 Causally.
decay in good, but by something that is bad; it is always some sinful evil,
which makes us to wither in spiritual good.

And then it is a thing very 2 Formally,
evil in it self; if it be a sin not to thrive in grace, it must be a
greater sin to be dying in grace.

And then it occasions much 3 Eventually.
sin, for it were a wonder to see a man dying in grace, and not withal,
living in sin; however, believe it, that sins will live the more strongly
in thee, by how much the more weakly grace does live in thee; when natural
heat grows low, then do diseases multiply and grow high, if that which should
keep down sin, be kept down by sinning, how exceedingly sinful may thou
prove?

2 Very sad: the Christian condition is excessively perplexed and prejudiced by
it, v. gr.

1 There is an extenuation of 7 Effects of it.
our chiefest excellencies: gold is now clipped and washed: Beloved, we have not
more real excellencies here on earth, then gracious and holy qualities. If the
naked soul be more worth then a whole world, what is grace, the which highly
elevates and advances the soul? But even our graces (in a decaying condition)
are droop ing and pining: for a man to have a finger withering is nothing to
that as to have his heart consuming: to behold a candle put out, what is that,
to behold the Sun growing dim or purblind?

When graces decay, then that To lose an house, a friend, etc. but
which is as the heart to the members, or as the Sun to the earth, or as the
soul to the body, a vital spring, decays: as she said about the taking away
of the Arc, that we may say of diminution in grace. Now the glory is departing
from Israel, now thy honor is lying in the dust; the less good thou growest,
the more vile thou becommest, it is as if thy fair hand should become leprous,
or thy sun set at noon day.

2 It is a depression of our heavenly strength; when Sampsons hair was off, he
was then as other men; he lost his hair, and lost his strength too.

streams prove thin, and branches grow almost fruitless, for these are the
principles of being, and of assistance unto them.

Our graces are a kind of Springs to our gracious abilities; when we be less
good, we shall always do the less good, and the more evil. Thy wheels will
move slowly, and thy feet (like those of a sick man) will move staggeringly
and wearily; there will be much a do to do a little good: thy services will
be like the thin rays of gold, which can hardly be discerned for the
multitude of ashes and dross.

Now this is a sad thing, when at the most, it is the most that a man can do
to believe, or to grieve for sin, or to love God and fear him, or to pray
unto him, whereas heretofore he was able to believe and rejoice, to mourn and
lament, etc.

3 A dampe upon our communions with GOD; there is a double communion.

One is direct, which is our active communion with God, another is reflexive,
which is Gods gracious communion with us: now by a dying in our spiritual
conditions, there arises a cloud and a dampe upon this reciprocal communion.

We cannot so behave our selves to God, and God will not so behave himself to
us, as in former days.



2 For Gods communion with us, it will be eclipsed both in the effective and
assisting part of it, as also in the affective and comforting part of it: he
will not give thee his hand or his eye as formerly; David found (upon his great
decay) not only a cloud in Gods face, but also a strangeness in Gods spirit,
Psalm. 51.
Psalm. 5^. 12. We do by our notorious decaying, debar our selves of much
help from God, and of all manifesting favor for the present.

Desertion is ever the consequent of decaying.

4 A vexation and restlesnesse in the conscience; when we take our leave of
grace, we must take our leave of peace and comfort. A dead man (many times)
rests in peace, but a dying Christian is never without trouble; the remaining
grace serves most to trouble us for our decayings in grace.

Spiritual comfort usually attends us, either upon great griefs for sin, or
upon great progresses in duties. And spiritual troubles usually follow us,
either upon great adventurings in sin, or upon great remissions in holiness;
for conscience will trouble us as well for loosing what is good, as for
committing what is evil.

5 A great silence in heaven: the decaying Christian shall either hear of much
displeasure from God, or little and no good from him.

The ordinances (to which he now more perfunctorily applies himself) shall
either be dumb and speak no encouragement, or bitter, and speak no strength
or peace.

His prayers (which now are more cold and formal) shall either have no answer,
or else the answer is more fear and trouble in spirit; God seems to have no
mind to speak unto that man, who now has scarce any mind to speak unto his
God.

6 A strange suspicion of the reality of a spiritual condition; if grace be
often put in dispute when the Christian cannot perceive it to thrive, how much
more questionable will it be, when the same Christian perceives it to abate
and decay, (usually it must be more then mere grace which must assure us of
grace) forasmuch as nothing resembles hypocrisy more then to be formal in our
duties, and with it to be withering in our dispositions.

A dying Christian looks very like to a dead hypocrite.

7 To all these may be added other evils, as horrid temptations, external
miseries, fears of death, etc. but I may not insist on every thing.

Q But here it is demanded, how may we know whether we be in a dying condition
or not.

A. I know no better way to discern this, then by a just comparison of things
present with things past, as also by a faithful observation of our own
spirits and graces: thus then,

1 Look, first, upon your judgment and mindings, 2 upon your wills and
affections, 3 upon your hearts and consciences, 4 upon your worship and
services, 5 upon your ways and conversations, so may you discern whether you
be dying or not.

1 For your judgments and minds, formerly in these there were strong
endeavors to know the truths of God, and to search out the mysteries of
salvation, and admirable appretiations of holiness and Gods favor, and sweet
meditations on the will of God; the mind was eminently taken up with God and
Christ, and grace and obedience and heaven.

Is it so now? or rather do not worldly things seem great in our eyes, are
not our mindings more for inferior good, then for spiritual good? divine
studies, are they not rare, and poor, and transient glancings? where is that
study to know God, or to see his favor in Christ unto thee? where is that
reverend regard of the truths of God? where is that diligence to know the
estate of thy soul? where is that sweet delight thou tookest once to know
Jesus Christ as thine?

2 For your wills and affections: time was, that thy will was a flexible will,
easy to obedience, submissive to the divine will, cheerful in the duties of
godliness, much closing with divine promises, ravished with love to Christ,
fearful to offend, careful to please, desirous of nothing more then Gods
loving kindness, strictly hating all evil, joyful in this alone, that God
was thy portion; floods of tears swelled thy grief, heavenly delights
satisfied thy soul, mercies were blessed, threatenings feared, etc. If in stead
of these, thy will grows weary and surly, hard to be persuaded, often
clattering with the divine will, impatient of strict obedience, indifferent to
please, slow to hearken to the counsels of God, and the mercies of God, and the
threats of God are of small efficacy; sin is not so watched and loathed, God
alone is not so delightful and sufficient, thy heart grows more insensible of
sin, and hardly mournful; thy delights are less in heavenly things. Ah now,
how is the mighty fallen, how is the noble plant degenerated? etc.

3 For your hearts and consciences, compare them now with what formerly they
were; how quick was conscience to direct, how apt was conscience to check,
how tender was conscience to offend? how unquiet was conscience till peace was
made, how exact was conscience to obey?

Is it so now? thou can sin; and conscience strikes not; God strikes thee,
but conscience strikes thee, not; conscience strikes thee, and thou carest not;
conscience is grown sleepy and drowsy, almost dead and scared; thou can
omit duties, or perform them carelessly, slip and fall, and lie; and either
conscience says nothing, or thou reformest nothing.

4 And for thy worship and service of God, how precious were the ordinances
unto thee, how delightful? thou had rather have spent a day with them, then
a hundred days in other employments: what secret impressions made the power of
them upon thy heart, what griefs, what joys, what degrees of persuasion, what
expectations of hope, what furtherance unto holy duties, what conflictings
with, and conquests over sin and temptations, what more serious care and
diligence to walk with God.

Oh why is it, whence is it, that now it is not as once it was? there is not
that connaturalnesse as formerly, the word works not on thee as formerly, the
Sacrament works not on thee as formerly: the word of threatening reveals wrath,
and thou tremblest not; the word of promise reveals goodness, and thou love
it not; fidelity, and thou beleevest it not: the Sacrament opens the blood of a
Savior, and thou thirstest not, thou rejoycest not; thou art grown dull under
all, and bar ren after all; thy dead heart argues that thou art a dying soul.

5 The same may be said for our conversation and ways, if they be now dead in
respect of sinfulness, or dead in respect of unprofitablenesse, that we are
now become as the Heath that brings forth nothing, or as the Briar which brings
forth thorns, that we turn all religion into a discourse or censure, or
dispute; we can eat and drink, and talk, and sin: how have the shadows of
death covered us? how chill and languishing are our graces turned?

Well, seriously consider of these things (you who hear me this day) and look
to it that you be not a dying people: more fearful would your condition be,
then the condition of others: for, first, you have more enlivening means then
any people on the earth; no City like unto you for public offers, or for
private opportunities; ye are even exalted unto heaven in the abundance and
choice of spiritual helps, and therefore your decayings would have more in
the account then other men's; the more means of strength and life
(accidentally) make dying diseases to be the more deadly.

2 We cannot but approve your flocking to the word and service of God in
season and out of season, as if you would take the kingdom of heaven by force;
if now under so fair a complexion you should be in a consumption, that the
vitals of godliness should slack and pine away in your hearts and private
walkings, this dissonancie would be not only shameful to your profession, but
also uncomfortable to your conscience.

2 Again, another way persons may discern whether they be dying and decaying.

By an observation of the acts or operations of their graces; as if they be
faint and more inconstant:

O Christian, thy faith does not commit things to God as heretofore, and thy
love is not so settled on Christ as heretofore, and thy patience cannot bear in
any measure as heretofore, and thy sorrow is dry, and thy zeal is cooled, etc.



1 To be inclining principles to gracious or holy acts.

2 To be enlarging principles to pious performances.

3 To be cleansing and opposing principles of sinful corruptions.

1 They are inclining principles to gracious acts: the nature of man without
grace, is like a dead man, who has no disposition to walk, but when grace
comes into the soul, it does enliven it, and enable it, and incline or dispose
it unto holy operations, to mind, to will, to desire, to do heavenly works,
as you see in Saint Paul, when converted, that renewing grace inclined him
quite to another way, and to other acts, to pray, to preach Christ, etc.

Now where is that ancient disposition in thee unto good duties? whence is that
wonderful unwilling esse and untowardlinesse of spirit in thee? how comes it
to pass, that if thou do serve the Lord, it is as if it were of constraint,
there is a kind of averseness and hanging back; thou do not mind him in
any measure, and his law is not in thy heart.

2 Again, they are enlarging principles, they do not only enable a man to
good performances for the matter, but also for the manner; they make us a
willing people in the day of our offerings, and to delight to do the will of
God, and to be glad in going to the house of the Lord.

But now there is not that relish of godliness, there is not delightfulness
of service, there is not that liberty and alacrity of spirit; thou art become
a dull and heavy Christian, as if there were not that suteablenesse 'twi^t thy
heart and holy duties, thou art grown very slothful and careless, and
negligent in thy work.

3 Lastly, they are cleansing and opposing principles of corruptions, therefore
compared to water which washes out the spots, and to fire which fetches off
the rust; and as our corrupt flesh is said to lust against the spirit, so the
renewed spirit is said to lust against the flesh, and they are contrary one to
the other, still in opposition and conflict.

And so the time has been, that thou have found it, that grace did humble and
cleanse thy heart from the love of sin, and raised tender fear about it, and
singular hatred and opposition of it; yea, the very thoughts of sin were an
heavy burden to thee; how often (by reason of the rebellion in nature) have
thou cried out with Saint Paul, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me,
etc.

Is it thus now, why is it not thus now? is sin quite subdued, or think
thou that grace and sin will ever be at truce? nay, but why do thou suffer
those contemplative evils to lodge in thy mind, or those delightful
imaginations to tickle and invegle thy affections? nay, how dare thou to be
tampering with acts, if not sinful, yet doubtful, and as like sins as can be,
and which occasion sin? yea, and sins prevail much on thee, as pride,
vanity, etc. and under all this thy heart smites thee not, restraines thee
not; the time has been, thou durst not have been or done this for a world,
etc.

But if the case be so (may some tender conscience reply) then I fear my
estate is not right, for I never had so much ado with a sinful nature all my
life, as of late, days, and if the greater power of sin shows the more
weakened estate of grace, I am then the person in a dying condition.



1 You must distinguish betwixt the turbulency of sin, and the prevalency of
sin; the spiritual condition is not decaying, because sin is more
molesting and rebelling, but because sin is more prevailing and leading.

2 Between sin in conflict, and sin in subjection; my grace is weakened
when I yield to sin, but it stands in strength when it stands in defiance and
conflict with sin: it argues the violence of sin to break out against
grace, and also it argues the potency of grace to keep the soul from serving
unruly and boisterous lusts.

3 Betwixt sin in temptation, and sin in the affection, even a strong
castle may be assaulted, and a stout Christian much tempted, then the
spiritual part is weakened, when sin is favored: If as there is much
temptation in thy sinful flesh, so there is much detestation on thy spiritual
part, thy bow yet abides in strength.

But another Christian replies, if these signs of decaying be right, which you
deliver, then surely I am in a dying frame; for heretofore when (as I thought)
God looked on me in mercy, in quickening me from the dead, I had a very melting
heart for sin, and a surpassing^y zealous love to God and his glory; but now
I find no such height, and flames, and measures?



1 You must distinguish betwixt equal sensiblenesse, and equal
spiritualnesse; upon the inchoation of grace, there may be more sensiblenesse,
for as much as grace erects it self much in the affections (of whose acts we
are more apprehensive, being more near to sense) but upon the advance in
grace, there may be more spiritualnesse: though not such a sensible grief in
the affection, yet a pure lothing of sin and displicence with our selves in
the will.

2 Betwixt passionate expressions, and deliberate or judicious expressions; I
confess that heretofore thy zeal and love might be more passionate and
violent, but now they work upon more pure and mixed grounds, and for ever know,
it argues the grace to be the more strong, which can act its parts with less
turbulency and unquietness.

3 Betwixt grace generally diffused, and it particularly employed: at the first
all the water ran as it were in one channel; grace exerted it self mostly
in the humbling part, and therefore seemed to be very much, because very much
employed in a particular, but upon further knowledge of Christian duties, grace
diffuseth its strength to all the acts of holiness, it is not the less,
because the more improved, only it is the less perceived;

4 Betwixt interruption and corruption, spiritual principles may sometimes be
interrupted ( the passages are not always so open for operation: the very
ineptitude of a man's temper, may occasion unequal expressions of the visible
act: actus Imperati: and yet there may be no weakening and decaying in the
spiritual condition, for the invisible frame, actus eliciti, are sure and full
still; the will and desires do act as much as ever, though the tongue or hand
cannot render it, and besides this, the work is made up by a secret humbling,
which is so unavoydably hindered from an open acting.

6 But lastly, if upon solid grounds, when we are our selves, we find a
manifest inequality of our present, with our former condition in grace; then
counsel is better for thee then comfort, and me thinks no better advise can
be prescribed, then that of Christ himself to the Ephesian Church, slaking in
her first love, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy
first works.



1 Then first bless the arm of the Almighty God, who has given grace, and
upheld it.

2 Beseech him for ever to preserve and increase thy spiritual qualities all
thy days; it is by his goodness that thou art good, and of his strength that
yet thou abidest in thy strength.

3 Use all the means thou can to keep up thy graces, that thou sink not
into a dying condition. Means to preserve us from a dying condition be these.

1 Be humble: being low in grace, it is this, that we still grow low and poor
in spirit. In the Rickets they have large heads, but weak feet, so, etc.

2 Strive for further perfection 2 Pet. 3. 17. 18.
in holiness, 2 Pet. 3. 17. the most of what we have, is but the least of
that we want: He that will not strive to be better, will be worse; in temporals
we should insist more on our receipts, and that will make us thankful: in
spirituals we should insist more on our wants, and that will make us
fruitful, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Add to your faith, virtue, and to virtue knowledge, 6
v. and to knowledge temperance, etc. 8 v. for if thou do these things, they
make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful, etc.

3 Quit all formality in all holy duties, take heed of the first coolings: much
impiety may hang upon much indifferency: a cool spirit is always a losing
spirit: he who gives way to do duties in a slight manner, will after a while be
able scarce to perform them in any manner. But as the rule was Hoc age, so
still keep up thy spirit with the duty; stir up thy graces in all duties, put
out thy heart and strength in holy actions of praying and hearing, and that
will keep thee alive in grace.

A conscionable and cordial acting of good is blessed, not only with a
preservation of grace, but likewise with an addition and increase.

4 Maintain an holy jealousy and fear of decaying; Blessed is the man who
fears always, says Solomon, Prove. 28.

Three things arise from this.

One is tender watchfulness against all decaying occasions.

Another is frequent search and examination of our spirits and estates.

Quick repairings of all faylings: all which preserve us from a notorious
decaying or dying.

5 Be prudently serious in christian society; spend not thy hours in vain
disputes, lest while thou studiest odd notions, thou in the mean time losest
precious grace.

There are disputes which end only in division, and there are inquiries which
tend to edification; rather study to make thy self better, then to prove
another to be bad.

6 Keep up uprightness, and by no means away with hypocrisy, say not the
sin is little,

When the children of the Prophets tasted of the pottage, they cried out Mors
in olla, death is in the pot, and so shall we find upon experience, that
there goes a dying influence with every sin.

Therefore take heed of all sinning, especially of those against knowledge and
conscience, these are peccata vulnerantia and divastantia, wounding and wasting
sins. The tender heart and the upright, these are the living and the lively
hearts.

7 I might add, that we must apply our selves to a living Christ, and to
living ordinances, etc. but these alleged rules shall suffice for this time.





2 Be lowly humbled; that thou have so humbled and abased thy glory; Thou
should grieve exceedingly, that by thy great decayings, God has been so
much dishonored, his spirit grieved, religion shamed, conscience wounded, and
grace impaired.

3 Then use the means prescribed here in the Text, strengthen the things which
remain, that are ready to dye; whence we come to the next proposition, viz.



For the understanding of this assertion, premise with me a few particulars,

1 That there is a difference betwixt the Implantation, Perfecting,
Strengthening
of holy principles.

The Implantation of them is nothing but their free and effectual
communication unto a person from Gods holy spirit; his hand alone sets all
these heavenly plants, and from his sole goodness and power are all those
stars, those shining and beautiful stars, created in our souls.

Perfecting of holy principles, is nothing but a successive addition unto grace
received, a rising or sprouting of those plants, a going on from a weaker, to a
stronger degree.

The strengthening of them differs from both, for it is not a new creation of
holy principles, but a restoration of them, and so it differs from grace
implanted, and though it be an addition to grace received, yet this addition is
not to grace as merely weak, but properly to grace as weakened, and so it
differs from the perfecting of holy principles.

2 The strengthening of decaying principles or habits of grace, it is a
spiritual and proportionable reparation of them unto their former liberty, and
ability, and efficacy.

It is not a mere sustaining of them in genere gratiarum, or in esse vitali,
that they shall not quite extinguish;

But strengthening of grace, imports addition as well as sustentation,

Nor is all regaining sufficient, unless it be proportionable to the estate of
grace when it began to decay and sink: when the decayed Christian recovers
again unto that ancient pitch of heavenly power and inclination, and unto his
old liberty of holy acts, whether inward in the mind, will and affection, or
outward in his open and visible duties; now has he rightly strengthened
himself.

It is true, that before he fully recovers that equal pitch, he may be said
to strengthen his graces by way of disposition, but punctually by way of habit;
the strengthening implies a new equality as it were to the latitude of his
former condition.

3 There is a threefold strengthening of decaying principles A threefold
strength.
of holiness.

1 One is by way of authority and plain causality; this strengthening is the
work of the spirit of Christ Jesus; for as he only is life to a dead man, so
he only is medicine to a sick soul; his blood is the only comforting
medicine to a troubled conscience, and his spirit is the only strengthening
medicine to a decayed Christian. It is he who must set us upon our legs again,
and who must make our withered branches to flourish again.

Now Christ Jesus does Christ strengthens three ways.
strengthen the languished Christian (as I suppose) three ways.

1 Excitando, by awakening him out of his drowsy and deadly sleep, like those
to Jonah, what meanest thou O sleeper? arise; so does Jesus Christ awaken the
decaying Christian, partly, per sermonem sonantem, by the powerful knockings
of the word, which will not let him rest thus, but charge on him all the wrath
of God, and the withdrawments of his love, if he will continue thus.

Partly, per sermonem tonantem, by some singular afflictions, and near
corrections, scourging of him in some singular outward mercies, that he may
see his spiritual losses in temporary ones.

Partly, per sermonem pulsantem, by his own spirit, clearing the eyes of his
understanding, to open and reflect, and consider on the decayed condition, as
also by exciting the conscience bitterly, to accuse and judge him for this
reciduation and witherings, with much torment, fear, and shame.

2 Adjuvando, by conferring Alvarez de aux. Gr. disp. 88. p. 698.
on him actual and efficacious strength (specialem concursumro. bur actuale)
whereby his will resolves to forsake those courses of death, and to turn back
again into the paths of lite, and is also enabled by that helping grace, both
to bewail its former decayings, and also earnestly and constantly to
supplicate the throne of grace and mercy for pardon, and for strength to
recover.

3 Renovando, by a daily infusing (in the use of means) such new measures and
degrees of holiness, until the decayed Christian recovers his former ability
and vigor, shaking off his corruptions, and attaining unto that strength of
holy understanding, faith, will, love; desire, fear, care, obedience, as
heretofore.

2 Another, is by way of ministry and office: this concerns the Pastors of
flocks, who should consider the estate of their sheep, and if they find any
to wander, to reduce them into the way of truth; if any to be weak, to bear
them up in their arms with comfort, if any to be pining and decaying, to
stir them up by holy reproves and pious counsels and directions for all the
ways of a speedy and safe recovery; and many interpreters think this the
principal strengthening meant and intended in this place.

3 A third by way of personal duty, and so the decaying Christian strengthens
himself, when being awakened, and excited, and assisted by the Spirit of
Christ, he applies himself unto, and continues in the use of all holy and
raising means, whether private or public, or both, until God again
strengthens what he has wrought in him.

This strengthening is partly

Privative in the expulsion of those diseases and occasions which have impaired
the spiritual condition.

Positive, in a continual succouring of the spiritual condition, till it
recovers to its ancient degree and station.

But why must the spiritual condition be thus strengthened?

Reasons hereof are many.



In that which is our excellency; holiness is the glory of a God, and the
dignity of a Christian; it is holiness which makes thee to differ from men,
more then reason makes thee to differ from beasts: If with him in the Gospel
thou should lose thy sheep, or with her in the Gospel, thou should lose
thy groat, thou would seek to recover them: how much more when thy crown
is losing? etc.

In that which is our safety: graces are not only ornamenta, beautiful
garments, but munimenta, powerful weapons: thou losest thy weapons in the very
field before thine enemies: if thou losest thy spirituals, and make thy self
naked, so that any temptation may insult over thee and wound thee:

In that which is our serenity: the weakened grace, and the wounded conscience
still go together: or if not, then it is the dying grace, and the dead
conscience, which is far worse then the other.

In that which is our felicity: ah unhappy Christian, who when thy bow abode in
strength, could see a loving God, enjoy a gracious Father, could speak
to him much, and hear from him much; but now have changed thy confidence into
fears, thy sun into darkness, thy communion into strangeness, thy glory
into shame.

2 Who knows what the end will be, if thou strengthen not thy decaying graces?
The Lord knows how far thou may fall, if thou will not think of rising.

Thou see how poor a crop of duties comes from thy decaying graces: thou
feel thy affections almost gone: thou apprehendest not only a weakness, but
a weariness in holy services: thou find thy appetite gone from the word,
thou know thy neglect of many a Sacrament: thou can not but observe a
vanity to arise in thy mind, in stead of heavenly purity, and a more
delightful consociation with vain and idle persons, then with solid and
fruitful Christians.

Yea and since thy graces have been weakened, easy temptations have been
very likely (if not altogether) effectual to ensnare thee to great
transgressions: from many omissions thou art now ready for great commissions;

And here will be work now made for that miserable soul of thine, which has
so far gone from home, and is departed from thy fathers house?

3 We are bound to keep our graces in repair, and more then so, orgo, we are
not to rest in a decaying estate, but to recover, etc.



Nay more then so, we are bound against not only decayings, but against mere
standings: we must proceed from faith to faith, we must perfect holiness in
the fear of God, we must grow in the love and knowledge of our Lord Jesus, we
must abound in all the fruits of righteousness, we must use and increase our
talents, it will not be an answer of proof, to retain our naked talent, and
say, Master, there is thine own.

The first use of this point shall be to stir us up to the Use.
practice of this duty. I will not spend time to demonstrate that we need
strengthening. I may speak my conscience with grief, that generally we are a
decaying people, in the powers of godliness, and flames of holy affections,
yea our own consciences secretly testify against us this day, that so it is;
yea, the judgments of God, the fire of his wrath which begins to burn and fly
abroad in this City yet again, testifies as much: and therefore my exhortation
to us all, is, that we wisely consider of our dyings and decayings: ah! if the
Plague should break into our dwellings, and take us away in our decayed
estates, a tormenting sore, and a tormenting conscience, a dying spirit, and a
dying body, both at once, the Lord knows the woefulness of such a condition.
There are only three things which I shall commend unto you for the application
of this, viz.

1 The motives to excite us. 2 The means to perform it. Three things.
3 The manner of doing it.
1 The motives,

To excite us to strengthen our spiritual condition, shall Seven disadvantages.
be drawn from the disadvantages in a weakened, and the advantages of a
strengthened condition.

1 In respect of duties, the Christian is to be Gods workman; he is the servant
of the Lord, who imposes on him not a few, but many works, not easy, but
(many times) difficult workers, not for a while, but constant works, such
duties, that a little knowledge will not serve the turn, nor a little wisdom,
nor a little faith, nor a little patience, etc. some of these duties are
active, some passive, some respecting his general, some his particular calling,
some of relation to God, some to man, some to himself. Now the weakened
Christian, he is no body to the strengthened Christian for duties, for every
man is, as his strength is, and our actions (for the course of them) are as the
ability of the soul is from whence they come.

The weakened Christian comes very short of the other, both for

His adaptation of spirit unto duty, there is not that connaturalnesse (if I
may so speak) of his spirit to spiritual offices; duties come hardly from
him, strengthened, Christians duties flow from him as from an easy principle,
and lively and quick cause.

His adequation of duty to the rule; He does not mind the rule of holy actions
so much, nor does he proportion his works to the commands, God may command
much more then he does, for ordinarily the decayed Christian is guilty of many
omissions.

He fails wonderfully ofttimes in passing over the duty of prayer, or
reading, or hearing, etc. But the strengthened Christian, he is for all duties,
difficult as well as easy, private as well as public, though he cannot
intensively answer the rule for duty, yet extensively he does; knowingly and
willingly he omits no duty.

His affective cooperation with duty: he does duty, but without such
co-working affections, more formally; he does pray and hear perhaps, but it is
coldly and sleepily, it is not as (...) but as if it were some indifferent
work, he acts with a careless and indifferent spirit. His eye is not so full
on Gods glory, nor is his heart so warm in prayer, etc. His coals of fire
burn in a cold hearth: He is not lively in living works, but performs
spiritual works without much spiritualnesse.

But the strengthened Christian has workings in his works, or as in Ezekiel,
there was a wheel within a wheel; he serves the Lord with a fervent spirit,
and with all his soul; he is exceeding glad to obey, and is much grieved that
he can obey the Lord no better.

Acceptance of duty: the Lord does not look so upon his offerings, as on the
duties of a strengthened Christian: it is true, that the Lord does not despise
the day of small things, even weak services are graciously respected by him,
but when Christians weaken their own operations, they do weaken also Gods
acceptations, for the Lord is pleased differently to answer his servants
according to their different dispositions and tempers; faint seekers have but
faint answers, and resolute petitioners get plentiful answers from him of good.

2 In respect of the ordinances, here also the weakened Christian is very short
of the strengthened Christian, both

For preparation unto them, his heart is not put in such a frame to come and
converse with God, he will not take that pains before he comes to the word,
he does not by precedent meditations and prayers, bring such a receptivity and
and teachablenesse of heart to the word; nor for the Sacrament: perhaps he
comes and thrusts on the work, but retires not himself, examines not
himself, humbles not himself, hungers not, thirsts not, nor considers his
particular necessities, so rightly to dispose his soul for an holy communion
with God, but is more full of carnal indulgence to himself, and study rather
for apologies to excuse his neglect, then by preparative duties to fit himself:

For application of them, he stands under the ordinances with more
distractions, with less attentions, with an unclosing spirit; the word works
not so on his heart, nor his heart on the word. He stands under the ordinances
with a more distracting spirit, or else with a more fearing spirit, lest the
Lord will find him out for his revoltings, and either he dares not come to
the Sacrament, or if he does, he is not able for his life almost to be
confident and persuaded of Gods love toward him in Christ.

For fructification, he buys not at the market, suckes not, and thrives not by
the breasts, nor makes that use of them as the other does; nor does he improve
them so to the benefit of his spiritual condition, as the other does, the
counsels, commands, exhortations, reproves, promises, they are generally to
him in his weakened estate, as water on the rock, or as the waves to Jonah
sleeping in the ship, they have not that virtutem moventem, that authority over
his drowsy spirit.

But the strengthened Christian has far more easy passages, the word and
Sacrament have their sweet and facile impressions, on his understanding, will,
and affections: by discoveries of sin, and threatenings, he fears the Lord;
and hates sin more. By discoveries of goodness and mercy, and Christ, his
faith gets more, and his love rises more. By discoveries of duties, and
commands, his cares and desires abound more in him; they are still humbling, or
still purging, still raising, or still upholding of him, he is more and more
built up and edified in his holy faith, his communions with God are more
cordial, and more beneficial: there is still a fuller and sweeter conjunction
betwixt his soul and Christ.

3 In respect of corruptions, which are the very bane and poison, and shame of
his soul, and sore woundings and impairings; the weakened Christian is found
much underfoot, and is more in bondage, and less sensible of it: gray hairs
appear more on him, unruly lusts get more head again, and he either hardly
feels them, or faintly resists them: He is now become as a wounded man, over
whom every coward can insult.

The strength of tender perception of sin fails, and the strength of
resolute opposition, and the strength of frequent conquest, so that his soul
is much imbased by lusts, his resistance are either,

1 None. 2 Or faint. 3 Or fruitless.
But he is overborne by the tide, more easily, like an unskilful rower, or a
sick man by a thrust.

But it is otherwise with the strengthened Christian, who now can lead
captivity captive: he is mighty in prayer, and resolute in defiances, and
generally happy either in making sinful motions to fly, or in preserving his
soul from yielding unto them; either he is more quiet, or less guilty: He is
a greater enemy to sin, a surer conqueror, and still a lesser servant.

4 In respect of conversation, it is true that the Christian must be gold
without, and gold within; he must be like the heavens, excellent in substance,
and beautiful in appearance; a good heart is not enough, but also a good life
and walking, like a Spring which is for common good, and not for private. But
the weakened Christian in his conversation, falls short of the others, who is
strengthened in many respects, v. g.

1 For strictness, though it be a kind of garment, yet it hangs more loosely,
and like one of the Planets; with the acts and ways of unworthy societies, or
at least his graces are out-dared, and overawed, so that when he should
express them for Gods glory, he is afraid to speak or work,

2 For profitablenesse: every good man should be like a tree, on which, one may
gather fruit; he is to be a steward of the manifold gifts, not enclosing, but
employing of them for the benefit of others: his box of ointment should be
opened: If thou be good, thou art bound also to do good, for graces are given
not only to make us good, but also to make us to do good; but thus it is not
with the decaying Christian. He being now fallen into a penurious stock of
grace, has almost lost the art and skill of profitablenesse, his acts seem
rather to be those of civility, then piety, he may be as facetious, but is not
so religious in conversings; his discourses are more censorious and insolent,
then substantial and edifying: I confess that some Christians cannot so draw
out their treasure, through a bashfulnesse of spirit, but he is grown less
active, because less able; his barrenness is in the cause, and not in the
instrument.

So that he may eat and drink with others, but no good comes from him; his lips
preserve not knowledge, nor does his communication administer grace to the
hear: whence it follows, 1 That God has little or no glory by him: 2 That
the Saints have little or no delight in him: 3 That his conscience has little
or no comfort in it self.

3 For cleernesse, his river is not so sweet, but ever and anon it proves
brackish; his sun, though it runs its course, yet it is frequently clowded,
so is it with his life, he is not doing of good so, but withal ever and anon,
he is doing of some evil: his weakened graces cannot bear him up against
strong occasions and temptations: his gold lies much in the ashes,

4 For delightfulness, he is almost a stranger to exact Christians, and does
not honor them so much as formerly, but secretly fears their company, and
judgment; he is perhaps more ashamed, or else more afraid of them: his
conscience is yet so apprehensive, that he interprets every glance as a secret
check of his decayings. Thus is it not with the strengthened Christian, whose
graces are high, carfulness great, usefulness large, godliness even, and*
great delights taken psalm. 16. 1.
up amongst the best and choicest Christians. He himself still grows better,
and others by him.

5 In respect of consolation: the declining sun creates the longer and darker
shadows, and the decaying Christian brings on himself either the sharper
terrors, or deeper griefs, the sick bed is full of pains; neither his own
spirit, nor Gods Spirit speak peace unto him. He who of bad begins to be good,
may have much tranquillity; but he who of good becomes less good, ever becomes
more undelightfull to God, and most unquiet with himself.



But it is otherwise with the strengthened Christian, for rising graces breed
stronger comforts and longer; there is not only no troubling accusation, but a
most surpassing excusation in conscience; he has a better heart, and shall
therefore find a more quiet spirit, for conscience speaks peace answerable to
our being more good, and doing of it. Alas, that thou should still walk
like a Benoni, a child of sorrow, whereas the other Christian lives like a
Barnabas, a son of consolation.

6 In respect of affliction: the weakened in active graces, is ever most weak
in passive duties: generally he has more crosses, and (or himself) less
wisdom and strength to bear them; because he is grown worse, therefore his
afflictions are increased, and because his abilities are sunk, therefore the
afflictions crush and prick him much the more.

Sampson who could easily break through many cords, and bars, yet when
weakened, a few Philistines were too hard for him.

He cannot be so patient, nor yet so confident, nor yet so diligent in a
suffering condition.

His weakened graces can neither administer strength, nor yet subdue those
workings of impatience, so that he is almost sunk and split with calamities,
his decayed ship can scarce abide any foul weather.

But when personal sicknesses come, and the apprehension of death (at which
times his conscience is thoroughly wakened) ah how bitter, how terrible are the
thoughts and disputes of his heart at such a time, much like those of him who
apprehends his condition not to be good.

Oh how the pulses of his disturbing and disturbed conscience work? what
reflections on his former ways? what comparison of his former flourishings,
with present decayings? what fears of approaching before the Lord? what smart
sentences on himself, what sudden and vehement exclamations? Oh Lord! (says
he) I would not yet dye, I am fallen much from my God: Lord, spare me a little,
that I may recover my strength (my decayed strength) before I go hence, and
shall be no more seen.

It is not so with the strengthened Christian, but as in active duties, he is
more forward, so in passive duties he is more sufficient; in losses, in
crosses, yea in death it self he is more submissive and confident; he can
(with Job) be as willing to receive evil at the hand of God as good, and does
not only rejoice in his favors, but in his strokes, and is as ready to go to
his father, as to serve God his good master.

7 In respect of Gods manifestation; the Lord is pleased diversely to manifest
himself to his people, sometimes in admirable motions and suggestions of his
spirit, sometimes in more quick excitations of their spirits, sometimes in
singular confirmation of them with assistances for extraordinary works;
sometimes by secret impressions of his favor and love upon their consciences,
which does revive their hearts as wine, and satisfy their souls as with
marrow, so David speaks, Psalm. 63. But now the weakened Christian, he darkens
this heaven over his head, he has not that comfortable sight of God, that
assurance of his favor, that joy of the holy Ghost; David lost the joy of the
spirit, and the voice of gladness; the arm of God is Psalm. 51.
not so revealed in him for doing of good, nor the face of God so open unto him
at all.

Whereas the strengthened Christian finds it otherwise, he has a better
heart, and a fairer day; his communion is sweet with the Lord; he still seeks
the Lord, and often finds him, enjoyes him in his power, and enjoyes him in
his gratiousnesse; the Lord meets him that works righteousness, and
remembers him who remembers the Lord in their ways.

Now think on these things (O thou fallen and decayed Christian) and rest not
in thy weakness, but recover and strengthen thy spirituals again.

Three things I will let fall, Three things.
which perhaps may fetch and quicken thee again.

1 Though thou art far sunk, yet thou may be raised again.

2 If thou do rise again, the Lord will graciously pardon thy decaies.

3 If thou will set upon the strengthening work, the Lord will work in thee
sufficient strength.

1 Thou may be raised and strengthened again, and that may appear thus
unto thee.

1 Repentance is possible for any sins which are committed, and if renewed
repentance be possible, then a recovery again is possible, for as much as our
recovery again consists very much in a renewed repentance.

2 Yea and we have examples of weakened Christians, strengthened again, as we
know in David, exceedingly wounded, but yet recovered, and Peter grievously
falling, but graciously rising again.

2 If thou do strengthen thy condition, the Lord will mercifully pardon thy
former decayings: I confess that there may be sore grounds of fear to
entangle and depresse the spirit of a decaid Christian, for his sins (by which
he has decayed) may perhaps be heinous for the kind, and also high for the
circumstances, being against knowledge, against the workings of conscience,
against the workings of his graces, against the tender love of God in Christ,
showed to him more then to another, so that his heart may strongly misgive him,
whether the Lord will ever look upon him more, and accept of him into favor.
But this I say, that be thy decayings what they will, either for the matter of
them, or causes of them, or circumstances of them; if thou do rise again by
a renewed repentance, I assure thee that the Lord will pardon thee, and accept
of thee in Christ; look, as the Lord pardons all the sins of thy unconverted
condition upon thy initiall repentance, so he will pardon all the sins of thy
converted condition, upon renewed repentance, and therefore he calls upon
backsliding and declining people to return unto him, and promises both to
heal them, Hos. 14. 4. and to Hos. 14. 4.
love them freely (ibid.) which is as much as to pardon them, but see the
pardon expressly, Micah. 7. Mic. 7. 18.
18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his beritage, etc.

3 If thou will set upon the strengthening work, the Lord will work in thee
sufficient strength for the work. There is a difference betwixt a man in his
conversion, there indeed he is without all strength, he can do nothing; and
the Christian in his restoration, there is now some living ability in him,
which can yet do a little, act a little, strive a little, at least in
bewailings and desires. Now if thou do in any sincere degree set upon the
right and full means of thy recovery, the Lord God will come in with his own
strength. He will strengthen what he has wrought in thee, and will work the
will and the deed in thee, his own works in thee.

But then you will reply, what means may a decayed Christian use to recover
and strengthen himself again?



1 A serious consideration of Seven Means.
their condition; this is the counsel which Christ gave to the Church of
Ephesus (decaying in her first love) Remember from Revel. 2
whence thou art fallen; seriously consider, take to heart, peruse and judge
over thy estate, what it was formerly, what it is now; what strength then, what
weakness now, how much glory God had then, what dishonor God has now; what
good thou did then, what evil thou do now; what peace in conscience
then, what woundings in conscience now; what estimation among the Saints then,
what strengthening of the hands, and opening of the mouths of the wicked now?

And this is an excellent means to work upon thy spirit, or rather to work
of thy spirit; David considered his ways, and turned his feet to Gods
testimonies.

2 A deep humiliation which will follow upon this; thou must break through all
businesses, and pleasures, and impediments, and retire thy self in a more
solemn manner, (more then once or twice) and set thy self before the Lord,
and fall down before his footstool with shame and confusion of face, with
bitter weepings and lamentations, with sound judgings and condemnations of thy
self.

Ah, how thou should exquisitely afflict thy soul, that thou should be
so mad and vile to lose a God, to lose any thing of the graces of a God, for a
sins sake, or a worlds sake.

That the Lord should show thee more love then another, and entrust thee with
grace (the least dram where of is more precious then all the world) and yet
thou should decline from the Lord, not answer this trust, not use those
talents which have yielded so much profit and comfort, being improved, but
decay in them, and fall behind hand, yea even under mighty means of strength
always continued unto thee; and these things should cut and grieve, and
afflict, and humble thy soul exceedingly.

3 A solid resolution: thou must with full purpose of heart resolve not to rest
in thy decayed condition, but to shake off all the causes and occasions of thy
decayings.

If any wickedness has got into thy heart, thou must put it far away from
thy tabernacles, and if the morsels have been sweet, thou must cast them out
with godly sorrow as bitter as gall and wormwood.

If carelessness and slothfulness of spirit has caused thy decayings, thou
must (with the Church in the Canticles) stand no longer upon, how shall I rise
and put on my coat? but rise thou must, and get out of thy slothful bed, and
thrust from thee a neglecting and negligent disposition.

Or if the world has caused thy decayings, either in the profits of it and
gain, or in the honors of it and respects, or in the friendship of it and
acquaintance, thou must resolve to bid them all farewell. Think on it O
Christian, what gets he for profit, who loses in his graces, or for honor,
who abaseth himself in his graces, or for love, who loses himself in the
favor of his God? Ah poor soul, thou may curse the day that ever thou
knew what did belong to thy drudgings in the world, and unto thy great
friends in the world, and thy society with such and such persons: at first thou
did converse with them with a regretting spirit, then with a silent spirit,
then with an yielding spirit; many, many a day have thou come home with
conscience accusing and smiting of thee, unto which had thou hearkened, thou
had been much preserved: well, well, if ever thou would recover thy
spiritual strength, thou must peremptorily resolve on it to sever from wicked
society, better far to be a poor man, and a rich Christian, then to thrive
any way, and be decaying in grace.

4 An active reformation: Remember (said Christ) from whence thou art fallen,
and do thy first works: so say I now, go to thy old works again, be
trading for thy soul, set up prayer again, and reading again, and hearing
again, and holy meditation and conference again, and solemn humiliations
again, stir up those coals and cinders of grace; there is life yet in thee,
oh act thy life, faith can do something for thee, though it cannot see comfort
for thee, yet it can see help and strength for thee; godly sorrow can mourna
little, set it to work, perhaps it may quickly rise to a flood upon particular
surveyes, and so set repentance on work, yea, and all thy soul, thy mind, thy
judgment, thy memory, thy affections to work in all the duties of thy
general and particular condition.

5 Ardent supplication, for it is the Lord who must show this power in thy
weakness, Psalm. 86. O turn unto me and have Psalm. 86. 16.
mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy servant: Beseech him to pity thee,
beseech him to succor and help thee, to be thy strength and thy salvation; to
beat down and weaken the sins which have so much weakened thee, to crucify
thy heart to the world, which has so much crucified thy heart unto thy God. To
breath upon thy graces as he did upon the dry bones, to stir up and revive
them by his Almighty spirit, to put his hand of power, upon thy hand of
weakness, as the Prophet did upon the Kings, etc.

Yea, and never give him over till then, that though thou have been a
backsliding child, yet he is a gracious Father; though thou have been
unfruitful, yet he is faithful; though thou art weakened, yet he is the
everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth, who faints not, who
can give power to the faint, and to them that Esaias 40. 28.
have no might, he can increase strength.

Yea, and that yet there is something of his own in thee, though very little,
yet something, and that holiness which he did once implant by a mighty hand,
he is now as able to revive and strengthen it by his Almighty power.

6 Careful application: now go to the healing and strengthening waters; thou
have known the ways of God, and his goings in the Sanctuary, how he has
wrought wonders for the dead, many a Creple has got strength there, and many a
disconsolate soul has found comfort there, in his word and in his Sacrament,
there has his arm been revealed; David grew (by his great sinnings) into
great languishings; but the Lord sent Nathan the Prophet unto him, and his
faithful dealing was a means of his happy renewing. What we pull down by
harkening to the voice of sin, that may be built up again by hearkening to
the voice of Gods spirit. But then this must thou do, if ever thou would be
strengthened, viz.

Strive for a plain and pliable heart which may yield subjection to whatsoever
law or course the Lord shall direct thee unto by his word; if the word As the
Jews in Jeremiah
offer thee a restoring plaster, but thou will not apply it, and prescribe
unto thee strengthening methods, but thou will not follow them, now thy heart
may grow more hardened, but thy graces will never be strengthened.

But this do, strive to yield up thy soul in an humble subjection to the
heavenly ordinances, that if they say forbear, thy heart answers I will
forbear; if they say do, thy heart answers, I desire to do thy will.
Cooperate with the word received, when it has got into thy soul, and stirred
thee in any kind, when thou perceivest any healing virtue gone from Christ by
it unto thee; oh bless the Lord, and get home, work it again upon thy soul
by holy meditation, yea and yet again by holy petition.

Benhadads servants did in another, they watched the words which fell from the
King of Israel, and improved them, so must thou watch what motions the Lord
puts into thy heart in private, and cherish them, watch what impressions the
Lord makes upon thy spirit by his word, and not only excite thy heart to
embrace them, but work them often and often upon thy conscience, and this is
the way to make thy weak spark to grow unto a flame.

7 And lastly, there must be lively consociation by a natural instinct, the
weaker things do cling and wind up themselves by the stronger, as the weak
Ivy upon the strong Oak: so thou must inwardly and affectionately join thy
self with strong and lively Christians, who skill the ways of grace, and
walk in them, who are good, and know how to do good, who have hearts to pity
thee, heads to direct thee, and arms to bear thee up.

Thou may exceedingly be repaired by their heavenly wisdom in counselling
of thee, and kept in by their tender watchings over thee, and put forward by
their daily exhortations of thee, and refreshed by their seasonable comfortings
of thee, and led on by their strict and lively examples, yea even stirred up by
the observation of those blessed experiences which thou perceivest in them,
through a careful communion with God, as also much assisted by the success of
their prayers for thy particular condition.

Thirdly, the manner.

Now be pleased to hear a little for the manner, how ye 5 Particular.
are to set upon this strengthening work, and then I have done with this
proposition.

If thou find thy self to be a weakened Christian, then set upon thy
strengthening work.

1 Presently: Initia morborum cavenda, say the Physicians, and therefore their
rule is, principiis obsta, etc. we should set upon diseases, as soon as
diseases set upon us, not trifle away the methods of recovery: three things
must be looked into in time, tides, seasons, diseases.

If we presently oppose our decayings,

First, we shall prevent the deadliness of diseases; had thou opposed thy
negligent, careless spirit at the first, thou had not now been bleeding
under so many wounds, thou had not stepped down from one sin to another,
thou had not gone so desperately from the Lord.

Therefore watch thy heart, and often examine it, weekly, nay, daily; thy
languishings are by this manner sooner espied, and sooner stayed.

Secondly, our strengthening will hereby become more easy; it is easier to
fetch a man from the brink, then from the depth of the channel, and for a
Physician to cure a distemper, then to heal a disease.

There is usually in the first impairings, less corruption, and more strength
of grace to oppose it and subdue it; Believe it, long decayings are the more
uncomfortable and more difficult for recovery: Therefore if thou fallest
suddenly, rise quickly; remember one thing, it is a very dangerous thing to
suffer the soul to habituate it self to decayings, all customs are hardly
broken.

2 Voluntarily; it is true, that though thou decaiest more and more, yet the
Lord may awaken thee at length and recover thee, but do not put the Lord to
it. The Physician may perhaps heal a deeply languishing patient, but it will
cost the patient dearly and bitterly. Ioab got little by not coming to
Absalom, for he at length fetched him by setting his corn on fire; if thou will
not come in of thy own accord, but stand it out, I tell thee the Lord will
fetch thee in indeed, but he will send a whirlewinde after thee, as to Elijah,
he will send flames into thy conscience, if thou will needs put him upon
compulsory ways.

Nay, but rather peruse thy decayings thy self, and arraign thy self and
judge thy self, and afflict thy self, and hye thee to make thy* peace, and to
recover strength; it argues the better heart to fall unwillingly; but willingly
to rise, hereby peace is sooner made, and strength sooner restored.

3 Prudently, when a tree is withering, you need not pour buckets on every
branch, if you water the roots, it is as if you watered all. There is an holy
part in recovering our graces again, if you can recover the roots, you have
hit the way to renew all. Now there are two radical graces (as it were) if
they be strengthened, all the rest will come to be strengthened, viz.

1 Faith, this is a root grace, and this is a strengthening grace, it is of
singular power with God, and with Christ, and with the spirit of God: It is
that grace which lays hold on, and applies all our strengthening helps, so
that it deals at the springs of strength, and brings away strength from them.

But this is not all, faith is no sooner strengthened to lay hold on our
strength, but (like those common officials in nature, the stomach, liver,
heart, and brain) it imparts this vigor to all the new man: every grace gets
when faith gets, the more a man can believe, the more will that man grieve for
sin, the more will he fear to sin, the more will he hate sin, the more
will he repent of sin, the more careful will he be to walk before God,
the more tender and conscientious will he grow in duties, the more able unto
prayer and the ordinances, and the more successful under them.

Therefore deal prudently for thy strengthening: I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me.

2 Love, this is another radical grace, not that it brings forth other graces
for their habits, but only that it eggeth on other graces to their acts and
operations, for as holy love is a most active quality in it self, so it does
make the Christian to be most active; it is a doing thing, and makes the person
to be doing.

More fully thus.

1 There is activity flowing from love; grace shall never be idle; where the
love of God is strong, the love of Christ constraines 2 Cor. 5.
me, says Saint Paul, it is like the virtuous woman in the last of the
Proverbs, who did set all her handmaids to employment, for love will find duty
enough, for it is never quiet but in doing the will of God.

2 There is diligence: It will not set graces to a naked work, but to a
diligent work, even carefully and diligently to express their acts, to take
all the seasons of holy actings, strictly to oppose and resist corruptions,
neatly to set out duties, so as God may have most glory.

3 There is delightfulness, it makes our communion with God, pleasant, and the
works of piety easy to the soul: and the more delightful and easy any acts
are, the more frequent they grow; David loving of the Lord, was glad when they
said, let us go unto the house of the Lord, and he had a desire even to dwell
and rest there, as the birds did, Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84.


Now put all this together, and you shall see that if love be strengthened, all
our spiritual estate will be strengthened, for it makes our graces to be
active and doing, to be careful and exact in doing, to be delightful and
cheerful in doing good, and in communion with God, and all these are
admirable means to raise and strengthen graces.

Forasmuch as the more any Christian does, the more he may, by using his
spiritual strength, he always increases it, and also wit.

All know, that diligence in acting is a thrifty course; the diligent hand
makes rich, says Solomon, so the diligent Christian is the gaining Christian;
and that delightful frequency of acting,

4 Seriously and in good earnest, and not slightly and faintly; the recovery of
a faint soul will never be effected by faint workings:

If my hands cannot keep a swouning person from falling to the ground, can they
lift him up being fallen? whereas every heavy body, the farther it descends,
the heavier it is.

No, no, Christian thou deceivest thy self, to think that a few complaints,
or a few sighs, or a few tears, or a prayer (once in a quarter of a year)
more earnestly pressed, will serve the turn.

I tell thee that thy wounds are deep, and thy diseases are strong, thou art
deeply revolted from the Lord, the very foundations are shaken and battered
within thy soul.

What talkest thou of putting a soft cloth over thy stinking and festred wounds
of sinful corruption; thou ought to search deeply, and to cut off the dead
flesh, lest the whole be gangrened.

Take my advise, even break up the fallow ground, I mean thy hollow heart,
search and try it to the utmost, not by slight, but by deep and full
humiliations and supplications, make thy peace; not by common, but by
extraordinary performances seek to renew thy self.

Thy falls have been great, and therefore thy work must not be slight; great
sinnings require grand sorrowings, and low fallings, the more industry for
higher risings; therefore act thy strengthening part with all thy strength, and
as it were for thy very life; remember that David was in fasting, and Peter in
bitter tears for their falling, and so they rose again.

5 Thoroughly and to some purpose; do not begin a strengthening work, and then
either upon the motions of a lasie heart, or a fearful heart, or an
unbeleeving heart, be discouraged, and desist: this inconstancy would keep
thee in an everlasting infirmity, thy licentious heart, or the fruits of them
to be hopeless to thy unbeleeving heart, (I cannot hold out, all is in vain,
or to little purpose) I tell thee that thou do but play the fool with thy
soul, set it forward and backward; this were to twist and untwist Penelopes
thread; thou never wilt get any thing by an inconstant and weary spirit.

But this must thou do, if thou would recover thy strength indeed, thou
must never admit of interruptions, thou must never break off thy renewing
work, till thou have got to thy former station in grace again.

The work must be a daily work, a constant going on in mourning, praying,
etc. till thou have got thy tender conscience again, till thou have gotten thy
broken heart again, till thou have got thy more willingly and cheerfully
obedient heart again, till thou have recovered thy first love; and can do
thy first works again.

It is true, thou shall meet with many temptations from Satan, with many
contrary suggestions from thine own spirit, and with many discouragements from
the world, and it is true also that thy doings may not at every time equal or
be like to it self; thou may feel thy physic at one time to work better
then at another; sometimes thou may do thy strengthening work with more
strength, sometimes with less; sometimes with more liberty of spirit,
sometimes with less, sometimes with more comfort, sometime with less.



Keep up thy services still, retain frequent communion with God still, be
begging still for the strength of Jesus Christ to raise thee, hear still, use
the prescriptions till health comes, thou art in the way, and must not rest
till thou have obtained.

If thou breakest off before thou have regained thy strength, thou will fall
back again, and also lose all thy new endeavors for thy recovery in grace.

Thus much for the second proposition, I proceed now to the third, of which I
can but give a touch, lest I be hindered in the prosecution of the matter in the
next verse.

I have not found thy works perfect, etc.

That the estate though visibly Thirdly.
fair to the eyes of men, yet it may be really imperfect in the eyes of God.
Amongst the Churches, Sardis had a name that it lived, but with God it had not
that name and estimation.

We Christians have the judgment of charity, but God has the judgment of
infallibility: we look only on the skin and surface of actions, but God looks
into the hearts and spirits of persons: we judge of the heart by the actions,
but God judges of our estates by the heart.

Now the outward acts (upon several arguments, and for several ends and
inducements, may be extremely different from the inward habit and disposition.
Persons for their credits sake, and for their peculiar advantages, may draw out
acts naturally good, when yet their spirits stand not right, either for
principles or ends of those acts: so that notwithstanding al their profession,
their estate may be imperfect before God: partly,

For the frame and constitution of soul,

For the vigor and fullness of acting.

For the scope and intentions in performing.

For the mixtures in matters of faith or conversation.

But I cannot now enlarge in this singular affection.

Abel, and then unto his offering.

2 To study Gods approbation more than man's; it is not sufficient nor safe,
that either we alone judge our estates to be good, or that men judge them to
be so, unless the Lord finds them to be so: every Christian is that as God
judges him to be, and he stands or falls according to this righteous judgment
of the al-seeing, and alknowing God. And so I take leave of that verse, and
proceed to the next.

Remember therefore how thou Revel. 3. 3.
have received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent.

In these words you have the other branches of the spirits special directions
to the Church of Sardis, which are three, viz.

1 Remembrance, (remember Three branches.
therefore how thou have received and heard,) 2 Persistence, (and hold fast,) 3
Renewed repentance, (and repent.)
Briefly to open the words.

Remember) sometimes the word is taken for the act of a particular faculty of
the rational soul, which is called by the Philosophers, Reminiscentia, and
then it is the calling back of a thing, or object formerly known and laid up
in the memory.

Sometimes it is taken for the act of serious consideration appertaining to the
judicious faculty of the soul, wherein apprehended truths are well weighed,
thoroughly thought on or considered of, in both respects I conjecture, it may
be taken in this place

How) some read that word rather thus, (...) what, remember. i. call to mind
and consider what thou have received and heard, as if it were a word declaring
the matter, but rather in this place it imports the manner, and therefore it is
well translated, (...), How, noting the manner how Christ taught, and
prescribed them at the first, and also the manner how they embraced those holy
rules of his for doctrine and conversation

Thou have received and heard,) that is, assented unto, and embraced those
truths and directions of Christ, where is expressed: first, their ancient
subjection or embracing of the doctrine of Christ (received,) and secondly, the
means or way thereof, viz. by hearing, (and heard)

I cannot possibly with any profit insist on all the observables out of these
and the other words, considering that little part of time which remains for me
to work amongst you, only I will point at three singular propositions, viz.

1 That holy truths once received, Three propositions.
are often to be remembered and thought on, (Remember, etc.) 2 That acceptance
of truths is not enough, but Christians must add thereto a persistence in
truths, (hold fast) 3 That renewed repentance is required of Christians, as
well as initiall (and repent.)
You see that all these propositions naturally flow from the text, and are very
proper for us, and for the occasion upon which they are handled, I begin with
the first of them, viz.



There are three things which should fall into a frequent consideration:

1 Our former sins, and this will keep us humble. 2 Gods former mercies, and
this will make us thankful. 3 Received truths, and this will make us dutiful
and fruitful.
The Jews were to bind them as frontlets between their eyes, Deuteronomy. 6. 8. to
which Solomon alludes in Pro. 6. 21. bind Deuteronomy. 6. 8. Pro. 6. 21.
them continually upon thy heart, and tie them about thy neck, and Eccles. 12.
11. they are to be as nails Eccl. 12. 11.
fastened. Look on David, and this was his practice, Psalm. 119. Psalm 119 15.
I will meditate in thy statutes, there once, then read verse 23. thy servant
did meditate in thy statutes, there is the second time, but then read verse
48. I will meditate in thy statutes, there is the third time; what speak I of
once or twice, or thrice; see him in verse 97. Oh how I love thy law, it is my
meditation all the day. The Apostles are frequent in their exhortations to this
purpose, to remember, to lay up, to keep in mind, not to forget the holy
doctrines delivered by them, nay, and Christ pressed the same also upon
themselves upon many occasions. But for the clear opening of this proposition,
premise with me these particulars.

1 The frequent remembering of former truths must be a remembrance by way of
subjection, and not by way of contradiction; we must not remember them and
question them, much less abuse and pervert them, least of all oppose and
despise them.

2 The remembrance must be ingenuous, and not prejudicial; though we must
stick to, yet not in the truths received, our former remembrance, must not
contract a present or future neglect of any other truths which God shall
reveal unto us, as when many remember the Sermons of dead men, and slight the
discoveries of the living.

3 There is a threefold remembrance of former truths.

One is notionall,

Another is verbal, when a person renues his acquaintance and complements with
truth only: his memory only loades his tongue, like a naked Astronomer who
knows heaven, and can only talk of it.

A third is practical, when the remembrance is like a cloud descending on the
plants,

Directive, when truths remembered are made a compass for us to sail by, or
copies for us to write after, still teaching and guiding us how to draw the
lines and letters of our conversation.

Affective, when truths remembered are like the conference of Christ (rising
from the dead) burning and inflaming of our hearts with most affectionate love
unto them.

Effective, when truths remembered, are truths obeyed; we often consider former
doctrines, and still better our present conversations.

After this practical form, are we to remember received truths.

4 There is,

1 A material remembrance, which is partly of the things themselves, partly of
the revelation of them, partly of the manner and means of revealing them.

2 Formal remembrance of For the manner, five ways.
truths received, which is rather of the manner how we our selves did receive
them; we are often to think on truths received, not only as they stand in
proposition or revelation, but also how they stood with us when we did receive
them for energy or operation: and thus I conjecture we are to remember truths
received.

1 With what estimations and admirations we did receive them; them as the very
oracles of God, not as the words of man, but as they are indeed, the words of
God.

2 With what subjection of spirit we did receive them, we did not only admire
their excellency, but felt their efficacy; the word came not in word only,
but in power and authority over our very consciences, and this power was a full
power, and an easy power, the truths which we received, did command and awe,
and order our whole man, and we too were most willing to resign up our selves
to the obedience of the Gospel in all things, and to be cast into that mould
of heavenly doctrine.

3 With what affections we did receive them; O then, those conflictings of
spirit, Heb. 10. 32 Heb. 10. 32.
those bathes of grief and heavenly compunction with them, Acts 2. 37. those
flames Acts 2. 37.
of love, with those Christians, Acts 4. 32. those raptures of joy Acts 4. 32.
Acts 16.
with Lydia, Acts 16. yea those extensions of zeal with the Galathians to
Saint Paul, Gal. 4. Gal. 4.
the word had a surpassing influence upon all our affections, to melt, and
convert, to raise, and dispose of them.

4 With what resolute loyalty, so that we did hate and defy all contrary
errors and ways, and so were our hearts sworn to divine truths, and (as it
were) espoused to them, that we once resolved to live and dye in those truths,
and for those truths, we could not endure any mixture with them, nor hear of
any divorce from them.

5 With what reverence we did embrace the Ambassadors of heavenly truths, they
were as the Angels of God to us, and we were like (almost) with Cornelius, to
adore the Peter's and Paul's, I mean the ministers of God revealing his truths
unto us; the feet of them who brought unto us the glad tidings of our
salvation, were beautiful and most acceptable unto us.

Now here are two questions briefly to be resolved.

What truths heard and received, we are often to consider and remember.



1 There must be an endeavor to remember all the truths, as Christ said of the
fragments, gather them up, and let none be lost; so it must be said of holy
truths (on which the soul has formerly fed) gather them up all, let none be
lost.

Every truth of God is precious, it is more precious then gold; it is
excellent, and as it is excellent in it self, so it may be useful to us,

But if either for the multitude of truths, or the sublimity of truths, or for
the obscure manner of discovering these truths, or for the impotency and
irretentivenesse of an unholding and unclasping memory, or for the space of
time, since truths were delivered and received; it so falls out, that all heard
and once received truths will not stand upon record, into which they have been
entered, but are in many places defaced and cancelled,

2 There must at least be a faithful remembrance of the most necessary and
chief truths, namely of those which more immediately and intimately, and
unauoydably concern our salvation, of the which (for methods sake) I conjecture
there may be three heads, viz.

1 That vital truth concerning Christ and faith in him, this is the great
fundamental truth.

of the heart from dead works.

3 That practical truth concerning obedience, in ordering the life and course
of a converted person.

As the moralists say of Fame, or of a man's good name, Omnia si perdas, famam
servare memento. Qua semel amissa postea nullus eris. (i) whatsoever commodity
you lose, be sure yet to preserve that jewel of a good name. That is so choice
a jewel, that whatsoever a man loses, he must yet take heed and care of
that. The same may be said of these forenamed truths; though through some
defect, or frailty, or malignity, any other historical or problematicall
truths may slip from us, yet these must be written in our hearts with the point
of a Diamond, and as in marble, the characters of them are to be kept fresh
and alive, and are never to be blotted out.

And why this faithful and frequent remembrance, or renewed consideration of
truths heard and received?



1 Though sometimes an assent may be sufficient to a particular word of truth
for the present, yet the virtue and use of that may be for the future.

or silver is put and kept safe; a little whereof my serve for the time being,
but most or all of it may be brought out upon future and several occasions.



The truths which thou have heard from the word ten years ago, may serve thee
twenty years hence; that discovery of the mercy of God, of the blood of
Christ, of the freeness of grace, etc. these may be of great avail unto thee,
and of sweet and proper help unto thee when thou come to old age, or to a
dying bed.

time, as the star to the wise men, which appeared the second time.

2 Frequent remembrance of divine truths is (as it were) a spur to further
obedience, and therefore Saint Peter joins, 2 Pet. 1. 13.
putting in remembrance, and stirring up, as if then we should revive our
services, when we did renew our memories.

Every truth newly and seriously thought on, is as it were a second Sermon or
repetition, and inculcating of it upon our hearts; I am sure it is like a
further digestion, which serves for the better health and strength of our
bodies.

3 It is a means much to strengthen our graces; the Philosophers have a
saying, eodem nutrimur ex quo generamur, that we are nourished by that of
which we are generated; the truths of God begat our graces, and the same
truths well remembered and perused, will increase them.

Those promises which heretofore inclined thy heart, and persuaded it to
believe, can perpetually bear and raise up thy heart to stronger degrees of
belief: as Christ when he would help his disciples against a particular
infidelity, objected unto them, why do ye not remember? Mark. 8. 18.
intimating that a right remembering of his works, would have enabled them much
against unbelief.

And so does the remembrance of the words of Christ, of his truths, which are
as able to build us up in grace, as to communicate it unto us.

4 It is a revocation from sinnings, as David said, I considered my ways, and
turned my feet unto thy testimonies; the same may be said of holy truths; a
remembering consideration of them is a recovering of an erring and falling
soul. Saint Peter forgate his Master, and then forgate himself, he forgate
the words of a Master, and then the duty of a servant, but Peter recovered
himself again: and how did he so? the text says that he remembered the words
of Jesus, and when he had thought thereon, he went out and wept bitterly.

5 It is an avocation or withholdment from errors; why do men so commonly
slip into new errors? one maine cause is, they have let slip old truths, they
have lost their touchstone to try doctrine by, they do not remember what and
how they have heard and received, and therefore they destroy what they
themselves have built.

down with every wind of doctrine.

But he who rightly remembers the truth, has not only thereby a touchstone
to try and discover contrary errors, but likewise a buckler to secure his
judgment, and a sword to cut off the corrupt reasonings and fallacies of the
gaine-sayer.

6 Lastly, it is of singular good, and concernement to a distressed and
deserted soul, and to a debarred person.

The days of famine may befall thee, and then the food which Joseph laid up,
may preserve thee, if future means should fail, will not former and remembered
truths be of comfort? and are you sure that seasons will last for ever? where
is Jerusalem, who did not know her day of peace? and where are the seven
Churches of Asia? or the days of sickness may befall thee, wherein thou art
debarred of the market, I mean, the public assembly of the Saints, and art so
weakened, that read at all thou can not; if now thy soul can remember God,
and remember the truths of God, and can secretly confer with them, they may be
of blessed help and peace unto thee; yea, the days of desertion may befall
thee, the Lord may not look on thee as formerly; he may not confer at all
with thee in sense and feeling: and what refuge have thou now, but to fly to
the truths of God, through which thou did heretofore hear him and perceive
him, and this may prove a support and solace to thy heart.

Sure I am, Asaph in his desertions did so, see him in Psalm. 77. 10. I will
remember the years of Psalm. 77. 10.
the right hand of the most high; I will remember the works of the Lord,
surely I will remember thy wonders of old: former embraces are new
encouragements.



Should received truths be remembered? then,

1 Hearing is not all, some there are who hear not at all, they are like the
deaf Adders which refuse to hear the voice of the charmer: Christ is pleased
to speak, but they are not pleased to hearken: how much have these to answer
for? Others do hear, and that is all; the word is but as a natural sound to
excite that natural faculty of hearing, but they understand not what they
hear: the word preached is as a book sealed up unto them, they think it enough
to come to Church, etc. Others do hear and understand the truths delivered,
but then they mind them no more, they leave all at the Church door, as we
do our friends at the grave, forgetting that we came to a feast, to carry
away, and not to a grave to leave all behind, as if the word were a tale, or a
dream, it is instantly forgotten; in comes the world, out goes the word, to
secular businesses, or sinful acts, they presently apply themselves, and so is
the word

Perhaps many a thousand Sermon they have heard in their days (and would
think it a mortal fault) not to hear, but for meditating, pondering,
reviewing of delivered truths, calling them to mind, the better to order their
hearts and lives, they will not trouble themselves so far; as if truth were a
burden, or an unworthy companion.

Now to the forgetful hearer, I would commend these things to be considered of.

1 If his forgetfulness be only of good things (when yet in any other thing
and business his remembrance is quick enough, he can remember a tale or story
twenty years since) it is a very uncomfortable sign.

I confess that every good man's memory is not an equal treasury, nor perhaps
a very fruitful soil, but to have a memory like an utterly barren womb,
retentive of no spiritual truths,

2 Forgetfulness of truths heard and received, is a kind of very evil
ignorance; the Schoolmen do distinguish of Ignorantiae purae negationis,
wherein a man does not know, and of Ignorantiae pravae dispositionis, wherein
either a man will not, or unfits himself to know. Thus is it with
forgetfulness, truths forgotten are like truths unknown, and the more that
the knowledge of former truths wear out, the less capacity is there to
apprehend and receive further truths:

Nor is this all, forgetfulness is not only a curtain drawn over knowledge,
but it is a bar also to our practice: the forgetful Iam. 1. 22.
hearer can be no good practitioner.

For no man acceptably practices more then he knows, and no man properly
knows more then he remembers.

Nor is that all, forgetfulness keeps us not only in an estate of ignorance
and blindness, nor only in an estate of barrenness and undoingnesse, but
further yet, it keeps us in a condition of sadness and uncomfortablenesse;
for all our comforts depend upon divine truths (they are our springs of joy)
but with this caution, so far as they are solidly and rightly applied by us (

So that now by thy forgetfulness, divine truths are lost, and the operations
of them are lost, they can neither guide thee nor help thee, nor preserve or
comfort thee at all; and if all these be lost, thou thy self can not be
safe; whatsoever opinion thou will have of thy self, Saint James assures thee
that thou deceivest thine own self, cap. 1. 22. Iam. 1. 22.


2 If remembering of truths heard and received be necessary, then be pleased to
act the point which Christ here charge, Remember how thou have received and
heard: thou have perhaps heard of the doctrine of sin, and knowledge thereof
by the law, out of Romans 7. 7.

Thou have heard of the manifold aggravations of sin in several texts, as
against knowledge, means of grace, mercies, afflictions, covenants, etc. and
of infidelity (that binding sin) out of John 3. Thou have heard many a Sermon
of the power of the word, for conviction and conversion, and for consolation,
and for conversation, and for salvation, out of 2 These. 1.

Thou have heard of the impediments of the soul from coming to Christ, partly
from the love of sin, John 3. partly from the love of the world, Mark. 10.
22. partly from the perverseness of our wills, Math. 23. 37.

Thou have heard of the preparations of the soul unto Christ, and much of the
new covenant, out of Mal. 3. 1.

Thou have heard much of faith, for the nature of it, out of Acts 16. for the
degrees of it, out of Mark. 9. for the use of it in all the promises, out of 2
Cor. 1. and of our love to God, out of Psalm. 31. 23.

Thou have heard the doctrine of repentance from dead works largely opened, out
of Acts 17. 30. and further unfolded in the conversion of the Prodigal, out of
Luke 15. and of the doctrine of temptations, out of Luke 4. the kinds of them,
and methods of defense and conquest.

Thou have lately heard of that comfortable, ample, perpetual care and
goodness of Gods providence over his Church and people out of Psalm. 23. all
over.

Lastly, thou have heard something of a languishing, and of a recovering soul
from this, out of Revel. 3. 2.

I call God to record at this day, that (according to my knowledge and ability)
I have, (as Saint Paul, Acts 20. 27.) not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God requisite to your salvation, testifying unto you all,
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, verse 21. yea
in season and out of season, in strength, in weakness, in public, in
private, have I desired and endeavored your everlasting good.

Now let not these pious truths slip from you, or be as water spilt upon the
ground: Ministers dye, but let not truths dye; Ministers depart, but let not
truths depart; stony hearts are bad, but iron memories are good: if ye have
heard truths and received them, why, still retain the truths for the truths
sake; let them ever abide with you, live with you, dye with you: And do not
lock up the truths only, but let your memories faithfully serve out those
truths, according to your particular occasions and occurrences of your life;
hold them out to keep out errors, bring them out to keep up graces, improve the
directions of the word, to lead your ways, and the comforts of the word to
refresh and encourage your hearts, and that you may skill the art of heavenly
memory, know that,

There are six things which Six things.
will much avail to help and enable the remembrance of truths heard and
received.

1 Ardent affection: love is a safe lock, and a ready hand; which we much
like, we shall much mind, David was fervent in love, and therefore frequent in
thinking of Gods law, Psalm. 119. Oh how I love thy law! Psalm. 119 97.
it is my meditation all the day: here was great love and great studying;

2 Frequent meditation: many earthly things wear out by handling (as
characters in gold or silver) but heavenly characters abide longest where they
are most perused. Every new and serious contemplation of them, makes a fairer
and firmer impression; it is like a second stamping of them. The memory is like
a glass, and the understanding as an eye looking back into it: the more
frequent acquaintance and familiarity that the understanding has, by
reflecting on the memory, the more strongly are things engraven in our
remembrance.

3 Constant operation: if memory were more used, memory would be more useful:
when thou have heard a Sermon, and art at home, then call thy memory to an
account, how it has played the faithful steward for thee, what truth it has
remembered, by a daily striving to remember, you shall daily perfect the
remembrance.

4 A distinct apprehension: Saul was not easily found in the stuff, and
confused minds are seldom linked with exact memories; the more orderly and
exact that the understanding is, the more easy is the remembrance of things.

Take heed of ignorant minds that know not truths, and of confused minds that
can mistake truths.

5 Abundant conference: this course Moses prescribed the Israelites, to
remember the laws given unto them, viz that they should often talk of them to
their children; conference is as the driving in of the nail; one remembers
that which the other forgets; our memories help our lips, and our lips do
strengthen our memories.

6 Diligent practice: the scholar by a daily writing after the copy, does
thereby mend his hand, and help his memory. Truths are ordained for practice;
It cannot be, but that truths should remain faithful in the memory, which are
made faithful in our walking. Truths easily take their leave of them who
oppose them, or do not act them.

Now to the second assertion, viz.

That acceptance of truths is Second.
not sufficient, but there must be persistence in them (and hold fast) (...)
serva, or as Beza translates it, observa.

Saint Paul is much in this doctrine; hold fast the form of 2 Timothy 1. 13.
Titus 1. 9.
sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. so again to Titus 1. 9. hold fast the faithful
word; and that this doctrine may not be thought proper and peculiar to the
Preacher of the truth; but common to all Christians, he therefore enlarges
the precept to all the Romans, Romans 12. 9.
(and under them to all Christians) to adhere or cleave unto what is good; the
word in the original is (...), that they should be glued unto it. Solomon in
effect delivers the same Pro. 23. 23. Buy the truth and sell. it not, a man may
lawfully sell his house and lands as the Apostles did, and followed Christ, and
in some sense his wife and children, (as Saint Jerome in epist. ad Heliod.
would rather then he would put off Christ) yea and his own life too, as Saint
Paul did, not count Acts 21. 13.
it dear for Christ.

But the truth must not be sold, it must be kept as a thing exceeding all
price and bargain. Now for the fuller understanding of this proposition,
premise with me these particulars.

1 That I speak not of humane and moral truths, such as are the rules in
secular arts, in which there may be and is many times, an infallibility; but
of religious and divine truths, which are contained in the word of God.

2 Religious truths are so, either in the imagination of man, or in the reality
of the thing: I am not bound to embrace, much less to persist in all which
every man propounds for truths, or which he conjectures to be so; only I am to
hold fast those truths, which the word (rightly and genuinely expounded)
teaches and determines to be so.

3 Again, the truths which seem to own themselves on the word of God, are
either immediate and express, or only mediate and deduced; express truths
are to be held fast, but deduced truths which are thence collected by the
medium of a man's ability to judge, these are to be tried and examined by the
prime and immediate truths, and so far to be held as they are found (upon due
search) to have conformity with the immediate and express rules of truth.

4 Express truths (suppose them to be known and received) may be considered
either in the latitude of them, or with restriction; we may not think it
sufficient to hold fast some particular truths, either the greater or the
lesser, and leave the rest to shift for themselves. But all known truths, even
those which are not of that maine concernement, not any one of them must be
forsaken or left, but retained and maintained: as Athanasius and others of the
first Nicene Fathers would not diminish, or add one iota and title about the
deity of Christ; or as Moses would not leave one hoof behind, so we must not
renounce or forsake any one branch of known truth, seem it never so little in
the eyes of men.

5 Though there be a difference of times, yet there ought to be no difference
of holy truths; there are times of prosperity for the Gospel, as Constantines
time was to the Church, and there are times of calamity as Neroes time, and
Dioclesians, and others the persecuting Emperors.

Truth must be held fast; yea all truth, at all times;

Josephus reports of the Samaritanes, that if any good and favor befell the
Jews, then they would pretend affinity and kindred with them, they came from
Jacob; but if any calamity, then they were none of the stock of Abraham. It
must not be thus with us, to vary our hearty respect to truths according to the
favor or discouragement that the world bestows upon them: but to cleave unto
them as Saint Paul did, under the sword, as S. Ignatius among the wild beasts,
and Laurentius on the Gridiron, and Daniel among the Lions, and the three
children in the fiery furnace.

6 Sixthly, though there be a difference of persons, yet we must not differ
and wave our respects to holy truths; perhaps those holy truths which thou have
heard and tried, and received, may be contradicted and disputed, by some bold
schismatic, heretical brains, who would bleare and blur the truth, that so
they may bring in damnable doctrines; by these they may be disgraced, derided,
and reproched, Hymeneus and Philetus, and turn vile apostates.

But as Peter said of Christ, that thou must say and act too, of truth, Though
all men should forsake thee, yet I will never forsake thee. Against all
subtilty of disputes, variety of judgments, schism and malice of evil men,
and inconstancy of some men, thou must be rightly balanced. Hold fast the
truth which thou have heard and received.

But how must truths be held fast?



1 In the judgment and understanding. 2 In the will and affection. 3 In
profession. 4 In conversation and practice.
1 In the judgment: for assent and approbation; there must be a firm evidence
of them. I confess that there is a latitude in our credence, upon more and
more evidence of truth; there may be a further and stronger assent unto them,
and approbation of them. But there must be no wavering in the judgment; we
must not admit of a staggering and reeling mind, nor of a levity in our
judgments, to be driven and carried about with every wind of doctrine, as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 14. Ephesians. 4. 14.
Athanasius knew this well, when he held his judgment fast in the truth of the
deity of Christ, against the Arians: so Saint Austin, his judgment fast in the
doctrine of grace against the Pelagians, and Cyprian against the Donatists, or
Novatians, or Catharists.

It is an honor for a man to recant an error, but a perfidious shame for any
Christian to suffer any truth to be supplanted by any error.

2 In the will and affection, our love must hold the truth fast, therefore the
Apostle bids us to be glued unto it, Romans 12. 9. it is with truths

That ancient desire after truth and delight in it, to take counsel from it,
and strength from it, and comfort by it, must not decay and dye within us, but
must remain and abound, though others hate, disgrace, and endeavor to make
void the truth, yet we must cleave unto it, and love it, as David, Psalm. 119.

3 In our profession; hence that advice of the Apostle in Phil. 2. 16 to hold
forth the word of life, even in the midst of a dark and froward generation:
Christ would have us not only to believe, but to confess him before men.
Remember that it was no small sin in Peter, when he pretended that he knew
not the man. Gregory Nazianzen reports in one of his orations against Julian,
that some Christian soldiers being cunningly circumvented by him to idolatrous
sacrifices, perceiving the error, they all ran back unto him, and threw him
his money again, and protested they were Christians, and in what they did,
they were circumvented by him, Heb. 10. Heb. 10. 23.
23. let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; the
Christian must change neither his Master, nor his service, nor his livery.

4 In our conversation; we must still practice truths, and keep our lives
answerable unto them. Saint John calls this a walking in the truth: then a man
walks in the truth, when he holds on his course of holy obedience unto it,
against all the encouragements and discouragements of the world, as the three
children in Daniel, etc. not with the Galathians beginning in the spirit, and
ending in the flesh, or like those Israelites, whose righteousness was as the
morning dew. But we must still run the race set before us, and keep steadfast
our feet unto the paths of righteousness and ways of truth.

Why must divine truths heard and received be held fast?



1 Divine truth is a most precious and excellent thing, therefore in Scripture
it is compared to gold, which of metals is the most precious, nay it is more
precious then gold or rubies, and all the things which thou can desire, are
not to be compared unto it, see Pro. 3. 14. 15. Pro. 3. 14. 15.
It is more excellent then the excellencies of the creatures, not then some of
them, but then all of them; and a man if he were to imagine any excellency, or
if the utmost of his desires were enlarged, yet could they not find out and
pitch upon such an excellency. Therefore says Saint John to the Church of
Philadelphia, Revel. 3. 11. Hold that Revel. 3. 11.
fast which thou have, that no man take thy crown; the crown is the top of
royalties, such a thing is truth, let no man take thy crown.

Beloved, there are two properties which assure us of the excellency of things.

1 The more holy they are, the Two things intimate an excellency.
more excellent they are; all corruptions are diminutions of excellency, the
more mixed a thing is, the more it is abased, as if gold and tin be mixed; and
the more pure it is, as mere gold, the more glorious it is. Now the truths of
God are holy, not as persons are holy (which is with mixture and imperfection)
but as the light at noone day is pure without darkness at all.

2 The more that God is in any thing, the more excellent it is, for so much as
we partake of him (who is excellency it self) so much more we rise in our
excellency.

But the great God is altogether seen in this word of truth: there is his
wisdom, there is his power and greatness, there is his love and
mercifulness, there is his Christ and faithfulness, therefore it is most
excellent, and consequently to be held fast by us.

2 Divine truths are (as it were) made over to us under terms of constancy and
perpetuity: I find in Scriptures that they are termed sometimes

Our heritage; estates which are personal (if that be the phrase) for
possession may be sold, as that which a child buys with his own money; but
estates which are natural or hereditary, such I mean as come to be ours by
descent, these ought to be kept for posterity: God forbid said Naboth, that I
should sell the inheritance of my fathers: divine truths are an heritage to
descend from us to our children, and therefore we are neither to dispossess
our selves of them, nor to suffer our selves by any to be dispossessed of
them, Psalm. 119. 111. thy testimonies Psalm. 119 111.
have I taken as an heritage for ever.

Gods trust: something we commit to God, something God commits to us, 2 Timothy
1. 12. He is able to keep that which I have committed unto him: we trust God
with our souls, and God trusts us with his truths, which are therefore called,
that good thing committed to us for to keep, 2 Timothy 1. 14. now in matters of
trust, we must be faithful, for we must be responsable for the whole
wherewith we are instructed, as the servants in the Gospel, who had talents
committed to their trust, they were called to an account for them: so if the
Lord trust any man with graces, or with his truths, the man must carefully
keep and preserve them, for the Lord will ask him another day for his trust,
as Saint John did of the Bishop of Jerusalem for his depositum.

They observe that a trust must be, first, redelivered, secondly, wholly,
thirdly, only to him who committed it to us for trust.

3 Not to hold fast the truths, is an exceeding and fearful injury or wrong,
it is injurious,

1 To God, for he is the Lord or God of truth: truths are ours for the
efficacy of them, but only this for the authority of them.

2 To our covenant and vow, what was our baptism but a devoting and solemn
vowing of our selves to be faithful to Christ and to his truths? we solemnly
professed that none should be our Lord, but God, and that we should be his
faithful servants unto our lives end, yea and we have ratified this vow many
a time, by coming to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Now if we do not hold fast the truths of Christ, but forsake them or any of
them, we are guilty of extreme perjury, not in a matter betwixt man and man,
but betwixt God and man; thou art forsworn again and again unto the Lord thy
God, and have (as much as in thee lies) made void the covenant of grace and
life for thy poor soul.

4 Consider but the necessary uses of divine truths, and then we will
acknowledge that they are to be held fast.

The use of the word or divine truths, respects the everlasting and happy
condition of the soul, from the beginning to the end thereof. Everlasting and
true happiness is the end and scope that every Christian looks at; and divine
truths serve him fully and effectually, to this end, both to discover it, and
to bring man unto it.

There are many things required to set us in the true way, to bring a man to
heaven, v. g.

1 Conviction of his sinful condition, but the word inlightens the mind, and
convinces the conscience.

2 Contrition for sin, but the word pricks our hearts, as Acts 2. and humbles
them.

3 Conversion of soul; but the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul, Psalm. 19. 7. by it comes faith into the soul, Psalm. 19. 7.
which gets Christ, Romans 10. 17. Romans 10. 17.
by it comes repentance, Acts 3. 19.

4 Augmentation of grace; but by the word we are built up, Acts 20. 32. and
grow more and more.

5 Perseverance in grace; but by the word we are kept and established to the
end, it is the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16. Romans 1. 16.


What should I say more, read the Apostle summing up all in 2 Timothy 3. 16. All
Scripture is given 2 Timothy 3. 16.
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness,

17 That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works.

15 Yea they are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

Again, there are many encouragements comforting and supporting in our way, as
divine consolations of the spirit of God, peace in conscience joy in the holy
Ghost, all which are the myrrh dropping only from divine truths; thy word
has comforted me, said David, thy word has quickened me; in the house of my
pilgrimage, they were the joys of his heart, and in the days of his calamity
they were the stay of his heart.

Now put all together, if divine truths show us the true happiness, if they
only put us into the true way, unto that true happiness, if they only keep
us in that way, if they only comfort and strengthen us in that way, if they
only bring us to the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls, will
we not, ought we not to hold them fast?



Consider divine truths as they lie.

1 In doctrine; we may now complain as the Apostle did of the Galathians,
chap. 1. verse 6. Gal. 1. 6.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ, unto another Gospel.

Some revolt from the Protestant doctrine, to the Popish leven, others fall off
from the orthodoxe articles of our Church, to Anabaptisticall fancies, and
Socinian Blasphemies, and the Lord be merciful unto us, what daily
unsetlednesse and giddiness possesses us; if any novelty of doctrine (though
a root of bitterness) start up and be delivered with any confidence or cunning
of deceiving wit, how instantly we fly off from our old truths, how greedily
and madly we suck in poisonous errors, and being thus driven with every
wind, what tempests of railing and disgraces do we heap upon those who
cross our fickleness with constant vindications and assertings of the true
doctrines of faith and life.

It makes me to pity this great and famous City, whiles I behold a colluvies,
a very rabble of all opinions, and such a going and coming, touchings at, and
saylings off from the land of uprightness: One week this is a truth, and
almost an article; the next week it is no such matter, but some other thing is
the right.



But are there so many ways to heaven as men will make, or have thou power to
coin other articles of faith at pleasure, or will the Lord bear all this
resting and mocking with his truths? Two things makes me fear the Lord will
punish us in the Gospel; one is, our general barrenness in life, another is
our great sicklenesse in matter of truths.

2 In conversation; many times we hold the truth in unrighteousness: we do
not prize the truth and love it, nor live according to it with constancy, but
as the Prophet cried out, how is the beautiful City become an heap? so may
we say of many, how is their righteous walkings degenerated into an ungodly
living? their wine is sowred, and lamp put out.

But I will tell you the reasons and causes of all this inconstancy The causes
of constancy.
and apostasy, v. g.

1 Men are very ignorant, and therefore very inconstant: ignorance is the great
sponge to suck in errors, as pride is the great Bawd to vent them. Chafe may
be tossed any way: that which is weak, is also light.

2 Though their apprehensions be large, yet their affections are foul, they
know truth, but love sin which is contrary to truth: secret love of sin,
works out the strength of truth in the mind: men do the more easily grow
erroneous, who first grow irreligious.

3 There is an itch of pride; Evah and Adam would know more then was fit, and
therefore lost all that was good; you never read of a proud person, but either
his life was notoriously tainted, or his judgment notably corrupted: the
greatest errors, have fallen from those that have been most proud, and have
been took up by those that have been most ignorant.

4 And then also many have Athenian wits, they long for novelties, though the
old wine be best, yet their palate must be in the fashion for new; there is a
sore vanity in a natural mind, that it cannot long fix on any estate, or on
any truth.

5 A colloging slavishnesse, many give up their souls and faith to the
religion of others, and like wax, are still fashioned to the opinions of great
persons; they are afraid of their displeasures, and therefore even in points of
religion, will dance after their pipe.

6 A sordid and eminent love of the world, for which Demas forsook Christ, and
Judas sold his Master, and Hymeneus made shipwreck of faith: the unsatisfiable
slave to the world will never be a faithful servant to truth; he who has
already pawnd his soul, will with as much ease sell off the truth.

Spira for its sake abjured the truth, but ventured the loss of it, and
himself too.

7 Many men are licentious, and therefore unstedfast: corrupt doctrines give
more scope then the true and heavenly: we are apt to believe that soonest,
which pleases us most; erroneous points are more for pleasure, and divine
truths are more for strictness, and to enjoy their sports, so many give up the
truth, to enjoy their easy and loose kind of walking.

Thyatira, the same I will presume to say unto you, Revel. 2. 24. 25. I will
Rev. 2. 24. 25.
put upon you no other burden but that which ye have already, holdfast: what
need I urge this with many motives?

1 If it be truth, why should it Motives.
be left? is error better then truth? then should darkness be better then
light?

2 Can you better your estates by leaving of truths? when the devils fell from
truth, they fell from heaven, when Adam fell from truth, he fell from Paradise.

3 Will not the truth keep you? if you keep the truth as the ship does the
Pilot who keeps it, truth will keep thy soul and graces together, thy soul
and Christ together, thy soul and comfort together, thy soul and prosperity
together, therefore it is called the girdle of truth, because as a girdle it
holds all together. Thou partest with strength, with joy, with safety, with
blessing, with happiness if thou part with truth.

4 The reward is sure, if thou be faithful, not a mean reward, but that of
life, even a crown of life, Rev. 2. 10. Rev. 2. 10. Rules.


Now that you may for ever hold fast divine truths, take these rules or
directions.

1 Lay a solid foundation in distinct knowledge of them; confused brains cause
unsettled hearts: rest not in Pilates demand what is truth, nor in the
Israelites hovering betwixt two opinions, nor in that gross salary of
religion, to take up truth upon trust, for any man sake whatsoever, were he the
sharpest Jeremiah, or the learned Paul, or the comfortablest Barnabas; be not
satisfied this is truth, because this, that man says, but as the honorable
Beraeans searched the Scriptures about the things which even Saint Paul
himself delivered, so do you prove all things says the Apostle, receive
truth upon an evidence of truth, if the first truth (which is the word of God)
and the rule and compass will not approve it, it is error and not truth.

Yea, but how may we know truths, for there are many religions, and many
opinions obtruded to the world, the truth of which cannot so or sily be
discerned.

unity of them, unum and verum convertuntur, truth is one or none, there is but
one way (says Aristotle) to hit the mark, but many ways to miss it; error
is manifold and diverse, Nebuchadnezzar saw mixed of gold and clay, and as
Aristotle speaks of Vices, that they are contrary both to virtues and
themselves; so erroneous doctrines are opposite to truth, and to themselves;
one Christ, so but one faith.

2 The purity of them; all false doctrine (like treacherous physic) gives
ease; Mohammedan or Popish tenants.

But truth is holy in it self, and to us, teaching it within the heart, and
ordering it in the life. It is an adversary to sin, because all sin is an
adversary unto God.

3 The efficacy of them: usually corrupt doctrines add to our notions, but
meddle not with our corruptions; they swell us, but do not edify us, they are
pills which only work upon the brain, they neither bring true grace, or sound
peace with them: only this, Satan makes the erroneous very violent, that
thereby they may think themselves in the right.

But the doctrine which is true, is strong, it is heavenly in its nature, and
mighty in its operation, comes from God, and brings to God, makes the bad good,
and the good better; there is no such salve to heal a corrupt heart, nor balm
to refresh a troubled conscience, as truth.

4 The antiquity of them: error is but the shadow and ape of truth, the saying
is, id demum verissimum quod antiquissimum. Truth is the first borne, for God
spoke it, before the devil spoke the other; errors may be old, but truth saw
the light before them; the whole farrago of corrupt doctrines amongst the
Papists for transubstantiation, invocation of Saints, prayers for the dead,
merit, supremacy; their originals were of yesterday; though they boast
antiquity, yet they dare not stand to the trial of Christ and his Apostles,
who must decide all truths.

5 The simplicity of them: errors came in by the Serpent at the first, and are
much of its nature, full of windings and turnings; all corrupt doctrines are
deceiveable and subtle: how many arts were fained by Arrius and the Arrian
Bishops, to bring in their damnable error? what forging of lies, and odious
accusations of Athanasius, that he was dishonest with a woman, and cut off a
man's hand, as Eusebius relates: and so the Jesuits about Calvin, and Luther,
and Melancthon, and Beza, etc. and so for the establishing of the Council of
Trent, the Popes Cloke-bags were weekly filled with devices and carriages.

Yea, and observe the very Papists at this day, how deceiveably confident they
are, that al^ antiquity and testimony is on their side, when either it is a
pack of their own writers only, or other authors which they have forged, or
else antiquity miserably lanced and cut, and interlaced by their Index
expurgatorius: yea, and I pray God that many of the opinions in this City be
not bolstered up with high clamours, and with artificial lies. But truth is
naked and plain, it is neither of a cruel nature, like Caine, nor of a
subtle spirit with Absalom, nor of a lying spirit with Ahabs false Prophets,
it flatters no man, nor beguiles any: being truth, it is not ashamed of light
or trial, and it alone can maintain it self against all contrary quarrels: a
good cause is like a good conscience, even a bulwark to it self, like the
sun in its light, and heat against all clouds, etc.

5 The duration of them: truth like the sun has run down through all ages:
not that all men have embraced it, but that by some it has still been
embraced: some one or more has still been at the bar, to bear witness
unto it. New men have still risen up, (and sometimes out of the ashes as it
were of the dead) to maintain, and either by tongue, or pen, or blood, to
defend the truth: but

Erroneous doctrines, as they want an inward harmony, so also an outward
consent, like a deceitful brook, they are spent after a while, or like
commotions in a state, Alexander against Arius, or the prayers of the Saints,
or the decision of lawful counsels have still cashiered these meteors: but as
it is said of divine mercy, that it endures for ever, the same is affirmed of
divine truth, it runs from one generation to another; till Christ make his
Church triumphant, the militant Church shall be the pillar of truth.

6 The conformity of them to the rule or word. Erroneous doctrines like unsound
flesh, cannot abide handling, and

But truth like sound gold, will endure a touchstone, truth will be found
truth upon search, bring it to the conscience, it will work as truth; bring it
to the deathbed, it will uphold as truth; bring it to the scriptures, it will
hold out as truth.

2 When truths upon search are found to be truths, then embrace them for the
truths sake, not upon personal and mutable causes or ends.

3 Firm refolution after trial, by which our knowledge comes to be clear,
and without doubt there must be now a plain resolution and purpose of heart in
cleaving to such faithfully evidenced truths: thou must by an immovable faith
(as it were) root thy very heart in the truths of Christ, as Saint Paul, though
bonds and afflictions, though good report or evil, though death it self abide
him for Christ, come what will come, disputes, fancies, errors, troubles,
losses, I have found the truth, and it will I hold for ever.

3 Loyal affection: then it is loyal, when it is inclusive, to every truth,
etc. exclusive to nothing but truth: this loyal affection will make us to,
first, do, secondly, suffer, thirdly, cleave: love truth, and then truth will
be held: I held him, and would not let him go, said the Church, then in love
with Christ, Cant. 3. Love is the easiest key to open the heart to Cant. 3.
Christ, and the strongest lock to keep sure the truth in our hearts: when
thou have experimentally felt the heavenly strength and comfort of Gods truths,
then will thou certainly stick unto them.

4 Join conscience to science: O when people have the truths still sounding in
their ears, and ungodliness still stirring and ruling in their lives, it
cannot be, that they should have strong hands, who have wicked hearts; Hymeneus
made shipwreck of faith, and of conscience both together, 1 Timothy 1. 19.

Therefore strive to obey the 1 Timothy 1. 19.
truths, add to thy faith virtue; be a doing Christian as well as a knowing
Christian.

5 Be watchful in prayer to God, with David, to uphold thee, with Saint Peter
to establish thee, still to keep thee, that thou may keep his truths:
excellent is that speech of Bernard, S. Bernard. in Psalm. qui habitat page 283.
Basil.
neque enim quae habemus ab eo, servare aut tenere possumus sine eo; that God
by whose light alone we know the truth, by his strength alone we keep it.

Thus much for the text, and now for the occasion, and here I cannot be long,
neither my affections nor yours will admit of large discourse, only a word of
you, and a word to you.

Of you, so regardfull have you been to my Ministry, so loving to my person,
so faithful in your maintenance, so cheerfully encouraging generally from you
all, but chiefly from the chiefest, that had it pleased the Lord to have given
me health (the which I have scarce enjoyed one whole year together since I
have been here) I should not have stirred easily from such a people, for the
best preferment that could be conveniently offered unto me.

I speak my heart freely, I cannot tell on which side the unwillingnesse is
most, whether on your part who are left, or on my part who am constrained to
leave you.

But to say no more of your goodness, give me leave (for the close of all) to
leave a few Legacies with you, being all my friends, and hearken to my words,
as the words of a dying man, for the Lord knows how short my days may be.

My Legacies are these:

1 Lay out more time for your souls: the soul is a precious thing, the soul
is a corrupted thing, sins are in it, much guilt is upon it, there is a
Christ that it needs, holiness that it must have, heaven that it would have,
thy body is but clay, thy soul a spirit, the world a vanity, thy soul
immortal: all is well if the soul be well, nothing is well if that be evil: I
beseech you pray more, hear more, know more, confer more, do more and more
for your souls, when you come to dye, you will then find it to be all your
work: O then whiles health is in you, make it thy chiefest work to seek the
kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof for your souls, feed not the
slave, and starve the child.

2 Upon good grounds make sure of a reconciled God: live not in an unreconciled
condition: no enemy like an ill conscience, and a good God: study the right of
thy sins, and the blood of Christ, repentance from dead works, and faith in
the Lord Jesus, so shall thou behold the face of God and live. The ways of
reconciliation with God, and the settling of thy conscience about it, may cost
thee many prayers and tears, and diligent studies, but the love of God and
heaven will answer, and recompense all.

3 Wisely improve all heavenly seasons: the Lord hitherto has continued unto
you, days of peace and salvation, heavenly opportunities public and private,
and I beseech him for ever so to do. Now receive not the grace of God in
vain, lay hold on these occasions, if there be not wisdom to improve them,
there may be sadness for neglecting them. You see how many worthy and
faithful Ministers God has taken away (of late) by death, and shall the
present Prophets live for ever? O then in your day and time hearken, regard,
repent, believe, live, and thrive under holy and faithful Ministers, make more
use of their doctrines, of their rules, of their counsels, of their comforts,
of their experience and prayers, the night will come when neither we nor you
must work any longer.

4 Study the grounds and principles of religion better; first, lay good
foundations, and then build on them: errors in the entrance, weaken all in the
progress. Take pains to know what that good and acceptable will of the Lord
is: a well bottomed Christian is like a well-bottomed vessel at sea, which can
ride out in all weathers: no Christian stands so fast, or thrives so well as
the well grounded Christian.

5 Be rather an agent, then a disputant in religion? the vanity of wit is to
argue much, but the sincerity of the heart is to do much: for doubtful
points, and subtle novelties, let others beat them, and serve them, and in the
mean while, pray thou much, that thou may obey the truths which thou kno
west. In speculatives be wise to sobriety, in practicals be as good as thou
can: it is not the wittiest scholar, but the truest Christian who shall go
to heaven.

6 Be less formal, and more fruitful: know that as we must be brought to an
account for every word which we speak, so much more for every word that God
speaks.

Mere godliness is not enough under constant and great means of grace: God
expects much when he gives much: if it does not utterly cast thee, yet it must
excessively trouble thee to be thin in bearing, when God has been large in
sowing.

7 Let all Christians be of more fruitful hearts and charitable spirits one
toward another. There are treacherous and malicious hearts enough in the
world, thou need not to help the devil to be an accuser of the brethren.
It is a sad thing when one Christian can hardly trust another, and that they
who should pity and heal infirmities, are yet inventers of lies and
obloquies; these are the wounds which my friends gave me, said the Church in
the Canticles. If thy fellow Christian do fail, rather compassionate and
succor him, then hate and reproach him; thou shall never establish thy graces
or name upon the ruins and scandals of another man; if thou be a strong
Christian, be more tender, if weak, be more silent; the strong should bear
the infirmities of the weak, and the weak should hearken to the directions of
the strong: your graces are strong, and safety surer by love then by division,
therefore be of one mind, and live in peace, let brotherly love continue.

8 Mind death often, and prepare for it betimes; he who is a stranger to
dying thoughts, is ordinarily a stranger to a godly life; thou would hasten
and better thy work, if thou did more look back on thy life, and more
forward on thy death.

9 Be diligent in your particular places: the idle body can hardly hold a good
soul; that man is in danger, who is all for heaven, or all for earth, both our
callings must be regarded.

10 Be much in prayer: the Christian usually gets the greatest blessings on his
knees; God is much with him in grace, who is most with God in prayer.

And pray not for your selves only, but for others, and as for others, so for
me, as Saint Paul desired of the Ephesians, c. 6. 19. that utterance may be
given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of
the Gospel, that therein (v. 20.) I may speak as I ought to speak; and so as
the same Apostle in his ultimum vale said to those Ephesians, the same I say
unto you.

Brethren, I commend you unto God, and to the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst all them which are
sanctified.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ACtivity of love to set on graces, p 144 Affections are many times dying, p.
11. 45 Ardency of affections, an exceeding help, 1 to the remembrance of
truths taught, 2 to the holding fast of the truth, p 198. and 213 The different
carriage of a weakened and a strengthened Christian under afflictions p 111,
The application of Christ, the ordinances and other means helpefull against
decaying, p 72. 98. 131 Apostasy from the truth, seven causes of it, p 272
Gods approbation to be studied, p 158 A distinct apprehension of truths
needful to the remembrance of truths, p 200
C
CAuses of a dying condition, p 16 Christ strengthens a languishing Christian
three ways, p 79 Comforts attend Christians, and when? p 40 Communion with
God, and its kinds, p 38. 39 Conference about truths taught, useful, p 201
Conscience to be joined with science; p 250 Conscience wounded and vexed, p.
16. 40 Corruptions have a decaying power, p 16 Considerations of a man's
condition is necessary, p 121 A dying conversation, p. 10. 50 Truths taught to
be kept in a man's conversation. p 215 Lively consociation, what? p 135
D
DAmping of communion with God. p 38 Depression of heavenly strength, p 36
Delight taken in godly company, p 108 Delightfulness in love, p 145 Diligence
in love, ibid. True doctrines discovered from false in seven things, p 240
Seven disadvantages in a weakened condition, p 92 Desertion a consequent of
decaying, p 40 A dying disposition opened, p 8 Christians are dying in seven
respects, p 10 Dying in duties how known, p 44 53
E
EXamination neglected, the evil of it, p 22. 23 Excess in passion dangerous,
p 28 Excellency has two things in it, p 217 Expressions of grace, 1
passionate, 2 deliberate, p 63 Extenuatio^s of excellencies by decayings, p 34
Truths are to be embraced, p 248
F
Faintness in acts of religion, p 53 Faith a radical and strengthening grace,
p 14. 142 Forgetfulness of the word evil and hurtful, p 190 Formality to be
checked. p 69
G
MEn may decay in gifts and graces, and how? p 13, 14 Graces given to men for
three ends, p 54 Graces are inclining, enlarging and cleansing principles, p
55, 56, 57 Graces bestowed, are to be kept in repair* p 88 Graces diffused,
and graces employed, how to be understood, p 64
H
HEaring not enough for a Christian, p 187 A plain and a pliable heart, p 132
Helps, first, to remember, secondly, to hold fast truths, p 198. 238 Hold fast
the truth, p 210 Divine truths a Christians heritage, p 219 Humbling under
decayings, p 67 Deep humiliation a means to strengthen a decayed Christian, p
123
I
Jealousy and three things arising from it, p 70 Inconstancy and its causes, p
232 Implantation of holy principles, what it is? p 74 Interruption in duties, p
64 Decaies in judgment. p 12 The imperfection of our estate before God, p 157
Truths held fast in judgment, p 211
L
THree things in love furthering duties, p 144, 145 Loyal affection to the
truth, p 299 Ten legacies, p 253
M
MEditation an help to memory, p 199 Means to keep up graces, p 67 Means to
recover out of a dying condition, p 73 Means of strengthening, p 121
N
NEglect and its danger, p 19
O
COnstant operation, what? p 200 Opposition against dying causes, p 137
Ordinances, and three things about them, 97
P
THree sorts of people living under the means, p 7 Perfection and a striving
unto it, p 68 Perfecting of holy principles, p 75 Persistance in holy truths, p
202 Practice a keeper of truths, p 202 Practical remembrance, what it is, p
167 Practical truths what they are, p 175 Preparation to the ordinances, p 97
Physicking the soul, what? p 22 Dying in profession, what, p 10 Truth is held
by profession, p 214
R
REasons for the strengthening of a spiritual condition, p 84 Reasons to hold
fast divine truths, p 216 Active reformation, what, p 128 Truths taught are to
be remembered, p 163 The nature, sorts, ways, causes, and means of
rememembrance, p 160. to 202 Resistance of sin, p 102 Rising of graces, p 110
Solid resolutions, p 125 Resolution to cleave to the truth, p 249 Revolting
from doctrine, p 228. and in conversation, 231
S
SIlence in heaven, what and when, p 41 Sin, and a Christian in sinning, p 60,
61 Seriousness in society, p 71 Standing at a stay, p 70 Strengthening of
spirituals under decays, p 74. 78. 83 Supplication must be ardent, p 129
Suspicion of a man's own condition, p 42 Sen siblenesse and spiritualnesse not
equal, p 62
T
TImes of spiritual troubles* p 41 Truths add their sorts, p 175, 205, 206
Divine truths is Gods trust, p 220 Three things about a trust. p 221
Z
A Case resolved about decayings in zeal, p 62
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 8. line 16. for a, read secondly, p. 147. l. 3. for wit, r. we all know,
etc. p. 221. l. 4. for instructed, r. entrusted.

October. 22. 1639.
Imprimatur,

IOH. HANSLEY.


