AN ARROW AGAINST IDOLATRY. TAKEN OVT OF THE Quiver of the Lord of HOSTS.

By H. A.

PSALM. 119.31. I cleave to thy Testimonies: Lord, let me not be ashamed.

Printed. 1624.

THE PRINCIPAL things here handled.
OF the Beginning and Nature of idolatry. Chap. 1. How fast the sin of
idolatry cleaves to all flesh. Chap. 2. Of Ieroboams idolatry that infected
Israel, and of the pretenses that he might make for his sin. Chap. 3. A
conviction of Ieroboams impiety. Chap. 4. Of the idolatry of these times, far
exceeding Ieroboams. Chap. 5. A Conclusion Dehortatorie from this sin. Chap. 6.
AN ARROW AGAINST IDOLATRY.
CHAPTER I.
Of the Beginning and Nature of Idolatry.

THE old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, Rev. 12.9.
has from the beginning sought to draw men Genesis 3.
from the service of God, to the service of himself: and this he has done,
as by other sins, so chiefly by idolatry, which therefore above all other, is
1 Cor. 10 19.20. Rev. 9.20.
called, and counted, the worship and service of Divils.

2 To bring men hereunto, he has first labored to separate them from the true
Church. For that being the house of the living God; 1 Timothy 3.15. Psalm. 26.8.
the place where his honor dwells; the pillar and ground of truth: it is a
mean 1 Samuel 26 19.
to conserv men in the true service of God, and preserv them from Idolatry. And
from the Church, Satan has separated men, either by causing the^ to be cast
out for sin, as Cain was and his seed: Genesis 4.
or to withdraw and schism themselves for some pretended cause or quarrel; as
did the 1 King. 12.27.28.29.
Israelites, and Jude 19. Heb. 10.25
others after them: or to forsake the fellowship of the Saints for love of the
world, fear of affliction, or the like; as Genesis 11.3^ and 12.1 2.3.4, and 24
10, and 28.2, and 31.30 ^3.
Nahor and his house accompanied Abram, from Vr, of the Chaldees unto Charran,
and no further; but dwelling there, gave himself to idolatry, from which
Abram, and all that would go with him, were Jos. 24.2.
called.

3 Again, the divill takes a contrary course to draw men to this sin; by
commingling and uniting his children and synagogue, with the Church and People
of God; whereby even they also Genesis 6.2.3
may be made flesh, drawn by examples and allurements, to partake with
idolatrous worship: as Ps. 106.28 35.36.
Israel and others, were mixed with the Heathens, 1 Cor. 8.10. and 10.14. ad 21.
and learned their works, and served their idols; which were their ruin.

4 Idolatry is performed, either by mixing men's Mat. 15.8 Ier. 7.31. Ezekiel. 43.8.
own inventions with the ordinances of God in the service of him: or by using
and applying the rites and services of the Lord, or other humane devices; unto
the honor and service of some Romans 1.23.25.
creature, in heaven, earth, or under the earth: which is is with neglect and
dishonor of the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.

5 Again, as the service of God is outward and inward; outward, by observing
and doing the external things commanded, of assembling together, Lev. 22.2 etc.
Psalm. 95.6
bowing down, vocal Act. 4.24. and 20.7. 1 Cor. 10.16.18.
praying, and preaching, administering and partaking of the sacrifices,
sacraments, and other holy things; inward, Ps. 2.11. and 5.7. Heb. 11.5.6.39. 1
Cor. 13.
by fear, faith, hope and love: so is the service of idols or Divils, outward
and inward, performed with body or with spirit, or with both; for whatsoever is
due unto God, Satan seeks to defrawd him of, and apply unto Mat. 4.^.
himself, by idolatry.

6 Idolatry is a Greek word, compounded of Idol, which signifies any
similitude, image, likeness, form, shape or representation, exhibited either
to the body or mind; and latrie which signifies service. Whereupon
Idol-latrie, or Service-of-similitudes, is the performance of any religious
duty to that which has a supposed similitude of God, but is not God indeed:
or the performance of that unto the true God, which has a similitude, show and
resemblance of his service, but is not so in deed; because Deuteronomy. 12.32.
he requires it not at our hands, and therefore is but a Col. 2.23.
will worship, or voluntary Religion; a thing devised and done, according to
Hos. 13.2
our own understanding. And these two sorts of Idolatry, God has forbidden
Exodus 20.
in the first and second commandments.

7 The first commandment binds us Deuteronomy. 6.4.5.
to have Jehovah the living and true God, for our God, and none other: and
forbids generally these four things. 1 The having of strange gods, and not
the true; as Act. 14.11 12.15.
had the heathens. 2 The having of strange Gods with the true, as 2 King. 17.33.
had the Samaritans. 3 The having of no God at all, as Psalm. 14* 1
foolish Atheists. 4 The not Isa. 29.1; Tit. 1.16.
having of the true God aright, but in hypocrisy only; not in truth and
sincerity. These, with Deuteronomy. 13.1.2*3.6.7.13, etc. and 7.25.26.
al causes, occasions, provocations, etc. that any way move draw or persuade
unto these or any of them; yea, every 1 These. ^* 22.
appearance of them, are to be shunned and abhorred.

8 The second commandment binds Ioh. 4.20* ad 24.
to the true worship of the true God, which is, only, Deuteronomy. 12.32, and 4.1, 2,
5, 6, etc.
as himself commands, and by the means, rites and services that he
ordains: and it forbids. 1 Al Psalm. 119.113. Is^. 29.13. Col. 2.23.22
inventions of our own to worship God by; voluntary religion, opinions and
doctrins of men. 2 All imitations Lev. 18.2, 3. Deuteronomy. 12 30 31. Rev. 17.2.
of Heathens or Antichristians in their God-services, to do the like unto the
Lord our God. 3 All imitation or counterfeiting 1 Kin. 12, 28 -- 32. Amos 4.4,
5, and 5.21, 22.23. Hos 8.14*
of Gods own ordinances and institutions; as to make Temples, like his Temple,
Feasts like his Feasts, Altars like his, Ministers like his: which was the sin
of Israel. 4 All Gen 17.14 Number 9.13, Ier. 3.10, and 4.14, and 12.2.
neglect of Gods services, or of the means and instruments by him ordained; all
irreligious profanenes or hypocrisy. Together with all Hos. 4.1^ 17. Amos 5.5*
communion with such kind of idolatry, all causes, occasions, and provocations
thereunto.

9 And that Idols, are not only false resemblances of things which are not;
and Idol-latrie, not only the giving of divine honor to a creature, as unto
God; (as Antichrists Bellarm. de Imag. sanct. c. 5, Greg. de Valent. l. 2. de
Idol. c. 1.
champions do pretend:) but that all religious images, or similitudes, made by
man himself, are Idols; and that all religious use and service of them is
idolatry, appears by the words of the Law. For every man is forbidden to
make unto himself, any Temunah Exodus 20.4
form, shape, or resemblance, of things in the heavens, earth or waters, of any
Semel. Deuteronomy. 4.16,
similitude, show, or likeness; any Tabnith. Deuteronomy. 4.16.
frame, figure, edifice or structure, of man or beast, fowl or fish, or any
creeping thing; any Tselem. Ezekiel 7.20, and 16.17.
Image, type, or shadowed representation* any M^s^ith. Lev. 26.1.
imagined picture, fabric, or shape; Matt^sebah. Lev. 26.1.
any statue, erected-monument or pillar; finally, any thing Ex. 20.4
graven or carved, or Hos. 13.2
molten; Eze. 8.10
drawn-out, painted or poutrahed: So that it is not possible, for the wit or
hand of man, to devise or make any image, or representation whatsoever, which
comes not within the compass of the words and things forewarned of God.

10 The latrie, or service of Idols forbidden, is also as large, under these
words, Ex. 20.5.
thou shall not worship them, neither shall thou serve them. For man being
charged to Mat. 4.10 Deu. 10.20
worship the Lord his God, and serve him only; is bound to give him all manner
of religious honor, and none at all unto images, or creatures. Worship is any
reverend submissiue gesture, as Deuteronomy. 5.9*
bowing-down, Ps. 95.6, Romans 11.4.
kneeling, prostrating, with all other like lowly and lovely behavior, as Hos.
13.2
kissing, Eze. 18.6
lifting up of the eyes, and all that appertain or lead unto this worship, as
Deuteronomy. 16.1, 6. 1 King. 12.32. Hos. 4.15.
observing the time, coming to the place, and other the like. And hereby is
meant, not external worship only: but as God is a Spirit, Ioh. 4.24*
and must be worshipped in spirit; so spiritual worship may be given to no
idols: as in heart to love, reverence or regard them; for God Isay 42.^
will not give his glory to another, nor his praise to graven images.

11 Service, is the practice or observing of any religious ordinance of what
sort soever, inward or outward; and hereunto pertains, all Ministry,
Priestood, ministration, Number. 8 22.24.
about Temple, Altar, Sacrifices, etc: all gifts and oblations Number. 4.2^ ad 31,
and 18.4.7.
of things living or dead, as cattle, silver, gold, vessels, instruments, etc.
all Number. 7.3.5.
purifications, 1 Chronicles. 23.28.2^* etc.
clensings, preparations of things for Gods worship; administering Exodus 12
26.27.
of Sacraments, and partaking with them; 1 Cor. 10 18.
eating of the sacrifices; 1 King. 6 Nehem. 3. 2 King. 12, ^ ad 12.
building, repairing, fortifying of any holy City, Temple, Altar, or other
like, belonging to religion; with all Exodus 36 1, etc, and 39.32.
manner work, labor, industry of body or mind, to help forward such things;
Nehem. 10.32 -- 37 39. Ex. 30.16, and 35.5. etc.
paying of tithes, offerings, contributions, of what creature soever, for the
maintenance of the Ministers, ministration, or worship. Finally, whatsoever
tends to the furtherance and upholding of any worship or religion, it is
comprehended in this word service: that vayn is the distinction that Idolaters
Bellar. de eccles. triumph. l. 1. c. 12.
make between the service latria, and the service dulia; giving this to Saints
and Images, the other not; when God by one word Ghnabad forbids both; and 1 Samuel 7.3, douleusate autoimonoi, q.d. giv him only your dulia.
binds us to give dulia, as well as latria, unto God only.

12 Many sorts of idolaters have always been in the world, which have defiled
themselves with innumerable idols; whose vanity and filthiness, God manifests
by titles and names giving unto them. For Idols are called Lev. 19.4 1 Chro.
16.26.
Aelilim, that is, things of naught; because they have nothing of that which
fools think they have, that is, of the divine power and Godhead, or of true
Religion: and so can neither help those that honor them, nor hurt those that
abhor them; neither sanctify any creature, nor pollute the same, to him that
has knowledge: in effect they are nothing, they can neither do good nor evil.
Whereupon the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.
an Idol is nothing in the world: and therefore nothing to be esteemed.

13 They are called also Lev. 26.3 Deuteronomy. 29.^ Eze. 6.4, 5*
Gillulim, as it were filths, dung, or excrements, because they are loathsome
and abominable to God, and do defile the consciences of men; proceeding as
dung and excrements out of man's corrupt heart, and vain invention: and in other
plain terms are named Ezekiel. 2 ^.8. Ier. 32.3
Shikutsim, that is, loathsome things, or detestable, and Eze. 7.^ and 11.21
Toghneboth, that is, abominations.

14 And for the labor and misery that comes by their means, they be called
Ps. 115 1 Samuel 3^ 9.
Ghnatsabim, that is, Sorrows; because with much labor, care and curiosity,
they are invented, framed, erected; and yet bring nothing to man, but Psalm. 16
sorrow and misery. Briefly, as they are in every respect false, vile, vain,
and worthless: so carry they the titles of ^er. 14.22 16.19, 2.8.11.18.15.13.25
Vanities, lies, unprofitable, false-vanities, leasings; and Hos. 10.8 4.15.
Aven, that is, vain-iniquitie.

15 Though this be the nature and condition of idols with God; yet men love to
vanish in their own vanities, robbing him of his honor, and deceiving
themselves; ascribing to idols a false conceited holiness, more or less,
according to the folly of the institutor, or worshipper. For all true holiness
is from Ex. 39.30 1 Samuel 2.2 ^say 6.3.
God alone, who as he is Lev. 20.8 ^.26, and ^.8.12.15 ^ and 22.2 32.
most holy, so halloweth he, or ^en. 28.16 ^, etc.
sanctifyeth his people and his worship, with all the Rites and Ordinances of
the same. He by his Word and presence, gives holiness to persons, to places,
to altars, to statues, to sacrifices, to means and instruments of all sorts,
wherewith his service is performed: and in the right use of these holy things,
God is hallowed and honored of us; which right use he manifests in his ^co.
29.29.^.36.37.^, and 40 9 ^.11, etc, ^o. 17.17.
Word. But Satan, who Mat 4 9
seeks the possession of Gods throne and glory, gives or ascribes 1 King.
2.28-33 ^ct. 19 27.^.
to his own ministers temples, altars, images, instruments and ceremonies, a
counterfeit holiness, which is in deed most deadly contagious filthiness, as the
evil spirit from whom it proceeds, is most filthy and Luke 11.24.
impure: and in the use of these execrable things, the Deuteronomy. 3^ 17. Rev. 9.2^ 1
Cor. 10.2.
Divill is hallowed and honored as a God.

16 And the more to deceiv, this serpent makes man himself his instrument, to
frame and set up his religion and service, which brings to perdition. For the
wisdom and prudence of the natural man, which is very 1 Cor. 1.2 Rom 8 7*
foolishness and enmity unto God, the Divil does abuse to 1 King. 12.18. Dan.
3.
devise and establish a carnal worship and politic religion; which exceedingly
Act. 19, 28.35.
pleases the naturals: for highly do they esteem of themselves, and of all
their own inventions. And Satan to confirm them, adds lying Rev. 1^ 13.14.
signs and wonders, as fire from heaven to consume the sacrifices on the altar
erected to his honor, who is Ioh. 12.3
Prince of this world, whom worldly men adore. Thus steppeth up Idolatry with
her blind devotion; a Gal. 5.2
work of the flesh, and of the Divill.

17 And this sin, so bewitcheth men given over thereunto: as (through Gods just
judgment,) it Isa. 44.^
shuts their eyes that they cannot see, their hearts that they cannot
understand. They have no knowledge or discretion to argue, that if they can not
give life or sense or motion to a dead image; nor any natural power thereunto,
to do Ier. 10.5.
good or evil: how much less can they give it spiritual life, or any
religious power, virtue or operation? For example: a man makes images of
silver and gold, and builds for them a court or palace. One image he
sets on a throne, and calls it his King: others he names Lords of the
Council, Judges and Justices of the Commonwealth. Unto a Judge he comes and
says; Good my Lord hear the cause of your suppliant, and do me right from the
violence of my adversary: an other while he supplicateth to the golden King,
falling down and saying, deliver me, for thou art my Le^ge. Would not this man
be derided of all for his folly, and counted as witless as the image it self
that he sueth unto? No less is their madness, that make images of Saints for
religious use, building for them Churches and Chapels. One idol they name
Christ, an other S. Peter; and the rest, as they please to call them. And
though they be altogether false representations, (as it the lot of images to
be Hab. 2.1^
teachers of lies;) so that the picture of Christ, be in deed like Caiphas, and
S. Peter's, like Iscariot; resembling no more the true visage of Christ, and of
Peter, then K. Henry the S, his picture, is like the image of Julius Caesar;
neither is there any more holiness in these statues, by any relation or
reference, then the Divill can give them, (for word of God to sanctify them,
there is none:) yet fall the fools down before these their fictions, and say, O
Christ help me: S. Peter pray for me. But these stony Saints Psa. 115^ 5 -- 6.8.
have eyes and see not, have ears and hear not: like them be they that make
them, and whosoever trusts in them.

18 Nor is there less impiety, in idols of other nature and esteem. For when
among men, one is set up as Head of the Church, an other as Patriarch, an other
as Primate, Archbishop, Metropolitan, etc. all of them as very good Lords
spiritual; and these without calling and appointment from God: these be Zach.
11^17.
idol Shepherds, not true Pastors of the flock; and the indignity and
dishonor which they do unto Christ, is more then if disloyal subjects should
choose, and set up from among themselves, without public Authority, one to be
Lord President, an other Lord Chief Justice, and others in their several rooms
and offices, for to rule the realm, and to judge all the causes and occurrents
of the same.

19 So is it in all other religious ordinances of humane invention: as when
Antichristians set forth new Sacraments to seal up Gods grace and remission of
sins; what is it, but as if some falser should make conveyances of crown land,
seal them with a signet of his own counterfeit making, and call it by the name
of the Kings privy seal. When they make a new form or frame of Churches, as to
be Provincial, National, Oecumenicall, with Arch-preists and Prelates to
overawe them: might they not with as good right alter the form of the
Commonwealth, making new Ditions and Jurisdictions, with Curions, Decurions,
and other new Magistrates to control them? When they make solemn days of
assembly, and call them holy; when they make new books, canons, constitutions,
ceremonies, and call them Ecclesiastical, sacred, laudable; constraining men
to keep and do them: they deal with Christ and his Kingdom, as they that in a
civil State should take upon them, without commission, to appoint new Terms,
Sessions and Assizes; to forge new Laws, Statutes, Court-rolls, evidences etc,
and compel men to credit and obey them. Now therefore o Kings be wise; Ps.
2.10.11
be learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling; and purge your Realms of all idolatries, the humane ordinances of
religion, which are after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. For
you would none of you suffer such innovation or alteration in your Civil
Polities, lest your Honors should be impeached: much less should ye suffer
it, in the Polity Ecclesiastic, to provoke God to wrath. For he is a gealous
God, Exodus 20.5.
and will visit this iniquity on Princes and on Subjects; on fathers and on
children: blessed are they that watch, and keep their garments from pollution
of the world herein.

CHAP. II.
How fast the sin of Idolatry cleaves to all flesh.

THE service of idols, or of God by them, although it be a sin more reprehended
in Gods word, more punished in his works, then other vices: yet is it most
common and familiar with the sons of Adam, easily compassing them about, and
hanging fast upon them. As may appear by three demonstrations; first, how the
best men in the world do easily fall into it; secondly, after, what pleasure
they take in it; thirdly, and then, how hardly they are drawn from it. Of all
these, the Scriptures give testimonies many.

2 When God had renewed the face of the world, after the sin-floud, and Noah's
three sons Sem, Genesis 10.
Ham, and Iapheth had multiplied on the earth: our father Abram, with his
father Terah, were foul of this sin, Ios. 24.2.
and served strange Gods, till the true God called him from that impiety. In
his days, idolatry was spread over all, but men would not be reclaimed from
it, either by Abraham's word or sword; though Genesis 14.14 -- 17.
Kings were given as dust unto it, and as scattred stubble unto his bow. The
Nations in deed saw this great work of God, and were afraid; Isa. 41.2 -- 5.6.7.
yet turned they not unto him from Idols, but strengthened one another in their
false religion; and made them more images, to save them from destruction.

3 When Abram would provide a wife for his son, of the best that he could find,
(for the Canaanites he Genesis 24.3 etc.
abhorred:) he sent to his kindred of Nahors house, who yet was not free from
this leven of idolatry, neither Genesis 31.53.19.
he nor his posterity. Into Iaakobs house did this canker creep, and his
retinue also were polluted with Genesis 35.2
strange Gods, which Iaakob did his best for to do away.

4. But when he came with his family into Aegipt, (a land full of Idols;)
having prepared his house as a pure virgin for the Lord: after his decease, the
Egyptians infected his children with idolatry, even in her youth Eze. 23.8
laid they with this virgin Israel, bruised the breasts of her virginity, and
powered their whordoms upon her: Then was God wroth with idolatrous Egypt, and
lifted up his hand to bring his people from among them, and to execute
judgment, Number. 33.4.
both upon their Gods, and upon their first born, that ministered unto them: and
unto Israel he said, Eze. 20.6.7
Defile not your selves with the idols of Aegipt, I am the Lord your God: but
Verse. 8.
Israel would not hear, nor leav her abominations; or idols which she had
loved. Yet God Verse. 9.
respecting his own name, brought them out of Egypt into the wilderness,
where Ver. 10.11
he gave them his statutes, and declared his judgments unto them; Exodus 20
3.4.5.23, and 23.24.32.33.
severely and often charging them to keep themselves from idolatry.

5 In those days notwithstanding, they made them Ex. 32.31
Gods of gold, and Verse. 8.
worshipped the work of their own hands, even a molten calf: and stayed not
there, but were given over, unto further evil, even to serve the Act. 7.42.43.
Amos 5.
host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the Prophets, O house of
Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices, forty years in the
wilderness? nay, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god
Remphan, the figures which ye made to worship them. Also they joined themselves
to Number. 25 2.3. Psa. 106.28
Baal-peor, and did eat the sacrifices of the dead, such was the great fall of
the people whom God had chosen from among all peoples of the earth, for to be
his; they Lev. 17.7.
sacrificed to divils after whom they went a whoring, as Moses told them.

6 When notwithstanding all this, God brought them in mercy to Canaan, Ezekiel.
20.15.
a land flowing with milk and honey, and most pleasant of all Countries; and
cast out the Heathens before their faces, and Deuteronomy. 24.25.26.
warned them to beware of their idols: yet there also they did Judge. 2.11 12,
13, 19* and 3.7, etc.
wickedly, served Baalim, and forsook the Lord God of their fathers, and
followed the gods of the peoples round about them; serving their idols, and
Psalm. 106.37, 38.
sacrificing their sons and their daughters unto divils, and shedding the
innocent blood of their children whom they offered unto the idols of Canaan. And
thus they did from age to age, whiles the Judges ruled them; till God Psalm.
78.59.60.
was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel, and forsook the habitation of Shilo,
the tabernacle where he dwelt among men, and delivered his power (the Ark of
the covenant) into captivity, and his beauty into the enemies hand.

7 Yet after this again in Samuels days, 1 Samuel 7 3, 4.
they were defiled with their idols; and in the days of the Kings, they
increased wrath. Solomon himself, the wisestman on earth 1 King. 11.5.
fell into this folly of serving idols, even the abomination of the Heathens;
although God had verse. 9.10
appeared unto him twice, and given him a charge concerning this thing. And
Rehoboam his son, though for his fathers sin ver. 11.12
he lost the most part of his Kingdom, yet gave himself to idolatry, he forsook
2 Chronicles. 12.1.
the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him. Then Judah 1 King. 14.22.
wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord; and provoked him more with their
sins which they committed, then all that which their fathers had done; for
they verse. 23.
built them high Places, and statues (or pillars) and 1 Chronicles. 14.3.
strange altars, and groves on every high hill, and under every green tree. And
Rehoboam made 1 King. 15.12.
Gillullim, filthy idols, and 2 Chronicles. 14 5.
Chammanim idols, or images of the Sun, and Maacah his wife made 1 King. 15.13.
Miphletseth an idol of terror, in a grove. And Abijam his son, 1 King.
15.2.3.
walked in all his fathers sins, neither was his heart perfect with the Lord
his God; although 2 Chronicles. 13.8.9.
he despised Ierobams calves, and boasted that Verse. 10.12.
God was with him.

8 Idolatry being thus fastened upon Judah, could hardly ever be weeded out
again: for though Asa the next King, did his best, 1 King. 15.11, etc. 2 Chronicles.
14 3, etc. and 15.8.
with an upright heart, to abolish all the idols that his fathers had brought
in, yet 1 King. 15.14.
were the high places not taken away, but remained till Iehoshaphat his son was
King, who took away many both 2 Chronicles. 17.6.
groves and high places, howbeit not all; for 2 Chronicles. 20.33.
the people had not yet prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers, but
1 King. 22.43.
offered still, and burnt incense in the high places. And when Iehoshaphat was
dead, his wicked son Ioram 2 King. 8 16.18.
walked in the ways of the most idolatrous Kings of Israel, even of Ahabs
house, whose daughter he married; and he 2 Chronicles. 21.11.
made high places in the mountains of Judah, and caused and compelled Jerusalem
and Judah to commit fornication, that is, idolatry. And Ahaziah his son,
continued 2 Chronicles. 22.2, 3, 4.
his wicked way, counseled also thereto by his ungracious mother Athaliah; who
after her sons death, broke up the house of God, and 2 Chronicles. 24.7.
all the things that were dedicated for the house of the Lord, were bestowed
upon Baalim. Thus Baal was honored of the people of God, 2 King. 11.18.
had a house, and altars, and images, and a Priest to minister unto him.

9 The Lord abhorring this great impiety, sent this wicked King and his mother
both soon unto hell; and set Ioash 2 Chronicles. 24.1.
his young son upon his throne; who had for his Tutor and Patron, the good high
Priest Iehojadah: by whose advice, the people 2 Chronicles. 23.17.
destroyed Baal and his house, and Gods Verse. 18.
true worship was restored; albeit not brought as yet to the primitive
sincerity, for the 2 King. 12 3.
people offered still, and burnt incense in the high places untaken away. But
so soon as this 2 Chronicles. 24.15.
aged father the Priest was dead; the Princes of Judah verse. 17.
fawning on the King, turned him away to the former superstition; and again
they verse. 18.
left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served groves and
grievous idols; and the high Priests son, (the Kings cousin) who prophesied
against their sins, they ver. 20.21
stoned him to death (by the unthankful Kings commandment,) in the court of the
Lords house, even between Mat. 23, 35.
the temple and the altar.

10 When Ioash was taken away 2 Chronicles. 24.25.
by a bloody death, Amaziah his son succeeded 2 King. 14.3.
like his father; did uprightly in the eyes of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
but not with a perfect heart; for idolatry still continued in Judah, and 2
King. 14, 4.
the people burnt incense in the high places. And the King himself (to add
unto all his fathers sins) brought the Gods of the Aedomites, 2 Chronicles. 25.14.
and set them up to be his Gods, and worshipped them, and burned incense unto
them, which turned to his ruin. But Vzziah his son, sought God and did
uprightly, yet 2 Chronicles. 26.3, 4, 5.
according to all that his father Amaziah did; for the 2 King. 15*4.
high places stood still for offerings and incense, and Iothan his son verse.
32.34.35.
trod the very same steps. But Achaz son of Iotham marred all again, and made
it worse then before; for 2 Kin. 16 1.2, 3, etc.
he walked in the way of the Kings of Israel; yea, and made his son to pass
through the fire, after the abominations of the Heathen; and made an altar in
the Lords house ver. 10, etc.
like to the idolatrous altar which he saw in Damascus; and ver. 17.
brake down the work in the temple of God; and made 2 Chronicles. 28.2, 3.
molten images for Baalim; yea being afflicted for his sins, he trespassed ver.
22.23
the more against the the Lord, sacrificing to the Gods of Damascus which had
plagued him; verse. 24.
breaking the vessels, and shutting up the doors of the Lords house, making
altars in every corner of Jerusalem, and high places verse. 25.
in every city of Judah, to burn incense unto other Gods. And thus Jerusalem
Ezekiel. 23.11.
Aholibah, marred her self with inordinate love, and with her fornications,
more then her idolatrous sister Aholah, or Samaria: for Judah 2 Chronicles. 29.6.7.
forsook the Lord, and turned their faces from his tabernacle, shut the doors
of his house, quenched his lamps, and neither burnt incense, nor offered burnt
offerings in the sanctuary unto the God of Israel, but sacrificed Deuteronomy. 32.17.
to Divils, new Gods whom they knew not, nor their fathers, and burnt incense
to 2 King. 18.4.
Nehushtan, the serpent of brass.

11 Then God raised them up the good King Ezekias, who 2 Chronicles. 29.1.2 etc.
did uprightly in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father
had done. He opened the doors of the house of the Lord, brought in the Priests
and Levites; (...). 16, etc.
cleansed the Temple, altar, and instruments of Gods service; sacrificed unto
God verse. 21.25.29.
for their sins; restored the true worship; sought the conversion 2 Chronicles.
30.1, etc.
of all Israel; 2 Chronicles. 30.1, etc.
caused them to break the images, cut down the groves, break down the high
places and altars through all his Dominions; and, 2 King. 18.4.
brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made, and Israel polluted.
Thus dealt he 2 Chronicles* 31.20.21.
well and uprightly, and truly, before the Lord his God, even with all his
heart, and departed not from him. But when he was laid down in peace, Manasses
his son, repeated all the former evils, and added more unto them, if ought
might be. For 2 Chronicles* 33.3, etc.
he went back, and built the high places which his father had broke down; and
set up altars for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the host of
heaven, and served them, and built altars to them in the Lords house; and made
strange Gods, and caused his sons to pass through the fire; and gave
himself to witchcraft, and charming, and sorcerie, and used them that had
familiar spirits; and 2 King. 21.16.
shed innocent blood exceeding much, till he filled Jerusalem from corner to
corner; and made Judah and Jerusalem to err, to 2 Chronicles 33.9.
do worse then the heathen whom the Lord had destroyed before them. The Ier.
7.17 18.
children gathered wood, and the fathers kindled the fire, and the women
kneaded the dough, to make cakes to the Queen of heaven, and to power out drink
offerings unto other Gods, that they might provoke the Lord to anger: they
verse. 30.
set their abominations in the house whereupon his name was called, to pollute
it: they Ier. 19.5.
builded the hie places of Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt
offerings unto Baal and unto Ier. 32.35
Molech. By which abominations they so provoked the Lord, as he forbad his
Prophets Ier. 11.14 and 14.11.
to pray any more to do the people good; for they Ier. 17.4.
had kindled a fire in his anger, which should burn for ever.

12 And although Manasses rewed all before his death, 2 Chro, 33 ^1, 12, etc.
and repented heartily when he lay fettered in Babel, and being restored to his
Kingdom, verse. 15.16
took away the strange Gods, and altars and images that he had made, and
restored in Judah Gods true religion, save only that verse. 17.
the people sacrificed in the high places: yet Amon his son would not be warned
by his fathers evils; but turned again from God, made 2 Chro. 34 ^, 4. 2 King.
23, ^4.
idols, and images, and altars of Baalim, high places, and groves; and
sacrificed 2 Chronicles. ^3.22.
to all the images which his father had made, and served them, and humbled not
himself as his father Manasses had done: wherefore he was soon rooted out of
the land of the living, and laid in dust.

13 2 Chr. 3^
Josias his son abolished all these former idolatries and monuments of them;
and did uprightly in the sight of God, as David had done, and verse. 19* 27.
trembled at his law and judgments: but the people Ier. 25.3 4, etc.
would not hear the words of the Prophets, calling them from their idolatry,
they sought not the Lord, many of them, but Zeph. 1.5
worshipped the host of heaven, on the house tops; remaining verse. 12.
frozen in their dregs; and showed themselves to be Zeph. 2.
a Nation not worthy to be loved. So when Josiah was dead, Iehoahaz his son, 2
King. 2^ 31.32.
did as evil as all his fathers, for the time which he reigned, which was but
3 months: and Iehojakim his successor ver. 36.3*
dealt as badly; and Ier. 26.2^ 23.
killed the Prophets which called them to repentance, and Jer. 36.2 25.
burned their writings. And after him 2 King. 24.8.
Iehojachim proved no better; though in these days death came up into their
windows, and Gods wrath was in pouring out upon Jerusalem. And Zedekiah the
last King, did 2 King* 24.18.19
still evil in the Lords eyes; Jer. 37.1.^.
neither he nor his servants, nor the people of the land, would obey the words
of the Lord; 2 King. ^4.20.
therefore the wrath of the Lord, was against Jerusalem and Judah, until he
cast them out of his sight. For it was not the Kings only, that did all these
evils, but also Ier. 44.9.
their wives, Ier. 32.32
and the Princes of the land, the Priests and the Prophets, and the men of
Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, even the 2 Chronicles. ^6.14.
chief of the people trespassed wonderfully, according to all the abominations
of the Heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord, which he had sanctified in
Jerusalem, and verse. 16.
mocked the messengers of God, despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there was no
remedy. For that City Jerusalem had Ier. 32.31
been unto him a provocation of his anger, and of his wrath; from the day they
built it, even unto the day that he should remove it out of his sight: they had
Eze. 6.9.
whorish hearts, and their eyes went a whoring after their idols: and with them
Ezekiel. 23.^7.
they committed adultery, till being wexen old in adulteries God said, verse. 43.
Now shall she and her fornications come to an end.

14 And as it was with Judah, so was it also with the ten tribes of Israel; who
sucked the milk of Idol superstition in the days of 1 King 12.28 30.
Jeroboam son of Nebat, whereunto they were addicted 2 King 10.28.29. and
15.27.28, etc.
always after, so long as their Commonwealth did stand; even throughout the
reign of nineteen Kings, who added unto their forefathers sins, and drew
the people to most horrible impieties, for which the land did spew them out, 2
Kin. 17
and Heathens came to dwell in their sted. As these are 1 Cor. 1^ 6.7.
ensamples to us, to the intent that we should not be idolaters like them; and
are written verse. 11.
to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come: so do they plainly
manifest the strength of this bewitching sin of idolatry, which as a harlot
steals away the heart of man; and the pronenesse of all flesh, (not of such
only as are aliants from the Church, but even of Gods own called people,) to
fall into this vice, if God restrain them not by his special grace.

15 Now for the pleasure that men take in this sin; it may be conjectured, by
the readiness of all sorts of people (as we have seen) to fall thereinto; and by
the cause of the same, which is the flesh, (one of the Gal. 5.19 ^0.
works whereof it is,) and therefore must needs delight the fleshly: and that so
much the more as it proceeds from the chiefest part of the flesh, namely
conscience, Romans 1.22, etc. ^. Cor. 1.20 ^1, etc.
wisdom, reason, knowledge, judgment, prudence, policy, and whatsoever is
most excellent in the natural man. It may also further be showed by examples
and similitudes which the Scripture sets down.

16 The Prophet Esaias calls men's idols their Esa. 44.9.
delectable things; because of their desire that is toward them, and their
pleasure in them. Ezekiel compares the idolaters of Israel, to Ezekiel. 23.2,
3.5, etc.
a woman inflamed with love toward some goodly young man, on whom she has cast
her eyes, and fixed her affections: and forgetting all modesty, she verse. 16.
sends messengers for him, and brings him to her verse, 17.
into the bed of love, so verse. 18.
discovering her fornication and disclosing her shame. Teaching us by this
similitude, that idolatry is as sweet to the corrupted conscience and mind of
man, as lust and fornication, is to any wanton body.

17 The objects also of this vice, are very pleasurefull and alluring: for the
doctrines, rites, ceremonies and observances of false religion, with the gifts
and learning of the Teachers thereof; are like unto the goodly proportion,
comely stature and glorious apparel, which set forth and adorn the persons of
men, making them seem like Eze. 23.6
Captains and Princes* and pleasant choise-youths, clothed in silks, and ver.
12.15
all kind of Gentleman-like apparel, whereby the woman's heart, verse. 16.
as soon as she sees them, becomes enamoured. The external pomp and show that
idolatry carries with it, in temples and altars, and images of gold, in copes
and vestiments, in organs and melody, in peaceable Ezekiel. 13.16, 7.
visions, sweet prophesies, and lying divinations; in diligent Amos 4.4, 5.
sacrificing, tithing, thanksgiving, and proclaiming free offerings, with other
like devotions: these give content to the worshippers conscience, and please
the mind no less then Pro. 7.14* 16.17, etc.
a feast with peace offerings, and after it a sweet perfumed bed, decked with
quilts and curtains most fine and costly, and verse. 13.15.18.
courteous intertainment of a paramour, with fill of love, and pleasure of
dalliance all the night, is to a loose and lustful young man, given over to the
fleshly and sensual sin of whoredom.

18 Agreeable to these similitudes, are the things foretold of the idolatry of
Antichrist, whose false Church is resembled Rev. 17.1
by a whore; the doctrines, superstitions, rites, ceremonies of the same, as
the wine of her fornication; verse. 2.
making drunk the kings and inhabitants of the earth. And the more to allure
them thereunto, her cup (wherein are the abominations, and filthiness of her
fornication: verse. 4.
) is of gold; her self is arrayed with purple and skarlet, and gilded with
gold and precious stones and pearls; counterfeiting hereby the habit and
ornaments of the true Church, the Rev. 21.2
Spowse of Christ, whose ver. 11.18
shining is like to gold and stones most clear and precious; her lips Song. 4
3.10.
like scarlet, and her love much better then wine. The pleasantness of that
false religion, enamouring so many Prove. 7.7
fools, is noted by Rev. 18.3
the abundance of her pleasures, whereby her merchants wexed rich; verse. 9.
the luxurious life and fornication of Kings with her, verse. 14.
the apples that her soul lusted after, and all things that were fat and
excellent; verse. 22.
the music and melody that there was heard; and is signified further by verse.
9.15* 16.19.
the sorrow and lament which all her lovers make for her desolation. Now when
the Holy Ghost takes the most pleasant delightful things in the world, and by
them notes out that counterfeit religion; what would he but teach us and warn
us hereby of the sweetness of this deceit, which lulleth men in security;
having their wits bewitched with the whors enchanting song; Prove. 9.16* 17.
Who so is simple let him come hither; stolen waters are sweet, and hid bread
is pleasant.

19. But if the intising words of others, do so far prevail with men, that
Pro. 7.22
they follow straightway, as oxen that go to to the slaughter, and as fools to
the stocks for correction, till a dart strike through their liver; what may we
think is the strength of a man's own heart, when he Ps. 106.39
goes a whoring with his own inventions; how easily will it prevail against
him? Every man naturally pleases himself, and likes well of his own
designs; loving the fruit of his wit, as the child of his body: that when Isa.
59.
he has conceived mischief, and brought forth (an idol, that is) iniquity; it
grows up with him, and delights him, and he Act. 7.41
rejoices in his own invention; persuading himself that Judge. 17.3.
now the Lord will be good unto him, seeing he has found out a truth, or right
manner of worshipping God. For this his devise, (specially if it be painted
with some color of holy scriptures,) he esteems as Act. 19.^5.
an image come down from Jupiter, a doctrine from heaven it self. And
henceforward, all the blessings that he injoyeth do flow from this, that Ier.
44.17
he burns incense to the Queen of heaven, the idol that he has made Hos. 13.2
according to his own understanding. wherefore he will loose his life, rather
then his religion, which he defends with tooth and nayl, lest the Act. 19.26
magnificence of his Diana should be destroyed; he will Ier^ 28.11
preach, and Act. 17.18.
dispute, Ier. 29.25
and write for the same, against whomsoever; and 1 King. 13 4.
persecute (if it be in his power) all that contradict it. And whatsoever is
said from the word of the Lord against it, he Ier^ 44.16
will not hear; being as hardly induced to think it no truth, which his own wit
has discovered, as were the Ephesians to think Act. 19.26.
them no Gods, which were made with hands; for his idol invention has bereft
him of sound judgment, a seduced heart has deceived him, that he cannot deliver
his soul, nor say. Isa. 44.29.
Is there not a lie in my right hand?

20 So in his blind devotion he continues, blessing himself in his evil,
feighning that he is high in Gods favor, and shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 20.19.
although he walk in the wrest and obstinacy of his own heart; and that Ier.
2.35^
because he is guiltless, surely Gods wrath shall turn from him: For he verse.
23.
follows no idols, (whatsoever men say,) but he Ier. 5.2.
swears, the Lord lives; and will show by his works, the 2 King. 10.16.
zeal that he has for the Lord against idolaters. He brings Amos 4.4.5.
his sacrifices and his tithes, offreth thanksgiving, proclaims free
offerings; yea willing he is to please the Lord, though it cost him Mic. 6.7.
thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil; and to give his
firstborn, the fruit of his body, for the sin of his soul: and though he
burn incense to Baal, Ier. 7.9* 10.
yet will he come and stand before God in the house whereupon his name is
called, and say, J am delivered; he will Mi^. 3.22
lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord with me? No evil can come upon
me; neither Ier. 5.12.
shall the plague come unto me, neither shall I see sword nor famine.

21 Finally, the Lord, to teach us how fast this sin cleaves unto us, says by
his Prophet of the idolatry of Judah (his own professant people,) Ier. 17.1.
that it was written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a Diamond graven
upon the table of their heart; showing that the inmost affections are most
deeply and continually inffected with this vice, and addicted unto it; from
which, no kind persuasion, no earnest dehortation, nor dreadful threatening
will turn them. For when Jerusalem had given themselves to this iniquity; the
Lord sent unto them Ier. 35.15
all his servants the Prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying;
return now every man from his evil way, and amend your works, and go not
after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have
given unto you and to your fathers; Ier. 44.4, 5.
oh do not this abominable thing that I hate: but they would not hear, nor
incline their ear, to turn from their wickedness, and to burn no more incense
unto other Gods. And now are we come to the last demonstration, how hardly this
sin is left, when once men have tasted the bitter sweetness of the same.
Which may be seen by the wilful and stiff persisting herein, notwithstanding
all judgments threatened, all punishments inflicted therefore. And hereof let
Israel be our pattern.

22 After that they had forsaken the Lord, to follow their idols, he (to
reclaim them from the iniquity) denounced, and brought upon them many heavy
judgments. King Jeroboam son of Nebat, the author of sin to the people, was 1
King. 1 1, etc.
rebuked by a Prophet, heard the destruction of his religion threatened; felt
his own arm miraculously withered and recured* saw the altar rent before his
eyes: yet could he not perceiv the impiety of his trespass. He had again
another 1 King. 1 1, etc.
Prophets reproof, heard the horrible ruin of his house menaced, that his
posterity should be swept away as dung, and eaten of dogs and fowls of the
aier; and by the death of his son Abijah, was deterred, if it might have been,
from proceeding in his idolatry: but all this prevailed nothing. He lost in one
battle that he fought with Judah, 2 Chronicles. 3.17.
five hundred thousand chosen men; and some of his cities: and yet had no heart
to return unto the Lord; till he was verse. 20.
plagued of God and died. And the year after, Nadab his son walking in his
fathers sin, 1 Kin. 15 25 -- 28.29
was murdered, and all Ieroboams house, (none left alive) destroyed, according
to the word of the Lord.

23 Baasha, whose hands had executed Gods wrath on Ieroboams house, yet had no
grace to forsake his sin; no not though he were threatened for it by a
Prophet, 1 King. 16.1, -- 4.
to have like vengeance brought upon his own posterity; but continued in that
Idolatry to his dying day; and Elah his son, in the second year of his reign,
felt the reward of his fathers sins, and of his own, 1 King. 16.8, -- 13.
was killed by a conspiracy, and all that family rooted out, none left unto
Baasha, either of his kinsfolks, or his friends. Neither yet would Zimri, who
rooted out Bashaes house be warned himself, but walked still in Ieroboams sin,
wherefore 1 King. 16.15.18.19.
reigning but seven days, God hastened wrath upon his head, and he burned
himself in his distress.

24 All this notwithstanding the people of Israel, and Kings that succeeded,
left not Ieroboams sins, but added more unto them, and did worse then he. And
although wrath was increased upon the Nation, 2 King. 6 24.25.
by sword and by famine, that women ver. 28.29
did eat their own children for hunger, and the Prophets did 2 King. 8.11.12.
weep to think of the plagues before they came upon them: yet could they not
be persuaded to leav their idolatry. The Lord gave them cleanness of teeth,
and scarseness of bread in all their cities, Amos 4.6.
yet turned they not unto him. He withheld rain from them, and made them
wander about to seek water to drink; Verse. 8.
yet turned they not unto the Lord. He smote them with blasting and mel dew,
and kanker worms did consume their fruits; verse. 9.
yet turned they not unto the Lord. Pestilence he sent among them after the
manner of Aegipt, and killed their young men with the sword; verse. 10.
yet turned they not unto the Lord. He overthrew them, as God overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah, and they were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning; verse. 11*
yet turned they not unto the Lord. And though the Lord 2 King. 17 13.14, etc.
testified unto them by all the Prophets, and by all the Seers, saying; Turn
from your evil ways, and keep my commandments: yet would they not hear, but
followed vanity, and became vain in their idolatry, till the land did spue them
out, as it had spued out the Heathens that dwelt before them, and they were
ver. 23.24
spoiled by the Assirians, and carried captives among the Heathens, and Hethens
came and dwelt in their sted.

25 In like manner fared it with the Kingdom of Judah; many plagues did they
feel for their idol service, and many more were threatened: yet would they not
turn from this iniquity. Presently upon Rehoboams apostasy 2 Chronicles. 12.1.2,
etc.
they were set upon by the King of Egypt, their strong cities taken; the
treasures of the Lords house, and of the Kings, were lost* and the men
themselves made verse. 8.
servants to Shishak.

27 The idolatrous Kings after, augmented sin and wrath, but could not be
brought to amendment. Jehoram lost 2 Chronicles. 21.8.
Aedom; had his house and children robbed and carried away ver. 16.17
by the Philistims and Arabians, and himself after two years sore sickness,
verse. 19.
had his guts fall out, and so died. Amaziah was 2 King* 14.13.14, etc.
taken by the King of Israel, the wall of Jerusalem was broken, and the temple
robbed. Achaz was sold into the hands of 2 Chronicles. 28.5.
the Kings of Aram and of Israel; and six score thousand valiant men of Judah
were killed in one day; ( verse. 6.
because they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers,) and two hundred
thousand taken prisoners; besides verse. 17.18.19.
other miseries that came upon the Country. But these and other plagues many
which God laid upon them, till Isa. 1.5* 6.7.
the whole head was sick, and the whole heart heavy, from the sole of the foot
unto the head, there was nothing whole therein, but wounds and swelling and
putrified sores; the land wasted, the cities burnt with fire, and the daughter
Sion remained like a cottage in a vineyard: yet the more they were smitten,
verse. 5.
the more they fell away; all labor was spent in vain upon them, the Jer. 6.2^
30.
bellows were burnt, the lead consumed in the fire, the founder melted in vain,
they were called reprobate silver, because the Lord had rejected the^. For
though he threatened Ier. 9.1^
to make Jerusalem a heap, and a den of Dragons, and to make the cities of
Judah wast without an inhabitant, and sent unto them saying, Ier. 18.11
Behold I prepare a plague for you, and purpose a thing against you, turn you
therefore every one from his evil way; verse. 12.
yet they said desperately, surely we will walk after our own imaginations, and
do every man after the speculation of his wicked heart.

27 Moreover, when God had brought upon them the desolation threatened, that 2
Chr. 36
Jerusalem was broken up by the Babylonians, the temple burned, the people
killed, and the rest carried prisoners into Babel; some poor men only 2 King.
^.5.12.
left to till the land; yet that remnant afterward fled Ier. 43.5 ^.7.
into Egypt, both small and great; and there committed idolatry again with
Jer. 44.8.
the works of their hands, burning incense unto other Gods in the land of
Aegipt, that they might bring destruction unto themselves, and be a curse, and a
reproach among all Nations of the earth.

28 Behold in this mirror (whosoever thou art that read,) the readiness of
all flesh to fall away from God; the pleasure that men take in their own vain
inven^^ons; and the difficulty to draw them from following after Satan. Behold
the madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart wherewith they are
stricken that be given to idolatry; and how this gangrene did spread the whole
body over, in the Church of Israel; whose history is left written for example
and warning to us, who all are subject to fall into like sin, are liable to
like plagues, and of like obstinacy in evil. For though God have scourged
Christendom with fire, and smoke, and brimstone, Rev. ^.17, etc.
out of the horses mouths and horsemen, conducted by the Angels of destruction:
yet the remnant of men not killed by these plagues, verse. 20.
have not repented of the works of their hands, that they should not worship
divils, and idols of gold and silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood,
which neither can see, neither hear, nor go; men Rev. 16.11.
have blasphemed the God of heaven, for their pains and for their sores, and
repented not of their works. All Rev. 13.3
the world wondreth and follows the beast, admireth the glory and
magnificence of the Rev. 17.
whore, and without Gods special grace, none can keep himself from her, for
she sits Prove. 9.14.15.
in the high places of the city, calling them that pass by the way; and her
lips Prove. 5.3.
drop the honey comb liquor, and her mouth is softer then oil; though her end
be bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two-edged sword. She takes her Ezekiel.
16.17.18.
fair jewels of Gods gold and silver, the holy Scripture and treasures therein;
and with them she makes her images and heresies; and covers them with
broydered garments, as wrought by Gods own spirit; and sets his oil and
perfume before them. She Ezekiel. 23.40.41.
washes her self, as if she were clean from all iniquity; and painteth her
eyes, as if she had the very visage of true faith; and decketh her with
ornaments, as wanting no gifts of knowledge, or utterance, or other furniture of
the spirit; and she sits upon a costly bed, as being seated and constituted
in the best perfection. Her table is furnished with Gods incense and oil; for
the word, prayers, sacraments, are the diet of devotion wherewith she feeds
her lovers; and verse. 42.
a voice of a multitude being at ease, is with her; for many fools follow her,
because of her worldly prosperity, she allureth and intertaineth all comers.
Thus with Pro. 7.21.
her great craft she causes men to yield, and felleth down many wounded; verse.
26.
great is the number of all that are k^ll^d by her; for her heart is Eccles.
7.28.
nets and sna^es, and her hands bands; he that is good before God shall be
delivered from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.

CHAP. III.
Of Jeroboams Jdolatry that infected Jsrael; and of the pretenses that he
might make for his sin.

THat the allurements of this whore Idolatry, with her deceits and snares, may
be further manifested, and people be warned to avoid her destruction: I will
yet prosecute this argument against her, to uncover her skirts and disclose her
iniquity; hunting her steps, as they are traced in the Scriptures, and left to
be seen as a perpetual type in Israel.

2 The commonwealth of Israel did never enjoy such peace and happiness, as in
the days of Solomon son of David, who reigned forty years. Him 2 Samuel 1*
24.25.
the Lord loved (whereupon he was named Jedidjah;) and chose 1 Chronicles* 28.5.
him from among many sonns, to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord
over Israel, and verse. 6.
to build his house and courts, and to be his son, and he would be his father.
He gave 2 Chronicles. 1.12.
unto him wisdom and knowledge, and riches and treasures and honor, so as
there was no King like him before or after. But Solomon 1 King. 11.1, -- 4.
loved many strange women, who withdrew him from the love of God, that he verse.
5.
followed the abominations and idolatries of the Hea^hen. Then God verse. 9.10
was angry, because he had turned his heart from him, who had appeared unto him
twice, and given him a charge concerning this thing, that he should not follow
other Gods, but he kept not that which the Lord had commanded him. Therefore
God verse. 11.
rent the Kingdom from him, and gave it to his servant ver. 26.29
Jeroboam son of Nebat, a man of the tribe of Ephraim; with this certification,
that if verse. 38.
he would hearken to all that God commanded him, and walk in his ways, and do
the right in his eyes; he would be with him, and build him a sure house, and
give Israel unto him. Now when Solomon was dead, all this came to pass; for
Rehoboam his son, 1 Kin. 12.
lost the most part of his realm, and ten Tribes declined after Jeroboam, and
chose him their King.

3 But he (though otherwise a man wise and politic,) wanting heavenly wisdom,
relied not in faith on the promise of God, but went and consulted with flesh
and blood, how he might confirm the Kingdom to himself. And thinking 1 King.
12.26, etc.
in his heart, that if the people should (as they were wont) go up to
Jerusalem to worship God there; their hearts would turn from him to Solomon's
son, who reigned in that place, and so they would kill him. Being fraught with
this fear, and void of faith; he thought to prevent these evils, by setting up
a place of Gods public worship, in his own dominions. And knowing that the
people would not easily be drawn to a new religion, he retained a show still of
the old, not altering any article of the faith, nor yet many of the external
rites; but as in Jerusalem there was a Temple, and Altar, and other outward
signs of Gods habitation with his Church; so would Jeroboam in Israel, make
Temples, and Altars, and signs of Gods presence, that his people might serve
him there. Then 1 King. ^.28, etc.
made he two calves or oxen of gold, and set one at Bethel, another at Dan,
with houses and altars, and other like furniture, and said to the people, verse.
28.
It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, behold thy Gods (o Israel,)
which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

4 The changes and corruptions which he brought into Gods worship, were chiefly
these. First of the place, which God had 2 Chro. 7.6.
chosen to be at Jerusalem: but Jeroboam would have 1 King. 12.29.
at Dan and Bethel. Secondly, of the signs or testimonies of the divine
presence; which at Jerusalem was by Gods own ordinance, Exodus 25, 10, -- 22.
Number. 7.89 Psalm. 80.1.
the ark of the covenant, with the glorious golden Cherubims whereon he ^ate,
and from which his voice had been heard: but at Bethel and Dan, by Ieroboams
device, 1 King. 12.28.
were bullocks or calves of gold. Thirdly, of the time; for the feast of
Tabernacles appointed of God Lev. 23.34
to be kept the 15 day of the seventh month; Jeroboam put off until 1 King.
12.32.
the 15 day of the eighth month. Fourthly, of the persons administering the
holy things; which by Gods authority Number. 18 1.7. Deuteronomy. 10.8.
were Aarons sonns, and their brethren the Levits: but by Ieroboams
dispensation, 1 King. 12.31.
were of other parts and lowest of the people. These things being verse. 31.
consulted of, and agreed upon by the King and State, the people of Israel
yielded unto; and practiced accordingly; showing their prompt obedience and
devotion in going, verse. 30.
because of the one, even to Dan, a city in the utmost part of all the land.
Thus sinned Jeroboam, and made Israel to sin; and it 1 King. 13.34.
turned to sin unto his house, even to root it out and destroy it from the face
of the earth.

5 Against this innovation, there were some that presently rose up, refusing to
follow the religion of the King; especially the Priests and Levites, (according
to the charge they had Deuteronomy. 33 10.
to teach Jankob Gods judgments, and Israel his law,) 2 Chronicles. 11.13.
resisted the superstition, and put the people in mind of their duty; which
Jeroboam perceiving, verse. 14.
put them from their office, and 2 Chronicles. 13.^.
drove them out of his realm. Some also there were of 2 Chronicles. 11.16.
all the Tribes of Israel, that harkening to the wholesome doctrine of their
Ministers, and following their good example, left their own Country; and
resorted to Jerusalem, so strengthening the kingdom of Judah. Thus was there a
controversy among the people, about these (the Kings) ceremonies; some
counting them novelties, and profane superstition; others (and they the many,)
esteeming them laudable, and well-fitting their State. But the men of Judah
reproched them for this, as having 2 Chronicles. 13.11*
forsaken God, and made verse. 8.
them golden calves for Gods, and done many like abominations. The Lord also
used other means to draw the King and people to repentance, by the admonition 1
Kin. 13 1.2, etc.
of a Prophet, confirmed by miracle; by striking dead Ieroboams arm, and
healing it again; and by 1 King. 14.
taking away his beloved son Abijah. These things, though they could not but
trouble both King and people, yet could they not prevail to bring them to
repentance; for Jeroboam had many things to say for himself, and much could he
color his new coynd religion, answering the objections that were made against
them, by th^s, or the like apology.

6 I See my course, (o men of Israel,) to be much suspected, if not wholly
misliked of many* some thinking my ceremonies to savor too rankly of Heathen
superstition; some charging me plainly with flat apostasy and forsaking of
God. But how far off I am from all such impiety (how ever it please men to
mistake my meaning, and pervert my actions) I hope to manifest unto all
indifferent persons. Chiefly since that I have neither spoken nor done against
any article of the ancient faith, nor changed any fundamental ordinance of
religion, given us by Moses; but worship with reverence the God of my fathers,
and love him (as I am taught) Deuteronomy. 6 4.5, and 30.20*
with all my heart, and with all my soul, cleaving unto him alone who is my
life, and the length of my days. Other Gods of the nations I utterly abhor,
with all their impure rites and services; and if any shall now or hereafter
decline to such abomination, I trust we shall show 2* Kin. 10* 16.28.29.
the zeal that we have for the Lord our God, against all their impiety. The
alteration that I have made, is in matters of circumstance, things merely
ceremonial; whereof there is no express, certain or permanent law given us of
God; and which are variable, as time, place, and person give occasion; and such
as good Kings have changed before me; and have been blameless.

7 And first for the place where God is to be worshipped, which many now would
have at Jerusalem only; I find the practice of our Patriarch Abraham, and the
fathers following, to be far otherwise. They sacrificed to God, as occasion was
offered, in every place they came; in Genesis 12.7.8.
Shechem, and in this Genesis 35.7
Bethel; in the plain Genesis 13.18
of Mamre; and in Genesis 26.25.
Beersheba: so this superstition of tying God to one place was not hatched in
their days. After this, when our fathers came out of Egypt, they Exo. 24.5
offered sacrifices in the wilderness, and being come into this land, in how
sundry places of it have they served God? At 1 Samuel 1 3, etc.
Shilo the Tabernacle and Ark was many days, and all Israel sacrificed there.
Again at 1 Samuel 7.1.2.
Kirjath-jearim the Ark had abiding twenty years, and there men sought the
Lord: and after that, in 1 Samuel 21 1.6, etc.
other places many. But when David was King, he removed the Ark 2 Samuel 6, 13,
etc.
to Jerusalem; and the Tabernacle which Moses had made, he left in a high place
1 Chronicles. 21.29.
at Gibeon: and thus were there two places of public worship at one time; and
Solomon sacrificed 1 King. 3.4.15.
in them both. And shall we now grow so superstitious, as to bind God to any
one place. Nay, this all is the Lords land, and his eyes are in every part of
the same: and it is not so material where we do worship, as whom we worship,
and with what affection; for our God is near in all times and places, to all
that call upon him in truth.

8 But it will be said, that Jerusalem is the place which God has chosen;
promising unto Solomon 1 King. 9.3.
to put his name in the Temple there for ever, and that his eyes and heart
should be there perpetually. I answer, the promise and covenant was
conditional, if Gods verse. 4.
statutes and judgments were observed: for if they should turn away, and verse.
6.
serve other Gods, God said verse. 7.8*
he would cast out of his sight, that house which he had hallowed for his
name; and it should be an astonishment and a hissing to all that pass thereby.
And see we not how Solomon forfeited his bond? His wives 1 King. 11.4.
turned his heart after other Gods: he followed verse. 5.
Ashteroth, and Milcom, Chemosh, and Molech; and other abominations of the
Gentiles, and verse. 7.
built them high places: for which his wickedness God was angry, and has rent
his Kingdom from his son, and given it to me. Look to Gods place which was in
Shilo, 1 Samuel 4. Psalm. 78.60 etc.
where he set his name at the beginning; and see what he did to it for the
iniquity of Israel: even Ier. 7.12 14.
so will the Lord do to that house in Jerusalem whereupon his name is called,
wherein also they trust. Example see in the rent of the Kingdom* for at the same
time when promise was made to dwell in that house for ever, God promised 1
King. 9.3.1.
also to stablish that throne of Solomon's for ever: howbeit already the throne
is thrown down, and most of the Realm committed to me. As is the one,
doubtless so is the other; no sanctity remains in the place so polluted with
idolatry: the holiness is gone.

9 And now that this Bethel where I build a house to our God, is the place
which he has chosen to dwell therein; we may boldly say; for it is most
renoumed, the chief and supereminent place in the land. They boast in
Jerusalem, how their Temple stands upon mount 2 Chr. 3.1
Morijah, where Abraham our father Genesis 22.2, etc.
offered his son Isaak (a type of the Messiah) for a sacrifice to God: we also
can glory, how Jaakob our Patriarch saw in this our place, a Genesis 28.12.
ladder that reached from earth to heaven, by which the Angels of God went up
and down; a type also doubtless of our Messiah to come; by whom, as by a
ladder we shall get up to heaven, whom Psalm. 97.7
all the Angels of God shall worship when he comes, and shall be seen to
ascend and descend upon him. Here God appeared to our father Jaakob, Genesis
28.13.14.
promising him the land, and heirs to possess it. He then acknowledged how
verse. 16.17, etc.
the Lord was in this reverend place, that it was no other but the house of
God, and the very gate of heaven; and thereupon gave it a new name Bethel, Gods
house; whereas at first it was verse. 19.
called Luz: yea Jaakob vowed that at his safe return, the stone which here he
had set up for a pillar, verse. 22.
should be Gods house. And this his devotion was approved of God, who expressly
commanded him Genesis 35 1, etc.
to dwell in Bethel, and make him an Altar here; which he performing, God
graciously accepted, and appeared again with new promises in this place,
whereupon the name was again confirmed to be Gods house or verse. 13* 14.15.
Bethel. Thus having so venerable antiquity on our side; can any man doubt but
it is more safe to worship here at Bethel, a place sanctified of old, and so
long continuing; then at Sion, of late so foully polluted by Solomon's gross
idolatry.

10 And me thinks the remembrance of that late impiety, should keep men from
doting so on that place; for it is much to be feared Rehoboam will set up ere
long his fathers religion, who followed strange Gods; seeing he walks
already in his evil way of oppressing the people, and 1 King. 12.3.4.13.14.
could not be brought to ease them at all of any tax or burden, wherewith his
father loded them. As he follows his father in sinning against the people,
so is he like to do in sinning against God. For lo the hie places which
Solomon builded for Ashteroth and Chemosh and Milcom, the idols of the Heathen,
2 King. 23.13.
are left standing still, even before Jerusalem, and on the right hand of the
mount of corruption, and are like there to cont^nue. Which wherefore is it, but
for a snare to the people, that they may fall again to the former sin?

11 I now being King, do hold it my duty to keep al my subjects from such
danger of idolatry; and to look that the true God be served in my Kingdom, lest
men either grow profane, or turn unto vanities. For to go to Jerusalem it may
prove perilous; sure it is 1 King. 12.28.
overmuch for the people that dwell a far off, and seems to me altogether
unreasonable. For may and ought not every Prince and people to serve God in
their own country? Was there any before me, that might not do it; and am I
more in bondage then all? Besides, who knows not the grudge that Rehoboam
has against us, whom of late 2 Chr. 1 1 -- 4.
he would have warred with, if God had not stayed him? Why, he counts me and
my people 2 Chro^ 13.6.
rebels; and if he can get me within his dominion, he will surely cut off my
head, and the heads of many more. And does God, (who Hos. 6
desires mercy rather then sacrifice) require of men thus for to runn upon the
swords ^oint, and endanger their lives without cause, and only for a
circumstance of place? I am not so weak of judgment, as to think it; neither
will I be so unwise as to hearken to these Levites, who kindle the fire of
contention among my subjects, and teach that we all must go up to Jerusalem,
or else we may offer no sacrifice to God. Beleev them that list; I have
otherwise learned the truth of the Law; and trust we shall so serve the Lord at
home, as will please him well enough.

12 For the worship that here we perform unto God, is (for the substance) the
same that himself commanded by Moses. We serve the same God 1 King. 2.28.
that brought us up out of the land of Aegipt: and this is Exodus 20.^.3.
the first and the great commandment on which all other do depend; the keeping
whereof, Psalm. 81.8 ^.10.
has the promise of reward. We offer the sacrifices of beeues and sheep, we
burn incense, pay first fruits and tithes of all we possess; we observe all the
ordinances that our fathers have kept since the world began, and God has
confirmed in his written law for ever. We hold the main article of our Messiah
to come, and of redempt^on from our sins by him; by which faith our ancestors
have pleased God: and unto this he leads us in his Law. In this faith offer
we according to the Law, Lev. 4.4.3.14 -- 20
bullocks for atonement and forgiveness of our sins; a shadow unto us of our
Messiah, who shall be led as an ox to the slaughter, and purge our iniquity by
his own blood. In testimony of this true and catholic faith, I have made these
bullocks 2 King. 12.28.
of gold (similitudes of the greatest sacrifices,) as representations of that
our true sacrifice, the promised Savior whom we expect.

13 If here it be said, we do against God, in making these golden figures;
because he forbids Exodus 2
graven images to be made: the answer is easy, Gods meaning is not to forbid
all images simply, but only idols that have divine worship done unto them.
Such as was that Calfe which our fathers Exodus 3^
made in the wilderness: for they Psalm. 10 19.
worshipped the molten image it self (not God by the image,) but made them Ex.
32.3
Gods of gold, which was against the express Ex. 20.2
words of the Law; yea, they were so gross, as they turned him Ps. 106.^^
their glory, into the similitude of a bullock that eats grass; and verse. 2
forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Aegipt for them. But
God forbid, and far be it from us (good people) that we should thus do. We
worship not the images of our bullocks here, any more then we worshipped the
images of the Cherubims, and other resemblances, in Solomon's Temple: but we
worship God, and him only do we serve, even 1 King. 12.28.
the God that brought us out of Egypt, not any other.

14 Yet some are so hardly prejudiced against me, as they spare not to say, I 2 Chronicles. ^3.8.
have made you these golden calves for Gods, and think that I give the honor
to them, that is due to the eternal and blessed God himself; because
(forsooth) I said, 1 King. 12.28.
Behold thy Gods o Israel. But were I so minded; I should be indeed more
brutish then a calfe my self. What, should I deny the Creator of the world;
the God of all our fathers; the wonders wrought for us in Egypt, and other
places; and turn to these images which are made with men's hands, and think them
very Gods? Far be such a gross conceit, from every true Israelite. Nay, if I
should have attempted any such thing, would you not have stoned me? And as for
my speech in calling them Gods, who is there so simple that knows it not to be
figurative, and very familiar to every man's ears? I am not the first, that thus
has spoken, our fathers before me used often such phrases. When the Angel of
God appeared unto Abraham, he called the place Genesis 22.14.
Jehovahjireh, that is, The Lord sees. Jaakob built an Altar, and called the
place, Genesis 35.7
The God of Bethel: Moses himself made an Altar in the desert, and named it
Exodus 17 15.
Jehovah Nissi, that is, The Lord my banner. Yet none of us, I trow, do think
that they esteemed these places or altars, to be properly Gods. The Ark is
called 1 Samuel 4.21.
the glory of Jsrael; Ps. 78.61
the strength of God; the Ps. 24.7.
King of glory; and (what can be said more) the 1 Samuel 6.20.
holy Lord God. The Lamb is called, Exodus 12.11.
the Lords Passover; and many such like Sacramental speeches, have we and our
ancestors been accustomed unto. What if I should call the pascall Lamb, our
Messiah; because it is a type of him: or the Manna which our fathers did eat,
and water which they drank out of the rock; the body and blood of our Messiah:
should I for this be suspected of Idolatry? My enemies might be ashamed thus
to cavil, and calumniate my honest actions, who have made these visible signs,
for to serve the true God by; and to be but as testimonies of his presence here.

15 And that this is lawful, the Law it self will show: which intends not
the prohibition of all images, but the abuse of them as idols; for so it is
written, Ex. 20.5.
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve them; whereby God explaneth his
mind, which is, that we should make no graven images for to worship them; but
to worship God by them, where is that forbidden? Nay the contrary is evident;
for have we not worshipped God in Jerusalem, and other places, by images; What
are the Ex. 25.18, etc.
golden winged Cherubims upon the Ark, but images, by which both we and our
fathers have honored God. And if any object, that those were made by Moses at
Gods command; but none else may be made by any other: let him look into
Solomon's Temple builded but the other day, and there he shall find 1 King. 6
23, etc.
two new Cherubims of great and high stature, whose wings reach from one end of
the holy place to another; and besides these, all the verse. 29.
walls of the Temple are full of such figures. Perhaps some will say, it is
tolerable to have the shape of Cherubims, as being figures of Genesis 3.24
Angels; but any other forms, especially of beasts is utterly unlawful. Well,
however the Law forbids to make the likeness of Exo. 20.4
things in heaven, as of things in earth, and so the Angels may no more be
pourtrahed then beasts or birds: yet to take away scruple, I refer you to
Solomon's 1 King. 7.25.
twelv oxen, or bulls of brass, which bear up that molten sea, which stands
at the door of the Temple for the Priests to wash in: also to 1 King. 7.29.
the Lions, Bulls and Cherubims wrought upon the ten brazen bases of the
cauldrons, wherein the work of the burnt offerings 2 Chronicles. 4.6.
is washed and cleansed every day. If Solomon in his Temple might make bulls of
brass, is it a sin for me to make such of gold? Tush, these are but the cavils
of these Puritan Priests and Levites, that of a stomach and refractary mind
will not be conformable to my ceremonies; whom therefore I mean 2 Chronicles. 13.9.
to drive out of my country, that they trouble my people no more.

16 Yet will I do my best, to satisfy them ere they go, in whatsoever they
can say against me. To proceed therefore to the time, (another circumstance
which they object, for want of more weighty matter;) they think it much that I
have pro^oged the feast of Tabernacles, until the 1 King. ^.32.
15 day of the 8 month; because it is appointed by Moses to be kept ^ev. 23.39
the 15 day of the 7 month. Herein they still do but strain out a gnat: for
so the thing it self be observed, what skilleth it for the change of the
month? The feasts were made for men, not men for the feasts; and if we keep
them in any meet and commodious time, it pleases God well enough: which I will
further show by the Law it self. When our fathers came out of Egypt, they
kept by Gods commandment the Paschal feast upon Ex. 12.6
the 14 day of the first month; and this was enacted to be an ordinance verse.
24.
for ever. After, it fell out, when a Passover Number. 9.^ -- 5.
was kept in the wilderness, that certain men verse. 6.7.
defiled by a dead man, could not keep it by reason of their uncleanness, and
came unto Moses to know what they should do. He could not tell, verse. 8.
till he had asked the Lord. Then God spoke and said, verse. 10, etc.
If any of you, or your posterity, be unclean, or in a journey, let him keep
the Pascha in the 14 day of the second month. Behold here how God explaineth
his own law, showing that he respects not the month, as though there were
any holiness in it; but if the feast were kept, though a month after, (upon
just occasion,) it should be acceptable: Forasmuch then as we have so pregnant
an example of occasional changing the time, without any sin: me thinks these
men are too too precise; that condemn me, who upon just occasion, and advice
with others, have deferred this feast, a month longer then ordinary.

17 It may be these men, make question of my authority, and think me not the
lawful supreme Governor, under God, of the Church; or that my primacy bears
me not out to alter ceremonies or circumstances in religion: but this I can
sufficiently clear. For I have my kingly office from God the King of kings; 1
King* 11.29, and
he appointed me hereunto by his Prophet, and chose me 1 King* 12.20.
by his people. I am not inferior to any Prince that has been before me. What
though I be not born of kingly blood? neither was David. And what though
Solomon and Rehoboam his son, were possessed of the crown before me? So was
Saul and Ishbosheth his son possessed of it before king David. But God for
Saul's sin, 1 Sa^ 12.28.
gave the kingdom to David his servant, and no man doubts of his lawful
title: so God for Solomon's sin, 1 King. ^1.31.
has given this kingdom to me his servant; and my title is just. Neither go I
beyond my line; I am content with my ten Tribes, let Rehoboam have the rest.
Now being your lawful Prince, o Israel, it lies me upon to see the Church
ordered, as well as the Commonwealth; to make Laws (no^ contrary to the laws
of God,) for the holy and peaceable government of you; to take heed you fall
not to Solomon's idolatry, or follow other Gods. Things substantial and
fundamental; I will in no wise change: circumstances of things, and ceremonies
I may freely change, for they are not permanent or perpetual.

18 And herein I can assure my self and others, by example of DAVID the
beloved of GOD, 1 King. ^1.34.38.
commended to me for his holy walking and upright admistration. He ordered many
things in the service of God, otherwise then he had express warrant for, in
the written Law. He removed the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 13. and 15.
from Kirjathjearim to Jerusalem. He appointed 1 Chr. 16 ^.5, etc.
instruments of music, cimbals, and vials, and harps, etc. whereof there is no
mention in Moses Law. He 1 Chronicles. 23. and 25.
distributed the Levites into their orders and offices, making some singers,
some porters, some assistants to the Priests: yea, and 1 Chr. 24
the sacrifices he set in 24 classes or courses; and where shall we find these
things warranted in the Law? If David then our worthy Predecessor, did thus
order the Church, and alter the ceremonies, by his regal authority: may not I,
which have equal power in my dominions do the like? And Solomon his son,
before he fell from the true God to idols, did many things otherwise then is
written in Moses; and God did allow them. In his famous Temple he had 2 Chronicles.
4.7.8.
ten golden candlesticks, and ten tables; whereas God by Moses, ordained of
each Ex. 26.35
but one. In sted of one laver that Moses made to wash in, Solomon made 2 Chr.
4.6
ten cauldrons; besides that other vessel, which for the hugeness of it, is
called verse. 2.
a sea: with many other differences, which who so compares his works with
Moses writings may easily perceiv. These Priests of Levi are much to be
pitied, that urge so the letter of the Law, which I think they understand not.
They say it is written, Deuteronomy. 4.2
Ye shall put nothing to the word that J command you, nor take ought
therefrom; but they mind not how this intends matters of faith, and
doctrines fundamental, which I willingly grant may in no wise be corrupted:
but ceremonies are variable, and circumstances may be changed upon every just
occasion, as before I have proved, and the practice of my godly predecessors
does approve. Accordingly mean I to retain my liberty, and maintain my
prerogative royal.

19 It rests to be scanned how we shall do for Ministers, if the Priests of
Levi be put away. And for this I 2 Chronicles. 13.9.
am reproched as violating the Law; whereas necessity constrains me to take
other order. I know that Aarons sons are appoinred by Law to do the Priests
office: but the power is in the Church, of whom they had their authority; and
might still administer if they were not so scrupulous. It is then their own
fault that they are deposed, and be it upon them: for we will serve God as did
our fathers, before these Aaronites enjoyed the Priesthood. I find that of
old, the Patriarchs Genesis 12.8 and 13.4.18 etc.
Abraham, Isaak and Jaakob, offered sacrifices themselves, even then when
Melchisedek the Genesis 14*18.19.
Priest of the most high God lived in the land. I find again how Moses did
send Ex. 24.
young men of the children of Israel to offer burnt offerings and peace offerings
to the Lord. How ever therefore for order sake, this work was committed to the
sonns of Aaron, yet hold I it not to be of necessity to salvation, or of the
essence and being of a true sacrifice, that an Aaronite must offer it. But
seeing all the Lords people are holy, yea, a Ex. 19.
kingdom of Priests, as the Lord calls them in his Law: they may (no doubt)
being duly sanctified and consecrate thereto, offer acceptable sacrifices unto
God. And hereof will I have care, that none shall administer 1 King 12.31.
but such as are consecrate; but I will not debar 1 King. 13.33.
any, be he of what Tribe soever, if he be fit otherwise. As for these
refractarie Ministers, the Levites, I will revenge me of them, for they are the
troublers of the State, the boutefeus that set on fire all the country. For
lo, how many people 2 Chronicles 11.16.17*
of all the Tribes of Israel, are ready to leave the land, and run to Rehoboam
in Jerusalem. These men are the cause of all this stur, and faction: their
doctrine impeacheth my supremacy, and disturbeth the peace of the Church.
Wherefore as Solomon 1 Kin. 27
cast out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, because his hand was with
Adonijah: I also by like right, 2 Chronicles. ^1.14.
will cast out these Priests of Levi, whose hands are with my enemy Rehoboam.
So rest and peace shall be unto my self, and to my people.

20 Yet a few words more of the events that are happened; which in their
simplicity many do mistake and abuse against me. The Prophet 1 King. 3.1.
that came out of Judah to Bethel, and gave there a sign; made some for to
think, I had sinned in deed. My self, I confess, was somewhat moved when I
felt verse. 4.
my arm withered: but seriously weighing things after, as they were, I stayed
my thoughts. For first, he came but as any false Prophet, (if God so permit,)
may come at all times; I mean, with sign and wonder, but without word of truth,
to convince the conscience. He verse. 2.
cried against the altar: but showed no law of the Lord to condemn it. He
threatened destruction; but who knows when the day shall come; for no time was
set down; that men may be held with continual expectation. I find in the Law,
that a Deuteronomy. 13 1.2, etc.
Prophet may arise, giving a sign or wonder, which shall come to pass: and yet
his doctrine may be abominable, and God thereby verse. 4.
proves the hearts of his people. The inchanters of Egypt Exodus 7.11.12.
could also do miracles even like unto Moses: yet were they no Ministers of
the Lord. What then though this falser had power to do great things, and
thereupon was hired by the King of Judah to come preach against me, and seduce
my people; no wise man will rest on counterfeit miracles, but will settle his
heart on the Law of God; which that Prophet could not convince me with all (for
then I had yielded,) but sought to get credit by abusing that power, which God
did permit him to have for my trial. The abuse of Gods name cannot go long
unpunished, for it is a great sin: neither escaped this Prophet due vengeance
for his crime; but as he went homeward, he was slain 1 King. 13.24.
by a Lion. Well worthy end, for such as dissemble the message of the most
High. How ever therefore some think of this matter, I am not persuaded he was
a man of God, that came to so fearful a death.

21 But the death 1 Kin. 14
of mine own son Abijah, sat nearer me, and made me look narrowly into mine
actions, till I found indeed whereof to resolve. I sent mine own wife verse. 2.
to Ahijah the Prophet for counsel about him: but the cholerik old man verse. 6.
would not suffer her to speak, but breaking out into heat and menaces, gave
her an answer before she asked. It is easy to see his partial affection; he
leans toward Judah, and speaks with bitterness against me, that never did
him hurt. And were it indeed that I had offended; my fault might be showed me
in love and meekness: which would better beseem the Prophets of God, then this
their distempered carriage. And what was the cause, why he did so threaten me?
even the common calumny that the Jews do give out, for he said, verse. 9^
J had made me other Gods: but how false this is I have showed before; and it
became not his gray head to beleev such reports, and condemn me unheard: I have
not forsaken the Lord my God, but the thing is mistaken by the verse. 4.
blind Prophet, who discerns no better my actions, then he can do colors.
My son is dead and gone, for his day was come: if he were cut off before the
time, it was rather for his vice then for his virtue. The Prophet said there
was verse. 13.
some goodness found in my son, toward the Lord God of Israel; and therefore
he must die. But does the Lord use so to reward them that are good before him?
It is said in the Scripture of wicked men, that they Psa. 55.23
shall not live out half their days: yet now this young man's death is brought
as an argument to prove he was godly. Ahijah, I perceiv, is too old to be 1 Samuel 9.9.
a Seer any longer; else could he not have been so much overseen in this his
new doctrine. Gods law Exodus 20
bids children to honor their parents, that their days may be long in the
land: but this my child had his days shortened; doubtless for disobedience. My
other sonns 1 Chronicles 11.14.
consented to that which I did about religion; and they live and prosper: he
only would be more precise then his brethren, and his honor is laid in the
dust. Thus see I in my house the proverb fulfilled, Pro. 10.^
The fear of the Lord increases the days: but the years of the wicked shall
be diminished. For which I lament, through fatherly affection, but am nothing
moved to leav my religion; nay rather these judgments confirm me therein, for
I see how they that speak against it are cut off. Yea, God himself has been
my Protector, and withheld 2 Chronicles. ^1.2.3.4.
by his Prophet, my enemies of Judah from fighting against me. On him will I
lean, and trust in his name; being fully resolved not to alter my course, but I
and my people to continue as we are, until we lie down in peace.

CHAP. IIII.
A Conviction of Ieroboams impiety.

THese, and the like pretenses many, Jeroboam could allege for to justify his
cause; wherein was only show, but no weight of truth. Yet such is man's
corruption, as he will admit of any color, rather then leav the sin that he
affects: and being in high transgression of the Law, will bear himself upon
the Law, as if it made for him in his iniquity. But as David prayed God, that
he would Psalm. 14.4
not incline his heart to word of evil, to set himself to pretend pretenses
(or forge excuses) in wickedness, with men that work iniquity: so need we all
continually to ask of God this grace; for as of Adam we have learned to
sin, so also for to hide and cloak our sin, and cover our nakedness,
though it be but with fig-leaues. That may be seen in Jeroboam here.

2 For he not having faith in God, nor resting on his promise, (who would be 1
King. 11.38.
with him, and build him a sure house as had builded for David, if he did that
which was right in his eyes:) gave himself to policy, and followed the
wisdom of this world, (which is 1 Cor. 3.19.
foolishness with God;) whereby he fell into vanity, altered and innovated the
ordinances of religion, to the ruin of his house and of his people.

3 The plea how he retained the grounds of true religion, and varied but in
ceremonies; came out of Satan's school, where Gods commands are wont to be
extenuate. The Lord required of his people, entire obedience Deuteronomy. 27 26.
to all and every of his ordinances, among which nothing was to be neglected,
nothing to be counted light or little: for who so breaks Mat. 5.19
one of the least of his precepts and teaches men so, he shall be called the
least in the Kingdom of heaven. The lightest matters in man's account, and
circumstances that he presumes to violate; have in Gods administration procured
heavy doom. As, for the place of public worship, it was enacted, that
whosoever brought not his sacrifice to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, but offered it other where, Lev. 17.3.4.
blood should be imputed to that man, and he should be cut off from among his
people* yea such oblations were esteemed of God, as offered verse. 7.
unto Divils. Likewise for the time; though the Lord Number. 9.10.
dispensed with the unclean and travelers, for keeping the Passover: yet if
any were clean and not in journey, and neglected to keep the feast in the 14 of
the first month; that person was verse. 13.
to be cut off from among his people, because he brought not the offering of
the Lord in his due season. And for the persons that should administer before
God; if any that was not a Levite, and of Aarons line, did minister at the
altar* Number. 18 3.7.
he was to be slain. Therefore Korah (though a principal Levite) was killed of
God, and all that took his part: Number. 16.9.10 -- 32.3^.
for presuming to do the Priests office, whereunto he was not called. Such was
the severity of God against the sins, that Jeroboam and his followers, have
made so light of.

4 Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, being newly entered into the Priests
office, (whereto a many particular observances were annexed,) failed but in one
point, taking strange or common fire to burn incense, in sted of hallowed fire
from the Altar; and behold Lev. 10.1.2.
a fire went out from the Lord, and devoured them. When the Ark of God was in
transporting to Jerusalem, upon a cart, and the oxen shaking it, endangered the
overthrow thereof: Vzzah a Levite that guided the cart, of a good intent to
help the Ark, put forth his hand to hold it; 1 Chronicles. 13.7.10.
but the wrath of the Lord was kindled against him, and he smote him that he
died there, because he laid his hand upon the Ark, which was not lawful for
him to do; God having charged the Levites, Number. 4.5 -- 15.
not to touch the holy things, lest they died. The men of Bethshes^esh, (a
city of Ios. 21.4, 16.
the Priests) when the Ark of God came home unto them out of the Philistims
land, because they looked into the Ark, (which by the Law Number. 4.20.
they might not do;) the Lord 1 Samuel 6.19.
slew of the people of that city, fifty thousand men and three score and ten.
So gealous has God been for the transgression of every rite and circumstance
of his Law: that all might learn to dread him, and have care of his
commandments. Here was no place found for those distinctions of mortal sins
and venial; fundamental and accidental, and other like quirks which the
Serpent and his Seed have invented, to beguile man's heart. The soul that Ezekiel.
18.20.
sins shall die: and sin is every 1 Ioh. 3.4
transgression of the Law; the person that does any sin with a high hand, Number.
15 30.
blasphemeth the Lord, and must be cut off from among his people; for Gal. 3.10
cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them; and Deuteronomy. 27.26.
all the people must say, Amen.

5 The innovation then which Jeroboam brought in by his Kingly power, what
colors soever could be set upon it, was loathsome idolatry. His assembling of
Israel unto Dan and Bethel, was a double sin: a departure from God, and a
schism from his people. From God they departed, by leaving Sion Psalm. 132 13.14.
where he loved to dwell, and which should be his rest for ever. There was his
Ps. 27.8.
face and presence, there was his Deu. 12.5
name; there was his 1 Kin. 9 3
heart and eyes perpetually. There 1 King. 8
was the holy and most holy sanctuary, with the Ark 2 Chronicles. 6.41. Heb. 9*4.5.
of Gods strength, the Tables of the Testament; the memorials of ancient
benefits* the tokens of his love and mercy, and mystery of salvation; in the
pot of Manna; the rod of Aaron; the book of the Law; the Mercy-seat; the
glorious Cherubims, and other Heb. 9.1^
like resemblances of heavenly things, not made by wit of man, 1 Chronicles. 28.19.
by direction and pattern from God himself. So the leaving of these, was the
leaving of God: wherefore Israel now, is said for to be 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
without the true God. Ieroboams calves, made to worship God by, were teachers
of lies: being called 1 King. 12.28.
Gods, as resembling his presence, who was not there; and signifying his
favor, which Hos. 8.13.
was far away: as hallowing the place, where Satan had his throne; and
sanctifying the worshippers, polluted by apostasy. So Ephraim was Hos. 12.1
fed with the wind, and followed after the east wind; for the golden Gods which
Jeroboam made them, were 2 Chronicles. 1.16.
Divils unto God, and so esteemed of his Saints.

6 The schism from their brethren, was a breach of that brotherhood and unity
in faith and love, wherein God had set the twelv Tribes of Israel, to grow up
together as branches of Ezekiel. 37.17.
one tree, and members of Ephesians. 4.4.
one body; whose abiding together, was Psalm. 133
both good and pleasant; but the renting asunder, was a withdrawing Heb. 10.39.
to perdition, because Gods verse. 38.
soul had no plealure in them, that forsook the verse. 25*
mutual gathering together of themselves. As in the former, Jeroboam showed
Eccles. 10 15.
his foolishness, not knowing the way into the City of the Lord: so in this
later he added to his sin, doing that which the Lord did Prove. 6.16.19.
abhor.

7 The pollution of the Temple, is but a pretense: and the sanctity of Bethel,
rather in conceit, then indeed and truth. Solomon's idolatry defiled himself,
and all the partakers; but not the Temple, wherein it never came. Or if it had
come there, yet might it have been purged, as 2 Chr. 29.15.16, etc
it was in days following. Or if it had not been purged, yet could no other
place be hallowed without 1 Chronicles 17.6. 1 Timothy 4.5
the word of God: For who could put his name there, and cause him there to
dwell; but Deu. 12.^
himself? It was not Solomon's sin, that gave Jeroboam right to the Kingdom;
but the 1 King 11.29.31
word of the Lord, in the mouth of the Prophet: neither was it the pollution of
the Temple, (if defiled,) that could warrant the King to build him another; for
God was to appoint both 1 Chronicles* 21.18, and 22.1.
place, and 1 Chronicles 28.2.3.6.
person: and without his Ier. 7.3^
word, nothing is lawful in his service. So sanctity in Bethel there was none
at all; but it was Hos 4.15
Bethaven the house of iniquity. The holiness which had been there of old, was
only by relation unto God that appeared, Genesis 35 ^
and his Word which appointed an altar there; when his presence departed, and
commandment ceased; it was as common as any other place. For this, God ordained
an Exodus 20* 24.
Altar of earth to be made unto him, in the wilderness, and all places where
he should cause his name to be remembered; that at their departure it might be
defaced, not left for superstition.

8 Ieroboams supremacy in the Kingdom of Israel, could not bear him out in
altering the ordinances of the service of God. For he was a subject unto God,
bound Deuteronomy. 17.9.
to his fear, and to keep all the words of his Law, as another man. He that
bears rule over men, must be just (says 2 Samuel 3.3.
the Scripture,) and rule in the fear of God: his heart may Deuteronomy. 17 ^0.
not be lifted up above his brethren, nor he turn from the commandment to the
right hand, or to the left. If he were in a straight, and saw himself in
danger, he should seek counsel of God* and not of his own heart, (as Saul did
of a Witch*) for the heart of man is dec^itfull above all things; and it is a
double evil, Jer. 2.13.
to forsake the Lord, the fountain of living waters, and to dig himself pits
that can hold no water. If he would worship God, he should ask of him how: for
man is ignorant (if the Lord inform him not) what will please him. He left not
to the discretion of Moses or Solomon, (though wise and godly Governors,) any
part or implement of the Tabernacle or Temple, or any of the services in them
used. To Moses he told on the mountain, Ex. 20.22, etc.
the laws and judgments which Israel should observe; he showed him a pattern
of the Tabernacle and things therein, giving him this straight charge, Ex. 25.40
look that you make these things, (even Heb. 8.5.
all things,) after their fashion that was showed thee in the mount; and
according to every point that the Lord had commanded, Exodus 39 42.43.
so provided he the work to be made, disposed of, and ordered, Ex 40.10
19.21.23.25.27.29.32.
as the Lord had commanded Moses.

9 David, with the other Prophets that assisted him in ordering the
Ecclesiastical estate, and providing for the Temple; had their commandments
also 2 Chronicles. 29.25.
by the hand of the Lord; and he gave to Solomon his son, (when he charged him
to build the Temple) a 1 Chronicles. 28.11.12.13, etc.
pattern of the porch and of the houses, closets, galleries and chambers
thereof, (and the pattern of all that he had by the spirit) and for the courses
of the Priests and Levites, and for all the work for the service of the house
of the Lord, and for all the vessels of ministration; the weight also of gold
for the candlesticks, tables, and other instruments; verse. 19.
all by writing sent unto him, by the hand of the Lord. Thus was there nothing
left to their own will or wisdom: both matter and form of all things about
Gods service, was set down by God himself. Yea and at first, when it was in
David's 1 Chronicles. 28.2. etc.
heart to build him a house; he durst not attempt it, without 1 Chronicles. 17.1, etc.
consent of the Prophet: and being forbidden of God, he desisted.

10 But Jeroboam would do things out of 1 King. 12.33.
his own heart; and that was his sin. He took verse. 28.
counsel, but it was of men, not of God, nor of his testimonies, which had
been David's Ps. 119.24
counselors: therefore Hos. 10.6
shame did take Ephraim, and ashamed was Israel of his own counsel. He made 1
King. 12.31.
house of high places; but 1 Chronicles. 17.6.
spoke the Lord any one word unto about this matter? Nay Israel, (as the
Prophet Hos 8.14
says) forgot their Maker when they builded temples: therefore Amos 7.9.
their temples were destroyed. He appointed places for public worship at
Bethel and Dan; but did the Lord Deu. 12.5
chose them (as Moses says) to put his name there, and there to dwell? Nay,
they Hos. 12.14.
provoked God with their high places, therefore their blood was poured upon
them: they Hos. 5.6.
went with their sheep and with their bullocks to seek the Lord, but they found
him not, he withdrew himself from them. He made altars, Hos. 8.1^
but they were unto sin. He made pourtratures of bullocks; but gave God him any
pattern or precept, as he gave 1 Chronicles. 28.18.
unto Solomon? Wherefore their bullocks did Hos. 8.5.
cast them off; Gods anger was kindled against them. He made a feast; but in
the month 1 King. 12.33.
which he had forged of his own heart: therefore God Amos 5.21, and ^.10
hated and abhorred their feast days, and would not smell in their solemn
Assemblies; but turned their feasts into mourning, and all their songs into
lamentation. He ordained them Priests; but their Number. 17.8.
rods had never budded, neither had they Deu. 33.8
Vrim and Thummim in their breasts. Himself 1 King. 13.1.
went up to the Altar to burn incense; but it was with Lev. 10.1
Nadabs fire. He offered sacrifices to the God 1 King. 12.28.
that brought them up out of Egypt; but God spoke not to their fathers, when
he brought them out thence Ier. 7.22.23.
concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices: but commanded them this, obey my
voice and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk ye in all the
ways which I have commanded you, that it may be well with you. This God, did
Jeroboam 1 King. 14.9.10.
cast behind his back; therefore evil came upon his house. He pretended ease
to the people, that they should not go so 1 King. 12.28.
far as to Jerusalem; but they went verse 30.
even to Dan, a city Judge. 18.28.29.
remote, in the furthest part of the land. So turned they their backs upon the
Nehem. 11.1.
holy City, where the Tabernacle Psa. 76.2
of God, and his dwelling was; and sought to the possession of the Genesis 36.^.6.
handmaids child, polluted of old by Judge. 18.30.31.
public idolatry therein erected, and long continued: whose Idol, Jeroboam now
renews, doing 1 King. 14.9.
evil above all that were before him. Thus Ephraim Hos. 5.3.
is become a harlot, Israel is defiled.

11 And although God sent his Prophets 1 King. 13, and 14.
with the word of power, to reprove Ieroboams iniquity; yet hardened he his ha^t
as did Pharaoh* no threatening dismayed him; no sign or miracle drew him to
repentance. But he scorned the Prophets, eluded Gods judgments, perverted his
actions, and pleased himself in his evil way, because of his outward peace:
not minding how often times the righteous Esaias 57.1
are taken away from the evil to come, when wicked men are Job. 21.30.
kept unto the day of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of
wrath. Yet could not this King be Pro. 12.3
established by wickedness; his idolatry was his overthrow; for as a harlot it
Pro. 2.16
flattered him with words, and drew him to forget the verse. 17.
covenant of his God; so went he unto her verse 19.
and returned not again, neither took hold of the ways of life; but Pro. 5.23
dying without instruction, and going astray through his great folly, when 2 Chronicles. 13.20.
the Lord plagued him and he was dead, Nadab his son was soon 1 King. 15 25.27.
killed in conspiracy, and after him, verse. 29.
all Ieroboams house, the remnant whereof, 1 King. 14.10.
was swept away as doung, till all was gone; the verse. 11.
dogs eating him that dyed in the city, and the fowls of the aier, him that
dyed in the field: for the Lord had said it.

CHAP. V.
Of the Idolatry of these times, far exceeding Ieroboams.

IT is the manner of men to be more equal and indifferent judges of other
times then of their own: the sins and sinners that are past and gone, we
readily blame; but though the like or worse be in our days, we have not either
skill to discern, or courage to condemn them. We can easily say, as did the
Pharisees; Math. 23 ^0.
If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partners
with them in the blood of the Prophets: and yet upon every occcasion we also
are ready to fulfill verse. 32.^4.35.
the mesure of our fathers, walking in their sins, resisting, blaspheming,
persecuting all that speak against us for so doing. Example hereof see in the
Christian Church, after the idolatry and overthrow of Israel: for so far have
we been from taking heed by their evils, as we have added unto all their sins;
and it was but a little which they then did, in respect of the huge mass of
abominations that has since been heaped up, even Rev. 18.4
unto heaven.

2 And first the frame and constitution of the Church, has quite been changed
from the pattern given of God, confirfirmed by Christ's blood, and erected by
his Apostles in all Nations. For lo the man of sin has joined together many
Parishes into one Diocese, and many Diocecess into a Provincional, and many
Provincionall into one National; and many national into one Ecumenical or
Catholic Church; of which he himself will be the most holy Father, the
Bridegroom, Lord, Pastor, Rector, and Rock. Of which Catholic society so
combined, we find no record in the holy Apostles Writ, where every
Congregation of the Saints, is See Epistles to the Churches i^ Rome, Corinth,
Ephesus, and the rest.
showed in every City to be complete in it self, a Church and 1 Cor. 1^*27.
body of Christ, furnished with his 1 Cor. 5.^
power and Math. 1^* 20.
presence; every one under the guidance of Act. 2^*17.28. Phil. ^.1. Act. 14.2
many Bishops; and not all under the government of one: joined altogether 1
Pet. 5.
in brotherhood, through Ephesians. 4.^ Ioh. 17.21
faith, love and obedience of the spirit, but not in one visible catholic
Church, with a visible Head or Vicar, Lord, Papa, Patriarch or Archpastor; but
only Christ himself Rev. 2, and 3, chap.
walking among them, overseeing their ways and works, and approving or
reprooving them.

3 This pseudocatholike Church, or false Ecclesiastical Monarchy, is an idol
or beast, bred in the bottomless pit, surpassing all the abominations that
ever stood up in the land of the living: and had for the parent of it, the
Dragon or Divill, Rev. 1* ^
that old Serpent, who used his most utmost skill, cuning and craft, to beget
and bring forth this his foulest child. It had also of the gravest and
learned Divines in their ages, to nourse it with the milk of humane
superstition; and the Princes of the earth to endow and adorn it, with the
riches and jewels of all worldly glory: that when this Iezebel showed her self
on the stage of the world; she made all men astonished at her majesty,
enamoured the Nations with her beauty, bewitched them with her sorceries, and
made them drunken with the wine of her fornications. The forest of Rome was
the high place, where this 1 King. ^.13.
Miphletseth, or idol of horror, should have her seat; for there grew many
fair trees, whose shadow Hos. 4.13
was good to burn incense under: and there before time had other beasts been
hatched and honored, whose Rev. 13.^.
image in this place must have reverence still.

4 And here the mystery of iniquity wrought contrary to Ieroboams, prevailed
more, and continued longer: For he in policy to settle his Kingdom, schismed
or rent the Church in twain, which God had conjoined in one: King. 12.
but Abaddon, the king and patron of this our idol, will have his false Church
resemble Bellar. d^ Romans Pont. lib. 1, cap. 7*
the polity of Israel in monarchical unity, to allure and gather all people
hereunto. But as Ieroboams counsel was divelish to divide without God: so is
Romes doctrine Satanean, to conjoyn without Christ. The Church then was
confined Psalm. 76.
within one little land, whose assembly was annual Psalm. 122, and 132.
in the earthly Jerusalem, where the high Priest remained to reconcile them to
God: but now the Church Catholic is dispread Math. 2^ 19.
over all, Jerusalem our mother Gal. 4.26
is above, and Christ our high Priest is Heb. 8.1.2, and 9.24.
in the very heaven, there interceding for us unto God. And for any one City
to be as Jerusalem, the place of resort for all Saints on earth: or for any
Archpriest, or Vicar of Christ, to be his vicegerent, and rule in his sted:
he never appointed, neither entered it into his heart; but it is the excrements
of the Popes wit, whereby in policy he would maintain the pomp and magnificence
of his Diana; and in her, his own pontificality.

5 And that this Lady might be made of Ezekiel. 27, 4.
perfect beauty, her friends have devised to paint her face with this
vermilion, that the goddess, the B^llar* de Eccl. mi^i^* l. 3, c. 14.
CHRCH absolutely cannot err, either in things absolutely necessary, or in
other things which she proposes to be believed or done of us, whether they be
found expressly in Scriptures, or not. Hereupon she trusting Ezekiel 16 15.
in her own beauty, takes a pride and power, to Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c.
16.
make Laws Ecclesiastical, to bind and constrain men's consciences; charging
and obliging us, to The. Test. 1 Timothy 3, sect. 9.
beleev and trust her in all things. So this Idol of indignation, (being crept
into Esa. 33.22 Iam. 4.12.
Gods throne, to be Judge and Lawgiver,) surmounteth far Ieroboams dumb calves,
which had mouths and spoke not: for this image can speak, because she Rev.
13.15.
has a spirit; and exacteth worship of the inhabitants of the earth, that all
should Conc. Trident. Sess. 22. c. 8.
adore her, as mother, and mistress of all the Churches; receiv, beleev and
obey her word, constitutions, canons, commandments, doctrines and decrees,
without contradiction; because the truth of the faith as touching us, relyeth
upon the Bellar. de Eccles milit. l. 3. c. 14
Churches authority, and whatsoever the Church allows is true, whatsoever she
disallowe^^, is false: and her word, Bellar. de ^erb. Dei, l. ^. c. 10.
is not altogether man's word, that is to say subject to error, but after a
sort the word of God. Out of this smoky furnace, have come the many heresies
and whoorish doctrines of Free will, merit of works, limbus, purgatory,
pardons, indulgences, vows, prayer to and for the dead, penance, pilgrimages,
auricular confession, and extreme unction, with sundry other like; which by
this Churches supreme authority, have been concluded Catholic, Orthodox and
Authentical. Who sees not now that Ieroboams Church, was but a Babe to this
Beldam; for she had no such sovereignty over men's souls, taught no such
doctrines, neither made she any decrees till Omri was King (whose praise in the
Scripture is this, that he did 1 King. ^ 16.25.
worse then all that were before him;) and he indeed made Mic. 6.1^
statutes which were observed in Israel; though nothing so many or so imperious
as the mistress of Rome has made.

6 This Rev. 18.7.
Qeen being thus set aloft on the high places of the earth, is far taller then
the golden image Dan. 3.^
that Nebuchadnezar set up in the plain of Dura; for her hand and scepter
reaches up unto heaven, where she rules among the canonized Saints; and the
very tail of her Rev. 17. and 12.4.
beast whereon she rides, can draw down the stars unto the earth. This is the
woman whom Rev. 17.3
John saw in the wilderness, arrayed in purple and scarlet, and gilded with
gold and precious stones and pearls, with a golden cup in her hand, full of the
filthiness of her fornication; even the verse. 18.
great city ( Rome) then reigning over the Kings of the earth. From this
common mother, (as her Council. ^ident. ^ss. 18.
children do entitle her,) came all the bastard idols into the Christian
world: for she being Rev. 17.1
a whore, sitting upon many waters, that is, verse. 15.
peoples, multituds, nations and tongues; she was Eze. 23.5
set on fire with her lovers the neighbor nations; that verse. 17.
came to her into the bed of love, and defiled her with their fornication; (for
they went in unto her verse. 44.
as they go to a common harlot;) and she Psalm. 106.^.36.
learned their works, and served their idols, which will be her ruin.

7 Of the Jews she has received Bellar. de ^om. Pont. ^1. c* 9.
one high Priest, (not Jesus Christ the true High Priest entered into the
heavens, but a supposed vicar of his, having Rev. 13.^.
two horns like the Lamb;) to be the chief Governor and Monarch
Ecclesiastical: and he enters Durand. ^tio^al. l. 6 75.
once a year into the most holy of the Popish Church, as the other did into the
most holy of the Jewish Tabernacle. From the glorious attire Ex. 2^.2.4.40.
of Aaron and his sons, as Ephod, Robes, Girdles, etc. she has learned to deck
her Durand ra^ l. 3. c. ^
Priests with cops, surplices, stoles, girdles, amices, al^s, and other like
ornaments. She imitateth their Ark, which had the Tables of the covenant; with
Durand l. 1. c. 2.
her ark or tabernacle the Pix, which has the Sacrament of the Eucharist:
their candlestick and seven burning lamps; with Durand l. 1. c. 1.
her candles, torches, tapers: their Number. 1^ 9, etc.
sprinkling water of purification; with her Durand. l. 1, c. 7.
holy water: and in many other particulars, of Temple, Altar, Oil, Laver, Fire,
etc. As the same Durand shows in that book.
she follows her footsteps, and Iudaizeth more then did the false Teachers in
the Galat. 4* 9.10. Col. 2.16.
Apostles days. Which things in Israel had their holy use and end, until
Christ came in the flesh: but since are dead and abolished, as Gal. 4.9. Col.
2.20.
beggarly worldly rudiments; though this whore-mother of Rome reviveth them by
her Art, and for her fleshly pleasure; whiles her self and her friends go a
whoring after these Jewish ceremonies.

8 But she had not her fill, by defiling her self with Jews: therefore she
sought to take her pleasure of the Gentiles round about her, far and near; and
decked her bed with all their abominations. And first she fell in love with
Aegipt; where Israel of old committed fornication* and had the Eze. 23.8
breasts of her virginity bruised. For whereas the Aegiptians commingled the
Kingdom and Priesthood; the Civil Magistracy, and the Ecclesiastical
Ministry in one person; and would have all their Kings to be also Priests, as
Plato in Politic.
Writers do record: with this goodly invention, the whore of Rome is
enamoured, and joyneth, or confounds the Magistracy and Ministry, Princedom
and Priesthood, in the persons of her Popes, Cardinals, Bishops and other
Church Princes. And although God in the Law distinguished the office of the
King and Priest, constituting one in Genesis 49.10. 1 Chr. 5.2.
the Tribe of Judah, the other Number. 18 1, -- 7.
in Levi; so as one might 2 Chr. 27 16.17.18.19.
not intermeddle with that which belonged to another: and Christ in the Gospel
has plainly Mat. 20.25* 26. Luke 22.25.26.
forbidden his Ministers to have the authority or titles of pol^tick Princes*
yet pleads this Babylonish Queen, that it is not against Gods word Bellar. de
Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 9.
for one man to be a Prince Ecclesiastical and Political together; and so she
and her daughters practice to this day. In which point, she is more abominable
and polluted now professing Christianity, then she was of old when she
professed Paganism; for the hethen Priests or Flamins in Rome, were not
permitted to have any Migistracie; because (as the Plutarch. Quest. Ro^.
Philosopher by light of reason reasons,) it could not be, (the actions of
these offices being so diverse and different,) that one man should perform both
at one time; but needs it must fall out, when both duties were to be done
together, that one should be omitted; and so sometimes God not to be duly
served, sometimes the Civil state should suffer damage.

9 Again this Romish Babylon doreth on the ordinances of Babel in Chaldea* for
as there they Ier. 10* 3 -- 9.
had images of silver and gold, wood and stone, to which Isa. 44.15
they bowed and worshipped; and which were representations of the Gods and
Saints whom they adored, to weet of Isa. 4^.1
Bell (which was Herod^t. Clio.
Jupiter,) and Nebo, and 2 King. 17.30.
Succothben^th, and other the like: even so has idolatrous Rome ordained to
have in her temples, Council. Trident. Sess. 25.
images of Christ, of the virgin Mary, and of other Saints, which idols must
have their due honor and worship, because the honor which is given to them,
is referred to the prototypes whom they do represent. And these abominations
she Council. ^id. ibid.
kisseth, as idolaters of old, were wont to Hos. 13.2
kiss the calves; lights Tapers before them, as the Babylonians did Baruch.
^^.
candles before their images; censeth them, as the Heathen Romans were wont to
do Cicero. ^ffic. l. 3.
their statues; kneeleth, falls down, and prays before them, saying
Catechis. one. Trid. ^act. de O (...). Tit.
Our Father, etc. as idolaters of old, Quis oran^us sit. Jer. 2.27.
said to a tree thou art my father, and to a stone, thou have begotten me.
Teaching her children further, that these Bellar. de ^mag. l. 2. c. 21.
images are to be worshipped, not only by accident or unproperly, but also by
themselves and properly; so as they do terminate or end the worship, as they
are considered in themselves, and not only as they bear the part of the
examplar or person represented: yea saying of an image, Synod. Nicen. 11. Act.
4.
This is Christ; as paynims said of theirs, Isa. 44 17
Thou art my God. But woe unto them ( Hab. 2.19*
from the Lord) that say to the wood awake; to the dumb stone, rise up. Herein
this Catholic Church exceeds the devotion of Jeroboam son of N^bat, who
worshipped by the Calves, 1 King. 12.28.
^he God which had brought them out of Egypt, and not any other Saints, much
less the images themselves. Yea in this kind, she passes sundry of the
Heathens, and her own Predecessors; for Licurgus the Lawgiver of Lacedemonia,
and institutor of many ceremonies; Alexand. ab Alexandr. l. 2, c. 22.
ordained no images in his Religion; but forbad the forms of men, or other
living creatures to be given to the Gods. Apollonius a Philosopher, Philostr.
de vita Apollon. l. 6, c. 9.
found fault with the foolish and absurd images in many places, and thought it
more honorable if the Gods had no images at all. The Persians had Herod. Clio.
no images, for they thought it a madness to worship God by such. The Germans
in their paynisme Corn. Tacit. de mor. Germ.
held it unlawful to paint their Gods on walls: or express them in any humane
shape. And Numa, the King of the antique Romans Plutarch. in Numa.
forbad them to think that the image of God, had the shape of a man, or form of
other living creature. Yet Rome that now is, allows Bellar. de imag. Sanct.
l. 2, c. 8.
the image of God the Father, in form of an ^ld man; and of the Holy Ghost in
form of a dove. Though the holy Prophet inveighing against this vanity,
demands, Isa. 40.18
To whom will ye liken God, or what similitude will ye set up unto him? And
though the learned Varro in August. de ^ivit. Dei, l. 4. c. 31.
Heathen by light of nature, approved the practice of ancient Rome worshipping
the Gods without any images almost two hundred years; and blamed those that
first brought in images, as authors of error, and causes of impiety: yet such
is the love of this whorish Church to these teachers H^b. 2.18
of lies, the counterfeits of God; as she adoreth the^, or the divill in them,
to fulfill that which is written of her, that men would Rev. 9.20
not repent of the works of their hands, and of the worship of divils, and
idols of gold and of silver, and of brass and of stone, and of wood, which
neither can see, neither hear nor go.

10 In another point also, has our Babylons zeal, surpassed Jeroboams, to
weet, in her Clergy, and multitude of Church officers. For Jeroboam had none
but simple 1 Kin. 12.31.
Priests, to say and do the Divine service in his high places: But our Iezebel
has founded Priests and Arch-priests, Lord Bishops and Archbishops, Deans and
Archdeacons, Suffragans, Cardinals* Patriarch^, and Popes; Abbots, Friars,
Monks, Seminaries, Jesuits, and a number more Chemarims, her Ecclesiastical
senate, to guard her throne, to fight her battles, to retail her wares, and to
satisfy by them her superstitious lust, which has been even insatiable, as
was Ezekiel. 16 28.29.
the whores of Israel. And Priapus the Pope is Bellar. de Pont. l. 2. c. 31.
bridegroom of this spowse, and has preeminence over all, to power out his
fornications upon her, by his doctrines, canons, rites, ceremonies, decrees and
decretals: for he is Bellar. d^*
head of this Church, and Prince of the Priests, Father and Doctor of all
Christians, and Bishop universal: who Bellar. d^ Pont. l. 4. c. 3.
when he teaches the whole Church in things pertaining to faith, cannot err by
any hap or chance; and Ibid. c. 5*
not only in matters of faith, but in precepts of manners also, prescribed to
the whole Church, he cannot err: and his wife the catholic church Ibid. c. 1*
has always believed, that he is a true Ecclesiastical Prince in the whole
Church, who can of his own authority, without consent of the people or counsel
of the Priests, make laws which bind the conscience, can judge in causes
ecclesiastical, as other judges do, and punish also the disobedient. And his
lawyers have born men in hand, that this Pope may dispense against ^. q. 1.
^icunq. gloss.
the Law of God, and against 5. q. 6. ^orit. In (...).
the law of nature; even with the Precepts of the old and new Testament; (
Sum. Angel. in dict. Pap.) that his bare will must Extra de ^sc. epis^. ^anto,
in ^ssa.
be holden for a law; and whatsoever he does, no man may Extra de ^ces* Preb.
oposuit. gloss.
say to him, why do you this? And whosoever obeys not his precepts, Did.
81. qui sunt ^ gloss.
incurreth the sin of idolatry. Finally, to lift up their blasphemy to the
highest, they honor him with this title, Cum inter (...) gloss.
our Lord God the Pope. And although this Romish Synagogue has received some
of her jolly Church Prelates, with their exorbitant power, by imitation of her
Heathenish Predecessors Romulus and Numa Pompilius, (...). Ioh. 22 (...)
Livius. 1.
who made Flamins, Arch-flamins, and a Pontifex Maximus to sacrifice unto the
Gods; and some of their ceremonies from other Infidels, as the shaving of
Priests crowns, like Hieron. ^ Ezekiel. 44 ^0.
the Priests of Isis and Scrapis in Egypt: yet neither, antique Rome, nor
Aegipt, nor Babylon, nor any nation in the world, ever founded such a pompous
Hierarchy, such store and varity of Divines, Friars, Priests, Prelates, and
religious persons, as this latter Babylon; whose clergy flies about like a
cloud of Locusts, to molest the world; and came Rev. 9.
out from the deep of the bottomless pit.

11 As be her deep Divines, so is her divine service, above all that ever
superstition hatched in any age. For as it is in Genesis 11
Babels language, an unknown tongue, so is it an idol wholly made (as the
Scripture speaks) Hos. 13.^
according to her own understanding, and is all the work of the craftsmen, the
Prelates and Popes, the lovers of this whore, who have patched together in their
several ages, the limms of this deformed monster, the Mass and Canon thereof,
(a Council. Trident. Sess. 22. c. ^
sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead,) with the Letanie and
Collects, Anthemes and Responds, hymns and songs; some of the canonical
Scriptures, and some of apocryphal writings of men; and in this Leitourgie God
and his Angels, and Apostles, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and he Saints, and
she Saints, (and some that had Satan's sanctity,) are wrapped up together in a
longsome stage-like worship, with organs and music to make them all merry; as
Dan. 3.^
Nebuchadnezar with melody celebrated the dedication of his golden image.
Which portesse and Missal, these artizens have framed, not by example of God in
the Law, who prescribed no such leitourgie by Moses or the Prophets; nor of
Christ in the Gospel; nor of Jeroboam and Israel of old, for they forged no
such idol; nor of the Turks at this day, who have no such written worship; nor
of the Heathens of old, that I ever heard of: but it is their own device and
forgerie, provoking God most high to jealousy and wrath.

12 But above all these sins, and beyond all wickedness that ever was invented
in any age; this catholic mother ( Ezekiel. 16.23.
woe woe unto her says the Lord God) has made her a God, not of gold and
silver, but of a wafer cake, by a charm of Hoc est ^nim corpus ^neum.
five Latin words: and this transubstantiated idol, she falls down before,
and adoreth as her Maker* anathematizing and cursing all that shall deny this
idol of indignation to be adored with Cultu latriae Council. Trid. Sess. 13,
can. 6.
the highest degree of worship, which is proper to God himself; for it is her
God, as she sings in her Roman missall, Rithmus ^. Thomae ^d sacr. Eucharist.
Plagas sicut Thomas non intueor:
Deum tamen meum te confiteor.
Wounds as Thomas did, I do not see:
Yet do I confess thee my God to be.
And this breaden God, her children eat, even flesh, blood and bones, (more
vile then Canibals,) and devour their maker, (even Brist. Motiv. 2^
their Lord and their God,) in their own carnal conceit; vanishing in their
vanity more then the Hethens, who thought Cicer. (...) not. Deor* l. 3.
none was so witless as to beleev, that that which he eats is a God.

13 And further to manifest her madness unto all men, this insatiable whore
doteth on and adoreth the Divils own engine, the Cross or Gibbet whereby he
killed Christ the Savior of the world. For the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.^
was to be done away by a cursed death upon a tree, on which, who so was
hanged, Deuteronomy. 2^ 23.
the curse of God was upon him. This death the innocent Lamb CHRIST JESUS
suffered for our sakes at the hands of wicked sinners, Pilate and the Jews, the
children Job. 8.4
of the divill; who used all exquisite torments to make his death miserable,
crowning him with thorns, peircing his hands, feet and side* with nails and
spear, and hanging him on a tree, to do him die. And this tree, these thorns,
nayls, yea other counterfeits of them, are for killing of Christ, honored of
these Babylonians, with as good a ground and devotion, as the Ophites, or
Serpentaries, are Orig. cont. ^elsun. l. 6.
said to honor the Serpent, the divils instrument for to bring man Genesis 3.
to the knowledge of good and evil. And that all the world might take notice
that Rome is Rev. 11.8
the city where our Lord was crucified, the Romanists do proclaim, Bellar.
de ^ag. sanct. 2, c. 27.
that the cross was the Altar, whereon the great sacrifice Christ was offered:
whereas the Scripture teaches that the bodies Lev. 16.27
of those beasts whose blood was brought to make reconciliation in the holy
place, were burnt without the host of Israel; (and not on the Altar, Ex. 40.6
which stood "before the door of the Tabernacle;) according to which figure,
Heb. 13.1.12.
Jesus also (that he might sanctify the people with his own blood,) suffered
without the gate of Jerusalem, which was a verse. 13.
reproach. Yet will these God-eaters, and crucifiers of our Lord, make the
cursed cross to be the Exo. 40.^.
altar most holy, and so greater then Christ the sacrifice, as being that which
sanctified him, for the Math. 23 ^^.
Altar sanctified the offering. And hereupon they Officium
call the cross blessed, and ascribe unto it worthiness to bear the talent of
the world; S. crucis. ^ crux. ben^^dicta, qu^ sola fuisti digna portare talent
^ mundi, and ^
they Bellar. a^ imag. l. 2. c. 26.^
account it among the most precious relics, and not only the whole, but
every piece thereof; they adore it, salute it, pray unto it, and trust therein
for salvation, crying; Brev. Romans Sabb^ in hebdom 4. quadrages.
Haylo cross our only hope, increase thou to the godly righteousness, and
unto sinners give pardon; Jb. infes^ invent. and exalt. S. c^ucis.
Save thou the company, gathered together in thy praises. Yea, the very sign of
this idol made in the aier, upon the forehead, or over any other thing, is
Bellar. (...) imag. l. 2, c. 29.
sacred and venerable, has force to drive away Divils, and do many like
feats. Wherefore this abomination has prevailed above other, and is like
Beelzebub Prince of the Divils, the badg of the beast and character of
Antichrist, imprinted in Churches, Chapels, Altars, houses and highways; in
books and writings, in word, prayers, sacraments, in garments, bodies and
souls of men, both quick and dead, and other creatures: nothing is well
hallowed without it, no As sait^ Pope Steve^ 5, D. Con^ d. 5. Nunquid.
Sacrament perfect without it. This great honor has the cross, because the
Divill killed our Savior by it: so that marvel it is, how Judas lips escaped
honor, seeing he also was Satan's instrument to betray Christ with a kiss.
Wherefore this spiritual Rev. 11.8
Egypt, the pseudocatholick church, deserves more to be branded by some
Satyrist, for worshipping monsters, then the first Egypt, whose less impiety
Quis nes* ^it Volusi ^ithinice ^ualia de^ens ^giptus ^ortenta ^olat? etc.
^uvenal. Sat. 15.
a heathen Poet did deride.

14 Moreover, to fill up her cup with abominations, this Witch has learned of
the old idolaters to worship Ier. 44.17
the Queen of heaven. For by her power fetched out of the bottomless pit, she
deifieth, or rather defiles the blessed Virgin Mary, with unsufferable
blasphemies; intitling her Lady, Queen and Epist. ^ ^emb. Leo. ^0, nom. ^ri^.
l. 8. ^ist. 1^.
Goddess; hayling her for Offic. B. Mariae re^ormat.
Queen of heaven, Lady of Angels, mother of grace and mercy; life, sweetness,
hope, and what not: and together with her, she invocateth the Angels, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Popes, Bishops, Virgins, etc. and prays God, that Ibid.
O^^t. propr. de ^^nctis.
by the merits and prayers of her Popes, she may be delivered from the fire of
hell.

15 And as the Heathens had their Gods and Goddesses of diverse ranks, Apu^e^us
(...) de Deo ^ocratis.
supreme, inferior, and middle ones called Daemones, by whom as by mediators
and intercessors, they thought men's desires and merits did come unto God: so
has this synagogue of Satan Div^s and Divas, Saints of all sorts, whom she
has Bellar. d^ sanct. l. 1. c. 7.
canonized, to be called upon in her public prayers; to have temples, altars,
feast days, dedicated and kept unto their memory, and many other honors;
acknowledging them to be mediators between God and men; and has dealt with
these Divi, as the ethnicks did with their Dij and Daemones. For as each
country and city among them had their special Gods or Goddesses to protect
them; as for Ephesus, Diana; for Athens, Minerva; for Paphos, Venus; for
Delphos, Apollo; for Rome, Remus and Romulus; for Babel, Bell; for Aegipt, Isis
and Osyris; and the rest in like manner: so the mother of Rome, in stead of
tutelar gods, has got her self Peter and Paul, has procured and appointed S.
George for England, S. Andrew for Scotland, S. Patrik for Ireland, S. Denis for
France, S. James for Spain, S. Martin for Germany, (insted of Mars their antiqu
patron;) the three Kings for Colen; and so for others. Moreover she has
Iodicus and Vrbanus for corn and wine, as the Heathens had Ceres and Bacchus.
Her Mariners now have S. Nicol. and S. Christop. to be their Pilots, as the
ancient Pagans had Castor and Pullux. Her Scholars now have S. Gregory and S.
Katherine to sharpen their wits, as Poets of old, had Apollo and Minerva.
Physicians and Chirurgians now are aided by Cosmas and Damian, as of old by
Aesculapius. S. Wendlin wardeth the sheep, as Pan the shepherds God was wont:
and other artizens have their special Patrons to pray and trust unto; and
beasts their several guardians: not so much but the very whores have Mary
Magdalen and Afra to sacrifice unto, if they will, as alder days had Venus and
Flora: and almost every disease, has a special Saint appointed for Surgeon.
And thus is fulfilled that which is written, 2 King. 17.15.
They followed the Heathens that were round about them, concerning whom the
Lord had charged them that they should not do like them. Yea the Heathens do
come short in their count of tutelar Gods, with this catholic whore; and she
excedeth those of whom it is written, Ier. 11.31
according to the number of thy Cities are thy Gods o Judah, and according to
the number of the streets of Jerusalem, have ye set up altars of confusion.

16 As for Jeroboam, he dares not show his face before this beast his
successor; for his inventions compared with hers, are not one to a thousand.
What were his two Calves to the infinite images of this strumpet? Nay her Lambs
of wax, are more worth then his Hos. 10.^
kowes of gold: for every immaculate Agnus Dei, or Lamb of God, that this Witch
makes of Virgin wax and holy water, has Sacra. c^^rem. eccle^ Romans l. 1, ^
Tit. 7.
the same virtue against all divilish wiles and guiles of the malignant spirit;
that the innocent Lamb Jesus Christ, delivered our first father Adam with, from
the power of the Divill. But Jeroboam doubtless had no skill at all, to make
such idols of proof. Again he forged but one 1 King. 1^ 32.33.
feast out of his own heart, to make merry with his images once in a year:
whereas this our purple Queen, has made many more holy days then there be
months (that I say not weeks) of the year, in honor of her Lady and all her
Saints: and these, some of them, correspondent to the Paynim festivities: as
Christmas, Candlemas, Fasgon or Shrouetide, according to the times and customs
of the Gentiles Saturnall, Februal and Bacchus feasts. For unless it be, she
would imitate Heathens; she can hardly show any cause at all, why she
celebrateth her Christmas in the end of December, and her feasts at answerable
times: seeing in all likelihood Christ was born Beroald. Chron. l. 4. ^. 2.
in September rather then in December; but herein the Churches authority which
cannot err, must bear out all lies and forgeries. Unto these she has added
fair temples, high altars, and other devotions more then can be told, much more
effectual then were Ieroboams. For his chapels and high places were simply to
worship God in: but whersoever any of our Iezebels Churches be, Pontific. Ord
de dedec. and consec. Eccl.
it is surely no other then the house of God and gate of heaven. And needs must
it so be, seeing it is hallowed with exorcised or conjured salt, water, ashes,
and wine, which have virtue so to consecrate that Church, as that it may Ibidem.
drive away all the Divils tentations; every fancy, wile and wickedness of
divilish fraud, every unclean spirit, and power of the enemy, and to root out
the Feind himself with his apostaticall Angels: and also by the merit of the
Virgin Mary and N. the Saint unto whose honor and name the Church is founded,
and of all other Saints, God is entreated to visit that place, and by infusion
of his grace to purify it from all pollution, and to conserv it being
purified, and that spiritual wickednesses may flee from thence. Which being
granted, (as cannot, I think, but be by so many Saints intercessions) it is
impossible now that any idolatry should be committed in such a Sanctuary; whose
Ibidem.
first stone is laid by a Bishop, in the faith of Jesus Christ, that the true
faith and fear of God and brotherly love, may there flourish. Such powerful
works as these, none of Ieroboams Bishops could turn their hands unto: for they
were but novices in Satan's school, and had never well learned the art of
exorcism or conjuration, which the sorceresse of Rome, by long practice and
experience has attained; being grown as cunning in these feats, as she that
was mistress of her art, Nahum. 3.^.
and sold the nations through her Witchcrafts.

17 For by these and innumerable more enchantments of Idolatry, (which the day
would not be enough to reckon up,) this Circe, the Lady of the
pseudocatholicks has intoxicate the earth, that the inhabitants Rev. 17.2
are drunken with the wine of her fornication; doting upon her reverend
clergy, her devout service, her sacred ceremonies, her hallowed Churches, her
Saints relics, and other like amatory potions; wherein Christianism, Judaism
and Paganism are tempered and mixed together, in the golden Babylonish cup of
her abominations.

18 Hence is it, that the relics of this Romish idolatry, are so fast
retained among some which yet Rev. 17.^6.
hate the whore, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Of her have they
received their Diocesan, Provincial and National Churches. Of her have they
learned to make portesses or Leitourgies, reading and singing their prayers
upon a book with organs and melody. Of her institution have they their solemn
festivities of Christ's, Angels and Saints days, with their fasting Eves. Of
her hand have they taken their Archbishops, Lordbishops, Suffragans,
Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, and a great many more of her royal retinue. From
her have they had their Churches, Chapels, Minsters, baptized bells, hallowed
fonts, and holy Churchyards; though some of those high places are of more
antiquity, as having been built and dedicated to the Heathen Divils. Finally,
from her have been received lands, livings, tithes, offerings, garments, signs,
gestures, ceremonies, courts, canons, customs, and many more abominations,
wherewith have been enriched the Rev. 18.15.
merchants of the whore, and all that sail verse. 19*
with ships in her sea. Thus with all the evils before mentioned, and others
more then can be told, which are very Gillulim the loathsome idols and
execrements of the Queen of Sodom, and the filthiness of her fornication; has
she dishonored and blasphemed the God of heaven, and all that therein dwell;
with them she defiles the consciences of men; with them she delights and
solaces her self in fleshly ease and pleasure: till in Rev. 18.8 19.
one hour, she and all her riches, pleasures, wares, merchandise shall perish;
and that be again fulfilled, which was said by the Prophet* Ezekiel. 23.43.
Now shall she and her fornications come to an end.

CHAP. VI.
A Conclusion Dehortary from this sin.

THE wares of idolatry being so common and universally spread by the merchants
of the whore, and conveyed into all nations: it comes to pass that many
are interessed in this Mart, buy and sell, partake and communicate with these
evils, not being aware of the danger they come into hereby. To warn them
therefore of the mischief ere they fall into it, or to help them out if they
be fallen, have I penned this Treatise: and add, to the things fore written,
these few advertisements.

2 This sin is direct against the Majesty of God, whose honor is to be
regarded above our own lives; above the peace or tranquillity of nations. The
sin provokes the anger of God, as adultery provokes the rage of a man injured
in his private bed. As he Pro. 6.34.
will not spare in the day of vengeance, and can not bear the sight of any
ransom: so the Lord is a Ex. 20, 5
gealous God, and visits the sin of the fathers upon the children, even to
the third and fourth generation of those that hate him.

3 Idolaters, as they are shut Rev. 22.14.15.
out of the city of the Lord, the Church of Christ, the heavenly Jerusalem; so
have they further this doom against them, they 1 Cor. 6.^.10.
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. The communicating with idols, depriveth
men of communion with God; for there is 2 Cor. ^ 14.16.
no fellowship of righteousness with unrightousnes, no agreement betwixt the
Temple of God and idols. The partakers therefore in this evil, (though perhaps
not authors, inventors; nor open maintainers of the same,) shall come unto
shame and confusion before God; for Isa. 44.1
all that are of the fellowship thereof, shall be confounded.

4 Folly is a blot and shame unto men, which they fayn would shun: but wisdom
is man's honor, and Eccl. 8.^
makes his face to shine. Of all foolishness, idolatry is the greatest;
depriving men of sound judgment in the best and heavenly things, and
possessing their minds with habitual vanity. Therefore is this vice resembled
by a Pro. 9.1
foolish woman, ignorant, and knowing nothing; yet troublesome and talkatiue,
Pro. 7.1
and loud in her babbling: of a smooth and Pro. 2.1 and 5.3.8.9
flattering tongue, and her mouth more soft then oil; yet cruel also and
malicious, Pro. 6.2^ and 9.18.
hunting for the precious life of a man; bringing him to beggary, death and
hell. But true religion, or the fear of the Lord, is resembled by Prove. 8 1.4.6.
wisdom, which utters her voice to the children of men, and speaks of
excellent things; the words (...). 8.9.^1.
of her mouth are all righteous and plain, her instructions better then fine
gold, and all her pleasures are not to be compared unto her. Blessed ^ers.
33.35.
is the man that hears her, watching daily at her gates, and giving
attendance at the posts of her doors: for he that finds her, finds life,
and shall obtain favor of the Lord, but he that sins against her, hates
his own soul; all that hate her, love death.

5 To worship and serve the Divill* is a thing horrible in religion, and even in
nature; worthy of vengeance from the hand of God. Though all manner sin
pertains to the Divils service: yet idolatry above all is counted and called
the worship of Divils, and so shall be punished. The Heathens albeit they Romans
1.^0.21.
had some knowledge of the true God, and worshipped Act. 17.^3.
him ignorantly; yet their worship is reckoned to Satan, for 1 Cor. 10 ^0.
the things which they sacrificed they sacrificed to Divils, and not unto God.
Jeroboam made account he served the true God, 1 King. 2.28.
even the God that had brought Israel out of Aegipt land: notwithstanding the
Lord has thus testified of him, that they were 2 Chronicles. ^1.15.
Divils which he made, when he made his calves, for to worship God by. And
Israel before him made Exodus 3^ 1, etc.
a calfe for like use; but Moses does blame them as having offered unto Lev.
17.^
Divils, and gone a whoring after them: and prophesyeth that their children
Deuteronomy. 32 17.
would also run into like blot. Antichristians would seem to be worshippers of
God; yet the Holy Ghost charge them to Rev. 9.2^
worship the Divils, when they think to serve God by idols. Forasmuch then as
all idols are Divils, though fools count them Saints: to partake with them, is
to forsake God, and to bring our selves into satan's damnation: for the Spirit
has protested, that we 1 Cor. 1^ 21.
cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of Divils; we cannot be partakers
of the Lords Table, and of the table of divils.

6 Many fearful judgments are threatened of God, against this sort of sinners,
and have come upon them. By Moses he Lev. 26.16. Deuteronomy. 28.3^ 59, etc.
denounced hasty, fearful, and consuming plagues, aches, and botches, and
incurable sicknesses, sore diseases and of long durance; which punishment he
brought even upon the 2 Chr. 2^ 18.19.
Kings for their idolatry. He threatened famine and drought, Lev. 26.^9 20.
making heaven as iron, and earth as brass, that the land should not give her
increase, nor trees their fruit: as came to pass in the 1 Kin. 17 Luke 4.25.
days of wicked Achab, when heaven was shut, three years and six months, that
it sent down neither rain nor dew, whereby great famine was throughout all the
land, because they had forsaken the Lord, and 1 King. 18.18.
followed Baalim. Wild Lev. 26.22.
beasts he menaced to send upon them, which should spoil them and their
cattle, and make their high ways desolate; of which plague they tasted in
Samaria, when the Lord, whom they feared not, 2 King. 17 25.26.
sent Lions among them which slew them. He said Levit. 26 25.
he would send the sword upon them, which should avenge the quarrel of his
covenant: and this plague 2 Chr. 12 ^, and 28.5 6, etc.
the Israelites often felt, because they forsook the Lord God of their fathers.
Hunger and misery was prophesyed unto them, that Lev. 26.26 Deuteronomy. 28.^3 -- 57.
Ier. 19.9. Ezekiel. 5.10
they should eat and not be satisfied, that men and women should eat their own
children, and after births, and every man eat the flesh of his friend, fathers
should eat their sonns, and sons their fathers, when all things should lack in
the seige and streightnes wherein their enemies should enclose them: which
extremities God 2 Kin^ 6.29.
brought upon Israel in K. I^r^ms days, and after, when Lam. ^ 11.12.
children and sucklings swooned in the streets, and gave up the ghost in their
mothers bosom, for want of bread and drink; and Lam. 4.
the hands of the pitiful women sod their own children for their meat; and
did eat their fruit, even Lam. 2.
children of a span long. The Lord threatened Lev. 2^ 30.31, and
destruction of their high places and images, and to cast their carkesses on
the bodies of their idols; and that his soul should abhor them* he would make
their cities desolate, and bring their sanctuary to naught, and would not smell
the savor of their sweet odours, but scattred them among the Hethens, and draw
the sword out after them: all which, with other like calamities came upon the
idolaters, whose 2 King 23.16.2^
dead bones were taken out of their graves and burned upon their polluted
altars; and the idolatrous Priests sacrificed upon them. Jerusalem the holy
city, Ier. 52.13.10.
was broken up, and all the men of war, fled; the house of the Lord, and al
great houses burnt with fire; Kings captived in chains, Princes and nobles
killed; the Lord trod ^am. 1.15
under foot, all the valiant men; Sion mourned, and there was none to comfort
her; the ^am. 2.1, ^.
beauty of Israel was cast down from heaven to earth, God cut off all the horn
thereof in his fierce wrath, which he powered out like fire; verse. 6.7.
causing the feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Sion, and despising in the
indignation of his wrath, both King and Priest; forsaking his Altar, and
abhorring his Sanctuary; so that peoples eyes verse. 11.
failed with tears, their bowels swelled, their liver was powered upon the
earth; for verse. 17.
the Lord performed that which he had purposed, and fulfilled his word
determined of old; doing that to Jerusalem Ezekiel. 5.6
which he never did before, neither would do any more the like, because of
all their abominations; and Ier. 8.3, 7.29.
death was desired rather then life, of all the residue of that wicked family;
for the Lord had rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.

7 All these, and Romans 15.4 Cor. 10.11
whatsoever else God threatened unto, or brought upon Israel, for their
idolatries; are examples written for us upon whom the ends of the world are
come: that we should not sin like them, lest we be partakers of like
punishments. It is Heb. 1^ 31.
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. For ver. 26.2
if we sin willingly, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth;
there is left no more sacrifice for sins: but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and a violent-heat of fire which shall devour the adversaries.

8 Wherefore, unto the children of men, thus says the wisdom of God; Pro.
1.22 23.
O ye foolish, how long will ye love foolishness, and scorners take pleasure
in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my correction, lo I power
out my mind unto you: Prove. 2.2 4.5.12.
cause your ears to hearken unto Wisdom, incline your hearts to
understanding; seek her as silver, and search for her as for treasures, then
shall you understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God,
which will deliver you from the evil way, Pro. 6.24 25.
from the flattery of the tongue of the strange woman. Desire not her beauty in
your heart, neither let her take you with her ey-lids: Prove. 5.8 9.11.
keep your way far from her, and come not near the door of house; least you
give your honor unto others, and your years to the cruel; and mourn at your
end, when you have consumed your flesh and your body. For Prove. 2.18.19.
surely her house tends to death, her paths unto the dead; all they that go
unto her, return not again, neither take they hold of the ways of life.
Children keep, 1 Io^. 5.21.
your selves from Idols. Amen.

FINIS.

