THE ARAIGNMENT of John Selman, who was executed near Charing-Crosse the 7. of
January, 1612. for a Felony by him committed in the Kings Chapel at
White Hall upon Christmas day last, in presence of the King and diverse of the
Nobility.

depiction of John Selman holding a purse

LONDON, Printed by W.H. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Palace, 1612.

A TRVE RELAtion of the apprehending, examining, committing, inditing,
arraigning, and conuicting of John Selman.
THe miserable and mischievous sins that men are howerlydrawn into by the
malicious means, subtle snares, inticements and allurementes of the Devil:
are so many and monstrous, that were not our own eyes continual witnesses of
the effect which they do daily work in many, it were not possible we could
or should believe that, which every minute is thrown into our own ears by
the report of others.

As for example, would or could any one be persuaded, that a man should be so
audacious, or irreligious, as to venture or enter into the House of God, with a
preiudicated and resolved mind, to do a deed that any honest Christian would
tremble and quake, but to think upon, in regard of the time, place, and
persons there present, which in brief was this. On Wednesday the 25. of
December last past, being Christmas day, one John Selman did presume to come
into the Chapel at White Hall, with intent and purpose to do that which at
last he effected, which was either to cut a purse, or pic. a pocket: and
houering long about one Leonatd Barry servant to the Right Honorable, the Lord
Harrington, was espied and noted by one M. Duble day, who for some reasons
which hereafter you shall hear, did not cease with his eye to follow him,
suspecting him to be such a one, as presently after by the fact, and his own
confession he did approve him self to be: for John Selman, after long hawking,
and following of the foresaid Leonard Barry (which was still noted by the
foresaid M. Dubbleday,) the said John Selman after he had (as it seemed)
purchased his prise, took his way forth of the Chapel, which M. Dubbleday
perceiving, he came dirrctly to the foresaid Leonard Barry, and did ask him
whether he wanted any thing out of his pockets or no: to which he answered, no
surely sir I think I do not. But M. Dubble-day wild him to be sure, and
thereupon Leon^^d Barry putting his hand into his pocket mist his purse, and
said to M. Dubleday, Sir, I have lost my purse. Then said M. Dubleday, go with
me and follow that man, for surely he has it, meaning the foresaid John
Selman: and thereupon M. Doubleday and Leonard Barry followed John Selman forth
of the Chapel, and having overtaken him, M. Dubbleday stent before Selman, and
caught him fast by both the Wrists, willing Leonard Barry to search his
pockets, for there quoth M. Dubbleday shall you find your purse: Leonard Barry
putting his hand into one of Selmans pockets, found nothing there but a knife
in a sheath: but in the other pocket he found his purse, and opening of it, he
found his money al there which he had put in in the morning. The purse was a
double purse of Lether into which Leonard Barry had put in twenty shillings
into the one part of the purse, and twenty shillings into the other.

The sudden coming of M. Dubbleday unto Leonard Barrie, together with his
speech to him in the Chapel, as also their hasty following of Selman forth of
the Chapel, caused the bystanders with admiration to look after them, and
one to enquire of another, what might be the cause of that sod^ine tumult.

In brief it came to his Majesty's ear, who being then in his royal person,
accompanied with our gracious Queen, the thrice noble Prince, the Duke of
York, and the Lady Elizabeth, with diverse of the Nobility, his sacred Majesty
being ready to receive the Sacrament, was somewhat disturbed with the report
hereof, and thereupon his most excellent Majesty gave commandment that the
malefactor should be detained and further examined.

The celebration of the holy Sacrament being performed, which in short time
after Selman was brought before the Right worshipful Sir Robert Banistre
Clerk of the Greene-cloth for his Majesty's Household, who examining the said
Selman, he did confess as follows.

The Examination of John Selman before the Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT
BANISTRE Clerk of the Greencloth for his Majesty's Household, taken the xxv. of
December. 1611.
FIrst he says, that he dwells in Shoe Lane, and that he has no Trade
which he betaketh himself unto. Being examined of the business he had at
Court, he answers, that he had not any that was good, and further confesses
that he did in his Majesty's Chapel the same day take out of the pocket of
one Leonard Barry servant to the L. Harington, a purse with money in it: but
what sum he knows not, in regard as soon as he was possessed of it he was
apprehended, and the said purse taken from him.

John Selman having been thus examined by Sir Rober Banistre, he was by him
committed to the custody of certain of the Knight Marshals men, with
commandment to convey him presently to the prison of the Marshalsey.

Now, gentle Readers, you must understand, that this Selman came into the Kings
Chapel in very good and seemly apparel, like unto a Gentleman, or Citizen:
viz. a fair black Cloak laced, and either lined through or faced with velvet.
The rest of his apparel in reasonable manner being answerable thereunto. Which
was the cause that he without resistance had free entrance into that holy and
sanctified place.

But he had not been long in the Marshall see, ere that his gallant apparel
was fetched from him, and meaner brought unto him, in which he came to his
araignement.

On Twesday being the last of December 1611. master Richardson (Marshall of the
marshall sey) having received a write or warrant to that effect, did bring up
his prisoner, the foresaid John Selman, to Westminster to the Kings bench
bar, there to receive his trial before certain of his Majesty's
Commissioners, whose names are as follows.

The names of his Majesty's Commissioners there assembled. William Lord
Knollis. Sir Thomas Vauasor. Sir Francis Backon. Sir Arthur Gorge. Sir Robert
Banistre.
and others of the Green Cloth. Sir Edmond Bowier. Sir Robert Leighe. and Mr.
Phillip Gerrard.


The Court being set, Proclamation was made, and every man charged to keep
silence, while the Kings Commission was reading on pain of imprisonment.

The commission being read, the grand inquest was called, who did appear all
being his Majesty's servants, whose names are as follows.

The names of the grand inquest. William Lancaster, Esquire. Edward Blackgraue,
Esquire: John Bull, Gentleman. Edward Beak, Yeoman. William Yates, Yeo.
Richard Langley, Yeo. Robert Powlston, Yeo. Thomas Gawen, Yeo. Anthony Barklet,
Yeo. Richard Gregory, Yeo. George Cordall. Yeo. Roger Terry. Yeo. William
Carter. Yeo. Edward Kiffin. Yeo. John Brown, Yeo. John Whitlocke. Yeo. John
Wonnam, Yeo. Richard Dyar, Yeo.


These Gentlemen and Yeomen being called and sworn, Proclamation was made
again, and every man charged to keep silence while the charge was given to the
great Inquest, on pain of imprisonment.

The charge being given to the Grand Inquest by Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings
Solister.

The Bill of Indictment was preferred unto them, for the approbation whereof,
The foresaid Leonard Barrie and Edmond Dubleday were called and sworn to give
their true testimony for satisfying of the Jury, and to that purpose, Leonard
was first called and charged by virtue of his oath to deliver the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, concerning the matter in question
between the Kings Majesty and John Selman the prisoner indicted, his testimony
was as follows.

The evidence of Leonard Barry given to the Great Inquest.
FIrst he said, that on Christmas day in the morning, being the xxv. of
December 1611. he came into the Kings Chapel at White Hall, with intent to
hear the divine service and sermon, to see his Majesty's Royal Person, and
the celebration of the most holy and blessed Sacrament, and being there in the
Chapel, the foresaid M. Dubleday came unto him, and did ask him whether he
had lost any thing out of his pockets or no: to which he answered, not any
thing surely sir as I think. But M Dubleday willed me quicly to search, and to
be sure, and thereupon I thrust my hands into my pockets, and mist my purse:
which M. Dubleday perceiving, willed me to go with him, and follow that man,
pointing to Selman, which we did, and ouertaking him, searched him, and with
him did find my purse, and all my money, and this is all said he, that I can
say: and thereupon M. Dubleday was called and charged, that by virtue of his
Does, he should likewise deliv^r the truth and the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, concerning the matter in question between the Kings Majesty and
John Selman the prisoner indicted.

The evidence of Edmond Dubleday given to the great Inquest.
FIrst he said that being in the Chapel one Christmasse day last, he did
epsy there the foresaid Selman, whom he did much suspect to be a very loose
and lewd fellow, and that made him very strickly, but covertly to watch him,
notwithstanding his formality in apparel. At last he did perceive Selman to
take his way out of the Chapel, after he had been long about the foresaid
Leonard Barry, and thereupon he came to the said Barry, and spoke to him as
aforesaid, and afterward with him did follow and apprehend the said Selman, and
found about him the purse of the said Leonard Barry, and forty shillings in
money therein: but M. Dubleday being demanded by the Court, what reason he
had to suspect him more then any other man in the Chapel, to which he
answered as follows.

That he having business in the Term time at Westminster Hall in the Cheker
Chamber, this Selman said he, that is now prisoner was very near about me, and
so near, as I could, and did wish that he had been further off, because I did
assure my self that he had no good meaning to me, keeping so near me, and
having no business with me, and that was the cause that I did suspect him.

And thereupon the great Inquest being ready to go together, they were willed
for their better satisfaction to stay and hear the examination and confession
of the said John Selman taken before Sir Robert Banistre Clerk of the green
Cloth, etc. Which examination together with the prisoners own confession was
red unto them as it is before set down. All which when they had heard, they
went not from the bar, but called for pen and ink, and to the indictment
subscribed Billa Vera, which with a general and free consent of them all was
delivered up.

That being done, master Richardson Marshall of the Marshall sey was called and
willed to bring in his prisoner, which he did, and he being placed at the
Bar, was commanded by the name of John Selman to hold up his hand, which he
did, then was the indictment read: which was this.

John Selman, hold up thy hand, thou stand here indicted by the name of John
Selman late of London yeoman, for that thou the twenty fifth day of December in
the ninth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord James by the grace of God
King of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc. and of
Scotland the five and forty, at the house of our Sovereign Lord the King,
called White Hall in the County of Midlesex within the verge, our Sovereign
Lord the King, being then in his Royal Majesty, at White-hal aforesaid,
withforce and Arms did make an assault upon one Leonard Barrie, and one purse
of the value of one halfepenny and forty shillings ready money in the same
purse, then and there being of the goods and money of the foresaid Leonard
Barrie, from the person of the said Leonard Barrie, privily and without the
knowledge of the said Leonard, then and there feloniously did take and carry
contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown, and Dignity.

What say thou John Selman to this felony, art thou guilty or not guilty,
to which he answered guilty, then after some small respite or pause, he was
demanded by M. Thomas Porter what he could say for himself, why sentence of
death according to the law should not be pronounced against him: to which he
answered not any thing but prostrating himself on his knees, submitted
himself to the Kings mercy, humbly praying, that after the law was executed,
his body might be delivered to his wife to have Christian burial, and that
the goods which he had, (part of which was well gotten, some otherwise) might
not be taken from her: to which the Right Worshipful and worthy Gentleman,
Sir F. B. answered: Here is an Honorable Lord, and an ancient Counselor, that
upon your true Repentance, and revealing of those of your faculty and
fraternity, who are still as ready to enter into the presence Chamber of the
King, as you were to enter into the Kings Chapel, which is the house of God,
wherein he has promised always to be present, and therefore it may well be
called the Sanctum Sanctorum. And therefore said Sir F. if you do this, upon
his Honors report to the Kings Majesty, questionles your request will be
granted.

Then Selman speaking to the Commissioners, nominated one (who as he said, was
then in the Hall, which could (if he would) do good service to the King, by
revealing many of that profession, his name as I have heard is I. H.

This being done, Sir Francis ^acon, to whom at that tune it did belong,
proceeded to judgment, and asking on the prisoner, thus or to this effect, in
some sort he spoke.

The first and greatest sin that ever was committed was done in Heaven. The
second was done in Paradise, being heaven upon earth, and truly I cannot choose
but place this in the third rank, in regard it was done in the house of God,
where he by his own promise is always resident, as also for that the cause of
that assembly was to celebrate the Feast of the birth of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus. And Gods Lieutenant here on earth, being in Gods house there
present, ready to receive the holy and blessed Sacrament, all which being
considered, the time, place, and persons there present, and therefore I do
advise thee that as thou have submitted thy self to the Kings mercy, so thou will crave pardon at Gods hands, who is more ready to give, then we to crave
which if thou do with a true feeling of thy sin, and repentance, and
loathing of thy sin, thou shall surely be forgiven at Gods hands, and being
fully persuaded thereof, I will now pronounce thy judgment, which is:

Thou shall be had from hence to the place from whence thou cammest, and from
thence be brought to the place of Execution, which shall be between Charing
Cross and the Court gate, and there to be hanged by the neck till thou be
dead, and so the Lord have mercy upon thy soul.

The last speech of Selman at the place of Execution.
I Am come (as you see) patiently to offer up the sweet, and dear sacrifice of
my life, a life, which I have gracelessely abused, and by the unruly course
thereof, made my death a scandal to my kindred and aquaintance: I have
consumed fortunes gifts in riotous companies, wasted my good name in the
purchase of goods unlawfully gotten, and now ending my days in too late
repentance, I am placed in the rank of reprobates, which the rusty canker of
time must needs turn to oblivion. I stand here as shames example, ready to be
spewed out of the Common wealth. I confess, I have known too much, performed
more, but consented to most: I have bin the only corruption of many ripe witted
youth, and leader of them to confusion. Pardon me God, for that is now a
burden to my conscience, wash it away sweet Creator, that I may spotless
enter into thy glorious kingdom. Whereupon being demanded, if he would
discover any of his fraternity, for the good of the Common wealth or not:
Answered, that he had already left the names of diverse notorious malefactors in
writing behind him, which he thought sufficient. So he requested the quietness
of conscience that his soul might depart without moelstation. For (quoth he) I
have deserved death long before this time, and deservedly now I suffer death.
The offense I dye for, was high presumption, a fact done even in the Kings
Majesty's presence, even in the Church of God, in the time of divine Service,
and the celebration of the Sacred Communion, for which if forgiveness may
descend from Gods tribunal Throne, with penitence of heart I desire it, all
which being spoken, he patiently left this world for auother life.

But see the graceless and vnrepenting minds of such like kind of livers:
for, one of his quality (a pick pocket, I mean) even at his execution, grew
master of a true man's purse, who being presently taken, was imprisoned, and is
like the next sessions to wander the long voyage after his grand Captain,
Mounsier John Selman, God if it be his blessed will turn their hearts, and
make them all honest men.

FINIS.
depiction of John Selman holding a purse


