A SERMON, Preached before the two high borne and illustrious Princes,
FREDERICK the 5. PRINCE ELECTOR PALATINE, DVKE OF BAVARIA, etc. And the
Princess Lady ELIZABETH, etc.

Preached in the Castle-Chappell at HEIDELBERG the 8. of June 1613. being the
next day after her Highness happy arrival there. By that reverend and
judicious Divine, Mr. ABRAHAM SCVITETVS, his Highness Chaplain.

Together with a short narration of the Prince Electors greatness, his Country,
his receiving of her Highness* accompanied with tw^ u^ other Princes, thirty
Earls, besides an exceeding great number of Barons and Gentlemen, and eight
days ent^rtainement.

Translated out of High Dutch by IA MEDLVS D. and one of hi^ Majesty's
Chap^^ines.

Imprinted at London by John Beale, for William Welby. 1613.

DEDICATED AND CONSECRATED UNTO THE SERVICE AND NEVER DYING MEMORY OF THE
RIGHT HIGH AND ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS-E, LADY ELIZABETH, PRINCESS ELECTORISSE
PALATINE, DVCHESSE OF BAVARIA, etc.

AND SOLE DAVGHTER OF OUR DREAD SOVEREIGN LORD KING JAMES, KING OF GREAT
BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH, etc.

A SERMOM Preached at Heidelberg, the S. of June 1613. before the high and
mighty Prince FREDERICK the 5. Earl Palatine, Prince Elector, etc. and the
right high and illustrious Lady and Princess, the Lady ELIZABETH, his espoused
wife, upon the occasion of their happy arrival there.
The Entrance.
But from whence and whereat beloved Christians, shall I begin this Sermon of
thanksgiving?

Praise ye the Lord, because he is exceeding good, and his mercy endures
for ever.

Let Heidelberg now say; his mercy endures for ever.
Let the Electorall PALATINATE now say; his mercy endures for ever.
Let them say now, that fear the Lord; his mercy endures for ever.
The Lord is God who defends us, and his mercy endures for ever.
The Lord is God who reioiceth us, and his mercy endures for ever.
I know not how to do better, then that we begin there where we will end,
namely; of commending, lauding, and praising the most Highest, who crowns us
with mercy and loving kindness, and binds the people that lie far asunder
one from another, firmly together in the unity of faith, love, and assured
hope of the blessed salvation to come.

Now to the end that our hearts may be the better and liuelier rowsed up unto
this laud and praise, we will read unto you an excellent Psalm of
Thanksgiving: but will first for the more fruitful hearing of the same, call
upon the Lord God for the gracious assistance of his holy spirit, in that form
of prayer, which our LORD and SAVIOVR CHRIST himself has taught us.

Our Father, etc.

Psalm 147. 1 Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to sing unto our God: for it
is a pleasant thing, and praise is comely.

2 The Lord does build up Jerusalem, and gather together the dispersed of
Israel.

3 He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up their sores.

4 He counts the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names.

5 Great is our Lord, and great is his power, his wisdom is infinite.

6 The Lord relieueth the needy, and abaseth the wicked to the ground.

7 Sing unto the Lord with praise: sing upon the harp unto our God

8 Which covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth,
and makes the grass to grow upon the mountains.

9 Which gives to beasts their food, and to the young ravens that call upon him.

10 He has not pleasure in the strength of an horse neither delights in any
man's legs.

11 But the Lord delights in them that fear him, and hope upon his mercies.

12 Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Zion.

13 For he has made the bars of thy gates strong, and has blessed thy
children within thee.

14 He sets peace in thy borders, and satisfies thee with the flower of
wheat.

15 He sends forth his commandment upon earth, and his word runs very
swiftly.

16 He gives snow like wool, and scatters the hoare frost like ashes.

17 He casts forth his ye like morsels: who can abide the cold thereof?

18 He sends his word and melts them: he causes his wind to blow, and the
waters flow.

19 He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.

20 He has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his
judgments. Praise ye the Lord.

The Jnterpretation.
LIke as the weather under the heavens alters, so that we now feel a fair
warm sunshine, anon lightning and thunder, and also presently after, rain:
even so do the thoughts of man change and alter. For sometime the godly man's
heart is so merry and iokand, that it is as a mere sunshine, that is, there is
nothing but joy and comfort perceived in him, namely, when God the Lord
fatherly remembers us with a cheerful conscience, with a healthful body, as
also with bodily joy, and a good outward estate.

But otherwhiles again, when troubles and miseries approach, it seems as if
our hearts were ouershadowed with thick black clouds, when as we hear and
feel nothing else in manifold tentations, then the hail, thunder, and
lightning of Gods law. Now then, the greatest wisdom of a Christian stands
therein, that he assuredly know, whether it be clear or dark in his heart,
how he shall so dispose of his business, that he may ever and at all times be
well pleasing and acceptable unto God in heaven.

The Apostle James prescribes unto us a notable rule in this case, when as he
says; Is any among you afflicted? James 5.13.
let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. By which words he would
have us understand thus much, that we ever ought to pray unto our Lord God in
time of need: and after obtained deliverance, praise him for it. According to
which will of God, all the holy men of the old, and new Testament lived.

If now therefore at this present, our affairs be likewise so changed, as that
we behold with joy, our right gracious Lord and Prince, FREDERICK Count
Palatine, and Prince Elector: and also the right high, and illustrious
Princess Elizabeth, his highness most honored, and best beloved spouse, to
be safely come hither in health under the safe conuoy of the most highest, unto
the place, where we have earnestly long desired, and prayed they might be:
the^ should we be surely most unthankful people, if we should not admonish,
provoke, and say one unto another; O ye faithfully beloved: Ier. 33.11.
Praise the Lord of Hosts, because the Lord is good, and his mercy endures
for ever. And it is true, that for the very performance of this holy work, is
this illustrious company now assembled here: which that it may be done with
the more fruit and profit, we will briefly expound the Psalm now read unto
you. And first, consider of the Prophets hearty admonition, wherewith he
stirs us up unto the laud and praise of God.

And then secondly, we will observe what those benefits be, for which we ought
to laud and praise God: wherein it will evidently appear, that we have at this
day, even as great and weighty cause to praise him, as ever the people of
Israel had in the old Testament.

Of the first.
As concerning the first point, the Prophet exhorts us unto thanksgiving,
not once nor twice, but thrice when as he says: Praise yeethe Lord. Psalm. 147.
verse 1.7.12.
Sing unto the Lord with praise: sing upon the harp unto our God. Praise the
Lord O Jerusalem: praise thy God O Zion.

And he concealeth not the reason, for he says, It is good and a pleasant
thing, to sing praises unto our God. Whereunto agrees that of the Prophet
David Psalm 92 saying, Psalm. 92.
It is a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing unto thy name, O thou most
highest.

The children of the world think it is a good thing to live every day
riotously, to sing, to play, to skip, to dance, to laugh and shout, or else to
rise up early in the morning, to drunkenesse, and surfeting, and to run up and
down until the evening, to scrach, and scrape something unto themselves.
These are the unwise men that know not, Psalm. 6.
and the fools that understand not Gods works, as David there speaks. But
the holy Ghost says by the Prophet, in the same place, that this is a good
thing, to declare Gods loving kindnesses in the morning, and his truth in the
evening.

For what is a better thing then to praise God, who only is worthy of all
praise, whom also all the unreasonable creatures, every one according to his
kind, do laud and praise? What is a better thing then to praise the Lord, from
whom all good gifts come and descend? What is a better thing then for every one
to exercise and acquaint himself daily in the service, wherein all elect
Angels and men, will exercise themselves in that blessed life of glory?

Such men as thus exercise themselves, have already begun and entered into
that everlasting life: and seeing they lead a well sauoured and praiseworthy
life, so does God also vouchsafe unto them at the last, a praiseworthy death:
according as the example of King David shows, who for that he always had
this saying in his mouth; I will praise the Lord so long as I have any being:
he also at the last yielded up his soul with a praise-singing mouth, as is to
be seen both in 1. Chron. 30. and 1. King. 1.

Such praise is pleasant, and comely, as the Psalm further says. For as
nothing is more foul and loath some then unthankful ingratitude, so there is
not any thing more pleasant then a thankful soul, which knows what benefits
she has received of her God, and does yield to him again that which is due to
him, namely obliged thankfulness. Herehence it is, Deuteronomy. 32.19.
that our Lord God terms unthankful people, not children, but shamespots.
And the Prophet Jeremy teaches, that man has an unfaithful and rebellious
heart, which says not once, I will now fear the Lord God, Ier. 5.23, 24.
that gives rain both early and late in due season, and safely preserves the
harvest at the appointed time.

Yet nevertheless, it is not here to be omitted, that God will nor be praised
of every one. For as any great Lord or Prince cannot at al endure to have his
worthy and valiant acts to be written by a lewd varlot: so will not the Lord
God by any means, endure at all to be praised of wicked persons; whence our
Psalm says, Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem. Psalm. ^3.1.
Praise thy God, O Zion; that is, as is elsewhere expounded, Rejoice in the
Lord, O ye righteous: for it becomes upright men to be thankful.

Now the reasons are known, why God will not be praised of wicked people. For
such people will not Understand the Lords benefits, but as the Prophet says,
Though mercy be showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn righteousness:
Esa. 26.10.
in the land of uprightness will he do wickedly, and will not at all consider
the majesty of the Lord. Besides, the offering cannot be acceptable unto God,
which is offered unto him of an impenitent soul, but the sacrifice which a
wicked man (who has chosen his own ways, Esa. 66.3.
and his soul delights in his abominations,) offers, it is even as much
as if he slew a man, as if he cut off a dogs neck, and as if he offered
swines blood. The cause hereof is, because wicked men are of an impenitent
heart, and therefore will only praise God with their mouth, whom they shame and
dishonor in their heart, yea throughout all their whole life and conversation.

Of the second.
But sufficient of the first. 2. Point.
Now let us consider of the second point; wherefore it is that the Prophet will
have us sing praises unto God. The Prophet commends here three especial
benefits of God: as first, that he builds Jerusalem. Secondly that he uses
his wisdom and power for the benefit of all his creatures, but most
especially for man's good. And then thirdly, that he clearly revealed his word;
his statutes, and his commandments unto the Jewish people.

He says, The Lord builds up Jerusalem, Verse 2.
and gathers together the dispersed of Israel. Here is to be observed, that
this Psalm was written, after that the people of the Jews were brought again
to Jerusalem, and other places in Judea, from the Babylonian captivity. Now
when the Prophet saw, that Jerusalem was again by little and little repaired,
the Citizens come again together, that were here and there before dispersed
abroad, and the true service of God established anew, he heartily rejoiced; yet
not so much for the fair and goodly buildings, as for that they were come
thither again, even unto the place, whereunto God had bound himself in the
old Testament, and couenanted with them; and that the people did jointly again
with one consent serve God, Romans 9.4.
Unto whom appertains the addoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. And in such
joy of his heart he begins, and admonishes all believing Israelites, to
sing laud unto the Lord one with an other, and to praise our God upon the
harp.

If now the godly forefathers did so heartily rejoice before Christ's birth, and
earnestly exhorted unto the praising of God, after they were delivered but from
their seauenty years Babilonian captivity, and were again returned into their
beloved Country: how much more then ought we, whose forefathers were pulled
out of popish Babylon, not after seventy, but after seven hundred years of
captivity, and brought again together into their old country, sing laud,
praise and thanks unto almighty God for it? The vulgar man considers not,
what a glorious benefit this is. To compare them a little together. Was not
that a misery upon misery, when the parents were dispersed from their
children, the brethren from their sisters, the husbands from their wives, here
and there throughout all the Babylonian government, and must undure to be
laughed at, scorned and derided of every man? The people of God themselves give
witness hereunto, when they say; Psalm. 137.1.
By the rivers of Babel we sat, and there we wept, when we remembered Zion.

But far greater misery did our forefathers endure in popery, when many
honest and well-affected hearts were forced to be kept and pressed down under
the Popes tyranny, and to behold (against their wills) shameful and horrible
idolatry. But yet God did after seven hundred years space, look again
favorably upon his distressed servant the Christian Church, caused the Gospel
to be clearly expounded, which was before obscured, Antichrist that child of
perdition to be revealed, and our beloved fathers to be set again into the
liberty of conscience, and which we ever since enjoy, blessed be his name
for it. Wherefore praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, Praise thy God, O Zion.

It is true, that Jerusalem is often grievously afflicted, and as it were even
rent asunder, either by the assaults and inrodes of enemies soldiers, or by
the death of high and chief Governors, who were the Churches Patrons, and
nureing fathers and mothers, as this Jerusalem of our Palatinate has
sufficiently felt about three years since, when Frederick the fourth of
blessed memory departed this life. But, praised be God, who ever builds
Jerusalem again. And this he does, when as he blesses a country with
Princely branches, who wax and grow up unto his honor, and their native
countries benefit. And this he does also effect, when he leads (as with the
hand) unto young Princes godly and religious spouses, with whom they may
comfortably live together in unity of faith, and shine before their subjects
in all good example of religious holiness. And therefore praise thou the Lord,
O Heidelberg, Praise thy God, O Palatinate.

But there might some man perhaps demand, Whether it be so much to be
respected, and be so great a benefit, to have the walls of Jerusalem rightly
builded in a country? Whereunto I answer, That every way it is much to be
regarded, and is Gods exceeding great benefit, when Jerusalem is well and
rightly builded: For in Jerusalem alone, that is, in the little flock wherein
God is truly served, is that done which is written in the next verse
following, He heals those that are broken in heart, verse 3.
and binds up their sores.

We poor miserable creatures were fallen indeed amongst thieves and
murderers, and grievously wounded of them, who were set against us by Satan.
Should the Angles cure and heal us? they could not. Should other creatures
help and relieve us? they could not. Then God sent Christ unto us, who comes
in the Gospel, and where the same is preached, there he powers out the
supling and healing oil of grace into every repentant sinners heart, and
binds up all their wounds, that is, he takes away all the great anguish and
trouble of conscience, which arises out of the sense and feeling of Gods wrath
against sin, and fear of everlasting damnation.

And here I know, that many men esteem not so highly of this benefit, and I
mean them, who understand not what sin is, what Gods wrath is against sin,
and what everlasting damnation is. But I know this also, that they who are
assaulted with the fierceness of Gods wrath, and have daily combat with their
own weakness and infirmities, esteem nothing so highly in this world, as
that Christ heals their broken hearts, through the gracious forgiveness of
their sins, and binds up the pinching grief of their consciences, in so
much, that they may boast with the Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 8.
there is no condemnation unto them, whose hearts are healed, whose wounds of
conscience are bound up and plastered: Hereupon they live; hereupon they die;
that for Christ his sake, God is become their merciful father, and they his
dear and loving children. Therefore sing unto the Lord one with another with
thanks, and praise our God upon the harp, even ye that do feel and
acknowledge this benefit of God unto your souls.

But the Lord God will not suffer it to rest there, that he builds the walls
of Jerusalem, but, though he be the wholly wise and almighty Lord, yet he
abuses not the same unto tyranny, and suppressing of the godly honest, but he
uses his wisdom and omnipotency, first, and chiefly for the good of man, and
then next for the benefit of all other creatures. For, Verse 4, 5.
He counts the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names.
Great is our Lord, and great is his power, his wisdom is infinite: or, his
government is not to be understood and comprehended.

He surely must needs be a wise and omnipotent Lord. The stargasers labor also
and weary themselves very much, that they might tell the number of the stars.
But yet themselves confess, that they only know the chiefest, the greatest,
and the brightest: the tale of the rest they must leave (will they nill they)
unto God, who both numbreth all the stars, and calls them by their several
names, and carries a goodly government over them, where the Sun, like a King,
swaieth in his glorious Lordship; but other stars as servants, and attendants
on him, must at several times, some at his rising, and others at his setting,
perform their service unto him. Now as he does wisely govern the stars, so
does he also powerfully uphold them, insomuch that the Prophet says not
without cause: Great is our Lord, and great is his power, which is the more
comfortable for us to understand, and lay hold on, seeing the text further
teaches, that God uses his wisdom and omnipotency, for the good of man, and
all creatures.

The Lord, says the Prophet, relieueth the needy, and abaseth, or rather
throws down the wicked to the ground. Which is as much to lay: God so uses
his might and wisdom, that he aduanceth the humble, and punishes the proud.
And this is, and ever has bin Gods custom. Go and search throughout all the
histories of the old Testament; go and search throughout all the histories of
the new Trestament, and it will appear, that humility was never left
uncrowned; pride never left unpunished. Pharaoh was proud and high minded, he
must needs perish in the water: Moses was humble he must needs be advanced:
Saul was high minded, he was brought down low: David was humble he was
advanced: Sebna was high minded, the keys of the house of David were taken
from him: Eliakim is humble, the ^eies were given unto him. Humble Hezekim had
his life preferued: whereas proud Senacherib was robbed of his life, and had it
at ken from him.

Hither unto appertain. Gods other benefits, which are here recited, as
namely, that he gives peace unto his people, that he blesses them will
children, and satisfies them with the flower of wheat and not that only, but
that he also uses his omnipote^cy ingenerall for the good of all creatures.
For it is he Which covers the heaven with clouds, Verse 8.
and pre pareth rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow upon the
mountains. Which gives to beasts their food, Verse 9.
and to the young ravens that call upon him.

We must needs wonder concerning the clouds; and we must needs wonder
concerning the rain: but yet we must needs much more admire and wonder, that
God creates such things, not, that he boasts of his omnipotency, but of his
goodness therein, which also evidently appears in the very preservation of
bruit beasts. For why does the Lord cover the heavens with clouds? That he may
prepare rain for the earth. Wherefore does he prepare raie ffor the earth?
That grass may grow upon the mountains. Wherefore does he let grass grow?
That beasts may have their food, and the young ravens that call upon him.

So then we hear it well, that God cares also for the brute beasts, as
likewise for the young ravens, which call upon him; that is, they which cry for
hunger, and must needs perish, if God did not nourish them. The heathen
Philosopher Aristotle taught, that God only cared for the more excellent
creatures, and regarded not the meaner.

But Gods word teaches, that God also preserves the young ravens when they
call upon him, and so makes no difference in his care for this or that
beast; as also in like manner concerning man, He is no accepter of persons: but
in every nation, Act. 10.34.35.
he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. For as
our Psalm says, he has not pleasure in the strength of an horse, verse 10.
neither delights in any man's legs; that is, he cares not at all whether
any be proud and potent in the world; but, he delights in them that fear
him, and hope upon his mercies, whether they be highly or basely esteemed of
amongst men in the world.

And it is not hard or heavy unto God the Lord, to nourish, preserve, and
support both man, and beast. For, verse 15.
He only sends forth his commandments upon earth: that is, he only
commands it, and his word runs very swiftly, that is, and it is done. Will
he have snow? then he gives it: will he have hoare frost? then he
scatters it like ashes: will he have ice? then he casts it like morsels:
will he have frost? then can no man endure the cold thereof. He sends his
word and it melts them; verse 18.
he causes his wind to blow, and the ye thaweth, so that the waters flow.

Now that which Gods people did here praise aforetime, that are we worthily
bound to extol and praise at this day. God has mercifully of late turned his
wisdom and almighty power over the Electorall Palatinate for good. He has
mightily three quarters of a year ago, led our Prince Elector out of the
Palatinate into England: he has wisely and richly blessed his highness
design and purpose, and mightily has very lately safely conuayed and
returned his Princely Electorall Highness, and also yesterday the Princess
Electoresse, his highness spouse, safely unto this place. Wherefore sing ye
one with another with thanksgiving unto the Lord, and praise our God upon the
harp: Praise the Lord O Heydelberg, praise thy God, O Palatinate.

Howsoever we have now with the old Church, in regard of Gods now recited
benefits, sufficient cause of praise and thanksgiving: yet does the Spirit of
God further lead us, unto the consideration of the most high and best good,
that God can give unto any man, in a whole Country or Kingdom. verse 19.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.

O gracious Lord God, verse 13.
what were it, though the Bars of our gates were made fast within us, and all
outward peace procured unto our borders, if in the meanetime the borders of our
consciences should be deprived of heavenly comfort? What were it, though our
children were blessed within our gates, if we were not thereof assured, that we
our selves also be Gods children? What were it, though our bodies were
satisfied with the finest flower; if our souls should in the meanetime ever
hunger and thirst with the want of Gods word and grace? Therefore the Prophet
rejoices and triumphs withal, for this benefit, that God offers unto the
Jewish people, his everlasting grace and mercy in the word preached: and for
that the true Religion was at that time altogether shut up within the cabinet
of the Land of Judah, he proceeds herehence with admiration, and says; He
has not dealt so with every nation, neither lets them know his judgments.
Praise ye the Lord. That is, praise and thanks be given unto God, who amongst
us gathers a handful unto him* who know him, honor him, and fear him,
whereas notwithstanding so many people live altogether without God, and are
deprived, and even robbed of all true comfort both in life and death.

We, beloved in the Lord, can now at this day rejoice of that, in the
Protestant Churches of Germany, whereof the people of the Jews rejoiced
aforetime, as namely, that God has showed unto us his holy word, and has let
us know his statutes, and his judgments. He shows his word unto us, that
is, he clearly reuealeth himself unto us in the Gospel.

This we know and acknowledge with all Protestant Churches.

God is the fountain of all goodness, and all the evil that is in the world,
proceeds at no hand from him, but from Satan, and man's free will. This we
know and acknowledge with all Protestant Churches.

Christ Jesus is the almighty Son of God, the brightness of his glory, and
the ingraued form of his person, who in the fullness of time took upon him
our flesh and blood, and has purchased for us through his death eternal
redemption. This we know and acknowledge with all Protestant Churches.

The holy Ghost is the third person of the Deity, the comforter of all the
afflicted, and the earnest of our salvation to come. This we know and
acknowledge with all Protestant Churches.

The Lord God has so near a care of his faithful children, that not so much
as a hair of their head is bowed, or any little bone broken in their body,
without his will. This we know and acknowledge with all Protestant Churches.

When God calls for us before his strict judgment, be it as well in health
as in sickness, and denies unto our own conscience all comfort, so that we
cannot withstand the just wrath of God at all: but yet the alone precious
suffering and bitter death of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (whose
suffering and death being laid hold on with true faith,) even then stilleth the
spiritual heart-beating, and quieteth the disturbed conscience. This we know
and acknowledge with all Protestant Churches.

When God sends us sorrow and affliction, it is so far from hurting of us,
that it also turns unto our good, and our selves may therefore praise
affliction: for it is true, that unto the faithful, tribulation brings
patience, patience experience, experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.
This we know and acknowledge with all Protestant Churches.

When faith is weak, patience cold, hope in a swounde, then is there no better
means to help and relieve the poor soul, then that she frequent the holy
Supper of the Lord, where we do not only see before our eyes, what and how
much Christ has suffered for our sakes, but we also feel, that our hungry
and thirsty souls are fed with his crucified body, and are quenched with his
bloodshed, which is done, when we ingraue and firmly press into our hearts
by true faith, that Christ is given unto death for our sins, and his blood is
shed for our transgressions, whereby faith will be stronger, patience warmer,
hope more lively, the whole man will be in God more joyful, and will go home
unto his house with a joyful heart, and praisesinging mouth singing, Psalm. 23.
The Lord is my good shepherd, I shall heceforth never want any thing; he
feeds me on the green pastures of his word, he gives me to drink of the
fresh watersprings of his spirit, his goodness and mercy will follow me, all
the days of my life This lastly we know and acknowledge with all Protestant
Churches.

That eternal salvation is prepared for us after this life. That is said, the
Lord shows his word unto Jacob, and reuealeth his grace and mercy only to
Protestant Churches.

But he shows us not only the word of grace and mercy, but he shows us
also his statutes and his judgments. Now these are Gods statutes and
judgments.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, Math. 22.
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and thy
neighbor as thy self. These be Gods statutes, and his judgments.

Let your light so shine before men, Math 6.
that they may see your good works, Luke 6.
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. These be Gods statutes and his
judgments.

Love your enemies, do good unto them that hate you, bless them that curse
you, pray for them that hurt you. These be Gods statutes and judgments.

Take heed that your hearts be not oppressed with surfeting and drunckennesse,
Luke 21.
and with the cares of this life. These are Gods statutes and his judgments.

To do well and to distribute forget not. Heb. 13.
These be Gods statutes and his judgments.

Follow peace with all men, Heb. 12.
and holiness, without the which no man shall see the Lord.

But so, O God, do few people at this day; therefore, Praise the Lord, O
Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Zion. For (as we have understood out of this
sermon) there is nothing more precious then to praise our God: such praise is
pleasant and comely: such praise is fitting to meet God the Lord with; as he
that builds the wales of Jerusalem, as he that uses his wisdom and power,
unto the defense and comfort of his Christendom, as he that yet shows unto
us in Germany his saving word, and his holy statutes.

Who so acknowledges this, who so laudeth and and praises this, he shall
find, that upon his praise singing life, a praise singing death shall follow;
and he shall by death be joyfully carried into that blessed life, wherein all
the faithful meet together, and shall sing: Great is our Lord, and great is
his power: he makes them that were low on earth, to be high in heaven, them
that on earth were proud, and wicked, he abaseth, and throws down unto
hell. For if the honest subjects of the Electorall Palatinate did heartely so
much rejoice yesterday, when they saw that our right gracious, and illustrious
Princess Electoresse, was well and safely arrived here in good health, and
received with joy of our right gracious Lord; what think you will be then
there, when we, and all other the faithful, who are Christ's Bride, that shall
have sailed over the deep, hideous, terrible, and tempestious Sea of this
world, yea the temporary death, and shall have arrived at the holy hill, He
alludeth to a hilat Heidelberg called the Holy hill.
not at Heydelberg, but in heavenly Jerusalem, where Christ will receive us,
even the good Bridegroom, who has undergone so far a journey for our sakes, as
from heaven unto the earth, and has given out his life a ransom for us? joy
fully will all sing there, that can sing; and all cheerfully give piaise that
can praise. The Angels themselves, will then assemble in troops, rejoice and
sing, Halleluia; praise ye the Lord; the lambs wedding is come let us sing and
rejoice. Reu. 19
That which the Bride desired on earth, that she has, that she hears, that
she seeeth, that she feels now in heaven. She has the bridegroom: she
hears Angels music: she sees the Father in the Son, the Son in the
Father, and the holy Ghost in the Father and the Son. God does not so unto
any wicked, nor lets them see his glory, nor suffers them to feel his
joy. Therefore, praise here the Lord, ye that would praise him there: sing here
unto the Lord, ye that would sing unto him there. Here must the beginning be
made, the full accomplishment and fruition of all will be found there.

Thanks be unto the Father, that so clearly reuealeth his mercy unto us.
Thanks be unto the Son, who has purchased for us peace, joy, and life.
Thanks be unto the holy Ghost, that binds us poor miserable worms on
earth, in a permanent everlasting love with God in heaven. Let all the people
say Amen: yea Lord Jesus Amen.

The Prayer.
IT is a pleasant thing indeed to praise our God, and to show forth his mercy
in the morning, and his truth in the evening. Therefore we return our hearts
and tongues unto thee, most merciful God and Father, and praise thy marvelous
goodness, which thou have so plentifully and richly showed unto us ever until
this present.

It was thy goodness, that our Lord and Prince Electors Highness went well
and sound from hence into England three quarters of a year ago.

It was thy goodness, that his Highness purpose and design came there unto a
happy end.

It was thy goodness, that his Highness arrived here so well again, after
the performance of that business.

And it is thy goodness, that his Highness best beloved spouse arrived here
safely yesterday, to the great rejoicing of all the people.

Blessed and praised be thy high and great name for this thy marvelous
goodness, from this time forth and for ever.

We beseech thee gracious God and Father, finish that work which thou have
begun, and renew thy ancient mercy and loving kindness from day to day upon
this Princely new married couple; power down upon them from heaven above thy
heavenly goodness and blessing, accomplish all their Highness designs, hear
them when they call upon thee, deliver them when they be in danger, rejoice
them when they be in sorrow, bless them as thou did bless thy best friends,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that so their whole country may be glad of them;
and that in time, under their government, judgment and righteousness may meet
together in all parts of the Palatinate, and love, kindness, and
faithfulness, may kiss one each other in all houses.

Receive likewise into thy protection and defense the Roman Emperors
Majesty, the King and Queens Majesty's of Great Britain, as also the Prince
their Son, all other Christian Potentates, Princes Electors, and other Princes
of the Empire, especially in our right gracious joint government, together with
their beloved Ladies, and all that belong unto them, and so likewise all the
whole Electorall and Princely family of the Count Palatines by Rheine: bless
them all in body, in soul, in honor, in goods.

Look down from heaven upon the fruits of the earth, and speak and spread
out thy blessing over them, that we may also thereby acknowledge thee, the
Father and fountain of all mercy and goodness. Have mercy upon all
persecuted, afflicted, and sorrowful Christians; cure that which sick is,
bind up that which is wounded, strengthen that which is weak. Lastly, receive
us, and give us unto thee, so shall we be a blessed people here temporally, and
there eternally.

Amen.
TO THE INDIFFERENT Reader.
Considering, indifferent Reader, how sinisterly some of ignorance, and others
of malice, conceive of the state and dignity of the High and Mighty Prince
Elector Palatine, Duke of Bauaria etc. of his Country, of his receiving his
most honored Lady the Princess Elizabeth, and entertainment of my Lords the
Commissioners, and accordingly make report thereof; as also how desirous others
are to be rightly informed of the truth: I could not, in my duty, knowing the
place, and having certain aduertisements thence from honorable personages, and
others of great worth and credit, but add this short and plain yet true
narration thereof, as well for the easier stopping of intemperate mouths, as
for the better satisfying of all honest minds that be desirous of the truth.

First, therefore concerning the Prince Elector Palatines original and state,
though those many pedegrees published here already of his Highness descent,
sufficiently show his ancient and high blood, rising from many great Emperors
and Kings, yet give me leave to fetch it from the very beginning.

The Palatinate and Bauaria, were once a kingdom, yet subject (as other
States) unto alteration and change. Chron Charian. lib. 4. Chronolog. Func.
The Kingdom continued from Adelgerius the first King, until Tassilo the
last, all in lineall descent 332. years, from the year of Christ his
incarnation 556. until the year 788. This Tassilo the last King, for that he
would neither be subject, nor friend unto Charlemaine, was at length after much
war subdued by him, taken prisoner, and both he and his son Dedon deprived
of their Kingdom, and kept prisoners in the Monastery of Lanceack near unto
Heidelberg, where they both ended their days in misery.

After this, the posterity of Charles the great held those Countries, until
the seventeenth year full, or mean, as is by some supposed. It is in length
about 200. english miles the lower and upper Country. In the lower the Prince
has 26. walled Towns, besides an infinite number of good and fair Villages,
22. houses; and the land is very fruitful of wine, corn, and other
comfortable fruits for man's use, having the Rheine and Neckar running through
it. The upper Country has not so many walled towns and princely houses, but
those that are, be generally fairer then in the lower, especially Amberg and
New Market.

For her Highness receiving: After that she had passed the low Countries, the
Dukedomes of Gulick, Cleue, and Mont, the Bishoprics of Collen, and Trier,
with a part of the Landgraue of Hessens country; in all which places she had
so great welcome, entertainment, and honorable presents, as truly expressed
the love and applause of the people, the affection of friends, and greatness of
those Princes through whose territories she passed. She came at last happily
to Cowlsome, where the Prince Elector Palatine met her highness post, with a
few horse, and went together to Gauelshemi, another very small village of his,
the 1. of June 1613. inconvenient for the providing for, and lodging and
provisions for such a train, which was occasioned by reason Coub, Bachrahe,
and all other good towns of his thereabouts were infected.

Here the Prince Elector and Princess earnestly invited my Lords the
commissioners, and others his Majesty's officers, who had attended in the
voyage to go along with them unto Heidelberg, whereby they might not only have
a better view of some part of the country, but also find entertainment to
their more content. The commissioners condiscended unto so gracious a joint
request, and the rather to see her highness well arrive at her own home: But
the other officers could not by any entreaty be persuaded to go further,
desirous (perhaps) to make speedy report unto their Majesty's and the state, of
her Highnesses safe arrival in the Palatinate, and so re^^ued the next day
for England. And this is the cause they saw not any memorable thing worthy of
praise in the Palatinate, as my Lords the commissioners did, and will not
forbear to speak honorably thereof, though some have done otherwise; for
answering of whom and satisfying of others, I have thought good to touch this
much by the way, and noe more I am informed of.

Thence they rid the next day the 2. of June unto the City of Mentz, whither
the Archbishop, and Prince Elector thereof, Chancellor of Germany had invited
their highnesses, where they stayed two nights, and were of him roially
entertained, with great and bounteous feasting, and sundry excellent
Fireworkes, the better to express their welcome, and pass out the time in
princely manner.

The 4. of June they rodd to Oppenheim an ancient City with a Castle therein of
the Prince Electors, and there lodged all night.

(...) which the Troianes drew into the City: in the night the Alarm was
given, Troy fired, and the Greeks in triumph, marched away Conquerours.

The next day the 7. of June the Princess removed toward Heidelberg, after
she had Passed the walled town of Ladeberg, was met 3. miles from Heidelberg,
with the Prince Elector, accompanied with 12. other Princes, the rich coach,
30. Earls, one thousand gentlemen, of the country richly attired, and bravely
set out with gallant horse, armor, and other habiliaments of war. The horsemen
attending the Princes, were besides these two thousand more. So that all the
horse were three thousand, and all great horse. The Princes alighted, and
welcomed her Highness, who ascended into her rich coach. After a while she
was again encountered in three several places, with three regiments of foot,
2000. in regiment, who first welcomed their Princess with vollies of small
shot, and had after the thunder seconded with 20 pieces of great ordna^ce. Then
they marched altogether orderly in good array, conducting her to Heidelberg,
where the Citizens wanted no expressions of joy, love, and duty in hearty
welcoming of her, and praying for her; all windows being replenished with
people of all ages and degrees, and the streets thronged with multitudes of
people, drawn thither from all parts, not so much to see the Pageants that
were erected to further this honorable entertainment, as to have their eyes
filled in beholding of her Highness, whom all honored and admired. And thus
having passed in magnificent great state through the City, she was in like
pomp conveyed into the Castle, where the Prince Electors mother, with many
other great Princesses, Ladies, and Gentle women received her with all fitting
honor, due to so great a Princess.

The morning of the day following, being the 8. of June, was dedicated unto
God, with singing of Psalms, prayer, thanksgiving, and this annexed Sermon,
as was mere for so great mercies received from God. The next days, the 9. 10.
and 11. were appointed for Tilting, Tourney, and running at the Ring; the
nights for fireworkes and dancings; two nights, after the Germane manner, the
other times according to the English and French custom. Where let me not omit
to show, that my Lords the Commissioners, and all the Princes were lodged
within the Castle, in lodgings well accommodated, and richly furnished with
bedding, hangings, and all other necessaries.

The Princess and other great Ladies, with the Commissioners, being fitly
placed at the Tilt-yard in the Princes garden: The first that entered the
Tilt-yard the, 9. day, was the Prince Elector himself, accompanied with other
Princes of the Empire, gallently mounted, but were interrupted for that time
from their matiall sports by night: But the next day being the 10. recompensed
the same, for there came before the Prince Elector in a very stately manner,
this show, which gave exceeding content unto her Highness, and all other great
personages the beholders.

Jupiter came first, sitting in a very rich Chariot, drawn by two Griffins,
guarded by Mercury, who was coachman Juno followed next in another Chariot,
drawn by Peacockes, and driven by Iris. The God of Husbandry followed close
with 3. Ploughes. And after him Neptune the God of the sea entered; in a Chariot
welbefitting such a Marine God, drawn by 3. Sea-horses. Neptune had to attend
him a Merman, who sat behind him on a rock with a looking glass in his hand,
and 3. Mermaides on an other Rock, singing and playing on musical Instruments.

The next presentation that entered, was a Centaure, (half a man, half a
horse) holding a Book in the one hand, and a Mace in the other; Arion followed
him riding on a Sea-Vnicorne, and playing on a Lute. After whom followed the
seven deadly sins, all chained, and driven forward by a Dragon, which did
ever spit fire. Immediately followed the Prince Elector, with two others in a
ship: himself resembling Jason; attended on by six Squires, bearing shields
and lances. The golden Fleece which Jason brought from Greece, was to be seen
in the Ship: at the stern whereof was Envy dragged, eating her own heart.

Mars followed in a chariot garnished with all warlike Ensigns, having three
Knights and six Squires for his attendants, bearing lances. Then came Venus
and Cupid, drawn by Swannes in a chariot, six virgins going before, Hercules
following after, and three Knights following him, the Sun artificially gazing
on the chariot.

Next hereunto was Victory mounted on high in an Imperial Chariot (signifying
Sovereignty) on whose top above there stood a displayed Eagle: on which
likewise attended three Knights, and six Squires.

In the last Chariot of Forrest-worke, garnished with living birds and beasts,
was Diana, attended by six Satyrs, playing wildly on music: six other
Satyrs leaping and dancing Antick-like: twelve Satyrs more leading Dogs
and Dear: the Wood-men followed: then came the Nymphs with bows and arrows:
and last, the chariot of other Nymphs playing and singing, who^ three Knights
followed. These were the shows, and then began the Til^ing.

Thus this days sports, and the night, being passed with much delight, and
they come the next day again (une the eleventh) into the Ti^^-yard, the Prince
Elector, with those other two that sat with him before in the Ship (himself
still representing Jason) attended upon by six Squires, eight Trumpeters, seven
footmen, and seven horses of State, lead single: Two others followed him,
resembling Apollo and Bacchus, who were accompanied with three Wild-men,
playing on strange music; Satyrs rustically dancing, three Nymphs on
horseback, crowned with garlands. Next came Musoeus, Orheus, and Eumolpus,
with music, on horseback: Mydas followed with Asses ears, riding on an
Ass, for compating Pan to Apollo; and after him miserable Marsyas, and a
Satyr fleaing off his skin, for daring to contest with skillful Apollo in
music. A pretty space after followed the nine Muses, seated severally upon
Parnassus hill, and playing sweetly upon diverse instruments of Music: then
came the three Graces with Hercules and Mercury accompanying them: and Silenus,
Bacchus his steward, with a too and a glass, which as fast as he could fill
with wine, he presently drank off: which representation was finished with
Bacchus himself, drawn by Dogs in a Chariot, and waited on by Iunius,
Pamona, Hymenaeus, Zephinus, Flora, and Vertumnus.

The last representation was a man wearing an Imperial Crown, four prisoners
bound with Skarfes going before him, three following him with drawn Swords,
and four Squiers with Lances. Next came three clothed like Turks, attended
upon by six Squiers carrying Lances. And last of alone cameriding in, armed at
all points, followed with three persons, leading barbed horses single, which
sights being passed they tilted. And so the 11. days Glory and Triumph ended
with exceeding great State, and Honor, and noble performance of all Courtly
Ceremonies, and feats. of Arms.

The next day after, being the 12. of June, the better to recreate their minds
with taking of the air abroad, and using other sports, the Princess
Electoresse, greatly attended, rid on hunting: (...) inform the Reader of one
thing not mentioned and which sets out the Princes Electors greatness not a
little. That besides this 6000. trained footmen, who stayed there all the
solemnity, and were fed by the Prance, abroad in the fields: there were every
mea^e (during the abode of the Commissioners and the German Princes there)
above ^500. Tables furnished, and about 6000. persons, guests, and servants,
fed at them. Wherefore let envy, malice, and ignorance, cease ever thence forth
to carp at that they cannot parallel, now they may know it: and all honest
minds rest satisfied herewith.

Thus having briefly related, indifferent Reader, that I promised, concerning
the Prince Electon Palatines ancient State, his Country, the receiving of his
most honored Princess, and roial entertainment which all degrees found at his
Highness Court, to their full content, during the whole time of these
solemnities, I betake their Highnesses, and our selves, and all the Israel of
God every where, unto the Almighties ever safe protection; who preserve his,
and convert or confound all his adversaries tha^ wish evil unto Zion.

FINIS.

