The tragical end and death of the Lord James Regent of Scotland, lately set
forth in Scottish, and printed at Edinburgh. 1570. And now partly turned in to
English.
JAMES Earl of Murray Regent of renown
Now lies dead, and woefully put down,
Murdered without mercy, mourning for remaid
Who lost his life in Lythquo by a Clown,
Giltles God wot, betrayed in to that town.
Was slain by gunshot, and suddenly put to death,
Done by the Papists our foes, through fellonous faith.
Hangman to Harry, now Burrio to their brother,
Well may this murder manifest the the other.
What wight a live would not lament his loss?
Woe is me to want him, is the common voice:
For such a Prince shall never poor man have,
Killed by a Traitor, stealing upon him close,
Purposing of purpose, life for life to lose,
But no comparison twixt a Kings son and a Knave
Since he is gone, we cannot again him crave.
Through al our realm I dare well make this choice,
Reigned not his fellow since buried was the Bruise.
To keep good rule he rode, and took no rest,
Both South and North, and sometime East and West,
All to decore our common wealth men know:
By whom let us see, was Pirates so oppressed?
Or yet the thieves so thrown down and dressed?
Argyle and Huntlye hid them both for aw,
And when he might, he was tendant at Law,
Twyse on a day, and sleeped not in sleuth,
To see no fauters should bear them by the treuth.
Of this foul fact suppose our foes be feign,
Yet after Moses, Joshua comes again,
To guide the people, give glory therefore to GOD.
Should they succeed, that have Lord James so slain?
Beware of that, least that ye feel the pain,
And have your weak ones wyrried with the Tode.
Think ye with reason that such should rule the rod,
Which with double murder have made us such ado
And with our King would play like cousonage to?
Pray, if you please, I warrant you ye have need,
To keep our King from kankred Kedzochis seed,
That daily ways inuentes to put him down:
His Graundsire slain at Lythquo as I it reed,
His Gudsire thrice did leave this land in deed,
Harry at midnight murdered in this town,
His Cousin now last, and yet they claim the crown.
Blind Iocke may guess, if these be godly deeds,
Brude by that Bishop in who^ this mischiefs breeds
Cut of that Papist Prothogal parts,
That with his leesings all the Laity peruartes,
Straight join your forces to the fields without fear,
Because ye take your stoutnes al in startes,
To Hammilton in have while ye have hearts.
Devise some way to pay your men of war,
For if they once begone, ye need not gather gear.
Fight well, and war them, and win the riches thore,
And if ye do thus, in deed ye need no more.
Cursed be ye both, Bishop and Bothwell each,
For this foul deed, your necks the halter stretch,
If ye two want the withy, they do much wrong you:
Lythquo lament, your Burgeses may look bleach,
In their said time your Burrow rueth the leach,
Because of this murder lately made among you,
For if I thought it helped ought to hang you,
So should ye die, and set your town on fire,
As some part of punishment to assuage Gods ire.
Over these two houses for these deeds inding,
The hand of GOD does over their heads hing,
Them to destroy, I dout not in these our days:
Hepburnis will go to wrack, for wyrring of the King,
But Hamiltons fie, this was a fouler thing.
Is this your firm religion, yea is, yea is?
Such a time shall come I trow as Thomas says:
Heardmen shall hunt you up through Garranis hill,
Casting their Plates and let the plough stand still.
Apparently these plages are poured out,
To wreake this world, and wot ye where about?
Because we want no vice under the heaven:
Since double murder makers seek to rule the rout,
With the Ninevites to our GOD let us go cry and shout,
For to retreat that sentence justly given.
Yet thou good Lord, that judges al things even,
Seeing the perril that over the people stands,
Let not their blood be sought at giltles hands.
Now Lords and Lordings assembled in this place,
Over long we talk of Tragedies, alas,
Away with care, with comfort now conclude:
As good in paper, as speak it to your face,
If murderers for this gear get any grace,
Ye shall be shent, think on, I say for good,
Since art and part are gilty of his blood,
Why should ye fear, or favor them for fleiching?
Ye herd your selves what Knox spoke at the preaching.
First on the fields, make shortly to le(...)
We lack but one, and what the worse are we?
Since GOD was pleased to take him out of pine:
Al men on moold are marked for to dye,
In time and place appointed, so was he.
Let not in care your couragies decline,
For want of one I would not al should tine.
Go seek at Roxbrugh when the King was slain
And yet one woman wan the house again.
Since then by women doughty deeds were done,
Ye Barrons be blithe, and hold your hearts above,
And let us hear wherefore ye happened hither,
They are no great party, and ye speed you soon,
Albeit that boyd be dayily in Denone,
Lang or Argyle be gathered in together,
When al is done, the Counsel may consider,
What is the most those murderers may do,
Suppose that Huntly would come and help them to.
Had we one head would stoutly undertake it,
The Barrons says they should be boldly backed,
Might they with speedines travel to these towns:
Why stand ye afeard of Traitors twice detracted?
Think ye not shame to hear your Lordships lacked?
Some fears their flesh, some gins to gather crowns
(...)ides their heads, some girds them up in gowns
Look how your enmies prides the^ in their spurring
Keeping the fields, and frees not in their furring.
Woe worth the wives that fostred you and fed,
Ye do nothing love but lie on soften bed,
And keep you fro cold, with cloutes in your shoo:
I think great wonder how ye can be so dred,
Or fray at them that last before you fled.
Wanting their Queen, since God is gaynst them too.
Why lie ye here, having here little to do?
The Barrons bids you shortly bide, or else begone,
Courage decaies if Scotishmen tarry long.
Have Lions looks, and then make way forth clear,
Be Hannibals, and hoyse your hearts with cheer.
But be not still, while those Knaves do enclose you.
He needs not work that has one good ouersaeer,
Nor ye need fight, so that your hearts were fraeer.
But by my soul my self could never ruse you:
I know well for this crime Christ shall accuse you.
For sparing Agag, Saul was punished sore,
So shall he you, I dare not say no more.
The Lord of hosts that heaven and earth co^maundes,
Keep our young King from al unhappy hands,
And that good Queen of England, and her Counsel to.
Ye fear the Frenchmen should ouerlay these lands,
But I hear say by some that understands,
The Doctors doubt but they have more ado.
Our Queen is kept straightly, her power is igo,
England will help you, and ye will help your selves,
And be the contrair, crave of them nothing else.
Thus fare ye well, I spare not to offend you,
In simple verse this Schedul that I send you,
Beseching you to scanne it if ye may.
Steal ye away, the wives will vilypend you,
And if ye bide, the Barrons will commend you.
Best were it I think, we might prevent that day,
Their meeting is on Sunday I hear say,
In Glasgow town, thinking to fight or flee,
It looks well there, ye get no more of me.
FINIS.
The Tragedies Lenuoy.
AS men records,
In deed my Lords,
I shrink not for to show:
Suppose ye crack,
Ye lie abacke,
And lybelles by the Law.
Ye make not to,
As men should do,
I trow ye stand in some aw:
Suppose ye hight,
To see you fight,
That day will never daw.
Is no remayd,
Fro he be dead,
No man to seek amends:
Or who is here,
Dare break a spear,
Upon yone limmeris lends
Ye dare not mum,
Till Sadler come,
To see what England sends:
Thinking to say it,
And ay delay it,
And so the matter ends.
With sighs and sobs,
And belted robes,
Ye counterfeite the dule:
What doughty deeds,
To wear such weeds?
Except it were a fule.
Make to the town,
And cow them down,
Now or your courage cule
For Maddie says,
Bide ye few days,
Ye be not there while Zule.
Is this the thing,
Who guides the King?
Ye cannot al agree:
Now fie for shame,
Fetch Leuenox hame,
Ye have none nar nor he.
If he want grace,
To guide that place,
There is other two or three:
Then war I feign,
But all in vain,
To wysh and will not be.
And some there been,
Wartes on the Queen,
But gape awhil they get her
And were she here,
I take no fear,
The Fiend aby we set her,
For we are now,
As stark I trow,
As farner when we met her
When all is done,
They start to sone,
To boast, and not the better.
I think it best,
Ye take no rest,
If ye durst under take it:
And we be true,
We are iniew,
Ye shall be boldly back it.
But sine I see,
It will not be,
That meter will not make it
The Fiend make cair,
I say na mair,
I rue that ever I spoke it.
Rob. Sempill.
Finis.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britain street, without
Aldersgate. 1570.


