A TRVE RELATION OF OF A WONDERFVLL Sea Fight between two great and well
appointed Spanish ships or Men of War. AND A small and not very well provided
English Ship, who was constrained to enter into this conflict at the Island of
Dominico in her passage to Virginia, as she was determined to take in fresh
water there.

woodcut of ship called the Black hodge

The Margaret and John, or the Black Hodge.

London Printed for N.B. 1621.

woodcut of coat of arms containing a ship and a lion passant guardant

A SEA FIGHT.
Having taken our journey toward Virginia in the beginning of February last past
in a ship called the black Hodge, her burden 160. tun manned only with 8.
Iron pieces and a poor Faulcon, we soon over passed both the tedious
endurances and fearful dangers of such a voyage, and came at last by the 14.
of March under 13. and half Latitude, within 20 leagues of Matalina by 6. of
clock in the morning, the weather somewhat thick, and the wind affording a
reasonable gale, whereby we descried a ship lying at hull, as if she were
careless either to go backward, or forward; which caused us to edge with her,
as desirous to know what she was: but she presently set up all her sails, and
taking a course of South and by West ran quickly out of sight in the space of
three or four glasses: this made us keep our course for Matalina, which we
attained by the nex day at night, being the 15. of March, and so wasting the
Island of Dominico, we bare with Guardalupo, and there anchored to take in
fresh water which we wanted.

Then came aboard us certain Indians, and 6. Frenchmen, who had remained there
some 16. months, being cast upon the land by shipwreck, and so were
unprovided for a further journey: they informed us of a Spanish man of war
that past along some seven days before discharging her ordinance at the
inhabitants, and putting the Island in great fear, notwithstanding some two
days before there anchored another ship, whose Captain with some soldiers
came a shore with wine and other provision, as if they meant to make merry and
show all the signs of friendship and contentment: but she stayed but one night
at anchor, and so departed without further notice; what course she meant to
take, nor could the inhabitants guess, by reason their fear enforced their
flight, into the mountains, lest they should be surprised: only we were
advertised by certain Indians, that they determined for St. Vincents, leaving
word, that when the great Fleet passed along they should inform the General,
that Captain Bartholomew was gone up in prosecution of his directions.

This was the ship we descryed at Hull and so resolved she must needs be
some Spanish man of war, because no Merchant, or ship of burden would lose
the advantage of so fair a wind to transport her to any port of traffic and
spend the time in hulling, as if she lay of purpose to discover some prise, and
take the advantage of such passengers as were to go to Menis, being the common
trade way both for English and Dutch, and so as it appeared afterward she
stirred that course of purpose, both to deceive the Ilanders, and to betray us,
whom they had descryed a far off.

From Guardalupa we departed the 18. of March hasting to Menis, and suspecting
the worst, held a loofe a half road to be the more free from the Spaniards, by
reason we determined to repair our ship, and refresh our selves at Menis: The
ship being much beaten with a dangerous storm some 70. leagues from our own
coast, the people much distempered as having been a 11. weeks imprisoned in an
ill conditioned ship, and peradventure wanting many necessaries, which commonly
we prepare for long voyages.

But such was the pleasure of God, that we were prevented and disappointed in
these purposes, for falling with Menis by the 20. of March, and compassing the
furthest point to stand in the handsommer with the shore, we perceived two
tall ships at anchor right oueragainst the watring place with their top sails
loose, and their boats going a shore for their men. At first we supposed them
Hollanders, in respect of their building, and the Hollanders co^ours borne by
their Admiral in the main top, the vice Admiral having his fore-top ma^^
down, and no colors displayed, which increased our former opinion, adding
withal that i^ must needs be prise or some other ship sub^e^t to the
misfortune of a fight.

But driven by necessity of water, and willing to refresh our selves a shore,
we trimmed our ship, and came to anchor fayrely by them, sending our boat in
friendly manner to hale them both unprovided and unarmed, which returned with
certificate, that they were Spaniards, wherein not fully satisfied by reason of
our former apprehension that it was otherwise the better to be resolved, we
sent out our boat again, as well to be assured what to trust unto as to gain
sometime to prepare our ship, and trim her more commodiously, being pestered
with goods and fardels between the deckes and altogether unprovided for any
fight either offensive or defensive.

The boat approached the hindmost ship, which I call the Vice Admiral, and
haled her, demanding who they were, but in steed of resolving us, she
commanded them to come aboard, and would answer no otherwise, whereupon the
boat rowed from them, as resolving all was not well, and so made haste unto us
again, yet could not prevent a volley of small shot powered very dangerously
amongst them, insomuch that they had their clothes shot through, their oars
shiuered, and the sides battered with bullets: yet thanks be to God neither
was a man hurt, nor any thing lost, which, as if they had had notice of the
same escape, rated their rage so much the more. For by that time the boat was
out of reach of their small shot, they followed it to the ship with great
Ordnance, and when they perceived they were safely come aboard, they took it
so ill, that they thundered against our ship with the soarer rage, and most
violent vollyes, which we could not answer, having no piece in our gunner
room, nor indeed any other well mounted for such a Sea fight.

By this time we understood what they were, and resolved we should not depart
quietly without mischief, whereupon our Master set us on work to have brought
our Ordnance into frame, and so to order our ship that we might defend our
selves if need were, but many things failing us, we practiced to weigh our
anchors, which was not to be done so suddenly, confidering our encombrances on
ship board: we then resolud to weigh it up with the boat, had not so many shot
thundered amongst us, that we wondered at our escape.

By this time their vice Admiral heaued up her anchor to her warpe, and laid
her self to wind-ward, if either we should pass forward, or anchor short
again, so that we perceived they meant to assault us on all hands: for she
let fly a whole broad side upon us, and came furiously up to our lee quarter
without damage or resistance of our parts, to which sure they were the rather
induced because the Admiral having received her men from shore, her top sail
loose all ready, and many things commodious to their purpose, began to weigh
anchor, and made toward us amain.

But when we were thus terrified and threatened by them, and thus encombred and
disanimated amongst our selves, knowing withal (by reason of our ill prepared
Ordnance) the disadvantage and hazard to be boorded at anchor by two good ships
well prepared for spoil and ruin, we hoysed up our sails, and determined to
set forward, had not the Vice Admiral come on our star-boord side, and beat
upon us so hardly, that we fell to our business, and answered their
unkindness accordingly with many fair shot, which proved most effectual,
especially from a demi culuering, which at last shot her between wind and
water, so that she was compelled from us, and bare off to Sea, leaving her
Admiral only single with us, who at last came fairly in our quarter to
wind-ward, taking in her Holland flag, and advanced her Spanish colors, and so
haled us.

We quietly and quickly answered, both what we were, and whither we were
bound, discovering the effect of our commission, and relating the cause of our
tarying there for water, neither purposing to annoy any subject of the king of
Spains, nor by way of affront to brave either Merchant or man of War. Then
she charged us to strike our sails for the king of Spain, and veil the
bonnet according to the prerogative they had in those Seas: we replied with
enlarging the particulars of the league between the King our Master and their
king, adding withal, that as we intended no ill, we would take no wrong,
whereupon the Master left the poope, and sequestered himself from such open
conference; had they not called for the Captain again, who at last presented
himself, till they commanded him to come aboard with his commission, which he
refused yet wished them to send their boat aboard, and then they should see it
most willingly.

But instead either of answering us further with kind words, or accepting of
our reply in good part, they made two great shot at us, and poured among us
such a volley of small shot, before we could get off the poope, that we
thanked God they did no more harm, yet we were much amazed they did so much:
not thus content they waued us mith their bright sword^, an reviled us with
opprob^ious terms mis-^earming us dogs, and inuenting more odious names
against us then we could imagine, that Christians durst urge one another withal:
at last they laid us aboard, which enforced us to raise up our maine sail, and
to give the word to our small shot, which all this while lay close well
resolved and prepared: but suddenly breaking forth we plied them in such sort
that we made them give back and shrink from their former forwardness.

The fight continued some half hour in our quarter, and according to the
terror of such encounters, we were compast as it were in fire and smoke,
until they discovered the wast of our ship naked, and were encouraged with the
hope of reciprocal damage, whereupon they bravely ran upon our side, and laid
us aboard lufe to lufe, hastening with pikes and swords to enter, to which was
added such fury, that if they had not been prevented, we should have shrunk
under the rage of a barbarous slaughter: but it pleased God so to direct our
Master with advice, and encourage our men with valor, that our pikes being
formerly placed under our half deck, and certain shot lying close for that
purpose under the portels of the ship, encountered them so bravely, that their
fury was not only rebated, but their hastiness intercepted, and the whole
company beaten back, especially upon the wind-ward side, where the charge was
hottest, and the fight bloodiest; for there the throng was great, and men had
work enough to make proof of their courages and fortunes, diverse of our men
were hurt, and many fell on their side; if a man retired wounded with us, two I
am sure were slain amongst them; if their pikes reached as far as our
bodies, ours were long enough to fasten in their sides; if a Partison from the^
gashed our arms, a Halbard from us lighted on their heads: yea, we came so
near, that swords cut pikes a sunder, and targets were hewed with the blows,
so that if a fight were worth the describing: it is pity that some great
Commanders on both sides beheld not this, to record the action to memory, and
recompense the men with sufficient reward.

In the end they were violently repulsed by us, enforced to a retreat, until
they were reinforced back again by their Commanders, who standing upon
terms of honor, as being men of war, and designed for that purpose,
thought it an indignity to be so afronted and countermaunded, which caused a
second charge, and that was answered with a second beating back, till the
Captain himself grew enraged, as not brooking to be so much ouermated, and
constrained them to come on a fresh, which they did so effectually, that
questionless it had wrought an alteration, if the God that tosseth Monarchies,
and teareth the Mountains in his fury, had not taught us to toss our pikes
with prosperous event, and poured out a sudden volley of small shot upon them,
whereby that worthy Commander was slain at the foot of a pike and many of his
soldiers dropped down on the top of the hatches.

This we saw with our eyes, and rejoiced at with our hearts, so that we might
perceive as it were good success coming on, and deliverance to break through
the thicking cloud of that vengeance which was prepared against us: for
presently our Master took advantage of their discomfiture (though with some
commiseration for that valiant Captain so slain) that he not only plied them
a fresh with great ordinance, but had more false shot under the pikes, which
were bestowed to good purpose, and amassed our enemies with the sodainnesse.

Amongst the rest one Lucas our Carpenters mate must not be forgotten, who
perceived a way how to annoy them, as they were thus pusled and in a confusion,
drue out a minion which he nobly set a work under the half deck, till at
the last he brought it to the doxe of the half deck, and there bent it upon
them but in such a manner, that when it was fiered the cases full of stones and
pieces of Iron fell upon them like hail, and cleared their deck in such a
sort that it slew many, and in short time we saw few assailants, but only such
as crept from place to place very covertly, and seemed willing to obscure
themselves from the fury of our shot, which now was thicker then theirs. For
although (as far as we may commend our enemies) they had done some things
worthy of admiration: yet either wanting men, or overtaken with the unlooked
for valor of our company, they now began to shrink, and gave us leave to be
wanton with our advantage.

Yet were our great Ordnance only four that we could use in this fight, but
it should seem they served the turn as well as four times four: for they
shot her diverse times between wind and water, and so prevailed, that at last
we saw many signs of their willingness to leave us, but by reason she was fast
in a slach of our cable, which in have of weighing our anchor hung loose, she
could not be divided nor make that way she purposed, until one of our men cut
it with an axe without direction, and was slain for his labor. But when she
perceived she was loose, after she had been a board two hours and a half,
good Lord what have she made, and how quickly were we divided, both great and
small shot playing on both sides, which lasted until the remoteness was above
a Caliuer shot, and we discovered the vice Admiral coming to her assistance,
who began a far off to ply us with great shot and put us in mind, we had
another work in hand.

Whereupon we manned our ship a new, separating the dead and hurt bodies by
themselves from us, and were so encouraged, that we waued her, and in a manner
made toward her to fight a fresh. For when we perceived, that the Admiral made
not a shot more at us, we verily imagined, that either she was preparing her
self with a new supply, or wanted men to make her serviceable, or resolved to
go away from us, considering she had lost her Captain; yet loath to be secure,
and imagining the vice Admiral might come and board us finding us play, till
the Admiral did make her self better ready, we prepared our selves, wondering
yet that she came no nearer us then Falcon shot, wherewith she plied us still
on the lee fide, until at last she received another payment from our demi
Culuering, which shot her through, and made her bear with the shore into
smooth water, where she remained till 2. of the clock after midnight, and so
we had time to reform our disorders, and make our selves better ready for the
next days variety.

By break of day she came up again with the Admiral with her; as if they
determined indeed to devour us at once; but as it seemed it was but a Brauado,
though for the time they forsook not our quarter within Musket shot: for all
that night and morning they were quiet neighbors, and kept us company without
any great anoya^ce with their top sails down, not knowing, as it should seem,
what to do with us, or else suspecting their own hurts and leakes, they durst
not trust themselves too far from land, nor to the fury of another encounter.

All that night we had time and leisure to ouerlooke our losses, and prepare
for them if they assailed us again; and indeed we were better provided then
before, and better accommodated in our ship, as freeing it from former
encombrances, and affoording far more scope for our Ordnance to play upon
them: but God be thanked it fell out otherwise: for though we might perceive
them speak together, and with many yards a cross entend to keep us company;
yet did they not make much have up, nor trouble us with many shot, till the
next day the Admiral made show of an encounter, and we after prayers were
ended provided to fight with them, but suddenly we perceived the vice
Admiral hang a stern, cutting her maine sail to come up, and stirring very
ill, which astonished us the more, because we could not imagine the reason,
considering she was the best sayler and now spared her Admiral a fore-top
sail, showing all the signs of retracting, and no desire to come too near us
any more.

At length the Admiral shook in the wind and by apparent signs gave us
notice of slacking her course, whereby we might run a head and follow the seas
at our pleasure, so we perceived the vice Admiral with all her sails to make
toward an Island called Sana, which the Admiral either took notice of, as
knowing the danger she was in, or gave directions accordingly, considering
there was no good to be done with us: for presently she tacked about and lost
us, bearing toward that Island also, which we easily discovered with her whole
length: but the ships were quickly out of sight, although we saw the breach of
the sheare all along, and how the Admiral departed from us, which caused us to
imagine, that she was forced a shore by her leakes received in the fight, and
durst not adventure for fear she should have been suncke altogether, and
questionless the Admiral had never gone from our sides, nor tried any fortune
but our courtesy, if we could by any means have brought over our demi
Culuering on our fighting side which was endeavored by our Master and Gunner:
but as you have heard our ship being so encombred, it was in vain, and we
little dreaming, either of Pirates or adversary in those seas, made less
account to be intercepted in this manner: but such is the condition of human
life, that commonly mischiefs come unlooked for, and when they come, accompany
one another with much variety, especially at Sea, where I will be bold to say,
that a fight is more terrible to frailty, and yields greater occasion of
astonishment, then a maine battle at land, or the surprising of a town in the
fury of an execution.

This fight continued five or six hours, and was the more unwelcome, because
we were so unprovided, and had no intents, nor gave any occasion to disturb
them, as for the loss of men, and accidental troubles if religion had not
taught us, what by Gods providence is brought to pass; yet morality and daily
experience might inform us of the dangers of war, and perils at Sea, by
storms, tempests, shipwrackes, encountering with Pirates, meeting with enemies,
cross winds, long voyages, vnkown shores, barbarous nations, devouring
monsters, and a hundred inconveniences, of which humane policies are not
capable, nor men's conjectures apprehensiue.

We lost Doctor Bohune, and seven other were slain out right: two died shortly
after of their wounds, and 16. were shot through in some part or other of the
body, whose wounds Gods be thanked were recured and without maime or further
impeachment of health are now recovered and settled in Virginia, according to
our first intended purpose and Commission: I reckon not such as are hurt with
pikes and other offensive weapons, because there was no danger in their cures,
and the skillful Surgeon showed his art and good speed with facility. How many
they lost we cannot tell, nor what men of name were entertained amongst them,
only I am sure we saw many lie slain on the deck, and more cast over board
in the fight, besides the scuppers ran with blood, and the very Sea in their
quarter was colored with a Scarlet hue, and looked fearfully upon us all.

O the ambition and turbulency of men's natures, and the ill condition of
revenge, that cannot be contented with fair satisfaction, unless it be
answered with death and blood: I speak not of the unjustifiable proceedings of
Pirates, because the devil has any scuse fo such theft, from the necessity of
life and the terror of poverty, which cannot be prevented in great and sturring
spirits without course of active employment, or some endeauours or other: but
of the insatiate pride of the heart, and the wicked disposition of malice,
which is never satisfied, but with the death and destruction of an enemy, as
was apparent in this encounter. For we could not imagine, why they should
adventure thus upon us, unless to make us prise, and subject to the spoil of
robbery. As for the pretense of their kings prerogative, there was not so much
as a thought of afronting the^ in that kind, had they not insulted as it were
over us in an ouerdaring manner, and commanded us to that which we knew was
dishonorable to our nation and disgratious to our selves: but for fear of
lauishes and burstings out of frailty, I will now desist, either from
complaining of them, or exscusing our selves; and only conclude, there were
some hreat faults committed amongst us all on both sides, which the God of
heaven determined to punish in this manner, and that God of heaven direct us to
make use of his judgments, that we not only pray to him for the diuersion of
his wrath from our sins, but yield him all possible praise and thanksgiving
for any deliverance, or blessing whatsoever, and more particularly for this our
unlooked for escape from so great a danger.

The buhthen of their Admiral was 300. tuns, having 22. pieces of Brass, and
all provision of a man of War indeed: their Vice Admiral 300. tuns, and 16.
cast pieces, nor much inferior to her for trimming and correspondent equipage,
and both to the outward show ouer-masterfull and daring for one poor Merchant
and passenger, being but a 160. tuns, having 8. Iron pieces and one Falcon,
ouerloaden with stuff and wares, encombred with passengers, toyled with a
storm, tired with a long voyage, affrighted with wants, and every way
insufficient to answer any such enemy: but as it in the Scripture, it is all
one to thee O God, whether there be few or many, and Gedeons 300. shall slay
many thousands of the Midianites: as for deliverances, the people of Israel
shall pass through the red Sea dry foot: Jonas shall be cast safe on shore out
of the Whales belly: and Paul shall escape shipwreck, saving his life with all
his passengers in the Island of Malia. For to conclude with the purpose in hand,
there is one thing most remarkable as an inducement to this our deliverance,
that Captain Chester embraced Doctor Bohune being mortally wounded, and thus
recomforted him, saying, O Doctor Bohune what a disaster is this; the noble
Doctor no whit exanimated, replied; Fight it out brave man, the cause is good,
and Lord receive my soul.

Slain outright.
Doctor Bohune. Thomas Demeter Gent. Th. Read. William Garret. Th. Vernam.
Gabriel Peies. David Bathering, Raph. etc.
Died after.
Francis Annis Gent. Ed. Nerobery sayler.
Wounded yet cured.
William Bird. Gent. Alexander Bouentine. William Bannington Gent. Will. Joyce
quarter Mr. John wakings. John Wilson Sayler. George Tailor Sayler. William
Lucas Sayler. John Robbins Steward. Phillip Durwine. Three French men. Robert
Lector. Anthony Brown Gent.
FINIS.

