A godly Sermon of repentance and amendment of life, together with the
account which we must render at the day of judgment. Preached at the Rolls
Church in London the second of May, and taken out of the fifth Chapter of
Saint Paul his Epistle to the Corrinthians.

Cor. 5. verse. 10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every man may receive the things, which are done in his body, according
to that which he has done, whether it be good or evil.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop, right
over against S. Sepulchers Church. 1585.

A Sermon preached at the Rolls Church in London, the 2. of May being
Sunday, taken out of the 5. Chapter of S. Paul his second Epistle to the
Corinthians: verse 10.
The Text.
2. Cor. 5.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things, which are done in his body, according to that which he
has done, whether it be good or evil. THe holy Apostle, at such time as he
wrote this Epistle to the Corinthians, being persecuted for the testimonye of
his conscience, and the profession of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ,
protests solempnely, that the troubles, which be suffered in his body did
not only not discourage him, nor cause him to faint, but either That they did
add zealo and (...), 2. Cor. 4. 9.
causing him to continue constaune in his calling, and to account those
afflitions but tuomentary and light in respect of that most excellent and
eternal weight of glory, wherewith all in the end he knew he should be
crowned, the earnest desire whereof caused him to sigh and groan in spirit,
that he might shortly be losed out of his body, and clothed with his house,
which the Lord had prepared for him in heaven, not that be thought he could
prevent the time, which the Lord in his secret counsel had already determined.
For he knew that the Days of man surely are determined, Job. 14. 5.
and that his number of months are known of God, who has appointed him his
bounds, 2. Cor: 5. 1. 6. 8. and 9.
which can not go beyond, but we know (says he) that if our earthly house of
that tabernacle be destroyed, we have a buildinge given of GOD, that is, a
house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, being absent from the
Lord, whileste we are at hoame in this body. Howbeit whether it be the Lord his
good will and pleasure, that we shall still dwell at home in the body, or
remove from home out of this body and dwell which him, we endeavor our selves,
that we may be found acceptable in his sight at all times, and in all places.
Whereof he gives this reason, For we must all appear, etc. Exhorting al men
both by his example and doctrine, in life to meditate of death, in prosperity
to fear adversity, in the day of mercy to think of the day of judgment,
and so to live in their several callinges, as to remember they must give
account of their callinges, so to use the benefits and blessings of God, as
not forgetting from whence they have them, and when they must resign them,
according to that counsel of the wise man, Remember thy end, Eccle. 7. 3^.
That is, the certainty of thy end, the uncertain hour of thy end, the
reward thou shall receive at thy end, the place of joy or pain, that thou
must go to at thy end, In all thy doings remember these things, and tho^^^^
shall never do amiss.

For what causes such losenes of life in all sorts, but the forgetfulness of
death in all sorts? What causes the wicked always to presume of God his
mercy, but the contempt of his justice? What causes such general security in
sin, but the general oblivion of the reward of sin? Whereas if we did
always remember our particular ends and our general judgments, it would
cause us to walk more circumspectly in our callinges, which more care of
conscience, and greater consideration of all our actions, which one day must be
brought to judgment. To this end does the Apostle preach of the day of
judgment in this place, putting us in remembrance of three things necessary
to be thought of, and considered of all men before that time.

1 First, who and what they are which must appear at that day.

2 Secondarily, where and before whom they must appear.

3 Thirdly, to what end they must appear.

If you ask who they are which must appear at that day, the Apostle says
All.

If you ask where and before whom those All must appear, the Apostle
answers, Before the judgment seat of Christ.

If you ask to what end, those All must appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, the Apostle does answer, To receive every man according to that which
he has done in his body, whether it, etc.

The first part.
TOuching the substance of that doctrine, which here is delivered by the
Apostle, it was prophesied long since by S. Peter, that toward the letter end
of the world, this doctrine of the general judgment and resurrection of all
flesh should of all other to the opinions of the wicked seem most absurd,
ridiculous and foolish. 2. Peter. 3. 3.
There shall come in the last days mockers Iud. 18.
(says he) 1. Tim. 4. 1.
which will walk after their lusts, 2 Timothy 3. 1.
and say, 2. Peter. 2. 1.
where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers dayed, all things
continue a like from the beginning of the creation. He terms the despisers
and contemners of this doctrine mockers, he says, the dais they shall live in
shall be the last: the manner, how they shall mock it, will appear both in
their lives and speeches, in their lives for that they shall not walk after
the laws of God, but after the laws of their flesh, fulfilling the lusts
thereof, as profane and rechles persons void of al godliness, and given over to
all sin and iuniquirye. In speeches not ashamed to profes, that they believe
nothing less, then that, that should be performed, which is promised in the
scriptures concerning the coming of Christ in judgment. The reason, that move
them to think and say so, is the observation of nature his constant course in
all the works and creatures of God continuing in ye same state, wherein they
were first created without any alteration or change in any of them, as those
great lights, the sun and the Moon observing their usual and ordinarye time
of their vprising and down sitting, Gene. 1. 16.
according to the several seals and times of the year, the one ruling and
giving light to the day, Genesis 1. 18.
the other in the night, the stars remaining firm and fixed as lights in the
firmament of heaven, where they were first planted in the beginning to divide
ye day and the night, and to be as signs and seasons for days and years:
the earth being vnremooueable under our feet, bringing forth budde and green
herb apt to seed, and fruitful trees, every one yiedling fruits after his
kind, and all these together with the beasts of the field, fowls of the air,
and fishes of the sea to be subject to man, who likewise according to Gods
first ordinance is borne at his appointed time, and at his appointed time
also returns again to duste, from whence he came, and so observing all the
works of God to hold on that course of nature at this day without any
change, which he gave to every one of them in their kind and at their first
creation many years since, thereupon they promise and presume of an eternal
perpetuity in all things, concluding with the Precher, Mundus durauit
hactenus, ergo finem non habebit, The wor^ has endured hitherto, ergo it shall
have no end, and thus (as much as in them lies) both in the examples of their
lives, and words of their lips discredyting, nay deriding the promise of the
coming of Christ, and mocking the threatninges of God his judgments. Such
mockers in these days of ours, Mockers.
which the Apostle terms the last, are many. Psalm. 14. 1.
One sort of them say in their hearts, there is no God. In which number the
most and greatest part of us (I fear me) may be comprehended, we are not so
impudent to say with our tongues, there is no God, but look into our lives, our
offices and functions, mark how every man walks in that state of life,
wherein he is placed of the Lord, and you shall see, we are not ashamed to say
in our hearts, There is no God. We all say with our tongues, that we esteem
our souls a thousand times more dear then our bodies, but compare that which
we do to the one with that which we say of the other, and you shall see, that
in our hearts we have a greater care to preserve our filthye carcass, then to
instruct our conscience we all say with our mouths, we would go to heaven, if
wishing would bring us to heaven, but we frame our lives, as though in our
hearts we neither hoped for heaven, nor believed there is a hell, but looked
always to live upon earth. We cry out with our mouths, fie of the flesh,
and we defte the Devil in our words, but we are ready to take his part in our
works, and the least temptation that is offered us, is able to vanquishe us,
and cause us to give the Devil our consent with our hearts. Thus we mock
God, and we deceive our selves, but the Devil he will neither be deceived nor
mocked of us, when time shall be, that the secreats of all hearts shall be
opened, and the deeds of all men judged, he will challenge that, which is his,
and bring in good and sufficient evidence to prove us to be his, then by our
own works, and not his. whose now we pretend to be with our mouths. Then
shall we find that in earnest, which now being preached to us, and yet not
felt of us, we esteem but as a mock or jest.

A second sort of mockers there is who although they confess there is a God, yet
say they, non veniet dies iudicii, that God will never come in judgment.
Esai. 22. 13.
Let us therefore cate and drink, 1. cor. 15. 32.
for to morrow we shall die, there is noman known to have returned from the
grave. Sap. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10.
We are borne at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter, as though we had
never been, our breath is like a smoke in our nostrels, and words like a spark
raised out of our hearts, which being extinguished, our body shall be turned
into ashes, and our spirit shall vanishe as the soft air, our life shall
pass away as the trace of a cloud, and come to naught as the miste that is
driven away with the beams of the same, and put down with the heat thereof:
our name also shall be forgotten by little and little, and no man shall have our
works in remembrance, for our time is a day shadow, that passes away, and
after our end, there is no returning. Come on therefore, let us enjoy the
pleasures, that are present, and let us cheerefullye use the creatures like as
in youth. Let every one of us be partakers of our voluptuousness, let us
leave some token of our pleasure in every place: for this is our portion, and
this only our lot. Let us oppress the pore righteous, let us not spare the
widow or old man, let us not regard the heads, that are graye for age, and so
forth as it follows in the book of wisdom, where the life and manner of
these second sorts of moekers and epitures is lively described and set forth
at large. The Apostle terms them Phil. 3. 17. and 19^
ennemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, Romans 16. 18.
whose God is their belly, and glory to their shame, minding only earthly
things, and not seeking after those things that are above. col. 3. 1. and 2.


The third sort of mockers there is, which say with the ill servant Tardat
dominus venire, these prove there is agod, and that God will at last come in
judgment, but yet presuming of his mercy, and life they differ their
repentance to the hour of death, thinking they may repent them, when they
will, and that they shall have leisure enough when they are old and ready to
dye. But O ye fools and mockers of God remember with your selves, that like as
God is merciful, so goes wrath from him also, and his indignation comes
down upon sinners. Ec. 5. 6. and 7.
Make no tarrying therefore to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to
day, for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall
destroy thee. Put not of thy repentance therefore in hope to attain to old
age, or to find God merciful at the last hour. For thou know not, whether
thou shall live, till thou art old, and death when he comes, he asks
not, how long a man has lived, but as he finds him, so he takes him. But
suppose, Eccl. 4. 1.
thou live, till thou art old, how art thou sure, that thou shall have the
space of an hour, on quarter, or minute of an hour, before that death does
strike thee with his dart. Old father Isaac confessed, Genesis 27. 2.
he knew not the day of his death, much less do thou know, Prech. 9. 11.
the hour of thy death. For as fishes are taken with the angle, and birds
cought in the share, even so are men overtaken with death. But when thou do
sicken, what if thou doste live an hour, a day, a week before thou die, art
thou sure in ye hour, day, or week to have a mind to call for God his grace
and repent thee of thy life misliked: Or do thou think, that a wicked man
can repent him, when he will, and when he list? why then did not Caine repent,
why did not Saul, why Judas, why Esau? who (as the apostle says) found no
place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. Heb. 12. 17.
No repentance is the free gift of the grace of God, who gives it to every
man, when he will, to whom he will, and in what measure he will according to
the riches of his mercy, which is free, and not tied to the will and pleasure
of man. And commonly the judgment of God is such, they forget themselves at
the hour of death, who in their lives thought not upon GOD.

Age poenitentiam ergo (says Augustine) dum sanus (...). Nam si poenitentiam
agis, quando peccare non potes peccatate demiserunt non tu illa. Repent thee
therefore in time of thy health: For if thou do repent thee in time of
sickness, when thon can not sin, Math. 9.
thy sins have there left thee, and not thou them. Such was the repentance
of that same blasphemous Antiochus, who in despite of God (as it were) had
vowed to make Jerusalem a heap of stones, would take upon him to command
the floods of the sea, weigh the mountains in a pair of balance, reach up to
the stars, and pull God out of heaven: yet suddenly in his greatest bravery God
cast him violently down from his chariot, smote him with an incurable plague, a
horrible pain of his bowels, and inward parts, in so muth, that the woormes
came serauling out of his guts, his flesh rotted, and fell from his bones,
which stancke so horriblye that no man could abide the savor of him, nor he
of himself, and thus with extremity of pain either the remorse of conscience
he was brought to this point, that he confessed, It is reason to be obedient to
God, and that man which is mortal, think not through pride to be equal with
God. A like kind of repentance did the Lord wringe out of hard hearted
Pharao who in time of his prosperitye and welfare Exo. 5.
was nota shamed to extol himself above God, acknowledging no Lord better
then himself, and therefore despising God, and his messengers Moses and Aaron,
who were sent in embassage to him. But in the end when he felt such plagues
laid upon him, as he could neither drive them away with tyrannycall
courage, assuage them by counsel, put them from him by pollicye, nor resist
them with power, he was so humbled and brought down thereby for the present
time, as he confessed, The lord is righteouse, and I and my people ungodly.
Exodus 9. 27.
But when the lord ceased to plague him, by and by did he cease to remember
him, much like to those same backeslyding people of Israel, who, when the
lord slew them, sought him, and enquired after GOD remembering that he was
their strength and redeemer. But they did but flatter him with their lyppes,
and dissembled in their tongue, for their hearts were not whole with him,
neither continued they steadfast in his couenaunte. So that we may set, that
even hipocrites and ^irauntes, such as have neither cast of God his mercy,
nor sear of his justice, in time of their health, wealth and presperitie, are
yet humbled and brought to knowledge of them selves, and constrained to
acknowledge the majesty and power of GOD with their mouths, when they feel
the execution of his judgments laid upon their bodies.

But this manner of repentance as it is but hipocriticall and dissembled and
not proceeding from the heart in us, so neither does it move the lord, who
lercheth the heart, to have pity and compassion upon us, but does ^^ther
aggrauate his heavy wrath and displeasure against us. who desposing the
riches of his goodness, patience, and long sufferance, whereby he leads us to
repentance, Romans 3. 4. 5. and 6.
according to our hardness and hearts, who cannot repent do heap up wrath to
our selves against the day of wrath, and declaration of the righteouse
judgments of GOD, who will reward every man according to his deeds. Let us
take heed therefore, mock not with God, but always endeavor our selves by
the example of the Apostle here, to be the same men inwardlye in conscience
before GOD, which we will seem to be outwardlye in conversation before the
world, least in the end we be accounted among those mocking sooles, which
say in their hearts, 1. John. 23
there is no God. If our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and
knows all things. Neither let us think with our selves, that because the
Lord does not as yet come in judgment, therefore we may live in securitye
withont all fear or dread of his judgment, as the second sort of mockers
do, which think he will never come in judgment, but rather as it becomes
good christians. Semper vigilemus been viuendo, ne nouissimus dies cuiusque
nostrum inueuiat nos imparatos. Let us watch and wait for his coming in
honest conversation of life, that the latter day of every one of us find us
not unprepared, beeleeuing always that he will come, whom we are ignorant,
when he will come. Neither let us think the lord is slack in coming, as the
third sort of mockers due. 2. Pet. 3. 9.
For he is not slack, as they count slackenesse, but he is patient to us
ward, because he would have mercy of all and none to perish. Howsoever we
mock with him, or how mercifully soever he deals with us, or how long soever
he deferreth his coming to us, yet in the end, he will come, and will not
tarry, at which time of his coming We must appear before his judgment
seat, etc. whereof that we should be the more assuredly persuaded, the
apostle not without great vehemency of spirit as well as of speech, tells us
that we must appear. As though he should say, how long soever the Lord may
seem to linger his coming, and how loathe soever we be to have him come,
yet in the end come he will, and necessity of his coming is ineschuable, it
cannot any way, or of any creature be avoided.

This Oportet or must, in this place is suppriced by diverse reasons, Oportet.
whereof the first is grounded of the eternal purpose, decree, and counsel of
God, and therefore of necessitye it must be accomplished. If it were the
counsel, purpose, or determination of man, it were possible either to
frustrate it, or at least to alter and change it. Men are men, constant in
nothing so much as inconstancy, which they will to day they will to morrow, that
which they fullye purpose at one time, upon better advise, they will dispose
themselves to the contrary at an other. But this is the purpose of God. If the
Lord of hosts determine a thing, who is able to disanull it. Esai. 14. 27.
Since this therefore is determined by God, it follows of necessity that we
must appear, etc.

The second reason is taken from the undoubted truth, and virtue of his
word and promise, whereupon we grounded our faith, and which in all
points shall be fulfilled and performed accordingly as he has spoken it.
Mat. 2 ^. 64.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sittinge on the right hand of the
power of God, and coming in the clouds of the sky. His Apostles seeing him
taken up into heaven in a cloud, were promied by two Angels, which stood
by them that the man Jesus, Act. ^. 11.
which was taken up from them into heaven, should so come as they had seen
him go into heaven, at whose coming all men shall rise again with their
bodies, and shall give account for their own works.

It is of necessity therefore, that we must appear, 1. Cor. 15 15 10. 17.
and 18.
etc. Otherwise (says the Apostle) our prearching is in vain, your faith
is also vain, yea and we are found false witnesses of God, because we have
testified of God, how that he raised up Christ, whom he raised not up, if
so be the dead rise not: bef^^es you are yet in your sins, and they which
are fallen a sleep are perished. But the preaching of the Apostles is true,
our faith grounded upon the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles is true,
and we beeleeue and receive it for an undoubted truth, that GOD has rayfed
up Jesus from the dead and that by virtue of his resurrection we all must rise
again, and they likewise Must appear.

A third reason may be taken from the justice of GOD. For (as the Apostle
says) if in this life only we have hope in Christ, then are we of all men
most miserable. 1. cor. 15. 19.
The best Christians are and always shall be most hated. The world shall
hate you, in the world you shall have tribulation, 2. T^. 3. 12.
and aga^^e, They that will live godly shall suster persecution. And therefore
their state, who will ^iue godly of all other may seem to be most
miserable and unhappy, and contrariwise the state of the wicked most happy
and blessed. For they for the most part are in no peril of death, but lusty
and strong, they come in no such misfortune as other folk, neither are they
plagued as other men, they prosper in the land, and have ryd^^ in possession.
They come to oulde age, thi^e children live in their sight, and theirc
generation before their eyes, their houses are safe from all fear, and the
rod of GOD is not upon them, their bullock ingendereth, and that not out
of time, their Cow caluethe, and is not unfruitful, they send forth their
children by flocks, and their sonns dance, they bear with them tabretes, and
harpes, and rejoice in the iustrumentes of music, etc. What shall we say to
this. Is God unjust, which thus heapeth his benefits and blessings upon the
wicked? Or is he unfaithful of his promise, that forgets the poor whom
he has received into his charge? God forbid, yea let God be true and every
man a liar. me has promised, Romans 3. 4.
that no good deed shall be unrewarded nor no ill deed unpunished, and be will
perform it. I grant, we see it fall out contrary many times in this
life, but yet her that has, promised, is faithful, he cannot deny
himself, and though sometime he does dissemble him self to his children in
this life, yet the truth and consideration of his justice do preach unto us
the performance thereof shall be in an other life, And therefore We must
appear, etc.

Neither must any man think him self Math. 25.
exempted from the general necessity of this judgment, challenging any
prerogative as privileged from it by his petegree, parentage, person, power,
riches, honor, learning, wisdom or authority. For says the Apostle, this
necessitye is common to all. We must al appear, etc. All. All flesh, all
Nations, Jews, Gentiles, Turks, insidels and Christians, high and low, Princes
as well as their subjects, Magistrates and mean men, rich and poor, men and
women, fathers and mothers, masters and servants, young and old. I saw the
dead (says John in his revelation) both small and great standing before God,
Apoc. 20 21
Not small in respect of their stature, nor great in respect of kodilye
proportion, but in respect of the great or small credit they carry in the
world. Math. 25.
These All the scripture deuideth into two sorts foolish or virginswise,
Math. 3.
chafe or wheat, Math. 13.
corn or else cockell, good stshes or bad, sheep or goaces, the children of
this world or the children of hight: which two sorts only shall appear in
judgment, Math. 25.
whereof one is blessed, the other cursed, ye one chosen before the foundation
of the world, the other rejected, as also there shall be but (...) forms of
judgment, Come and go, but two places mentioned for these two sorts to go
unto, heaven or hell, no mention of any third, either before judgment or
after judgment, which were requisite, if there were any collects or third
sore of people, as they fandly imagine to them selves, which dream of a third
place. And these two sorts shall all be found alive or dead (not half alive
or half dead, as they may seem to be, which are supposed to be in the third
place) according to the articles of our Christian faith, wherein we believe,
that he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, which the Apostle also
witnesses, when he says, We shall not all dye, but we shall all be changed,
not meaning, that we shall he changed in substance or quality of our
bodies, 1. Cor. 15. 51.
but in the qualitye and nature of our bodies, Psa^. 25. 81
The tears being wyped from our eyes, Apoc. 21 4.
all sorrow and grief taken out of our minds, Apoc. 7. 17.
All infirmities and blemishes out of our bodies and cur hearts replenished
with such, psalms of joy, as no man can take from us. Besides this
corruptible must put on incorruption, this mortal must put on immortalilye,
and as we have borne the image of earth, so we shall be are the image of
heaven. Our bodles are sown in corruption, they shall rise again in
incorruption, 1. Cor. 15. 53 and 54.
they are sown in dishonor, they shall rise again in honor, they are sown
in weakness, they shall rise again in power, they are sown natural bodies,
they shall rise again spiritual bodies, and death shall be swallowed up into
victory. If any man be so curious to ask, whether those, that shall be found
alive, or those, which shall be dead, shall appear first, 1. These. 4. ^5 1^.
and 17.
the Apostle does answer him, That those which be alive, and which remain
unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them that sleep.

For the Lord him self shall descend from heaven in a shoute, and in the
voice of the archangell, and in the trumpe of God, Mat. 24. 31.
and the dead in Christ shall rise first, 1. Cor. 15. 52
then we, which live, and which remain, shall be caught up together with them
in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, to remain and live with him for
ever. So that whether we remain alive, or be found dead at his coming, We
must all appear, etc. All, whether we died at home or abroad, in our beds, or
in the field, whether we were drowned in the sea, or slain on the land, or
whatsoever becomes of our bodies in this life to come. Apoc. 20. 13
We must all appear etc. I saw the sea give up her dead, death and hell (says
S. John) delivered up the dead, that were in them, and al stood before God.
Many think, that those bodies, which are buried in Christian burial (as they
term it) that is, such as are laid in graves and included with in Church
walles-shall rise again, but as for those bodies, which have been brent and
consumed to ashes, slain in fields, and veuoured of wild beasts, or corn in
pieces with vermin, or which have miscarried on the seas, they think it
impossible, that those bodies should be brought again. But that which is
impossible to man is possible with God, and al is one with him, whether the sea
has received us or land, the Church or the Chancel, earth or water, and as
easy it is for him to raise up our bodies out of the earth, sea, or land, as
it was easy for him at the first of nothing to make us something, and with
the breath of his spirit to breath into us a living soul, which before were
boyde of life. Do ^oe thou see, it is possible for thee being but a man and
the creator of God, to strike ster out of the hard flint, where before thou
flindest it, it may seem impossible to have fire? And why should thou
think it were impossible thy creator and maker, which has given that nature
to the stone, and that power to thee, himself having greater power to raise
thy body out of ye dust, water or cinders, seeing at first he gave thee thy
body. Those that find not them selves thus satisfied with the consideration
of the omnipotent power of God, but require to be further satisfied with
reason, 1. Cor. 15. 36
the apostle says there are fools and mad men, as thaugh he should say, the
resurrection of the body is either to be believed that it shall be, then to be
reasoned upon, how it can be and they but fools and madd men, that will stand
reasoning about it, when they are bound simply to believe it. Nay he, that will
call in question every kind of doctrine in the scriptures, whereof he cannot
conceive or give a reason, may chance to doubt of the highest points of a
christian man's faith and religion. For what reason in there, that there should
be one, and one three, as that the Father should be God, the son God, and
the holy Ghost God, and yet not three Gods, but one God, a trinity in unity,
and an unity in trinitye. What reason is there, that a Virgin should
conceive with child, bear a child, and yet after her conception and birth,
remain a pure and undefiled virgin still? What reason is there, that a man
dead, buried, and laid in his grave three days, should rise again alive? Or
what is he, that baring the name of a Christian dare deny, or doubt of the
truth of these things, because he sees not the reason of the^. No God
almighty his mysteries are hid and inserchable, not to be construed by reason,
but conceived by faith. And we are taught in the scriptures, and bound to
believe many things, whereof our reason can conceive but few. I come to the
lord his table, who has hidden me under the sign of bread and wine to receive
his body and drink his blood and I do nothing doubt, but he does truly
offer him self to me, and I do truly receive him. Howbeit if any man ask
me, how he being in heaven should be received in earth. I answer as
Master Calvin. De modo si quis me interrogat, 4. Instit. cap 17. sect 32.
fateri me non pudebit, sublimius esse attamen, quam vt vel meo ingenio
comprehendi vel enarrari verbis queat, atque vt apertius dicam, experior magis
quam intelligam: Itaque veritatem dei, in qua acquiescere tuti licet, hic sine
controuersia amplector. That is, If any man ask me of the manner how Christ
is present in the Sacrament, I will not shame to confess, that it is a higher
mystery, than can either be conceived with my wit, or expressed with my
tongue, and to speak more plainly, I rather feel it, then understand it,
And therefore in this point I do willinglye embrace God his truth, wherein I
do safely rest and stay. So for the resurrection of the dead, though I see no
reason in it, or that the reason is hid from me, yet I do acknowledge it to be
an article of my Christian faith, and therefore do undoubtedly believe, that
the spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead shall raise my mortal and
corruptible body, and that my body, and all men's bodies, through his
omnipotente power and might being so raised Must appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, etc. But here now least any man should think, that among
such a multitude as must then appear, it were possible for some to hide
themselves, from the presence of their judge, and so escape the severity of
his sentence, therefore the Apostle says we shall not only be summoned by the
trumpe of the Lord, and so dismissed again, but of necessitye We must ad
appear before him, and can no way hide our selves from him. The word
Apparere, that is, appear, is very emphaticall in this place, notinge unto us
the appearaunce of the soul as the body, the inward heart and conscience, as
well as the outward man. And because the nature of the wicked is to promise
themselves perpetual impunitie of those simes before God, whereof they can not
be detected before the world, to confute and confound that vain hope of
theirs, the Apostle tells them plainly, they must then appear. Which
imports so much, as if he should say, whereas we have here played the
Hipocrites, dissembled our selves and our sins before men with a
counterfaite show of vprightnes not being the same men before God in our
consciences, now we must have the vizardes pulled of from our faces and be
uncased, laid wide open to the whole world, Even as though our bodies were ripped
in pieces for every man to view us, to look over us, under us, round about
us, and into us. Naie either the very hearts in our bodies, which now we
(...) count the most feereat parts of us shall be so (...) sought and searched
into; as if they were (...) in smell peers, for every (...), and discern the
secreates thereof, which now are only known to our selves. Let us take herd
therefore we be no bescher encouraged to be (...) for the (...) of our (...),
or the (...) (...) of the place, wherein we do (...). For how (...) we be in
our selves, or how (...), yet will our wickedness one day appe^^^ when
nothing can hide it. Luke 8. 17.
Nothing so secreat; but it shall (...), Says Christ it is not always
revealed; as it is done but it shall be. The wicked presumptuous sinner, who
(...) ^he world with his glosing speech and ^ocketh God with his abominable
life, thinking that his hypocrisy shall never be found out, because it is not
always pi^nished and detected of God. But God by the Prophet tells him an
other ca^e. Psalm 5^. 19. 20. 21. and 22.
When thou saw a theife, thou did consent to him, and haste been
partaker with the adulterers. Thou have let thy mouth speak wickedness, and
with thy tongue thou have set forth deceit. Romans 2. 5.
Thou sattest and spakest against thy brother, yea thou have slaundered thy
own mothers son, these thing haste thou done, and I heid my tongue, and
thou thoughtst wickedly, that I was suen a one, as thou thy self, but I will
reprove thee, and lay before thee the things that thou have don. Let us not
flatter our selves in our sins therefore, thinking bicaus God does dissemble
the^; and make as though he saw them not, that therefore be does forges them, or
allow of them, but assure our selves, that one day he will reprove us, and lay
our faults before our eyes, We do many things in secret and huggermugger,
which for shame we would not if we knew we were seen of any how much less
ought we to do the^, since we are seen of God. We have many secret thoughts,
and fantastical imaginacio^s, wherein we much please our selves and delight
our flesh, and would blushe to have them known of others, which one day the
Lord will make known to our neighbors, 1. Corr. 4. 5.
when he shall make manifest the things of the darcke, and open the secreates
of all hearts. I will search Jerusalem (says the Lord) in that day with a
lantern. Sop^o. 1. 4.
Alas who can hide him self so secretlye, or dissemble so deeply, but the Lord
will find him, and found even the unsearchable depth of his heart, when he shall
search Jerusalem with a lantern? Let us remember this all the sort of us
(least as the Prophet David says) Psalm 53. 20.
we forget God and perish from the right way. The witnesses, which shall come
in against us, shall be especially the testimonye of our own hearts and
consciences. Dan. 12. 2.
The books shall be opened, and the dead shall be judged of these things which
are written in the books. Apoc. 20. 12
These books are the consciences of our good deeds and bad, which (as the
Apostle witnesses) shall then excuse us, or accuse us, iustiste us or condemn
us, Romans 2. 15.
make with us, or against us. And there is no man, to whom God has not given
one of these books to carrye with him always in his bosom, neither is any
man so ignorant, but the Lord has given him knowledge to read them. But
most men are so careless to vnclapse them, as they never read or mark the
contents of them, till it is to late for them. When God had placed Adam in
Paradise, forbidding him to eat of the fruit in the midst of the garden, he
gave him a book, and for his memories sake he wrote in it, What day soever
thou eat thereof, thou shall dye the death, Genesis 2. 1^.
But Adam never vnclaspt this book, till he had in deed transgressed Goods
commandment, and then his book being opened, he saw the vglesome deformity
of this sin, whereto he had brought him self, Exo^^. 2^. (...)
and his posterity, but it was too late. Caine carried this book in his
bosom, but he never opened it, til he had murdered his brother, and then
vnclasping it, he found written in it, Thou shall not kill, but thou have
killed thy brother, ergo says he, My su^e is greater, than that it can be
forgiven. That same frantike (...), of whom mention is made in Euripides, Genesis
4. 15.
after he had stain adulterou^^ Egisthus, and Clytemnestra his own mother,
having no man to accuse him, but his own conscience, he looked in his book,
and there he found written, Blood will have blood, and thereupon though he was
acquit by the law, he presemlye ran mad, and was never his own man afterward.
One demanding the cause thereof in Euripides, Quid muli te perdidit Orestes,
What ill has betide, or what has caused thee lose thy wits, Orestes? He
answers him, conscientia, my conscience. for Quid si omnes excusant; and
sola consc^en^ia accusat, what if all me^ in the world excuse a man, if his
own conscience accuse him, which is instead of a thousand witnesses, and shall
more and fo^er confound him, then they al. S^neca.
And therefore, Nullam peccatoru^ tuoru^ conscium magis timueris, qua^ teipsum,
aliu^ potes effuger^, teipsum nun quam, fear no man y^ in privy to thy sins
so much as thy self: thou may avoid an other man, but thou can not flee
from thy self nor thy own knowledge and conscience, which (according to the
Etimologye of the word) is nothing else, but a joints knowledge, which an other
has with thee, and thou with him, which is God and thy self, and is very aptly
termed of Chrisostom in psalm. 50. Coae^, in quo conscriban^^ quotidiana
peccata. A book, wherein is recorded our daily sins, which howsoever they be
dissembled of us now shall then be revealed, brought to light, and punished,
when we must appear, etc. And therefore is this day and time of our appearaunce
termed of the Apostle, dies declarationis, the day of declaration, not that
any thing shall then be declared to the Lord more then he knows already (For
he that planes the care, how can he but hear? he that made the eye how can he
but see? heaven is his seat, earth is his footstool, what can be d^n in
heaven or earth, Psa. 139. 2. 3. 4 5. 8. 9. 10. and 12
whereof he has not knowledge? he knows our down sitting, our vprising, he
understands all our thoughts long before, he spieth out all our ways, not a
word in our tongue, but he knows it altogether, if we climb up into heaven, he
is there, if we go down into hell, he is there, if we remain in the uttermost
parts of the sea, he is there also, if we think darkness shall hid us, the
darkness is no darkness with him, but the night is as clear as the day, darkness
and light are both alike. To conclude, all things are naked and open to his
eyes, and there is no creature, that is not manifest in his sight, but wherefore
is the day of judgment termed of the Apostle, Hebr. 4. 13.
the day of declaration, for that nothing is so secretlye concealed of us now,
Romans 2. 5.
but it shall be manifestly revealed then. Mar. 4. 22.
The day of this life, is one day, and may be termed, the day of our
dissimulation, the day, which follows immediately after this life, is the
lords, and is termed, the day of declaration. For then the very heavens
(says Job) Lib. 20. 2^.
shall declare the wickedness of the wicked, and the earth, which now does
bear him, shall then take part against him. Now the ten virgins go together,
walk together, talk together, eat and drink together: but at that day, it
shall appear, who are wise, who foolish, who have slept, and who have watched,
which of them had oil in their Lamps, and which way, which of them shall be
admitted unto the marriage, Matthew. 25.
and which excluded and shut out. Now the corn and chafe lie together on a
heap in one flower, and are not yet scucrd, but at that dtye, Matt. 3. 12.
the Lord shall come with his ^ari in his hand, and purge his flower
thorowlye, carrye his wheat into his garner, but burn his chafe with
unquenchable fire, Now the wheat and tares grow together in one field, and
are not yet weeded out, Mat. 13. 30.
but at the day the lord of the harvest, will say to the reapers, gather the
ears, and bind them up in bundels to burn them, but carry the wheat into the
barn. Now the sheep and goats go together, feed together, and are foulded
together, but at that day shall the chief sheapehard separate the sheep from
the gouts, placing the sheep one his right hand, and the goats on the left.
Now the world does deride, and the children of GOD do weep and lament, but at
that day they shall be comforted, and the other shall be tormented. Romans 8. 19.
and 21.
Now all the creatures of God do groan and travail in pain with us, looking
when the sons of God shall appear but at that day they shall be freed of
the bondage of corruption, and vanitye, whereunto they are now subject. Now
the very heavens are not pure in his sight, but at that day the heavens being
on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with heat, and we look
for a new heaven and a new earth, 2. Pet. 3. 12. and. 13.
according to his promise, wherein dwells righteousness. Luke 21. 19.
In the mean time let us possess our souls in patience, and rejoice to be
partakers of Christ his sufferinges, 1. Pet. 4. 13.
that when his glory shall appear, we may be glad and rejoice being certainly
persuaded, Romans 8. 18.
that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of that glory which shall
then be showed upon us. 2. Pe. 3. 14.
Only let us be dilligent, that we may be found of him in peace, without
spot, and blameles in holy conversation and godliness, Heb. 10. 22. and 5.
our hearts being pure from an ill conscience washed in our bodies with pure
wator, and that so much the rather, because we see the end of al things to
draw near, and the day of our appearaunce to be even at hand. Thus much
of the first part.

The second part. Where and before whom we must appear.
THe place, where we shall appear the apostle calls it, The judgment
seat. The person, before whom we must appear, is Christ, For the father has
given all judgment to the son, and the articles of our Christion faith do
teach us to be leeue, John. 5. 22.
that he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, not that God the father
and God the holy ghost shall then be excluded and not joined in judgment with
him, but for that the visible execution of this judgment shall be done by
the second person in trynitye God the son, who shall then sit one his seat
of judgment to give every man etc. Now he sits one his seat of mercy
as our mediator and aduocare making continual intercession, to God his Father
for us: Sitting on his seat of judgment he shall pronounce the sentence of
condemnation against us. Now be offers himself to be entertained and calls
al men to be his clientes, that are opressed with their ennemies, the world,
flesh or devil, come to me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will
refresh, Mat. 11. 28.
and give ease to your souls. Those, which now resist to come, when he thus
calls them in mercy he will refuse them, when he shall come in judgment and
whereas now he bids them come, and they will not come, he will then command
them to depart. Now he knows those, that are his: but those, that now will
not know him, be will not know them.

Now he has neither beauty nor favor, Esai. 53. 2. and 3.
now the world has no lust to him, now he is despised, and abhorred of all
men now he is counted so vile, as men are ashamed of him, and hide their
faces from him, now he is reckoned as a worm and no man, a reproach of men,
and the very ^f coome of the people. But when he shall come in judgment as
the son of God in glory. of his father, accompanied with a multitude of
heavenly soldiers, in the sound of the trumpe, Mat. 25. 31.
and in flaming for to render vengeance to such as know not God, nor believe
not the gospel, 2. These. 1. 7. and 8.
his presence shall be so hot, that no man shall be able to abide it, his
lips full of indignation, his tongue as a consuming fire, Esa. 30. 7.and 8.
his breath is a vehement flood of water, that reaches to the neck, insomuch
that even kings of the earth, great men, rich persons, graund captains and
mighty men, Apoc. 6. 15. 16. and 17.
every bondsman and freeman shall hide themselves in dens and amongst rocks
of the mountains, Isai. 2. 19.
saying to them, fall on us, Hose. 10. 8.
and hide us from the presence of him, Apoc. 6. 16.
that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, Apoc. 9. 6.
for the great day of his wrath is come, Kuk. 23. 30.
and who can stand, Now he appears in him little, then be shall appear in
majesty, now we see him in poverty, then we shall see him in glory. Now he
seems to be but a man then shall be show himself to be god. Now is he judged
of all men, then shall he come to judge al men, Now he comes as a lamb,
then shall he come as a lion, Now be comes to call, then shall he come to
condemn* Now he comm^th entreating of us, then will he come three a^e^nge of
us. Matt. 24. 6.
The signs and tokens, which shall go immediately before this his seas (...)
coming, the scripture shows to be many, Christ himself says you shall
hear of wars, and rumoures of wares, Hearing has relation to speaking. And
therefore when be says, you shall hear of wars, he thereby signifies unto
us, that toward his coming ye devil shall disperse sediciously messe^gers of
news into the world, which shall raise up rumors and tales, filling ye peopls
heads full of news, and those no joyful or good news (as ye angels reported
at his first coming,) Luke 20. 10.
but heavy and troblesom news, news rending to sedicion, ye disturba^ce of
public peace, and disquieting of peoples minds, breeding disoledience in
subjects against their souer^igues, in princes ielosie of their Subiertes, in
Magistrates and men of honor secret hearted and disliking one of an other both
in religion and government. After which rumors and news dispearsed abrod of
war and that men's hearts are, (as it were) prepared to wars, wars shall flow
indeed both foreign, ciuell and domestical. For nation shall rise against
nation, realm against realm etc. Bitter contentions and contrariety of
opinions, and controversies for matters of religion shall ensue and sollow.
They shall put you to troble and shall kill you, and you shall be hated of al
nations for my names sake. Many shall be offended, Mat. 2. 6. and 10.
betray and hate one another, and that which is wonderful, and against the
common course of nature, Mat. 10. 21. 35. and 36.
a man shall be at variance with his father, the daughter with the mother, Luke
21. 16.
the daughter in law with the mother in law, insomuch that the brother shall
betray the brother unto death, the father the son, children shall rise against
their own parents, and shall cause the^ to die, and a man's foes shall be those of
his own household. Micah. 7. 6.
For nullu est (...) says Hier^m, in (...) non sint infidele^ and (...). There
is no house, Hier. 11. 10.
where in they are not both infidels and bele^^ers. Matthew.
And therefore no (...) though they be thus divided in kingdo^s, in cities,
towns and houses. For non potest (says he (eorum fidies esse affectus, quorum
diuersa est fides: They cannot be true on to another in heart and affection, ye
differ in faith and religion.

Another sign going before his coming is, The Gospel shall be preached in
all the world for a witness of all nations, whereby he notes unto us, that
toward his coming the gospel shall be preached to all nations, professed
also of many, but practiced of a few, but be a witness and testimony against
him. For notwithstanding the preaching of the Gospel, Tim. 4. 1. 2. and 3.
some shall depart from the faith and shall give heed to spirits of error,
2. Tim. 3. 1.
and doctrines of devils, 2. Pet. 3. 3.
which speak lies through hypocrisy, lud. g18.
and have their consciences burned with a hot iron, forbidding to marry, and
commanding to absteyne from meats, which God has created to be received
with giuinge of thanks of them, which believe and know the truth.

An other sign is, that faith shall fail, charity wax could, and iniquitye
abound. For men shall be lovers of them selves, 2. Tim. 3. 2. 3. 4.and 5.
covetous, proud boasters, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, without natural affection, truthbreakers, false accusers,
intemperate, fierce, no lovers at all of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high minded, lovers of pleasures more then of GOD, having a show of Godliness,
but denying the power thereof. But for all this the end is not yet, For that
day shall not come, except there come a departinge first, and that the man of
sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is an adversary and
exalts him self against all that is called God, 2. Ehe. 2. 3. and 4.
or that is worshipped sittinge as God in the temple of God, showing him self
that he is God.

These are the heginninges of sorrows, the manifest demonstrations of his
coming, and the experience of the^ in our days do plainly Prognosticate unto
us, that he can not be far of. For daily do we hear of wars and tumors
of wars: never was the world so full of news, and fearful rumors: nation
does rise against nation, and realm against realm. And even now is the time,
that the son is at variance with the father, the father with the son, etc.
Even now can one state hardly abide another without grudging, disliking or
disdain, or if they agree in matters of policy and government, yet do they
hardly agree in matters of faith and religion in one house, where they are
nighly joined together, it is hard to find two of one mind, and among those
that seem to consent in opinions, not to have the self same man in some
things to dissent from them selves. Even now is the Gospel preached, and yet
even now in the time of the Gospel do some depart from the truth, giving
beede to spirits of error and doctrine of Devils, forbidding to marrye and
eat meats, who the Lord bath ordained to be received with tha^ksgiuing. Even
now also does faith fail, faith in religion, faith in word of promise, in
bargening, buying, and selling, and no truth to be found, charity kaiecold, a
care to each man, common abuses remains in many, pity, mercy, and
compassion, and judgment remains in few. Iniquity is grown to such
perfection in both sects, all states, ages and callinges, that it has almost
gotten the upper hand. For when was there ever such self love? when was there
ever so liet len^ig h^orly love? when were ^teneue^ so (...)? when were there
eure such bosters and braggers? when was there ever the like pride? when were
men's mouths fuller of cursing and bitterness? where were Children so
disobedient to their parents? when were men ever so unthankful? either to God,
their prince or their private friends? when were men ever so void of
compassion: when so falls hearted? when so many false tongs? when so many riotous
ruffia^s and so fierce? when was virtue, godliness and godly men more abhorted?
when so many traitors public and private, open and secret? when were there
ever so many bayrebraines? when so many high minded merchants? In what age
were pleasures in greater price, and God had in less honor? when was religion
ever more in show, when was there ever less among all men generally in truth?
And to make iniquity consummate has not the man of sin^^ long since been
disclosed? has not the child of perdition be^^t manifestly deuealed? are not
his dangerous practices daily discovered, and through the wanderfull working of
God miraculoustye confounded?

Since these things therefore are the Signs of his coming, and are gone
before, let us assure our Selves, the time of his coming which they
prognosticate, can not be far of. And yet (...) not I speak this, as though
A (...) scem^ precisely to determine of the very day or hour, week or year
of his coming. I know what Christ answered his Apostles, when they (...) yred
of his return. A^^. 13. ^.
It is not for thee to know, the times and seasons, Mat 24. 32
which the father has put in his own power. And de die and hora, etc. Ma^k.
13. 32
Of thatday and that hour no man knows, not the angels in heaven, nor the
son of man him self. But even as lightninge: flash (...) in a man's face
unawares, and as the byed is (...) in the snare before he thinks: himself
within danger of the net, and as a chief enmmeth suddenly in the night, so shall
the coming of the son of man be: yet because men are so senseless of their
sins, and live in such security of life, crying peace, peace, safety,
safetye, thinking least of those dangers which hang over their heads, giving
them selves wholly to eating and drinking, planting and building, buying and
selling, chapping and changing, wyuing and marrying, etc. even as they did in
the days of (...), when the flouddes came and destroyed them all, and in the
time of Lor, when fire and Brimstone came down from heaven, and consumed them
all upon earth. This general security, I say, and these peritous times of
ours, whereas men live, as though they were either wedded, or bewitched of this
world without any word or remembrance of the world to come is a most
plain and manifest argument, that he is at hand, even at the door, who
comes to judge the world.

And therefore, if thou will be counted worthy to stand before the son of
man, and avoid those dangers, which shall fall upon them, that dwell on the^
face of the earth, Luke. 21. ^4.
Take heed that your hearts be not at any time overcome with surffeting and
drunkenesse, and the ears of this life, but being on earth let your
conversation be in heaven. Colo. 3. 1. 1. 2
Seek those things that are above, where christ sits on the right hand of
god: set your affection on things above, and not on things on earth, and take
unto thee the whole armor of God, Eph^s. 6. 13. 14. 15. 16. and 27.
that thou may be able to resist in the evil day, that having finished all
things thou may stand fast, having your loins gyrte with truth, and the
breast plate of righteousness, your feet shod in the preparation of the gospel
of peace, your souls armed with the shield of faith, Luke. 12. 36. 37. and 36.
your head with the helmet of salvation, holdinge in the hands of our hearts
the sword of the spirit with your lights and lamps burning in your hands, and
your selves like unto men, which look for their Lord, when he shall come from
the wedding, Mat. 24. 46.
that when soever he shall come and knock, Luke 12. 43.
whether at even, or at midnight at the cock crowing, or dawning of the day,
thou may open unto to him immediately. Happy is that servant, whom the Lord,
when he comes shall find so doing.

The third part. To what end we must appear.
THe end of the appearing shall be To receive every man according to that,
which he has done in his body, whether it be good or evil. Where first the
Apostle notes unto us the integrity and uprightness of him that shall be our
judge by two excellent points of justice, one in that he will reward every
man, the other is in that he will reward them according to that, which they
have done.

The first property, which the Apostle notes, gives us to understand, that
he will respect no persons, but minister justice to all alyke without
particularitye showed to one, or extremity to another, rewarding every man
according, etc.

If any man therefore living in the fear of God, and with the testimonye of a
good conscience finds him self vexed, iniuried, hurt or oppressed pouring
forth his grieved soul before God without ease or release of these evils, let
him not therefore faint, or think himself forsaken of God, but patien^lye
abide his leisure, till he reward every man, etc.

When David saw Saul sought his life, 1. Sam. 29.
Abner after Saules death to enjoy 2. Sam. 2.
his welfare and seek to overthrow his state, and then Abso^on his own child
to seek his life, and thirst for his kingdom before his death, with a number
of such like calamities, wherewith all it pleased the Lord to try him mithall,
he was in that perplexity, that he protests he had utterly fainted, but
that he did verily believe to see the goodness of the lord in the land of the
living. As though he should say, the remembrance of the Lord his goodness,
which I was sure to see and taste of at last in the land of the living, was
that which comforted me in the midst of all my troubles.

When the Lord had laid upon Job all those plagues, which might fall upon man,
robbed him of his riches, spoiled him of his goods and cattle, vereft him of
his children, marked him with botches and biles, that from the sole of the
foot to the crown of the head he had not one clean place, and that which was
his greatest ge^e^ plagues him with untrusty friends vpbrayding him with the
hippocrisie of his conscience, and the calamities of his life, adding this
moreover to the perfection of his manifold miseries, namely a wi^^^ust,
froward, and wicked wise mocking and scoffing his misery, yet says he, The
lord gave and the lord has taken away. If the Lord should kill me, yet
will I still trust in him. For I know that my redeemer lives, Ioh. 19. 25.
26. and 27.
and that I shall be clothed with my skin, and see God with these eyes, etc. As
though he should say, as for these temporal blessings he has taken them,
that gave them, blessed be his holy name for them, if he should take my life
with them too, yet have I this hope left, that whatsoever I lose, I have a
redeemer, whom I cannot leese, and who will not leese me, but in his time,
reward me and every man according, etc. In all thy troubles fore whatsoever
look unto Jesus the captain and finisher of thy faith, who in the end will
reward every man, whether he be bound or free I have been Ephesians. 6. 8.
young (says David) and now am old, yet did I never see the righteous man for
saken, Psalm. 37. 25.
nor his seed beging their bread, confessing as it were, that he had seen
them, have their crosses to be persecuted, hated and oppressed, but that he
never saw them fully forsaken. For the patient abiding of the poor shall not
alwais be forgotten. The lord may disse^ble his loving affection toward them
for a time, and seem to forget them, but at last he will remember them. Prea.
37. 3. 4. 5. and 6.
Put thy trust in the lord therefore, and be doing good and verily thou shall
be fed. Delight in the lord and he shall give thee thy hearts desire, commit thy
words to him, and he shall make the righteous as clear as the light, and thy
just dealing as the noone day when every man shall receive, etc. In the mean
time fret not thy self, because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious at
evil doers, nor grieved at the wicked or ungodly, whom thou see in
prosperity. For prosperity neither comes from the East, nor from the
Weste, nor yet from the South, but the Lord sets up one and pulls down
an other.

And though for a time the wicked florishe like a green baye tree, Psalm. 37.
35. 35.
yet suddenly do they go down to the ground, where they are kept to the
day of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath, and
come to a fearful end, and not be able to stand in judgment, Job. 21. 30.
31. and 32.
nor in the congregation of the righteous, Preach. 1. 5.
but receive according to that which they have done, etc.

The second note of his uprightness is in this, that he will reward every
man, and every man shall receive according to his doing, whereby the holy
Ghost signifies unto us, then he will proceed in judgment according to
the circumstance evidence, and matter hanginge before him in judgment, nor
respectynge the man, whose the cense is, but the matter what it is. For where
the man is not respected and not the matter, their justice is perverted, but
where the matter is weighed, and the man not regarded, there is justice truly
ministered. To show therefore the exact and precise form of God his judgment,
the Apostle says, Every man shall receive according to that, which he has
done, etc. The judges of this world they are men and no gods, and therefore as
men they proceed in judgment and give sentence according to such evidence, as
they see with their eyes, or hear with their ears, and therefore do err many
times in their judgments, Esai. 11. 3. and 4.
and swerve from the truth. But he that is lord and judge of al men, shall not
give judgment after the thing that is brought before his his eyes, neither
reprove after the hearing of his ears, but with righteousness and according
to the truth of the heart shall he judge the earth, and his people with equity,
every man receiving according to that which he has done in his body etc. Let
us not deceive our selves therefore being only vain speakers of the word,
and not dooers, thinking at last to win heaven with speaking heavenly, if we live
wickedly and ungodly. For at the latter day men shall receive according to
that, which they have done, and not according to that which they have
professed and spoken. Many shall say unto me in that day (says Christ,)
Lord we prophesied in thy name, Matt. 7. 22. and 23.
cast out devils, and done many great works in thy name, and yet for all
their so saying, Christ says, he will term them workers of inniquitie, ver.
21.
and bid them depart from him. For not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he, that does the will of my father,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, so that many good words shall be
found in hell, but good works go all to heaven. I speak not this as
houlding, Romans 11. 16.
that we are justified by our works. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
No, Tit. 3. 5.
we are saved by grace through faith, and that not of our selves, Ephesians. 2. 8.
it is the gift of god. But if thou braggest of faith shows me that says of
this heart by the sruictes of thy life. for true christianitye consists of
owo parts, profession and practice, or, (to use the phrase of the scripture,)
of faith and good works, and to the perfection of a christian man both are
necessary, and each does mutually accompanye other as the shadow goes with
the body. And as the body is known to have life by it moving, so is the life
of faith perceived by working. The life of the body is the soul, and the
life of faith is love: and as the body is dead without the soul, so is faith
without love, and as circumcision profited the Jews nothing without the law,
so neither does faith profit us without charity. Whatsoever we profess, how
muth soever we know, our Savior Christ pronounces us so farfoorth blessed,
Ioh. 13. 17.
as we do that we profess, and follow, Ioh. 15. 14.
that we know. They that profes the faith of christians, and do not confirm
it with a Christian life are like belles in the steeple which call others to
churthe with their sound, but never come into it them selves, like fair
painted sepulchers, which are full of gaye golden pictures and immages
without, but full of dead carcases and filthy corruption within, like salt,
which has his color, but lost his savor, like a candell, which is light,
but hidden under a bushel. But let your light, (says Christ, speaking to
Christians.) so shine before men, Matthew. 5 16.
that they may see your works etc. John. 8. 39.
If you be the sons of Abraham, Math. 7. 21.
do the works of Abraham. If ye call me Lord, Luke. 6. 46.
Lord, John. 15. 14.
do the works that I command you. Romans 2. 23.
The tree is not commended for bearing leaves but fruits, Iame. 1. 22.
even so the commendation of a Christian consists not in speaking but in
dooinge They shall leave their words beehinde them, but their works shall
follow them, and they receive according to that which they have done.

Doing is double and of two sorts.

1 Well doing. 2 Ill doing.
And boeth shall be rewarded accordinglye. He that has done well, shall
receive according to his well doing, not that any man does well of him self.
For all flesh has corrupted his way, and all the immaginations, of our
hearts is evil every day, There is not one, that does good, no not one, our
lips are full of cursing and bitterness, not apt or abell to utter a good
word, much less are we able to do a good work. Men do not gather grapes of
thorns, nor figs of thistles, and we being shapen in wickedness and
conceived in sin are as unapt and as unable to bring forth good fruits, as
thorns are to bring forth grapes, or thistles figs. But yet as the stock
of a sower crabbe may bring forth a sweet apple, if the graffe be good: so
we being the children of wrath by nature may bring forth good fruits by grace,
if Christ be ingraffed into our hearts by faith. For without me (says he)
you can do nothing. I am the vine, John. 15. 4.
you are the branches, he that abides in me, and in whom I bide he brings
forth much fruit. But as the branch cannor bring forth fruit of it self,
except it abide in the vine, so neither can you, except you abide in me.

To make our works good therefore it is necessary to observe these four
circumstaunces, 1. Tim. 1 5.
that we do them in love, with a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned, How glorious a show of godliness or good intention soever our
works do carrye before men, if these four conditions be not observed in
doing them, we that are the doers of them (as says the Apostle,) are but
vain ianglers and no frutifull workers. 1. Tim. 1. 6.
To make the work good (says Augustine). It is not only requisite, vt
aliquid fiat, quod in suo genere bonum sit, sed pr^cipue vt been fiat. 1. that
the thing which is done, be in his own nature good, but especially that
it is well done.

For many things being of their own nature good may be done, they
notwithstanding not doing them well, of whom they are done. It is good to help
any man in necessity, but he that seeks the glory of men thereby rather then
of God, bonum facit non been, says Augustine, he does that which is good, but
he does it not well, because he does it not with a good mind and conscience.
Hence it is, M^t. 6. 1. and 2.
that Christ condenmeth the prayers, fasting and alms of the scribes and
pharisees, who sought not to please God therein, but rather to procure
themselves a name and credit before men. Many excellent moral virtues were in
the heathen philosophers, which notwithstanding because they referred them not
to God, were no hetter then sins before him, Amb. devocatio^e gentia (...)
lib. 10. cap. 3.
Sine cultu very dei, etiam quod virius videtur esse. peccatu^ est, nec placere
vllus deo si deo non potest, that is, without the worship of the true God, that
which seems a virtue is a sin, neither can any man please God without god.
Omnis vita infidelium peccatorum est, Ansel. in 14. Romans
and nihil bonum sine summo hono. The whole life of infidels is sin, and
nothing good without him, that is the perfection of all that is good. And to
say all in one word, without faith it is impossible to please God. why (says
Iulianus to Augustine) if a Pagan should cloth a naked christian, because it is
not of faith, were it sin? yea indeed were it says Augustine. Ipsa miserico
dia per se opus est bonum, at hoc bonum malefacit, qui infideliter facit. i.
non fideli sed infideli (...) Mercy it self is a good work, but this good work
does he euilly, which does as infidels, that is, not with a faithful, but an
unbelieving heart.

And whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23
Whereupon Prosper de vita contemplatina lib. 30. cap. 10. Apostl. non dicat
quicquid non est ex fide, nihil est, sed dicend^, peccatum est, declarauit,
quod si non fuerint ex fide, non sunt aliqua bona credenda, sed vitia, que non
iuuant suos operarios, sed eadem mane, that is the Apostle said not,
whatsoever is not of faith is nothing, but saying, it is sin, declares that
whatsoever things are not of faith, they are not to be decided as good things,
but as vices rather which justify not the doers of them, but rather do condemn
them. When the scripture therefore says in this place. Every man shall
receive according to that which he has done, and in other places, that every
man shall be rewarded according to that, which he has done, that manner of
speaking is not meant of the merit of our dooinges (for that we should all
be rewarded with everlasting damnation and hell fire) but that we shall receive
and be every man rewarded according to the testimonye of that, which he has
done bearing witness of our faith with us, or of want of says against us. If
that which we have done proceed of faith, then does God accept it and impute
it to us for a good woorlie, not in respect of the work it self or for our
sakes, or for our faith sake, but for Jesus Christ's sake, in whom he is
well pleased, and in whose name we do it, and he does accept it, and in mercy
reward it.

Now we are to consider, that the Apostle says, Every inan shall receive
according to his well doing, so likewise, Every man, that has done evil shall
receive according to his doing ill, which must not be (...) con^^ued of us, as
though man at the la^tter judgment should receive only according to that
ill, which he has done, and not answer at all, nor receive any punishnent
for that ill, which he has spoaken. For I tell you (says our savior
Christ) a man shall Mat. 12 36.
give account for every evil word. Psa. 5. 1. 1. 2.
Quid ost in omni vit a nostra, cutus nos minus rationis habeamus, quam
verborum. what is there in the whole course of our life: whereof we have less
regard, then of our words and therefore in what danger stand we before God,
if we shall answer every idell word, wherein we have offended before men? Or
if we shall answer every idle word. Alas how shall we answer every idell
word. If we must answer every idell word, how shall we answer every lying
word, every blasphemous word, every flandorous word? Or if we cannot answer
our idell words, how shall we answer of one idell deeds, and time misspent? Or
if we cannot answer our idel deeds, how shall we be able to sustain the
punishment which we must receive for our il deeds? Here we may all cry out.
and appeal from God his justice, and our deseruings, to his mercy, Enter not
into judgment with thy servants O lord for no flesh is righteus in thy sight,
and have mercy upon me O God, not according to my merits but according to
the mercy do away my offenses, etc. For otherwise we must all prepare our
selves to taste of the reward of sin, which, be our sin never so light or
littell, committed in thought, word, or deed, is death of body and death of
soul to every one according to that, which he has done. Upon the ungodly
shall come snares, fire, and brimstone, stormy and tempest, this shall be their
portion to drink. The Prophet uses many words, where of every one may seem
more grievous then other, to teach us, that the greater shall be the punishment,
which the sinner shall receive according to that, which he says in the second
chapter to the Romans, that the impenitent presumptious sinner does heap up
wrath to himself etc. as who should say God will heap damnation upon his head
in life to come as he has heaped one sin upon an other in this life, not
that there are many helles, or many siers in bell, Greg. sap. illus.
but that the justice of God re quireth to measure out y^ grieuousnes of their
punishment accor to the grieuousnes of their sines, Mat. Egerientur in
tenebras. etc.
vt et ignem non dissimilem habeant and tamen eosdem singulos exurat, Psa. 5.
1. 1. 2.
that not having a diverse fire yet every one to be tormented the same with fire,
even as we feel in our do dies, whereas many stand together in the sun, and the
sun has like power of them, all alike, yet do they not all feel the like
heat, but some feel it hotter then other some, every man according to the
complexion and constitution of his body. Even so according to the quality of
his sin shall every man receive his punishment. And therefore in the day of
judgment it shall he easy for Sodom and Gomortha then for those Cities.
Towns and persons, which have hard remission of sins preached in the name of
Jesus, and yet have not repented. For the servant, that knew his masters will
and did it not shall be beaten with many stripes. If that reverend and childish
fear of God therefore cannot win us to eschew evil and do good, yet let this
servile and slauishe fear, the fear of punishment stay us and make us a
fraide to persevere in our ill, least according to the greeuousnes of the same
in our souls, at last we reseaue double damnation in our bodies.

For although every man, so sone as the soul and body are parted by death,
has his particular judgment, and receives in his soul (which presently
mounteth either to heaven, or is carried to hell) the reward of joy or pain,
which either thorough sin he has deserved, or the Lord in merrye does
freely give him, yet does he nor receive the same in body (which remains in
the grave) til the general resurrection and judgment of all flesh, at what
time the body shall be united to the soul, and be made partaker of the same
everlasting joys in heaven, or eternal torments in hell, as it was partaker
with the body in sin upon earth. If any man therefore ask, wherefore and what
there should need to be a second judgment, since every man has his
judgment already, I answer out of the Apostle; that every man may receive in
his body that which he has already received in his soul. L^^ us forbear
therefore to judge of (...) men's sins, to look into other men's lives, and
either every man, that calls upon the name of the Lord depart from iniquity,
and learn to amend him self. For every man shall receive according to that
which he has done in his body. I shall not receive according to that, which
thou haste done in thy body, nor thou shall not receive according to that
which I have done in my body, but I according to that which I have done in my
body, and thou according to that, which thou (...) done in thy body, and so
forth every man according to that, which he has done in his own? body. That
soul, that has sinned, that soul shall dye the death. Though the father have
eaten sour grapes, the childrens teeth shall not be set on edge. Ezech 18. 2.
and 20.
The son shall not bear the fathers iniquity, nor the fathers bear the
sons. The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, the wickedness of
the wicked upon him also,, and every man shall die in his own sin, or live in
his own righteousness. Noe, Daniell, and Job shall in their own
righteousness deliver but their own souls, not the souls of their sons,
daughters, servants or wives, Ezech. 14. 14 and 16.
but every man receive his wages (says the Apostle) according to his own
labor. Let no man therefore trust to other men's works and prayers after he is
dead, thinking to be releaued by them, as he that was sent for to the great
supper though he might be excused by the messenger, though he came not
himself, and many in these days having lived very wickedly the^ selves, think
to compound with God almighty for their sins and life mislead by alms deeds
and prayers, not dooinge them selves in their own lives, but making other men
their factors, and posting them over to their executors to be done for the^
after their deaths. But thou foolish man, then that good which after thy death
is done by others, is theirs, and not thine, and they shall receive for it and
not thou. While thou have time therefore, make sure thy salvation thy self, and
as much, Gal. 6. 10.
as in thee lies Do good to all men, Preche. 12. 1
especially to the household of faith. Remember thy maker in thy youth before
the days of aduersitye come, Prech. 9. 10.
put thy righteousness before judgment, and so shall thou find grace in the
sight of the Lord. 1. cor. 9. 9.
For the grave which thou go unto, there is neither work, counsel, nor
wisdom, but what a man sows now he shall reap then. Hebre. 6. 10.
He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, Ephesi. 6. 8.
he that sows liberally, shall reap also liberally. For God is not
unrighteous to forget our works and labors of love, But what soever good
thing any man does, he shall receive of the Lord at the resurrection of the
righteous, Luke. 14. 14.
where his reward shall be great in the kingdom of heaven, Math. 5. 12.
and every man receive according to that, which he has don. And thus we see
the end and use of this doctrine concerning the general resurrection and
judgment, John. 5. 28 and 29.
the sum whereof is no more, but this. All that are in their graves shall hear
the voice of God and shall come forth, Math. 25. 46
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have
done ill, unto the resurrection of damnation. They that by continuance in well
doing seek for glory, honor and immortality, shall have eternal life: but
unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, shall come indignation. and wrath, tribulation and iniquity A
sweet and comfortable doctrine to the children of God, who then shall have an
end of all those miseries, whereto in this life they were subject, resting at
last in joy, peace, and tranquillity with the angels and saints in heaven. The
sun shall be no more the day light, Apo. 21. 23.
the light of the Moon shall not shine to the^, Apoc. 22. 5.
but the Lord himself shall be their everlasting light, Isai. 60. 19.
and God their glory. Isai. 25. 8.
He shall take the care from thine eyes, neither shall they taste of death,
heaviness, sorrow, or pain, but freed from all such calamities have the full
fruitio^ of al those joys, Sap. 5. 16.
which the lord has prepared for them that fear him, and look for his
coming. They shall receive a glorious kingdom, and a beawtifull crown at the
lords hand, for with his right hand shall he carry them, and with his arm
shall he defend them. But on the contrary most terrible and fearful to the
wicked. Sap. 5. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. and 22.
For the ielosie of the lord of hosts shall take on harness, and he shall
arm the creature to be avenged of his enemies. He shall put on righteousness
for a breast plate, an stake unfeigned judgment in stead of a helmet. His ferce
wrath shall be sharpen for a swoorde, and the whole compass of the world
shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall the thunder boultes go
right out of the lightninges, and come as out of the well bente bow of the
clouds to the place appointed. And as from an angry caster of stones their
shall fall thick hail, and the water of the sea shall be wroth against them and
the wind shall stand up against them to scatter them abroad. Then shall the
righteous stand in great boldness before the face of such, as have dealt
extremely with them, and taken away then labors. When the ungodly shall see
it they shall be vexed with horrible fear, and shall onder at their health so
far beyond all, that they looked for. And changing their opinions with
groaning for redress of mind, they shall say, this is he whom sometime we had
in derision and iested upon. We fools thought his life very madness, and his
end to be without honor. But lo, how he is counted among the children of God,
and his portion is among the saints. Therefore have we erred from the way of
truth, the light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the sun of
understanding has not rose upon us. We have wearied ourselves in the way of
wickedness and destruction, but as for the way of the Lord, we have not known
it, What good has pride done unto us? Or what profit has the pomp of riches
brought unto us. All these things are passed like a shadow, and as a Post that
hastes by, etc. As soon as we were borne, we began immediatlye to draw to
our end, and have showed no token of virtue, but are consumed in our own
wickedness. If they should have no other judge to condemn them, if there were
no devil to watch for them, no hell to receive them, no fire in hell to torment
them, what greater torment may be imagined, then this woeful complaint and
mutual accusing of the worm of their own consciences, and the sensible
feeling of their sins past, acknowledging with their own mouths themselves
deserue^ly deprived of all those heavenly joys, whereof they shall see the
children of God to be made partakers. But not only to be deprived of those
heavenly joys, but to be partakers of everlasting torments, to be tied with
perpetual chains, to be cast into palpable darkness of the Devils dungeon,
where the worm dies not, where the fire goes not out, but continual weping
and gnashing of teeth, howling, yelling, and criyng without ease of pain, or
comfort of mind, this is such endless miserye as the grief thereof can
neither be conceived of us, that speaks of it, nor expressed of them that
feel it.

The greatest cross, that can be said upon man in this life, is to be cast
into perpetual prison, leese our lands and goods, and want the company of
our wives, our children and other our friends that love us. But yet in this
case we always live in hope of liberty, and release of our punishment. Or if
our hope be vain, yet will God stir up the hearts of strangers to visit
us, to pity us, to comfort and relieve us, some with meat, some with money,
some with cloth, some with counsel, every man as he is able has compassion of
feeling of our state. But out of hell there is no redemption, no hope of
redemption, no hope of out pains to (...) ever ended or eased. No friends to
pity us, to see us, to speak with us, or comfort us. Naie if No^, Job and
Daniell, even these three righteous persons, or any other holy Patriarch,
Prophet, Apostle, Saint, or Angel should see their own friends, Father,
mother, wife or children in that hellishe place of the damned, and would make
intercession for them, they could not deliver their souls. Nay that which is
more, and more lamentable, those that shall be placed in the joys of heaven
shall be so far from having any natural compassion, either the father, which
shall be saved, of the child, which shall be damned, or the child, which shall
be saved, of the father^ which shall be damned, John. 15. 4.
or the child, which shall be saved of the father, which shall be damned, or the
wife which shall be saved, of the husband, which shall be damned or the husband,
which shall be saved of ye wife, which shall be damned, that they shall continue
none more then these their friends, whom they saw given over to all sin
and wickedness in their lives, and by Gods just judgment to be now tormented in
hell s^re after their deaths. Thus we see, there are but two ways of all
flesh, heaven or hell, two rewards, the one of joys the other of pains, two
rewarders God and the Devil, two ends, good and evil, two sorts of people,
the wretched in this life, and cursed in the life to come, the other happy
thorough hope in this life, but most blessed in the life to come, when they
shall enjoy the full fruition of that they hoped for, inheriting the kingdom,
which has been prepared for them from the foundation of the world through
death, passion, and meditation of. Jesus Christ their savior, to whom with
the father, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, etc.

A Letter.
SIR according to my promise, and your request I here send you a copy of my
sermon preached before the right worshipful and my very good Patron the M.
of the Rolls, and others the company of the six Clerks, praying you
particularlye (as with whom by occasion of a suite I had in Chauncerie, I was
first acquainted, and through whom my acquaintance grew with the rest of
your brethren) to impart the same unto them, not for any cause of desert in
it, but for that it was their pleasures to desire it, and I gave promise to
send it. Howbeit if it shall not so please their ears in the reading, as it
does move their hearts in the speaking, they must remember, it wants that
spirit and action, wherewithal it was first delivered. And a sermon which
has been uttered with the tongue, and afterward is written with the pen,
will seem no more like it self to those, that did first hear it, and shall
now read it, then a dead image is like a living creature, or a dumb man like
him, that can speak. Besides it wants diverse cotations, which I would have
added, if opportunity and leisure had served for it beetweene the writing of
it, and the sending of it. But whatsoever it wants in form or in words, I
trust, you shall find it the same, that was delivered in substance. And so
with hearty thanks for that general curtisie which I received at all your
hands, I take my leave, praying you to account of me as yours deseruedlye
always to be commanded in the Lord, according to the final tallente he
has lent me. The Lord Jesus have you in his keeping, bless you with his
holy spirit, and continue you in his fear. From Oxbrough this 18. of June.

Yours and the whole Churches in the Lord. Thomas Scott.


