SEABROOKES CAVEAT: Or His warning piece to all his loving Countrymen, to
beware how they meddle with the Eyes. In which is contained the exact and most
certain remedies for all manner of infirmities, which shall happen unto the
Eyes. Written for the general good of this whole Monarchy of great BRITAIN.

By RICHARD SEABROOKE, Practicioner in the Art of the Occulist.

LONDON: Printed by Edw. All-de, dwelling near Christ's Church. 1620.

To the Right noble and most virtuous Ladies (being the Nursing-Mothers, and
Comforters of many poore-afflicted people) The Lady SYDNEY of Walsingham, and
the Lady STRAVNGE, wife to the Honorable Knight, Sir HAMON STRAVNGE of
Hunston; RICHARD SEABROOKE wishes the increase of Gods good blessings in this
life, and all graces leading to life eternal.
Most noble and virtuous Ladies,
WHen I called to remembrance the most just condemnation of that evil servant
in the Gospel, who buried his one Talent: It did quicken my conscience and
stir up my mind on the contrary, ere death should prevent me (according to
that measure of knowledge in my profession wherewith God has endued me) to
communicate with my dearest Countrymen my skill (such as it is) by publishing
in this small Treatise the principal observations of my whole practice. True
it is, I have now attained to the age of seauenty and two years, being from my
youth by profession an Occulist. In which course of life, as (to my great
rejoicing in the Lord, through his blessings upon mine endeauours) I have
helped very many (who have been long darkened) to their perfect sight, so have
I seen by lamentable experience, not a few poor Christians, of both sexes,
and all ages, by sinister means and applications made helpless, and utterly
deprived of the most dear and delightful light of their eyes. The original
of these mischiefs are sometimes to be imputed to the negligence of Mothers
and Nurses: But for the most part, the Practicioners in this kind are to be
taxed, and of them also the negligent, the unskillful, and the wilful, most of
them more, studious to lighten the purses, rather then the pains of their
grieved patients. All these sorts (after my plain manner) I have briefly
touched in certain caueats: then I show the causes of Blindness, the several
hurtful humors incident to the eyes, their qualities, and how to judge which
be curable and which incurable: and lastly, I have annexed the most approved
medicines and remedies which I have found by long experience to be most
profitable.

I foresee (most virtuous Madames) that these aduertisements coming from my
self a plain old man; shall not escape the detractions and scoffs of proud
and malicious censurers; but having for the warrant of my doings the testimony
of a good conscience (that I have sincerely, charitably, and upon known
grounds proceeded herein) I cast behind me all the unjust aspertions they
possibly can throw upon my name, I am a poor man my self, and my poor mite I
freely cast into the poor man's treasury, wishing all them that are so humbly
minded, not to despise what they not understand: But first to make trial, then
to trust, and so to take in good part that which is tendered unto their good.
And very sure I am that I cannot want good attestation of my cures performed by
these means; and thankful acknowledgement also from such as (under God) have
found help by mine applications.

Now the reasons enducing me (most honored Ladies) to present this my simple
labor to your excellent selves, are the famous reports of your noble virtues,
whose charity, and piety, like two goodly collumbs, support and hold up a world
of poor distressed people, which otherwise would perish and fall to dust in
the ruins of their afflictions and affirmities, as also that I know the
excellency of your clement natures, will vouchsafe to accept a small present,
being offered of great good will and affection: In which since I can find no
distrust, because your goodness is my warrant. I humbly crave pardon for my
boldness, and vow ever till this little sand of my life be consumed, to
remain, The ever obliged servant and true admirer of your virtues;

RICH. SEABROOKE.

To the courteous and indifferent Reader, especially to all such who (...)
troubled with any disease incident to the eyes.
I Have not here (courteous and indifferent Reader) entertained thee with fine
phrases, and artificial method (things curious and becoming the curious) I
leave that to those which are more ambitious of private fame, then studious for
the common good. But I have truly and plainly showed thee how to beware of,
and prevent certain grievous inconveniences: where the disease is curable, I
have set down approved remedies for it, where it is incurable, I advise thee
to comfort thy self in God, and save thy money: Read and practice, and as
thou find any profit, take in good part my pains, but give the whole praise
unto God, to whose holy protection I commit thee and my self, and all the
faithful in Christ Jesus. Farewell.

R. S.

CHAP. 1. Of Blindness both curable and incurable in Infants, the cause,
prevention, and cure.
FIrst, because experience is the Mother and chief Nurse of all wisdom, and
that by it we are led and conducted to the end of perfection, I will in this my
small Treatise take her by the hand, and as she shall with the assistance of
truth guide me, so both begin and finish this profitable labor which I hope
shall be both to the glory of my God, and the general profit of my dearest
beloved Country.

Know then all to whom this (almost insupportable) infirmity of Blindness is
burdenous and heavy, that it has two great and eminent enemies, Ignorance and
Negligence, and by them it is often made desperate and curelesse, which
otherwise would either not be at all, or if happening, yet rest within the
easiest compass of speedy cure and prevention.

To you Mothers then and Nurses (...).
(for you are the first caretakers of children) I direct my first admonitions,
because from you (when you prove the least remiss and careless) do proceed
the greatest errors, let me earnestly persuade you by all means to beware of
suffering your children to take cold in any part, especially on their heads by
sitting with them long bare-headed, whether by the fire, in the Sun, or in
the open air, especially whilst they are in their swaddling clothes, or in the
tender time of their Infancy; a fault much too common amongst Nurses, and a
negligence so offensive; that the defect of blindness coming thereby, the
disease is hardly or never to be cured: For the mould of the head not being
then closed, the least offense of cold striking the brain, brings sudden
and present blindness, which defect found, ere the cause be discerned,
Ignorance presently gives out, that such children were borne blind: But I
affirm it is nothing so, and for proof thereof call to witness mine
experience, which I will show in a few instances.

First, being in a place where my practice was known, there came to me two
women, within very few hours the one of the other, and brought to me two very
sweet Babes, one nineteen weeks old, the other one and twenty, both which
had very clear and fair eyes, in all outward semblance, but absolutely so
blind, that no blindness could be greater: Then I told the Mother of the
first child, that questionless in mine opinion her child had taken cold
whilst it was in the swadling-cloathes, to which the Mother made present
answer, that I had spoken truth, affirming that her Nurse (within five or six
days after her deliverance) had sat by the fire with the child bareheaded so
long a time, that she took offense thereat, and making her dress up the
child, the very next day after she found that her child was blind, which she
was most certain had seen very perfectly before.

Then came the other woman with her child, and I said to her as to the first,
and she likewise consented with mine opinion, and only affirmed, that she was
assured her child did see perfectly a month or five weeks after it was borne.

Not long after this there came unto me (and one M. Surfleet, a very skillful
Occulist) another woman with a child in the same manner, which child was not
above fourteen weeks old, and both our opinions were (as of the former) that
cold was the only cause of the disease, and she agreed with us showing
circumstance, to lead her thereto; and only affirmed that of her certain
knowledge her child did see perfectly eight or nine days after it was borne.

Now it was M. Surfleets absolute opinion, that in these cases there was no
cure in Art: but for mine own part I a little dissent therein, and do allow
all virtuous industry to be applied; because it cannot bring the disease to a
worse end then it is already arrived, and may by Gods blessing recall that
strength and vigor to the member offended, which may restore that which was
but a little put by, not utterly forsaken; whereas to cease from all manner of
application, were to embrace a distrust somewhat to near allied to desperation.

When therefore this infirmity shall The (...)
happen, and proceed of the causes before-said (which is easy to be known by
argument, and the characters before mentioned (I would have you the^ carefully
to rub and chafe the childs head continually with warm clothes, and to keep
it in a temperate warmenes. Then take Eyebright (or red Sage if you cannot get
Eyebright) Wood-Bettony, or Garden Bettony, Fenel (or Fenell-seed) and of the
Fenel or Fenel-seed a double quantity to either of the other two; stamp them
and strain them, then infuse them in strong Ale, as to a quart or three pints
of Ale, one small handful of Eyebright or Bettony, and a double quantity of
the Fenell: and of this let the Nurse drink for the space of twenty, or four
and twenty days together, and if it be too strong for her, let her alay and
temper it with fine Sugar or well clarified honey, and doubtless (by Gods
permission) if any help at all be left in Nature, this will restore it,
otherwise the expense of greater charges will be but the loss of your further
labor. And herein by the way let me advise you to remember to gather these
herbs (if it be possible) in May or June, and having dried them in the shadow,
preserve them for your use all the year following, the^ having occasion to use
them, beat them in a Mortar to fine powder, then searse it, and A (...)
to one draught of new Ale, infuse of each of these several powders as much as
you can well take upon a six pence; but of the Fenell a better quantity, all
being compounded together. Now if you have not the herbs provided at this
especial season, then know that in case of extremity, you may gather the^ at
any time, and use them as was first of all prescribed, at least every morning
and evening if not at other hours.

And herein is an excellent observation to be observed, that the unskillful
practitioners in this Art (who taking these desperate cures in hand) and not
looking to ye tenderness and delicacie of the eye, will only apply sharp
medicines (causing a torment and pain where no pain is necessary) which is not
only contrary to the charitable rules of Art, but utterly offensive to all good
minds to behold any creature (especially weak Infants) so unmercifully
afflicted by these unskillful and hard-hearted tormentors, and so much the
rather, in as much as their cruelty is extended upon the eye, being a member
most quick, and of greatest sense and feeling.

CHAP. 2. Of Cataracks in the eyes, their diverse kinds, signs cure and
preuentions.
Having showed the imperfections generally happening unto Infants, with their
preuentions and cures, I will now proceed to the more substantial diseases of
the eyes, and such as indeed are incident to all people of all ages, of which
the most principal and most dangerous is that (...)
which is called the Catarack, being a thick, slymie and tough filme, bred and
engendered four elements within the eye, either naturally by the flux of
gross and evil humors, or accidentally by the means of some stroke, bruise or
wipe upon the eye, by which the member being offended, puts forth that ill and
naughty substance, whereby the sight is not only hindered and impaired, but
also wholely taken away, and deprived of all worthy use and benefit.

To speak then generally of the Catharack, (...)
you shall understand that there be six several kinds thereof, as first the
hazell colored Catharack, the Catharack of the color of the sky, the grayish
Catharack, the black Catharack, the white Catharack, and the yellowish green
Catharack; and of these the three first are curable, and the latter three
utterly incurable.

Now for as much as there may be a (...)
failing in the true knowledge, and discerning of these Catharacks, that you
may be better enabled to judge which is curable and which is incurable; you
shall understand, that if the Patient grieved with any of these Catharacks,
shall be able to discern or perceive the glimmering or shining, either of the
Sun, fire, flame or candlelight, that then questionless all such Catharacks
are curable, and by Art to be helped (the Practicioner having knowledge in the
same) but if he cannot discern any such brightness, and that all things seem
black, clowdie, and without any apprehension of shining, then be assured that
all such are utterly incurable, and a man may both save the consumption of his
purse, and the torment of his body.

As for those which are curable, they (...).
are to be cured by the Catharack needle, the demonstration of which is
^^^edlesse here to be expressed; because (...) Artist or Professor in this Art,
ought or should be ignorant in the true use thereof, and to set down in
imperfect words, a thing of such exquisite perfection, whereby ignorance may be
imboldened to adventure on that which is far beyond his cunning, were to give
courage to that from which my uttermost endeavors do daily seek to dissuade
them, and therefore let every good man be careful not to meddle with the
needle, till experience and long practice in matters of like nature, have made
him an absolute Master in the true use of the needle.

After the Catharack is couched, or taken away with the needle (by a skillful
Practicioner) the Patient must be exceeding careful of himself, that by no
means he take any cold, for the least cold which shall enforce him to
sneese, cough, or otherwise to strain any of the opticke nerves or members,
will suddenly make the Catharact to rise again, and so bring on a mischief
much greater then at the beginning; and therefore by all means the Patient
must be contented to lie muffed and warm for eight or nine days, till all
such danger be avoided.

Now for the prevention of these Catharacks, that they may either not grow at
all, or beginning to grow, that they may be taken away long ere they come to
any dangerous issue, as also to prevent both the danger and torment, which
cannot but necessarily depend upon the use of the needle; I would wish all
sorts of persons of what sex or age so ever, whether old, young, or of middle
estate, as soon as they shall perceive their sights to decline or grow dim
without any pain, or much extraordinary watering, then to use this powder
hereafter following, in such sort as you shall find it prescribed.

CHAP. 3. An approved and most excellent receite both for the cure and
prevention, of all sorts of Catharacks of what nature so ever.
TO cure the Catharack of what nature so ever, which begins to grow, or to
prevent the increasing or blindness, which proceeds from the same; as soon
as you shall perceive the first offense, use this drink, and be sure you shall
find the virtue and great perfection thereof: for it will not only take away
mischief bred, but prevent the breeding and growth of mischief; and if
casualty happen not, doubtless old age may bring a clear sight to the last
minute; for it not only gives strength to the weak eye, whether the
weakness proceed from any defect of the brain, or other disturbance of
humor or inflammation, but also fortifieth it against all other infirmity, which
may any way annoy or trouble it, as my daily experience has found to my own
particular satisfaction, and many good men's comforts: the substance of which
excellent receipt, is this which follows: Take of the powder before rehearsed
in the first Chapter, and in such manner prepared and gathered as is there
spoken, together with the hours, times, and quantities, as is there set down,
only with this difference, that whereas there the Nurse is appointed to use it
for the benefit of the child (the medicine working from a secondary means, as
from the milk* which the Infant sucketh) here the party must as the Nurse use
it himself for his own profit, and not fail but morning and evening to take
it, and the newer that the drink is (in which the powder is infused) the
better it is, for it will enforce a man sooner to belch and break wind
upward, which is much anailing in this cure, because the ascending of the fume
purges and works great effect in the eyes, which the rather to increase, you
shall when the fume and wind arises, keep your mouth close, and with your
fingers stop your nosthrils, that as near as you can the whole fume may assend
into the head and eyes: whereby it comes that your new Ale or bottell Ale is
thought most sovereign to be used with this powder: but where neither bottel
Ale nor new Ale is to be gotten, if then you use to eat the same quantity of
powder (before rehearsed) dry without any moisture, it is also very available.
Neither must you fail morning nor evening after the taking of this powder
(whether dry or in drink) but to walk at least an hour after up and down,
that the medicine may work both the sooner, the better, and with more
efficacy, neither need this walking up and down be limited to any certain
place of special retiring, but may very well serve for the discharge of any
outward or inward business, as your affairs shall move you: neither need you
to stand too strictly upon the quantity, but after the use of it a little
space, then either to increase or diminish the quantity, as you shall find
your stomach apt, and able to receive it.

Some may imagine because these simples are so little curious, that therefore
they may carry but little virtue: but let not such folly deceive thee, for
they are all of most singular worth and virtue, especially for the eyes, in so
much that the Ancients affirm, that the Serpent which is the subtillest and
wisest of all creatures, as soon as he waxes old, and finds his sight
begin to fail him, presently he goes to the root of the Fenell, or to the
leaf, according to the season, and eateing thereof, he finds present ease
and redress of his infirmity. And of like nature is your Bettony and the rest,
so that no pen can write too much of their virtue, nor any tongue too highly
extol the praise of this excellent compound, being used in such sort as is
already prescribed, for otherwise the abuse of any thing turns the greatest
virtue to the greatest viciousness. And thus much of the Catharacks and their
cure.

CHAP. 4. Of accidental wounds in the eyes by what means so ever, and of the
cure thereof.
Having spoken of Catharacks whether natural or accidental, and of the cures
thereof, I will now proceed to other accidental wounds or hurts in the eyes,
as are pricks with thorns, knives, needles, or any other sharpe-pointed
instrument, strokes with the ears of corns, stubble, briars, or any other
bruise or wipe in the eye, which when at any time they shall happen, be most
diligently careful (of what age or sex so ever thou be, whether young or
old) not to apply any sharp or coroding medicine thereunto, either waters,
powders, or other compounds which are of hot, fretting and sharp nature: but
rather follow mine advise herein, and as soon as you shall receive any of
these mischances, presently get one of wholesome and sweet breath to blow into
your eye, to cool and assuage the pain thereof (for much good shall be found
thereby) and be sure that the party so blowing, have not eaten Garlic, or
taken Tobacco any small space before, for they inflame and make hot the breath,
and so assuage not but increase your torment, whereas it should be cool,
sweet, and wholesome breath, which should mollify and make less the pain you
suffer; this done, take the white of an egg, and beat it to oil, and dipping
fine round pleagants of flax or soft towe therein, as broad as an English
shilling; apply it to the wounded eye, and renew it as it dries, and this will
not only draw away the corrupt or bruised blood, but also cleanse and cool the
eye in such manner, that the cure will be made more safe and quickly; or if
this cannot be had, take Parsley and sweet butter, and beat and mix them well
together, and so apply them to the eye, and it will work the same effect as
the former, whereas to apply any sharper medicine, whether water or powder, it
is great ods that you not only loose that which is already wounded, but also
perish the sound one also, and so loose the benefit, of the most comfortablest
sense which man enjoys. If this assuage not the pain, and give case
according to your expectation, then take white-bread crummes finely grated, and
of the best new milk, and boil them together till they be thick, then apply
it to the eye lukewarm, and so renew it once in six or eight hours at the
first dressing, and after in ten or twelve hours, as the eye shall amend,
and there is no doubt but the cure will soon be brought to that perfection
which your own heart can desire.

CHAP. 5. Of red furious eyes, which are troubled with a hot scalding rhewme,
the cause, offenses, and the cure.
NExt to these accidental wounds in eyes, we will proceed to the red furious
eye, which is troubled with a sharp, scalding, and fretting rhewme,
ouerflowing and annoying the same. And here you shall understand, that for
these eyes in diverse cases, there are good and certain cures to be wrought,
especially if you have a good Practicioner in the same: But now a-dayes there
are so many wilful and unskillful dealers with this Art, that many by their
ignorance are made blind, which otherwise might enjoy the benefit of their
sight to their lives end, nor does this blindness fall upon them as the Parrot
climbes (lento pede) by leisure or with slow steps, but suddenly and quickly,
as within two or three hours or little more at the uttermost, which that you
may the better perceive, and thereby the better avoid their ignorance, I will
by instance show you how many unfortunate Patients are made blind.

First, when the grieved Patient comes to the unskillful Practitioner, (...)
and desires his help, presently (ignorance being his guide) he opens a vein
in the temples of his head, and another vein under the eye, close by the nose,
and also a third in the roof of the mouth, or under the tongue, which blood is
no sooner taken away, but presently blindness insueth, as has been
experienced by diverse, as namely a young Gentlewoman of little Snotynge in
Norfolk, and one James Feyld of Broughton in Huntington Shiere, both which,
after the taking of their blood, fell instantly blind within two hours after,
albeit both their sights were reasonable good before, only afflicted with some
little pain, and the suspicion of dimnesse, nor was the blood which was taken
from the latter much; for it was no more then was received into two little
cupping-glasses placed on his neck, and yet notwithstanding presently he fell
blind, nor could ever after be cured: and in like sort unto these, one Goodman
Fletcher, dwelling in a little Town near Bourne in Lincoln Shiere, having
some small impediment in his eyes, and coming to an ignorant Practicioner, had
a vein opened in his temples, and another by his nose, but the blood was no
sooner received, when as the sight was utterly lost for ever. And as these, I
could cite a world of others, were not the circumstances too tedious, and the
rehearsal needless for our present purpose; only this I collect from these
instances, that every man troubled with these infirmities, should be exceeding
careful in making election of his Artist: and every Artist religiously
careful not to exceed his knowledge, or meddle with the taking away of blood,
or weakening the eye by any application, then which there cannot be a greater
mischief; for assuredly all these inevitable blindnesses happening to the
parties before recited, might have been avoided, and the sight certainly both
fortified and preserved, had they used the means only which here I will set
down, without any other aditions of greater torment.

Whosoever therefore shall be troubled in his eyes with the infirmities before
said, I would first wish him either by his own diet, or the counsel of the
learned Physician to keep his body soluble: Then take of white Coperis, and of
Bolearmoniack, of each the quantity of a good French Pease, and beat them to
very fine powder, then take of rain water (if it may be got) or snow water; or
for want of them fine clear running water, the quantity of a quarter of a
pint, and put it into a glass violl suitable to the quantity, and then add to
it the powder of the Coporis and Bolearmoniack, and shake and mix them very
well together till they be incorporate, then dipping a fine feather in this
water, wash your eyes therewith morning and evening, if your occasions draw you
not abroad into the air, for then it will offend and make your eyes smart too
violently, so that in that case when you must travail, you may then spare your
morning dressing, but by no means the evening when you go to rest. Now if at
the first dressing you find the water be too sharp and biting, so as you can
hardly endure the torment, then you shall alay it by adding to a little more
water, or a little more of the Bolearmoniack, provided that you make it not too
gentle, for to take away all sense of smarting, is to take away all force, and
strength of virtue.

Now for as much as not any of these eyes thus afflicted with these sharp and
scalding rhewmes, are void of much soreness, rawnesse, and bloodinesse about
the lids and closures of the eyes, and especially at the two extremest corners
of the same, It shall therefore be meet for you for the cure of the same, to
take of the thickest and best Cream you can get, and besmeare and spread it
all over the bottom of a copper or brass Pan, Kettell, or Basin, leaving it
of a very reasonable thinness: then take another vessel of little less
quantity, and fill it full of strong new made urine or chamber-lie; then take
the brass vessel in which the Cream is spread, and whelme it over the urine
(yet so as it may not touch the urine) and let it there rest the space of nine
or ten days, then take it off and gather the Cream from the bottom of the
vessel, and putit into a glass, and keep it close; with this ointment,
anoint all the raw places of the eye lids every night when you go to bed, and
it will not only take away the rawnesse and smarting, but also dry them up and
skin them: and herein you must observe to let the ointment come as little
into your eye as is possible, for it will cause smarting, though otherwise it
does not further hurt. And thus much of the red furious eye, which is troubled
with a hot scalding rhewme.

CHAP. 6. Of the red fiery eye, which is oppressed with gross humors, and
accompanied with a corrupt breath.
THere is another sort of red eyes, which are full of contagion and gross
humors, and though not altogether so moist as the former, yet fully as
painful and troublesome; for the inflammation is more violent, and the rhewme
almost as sharp. These kind of sore eyes are very curious to be healed, for
the party that is troubled therewith, has ever for the most part a very strong
and corrupt breath, which is so nourished and fed by the evil humors that
accompany the disease, that it is very difficult, and requires both much Art
and care in the reformation.

He therefore that is troubled with The (...)
these enflamed fiery and corrupt eyes, let him first purge his body well,
either with purgation, glyster, or vomit, according to the abillity of the
party which is diseased, and in this administration of Physic, I do advise
every man that is careful of the health of his own body, not to take any but
by the advice either of the reverend Doctor or learned Physician, and not to
rely on the audacious boldness of ignorant Professors, for in these days
there are a world of Empericks and Mountebanks, which will take upon them to
give Physic, whose skill (God knows) can neither discern nor judge the true
nature of the most ordinary simples; therefore let every man that loves
himself, fly to the protection of the best, for it is best cheap, and brings
with it the best safety; for none are more costly then the ignorant, because
they hold great gain a great advancement to their glory and reputation,
reckoning not with the good they have done, but the profit they have received.

There are another sort of Professors, who because they have some insight in
some of the liberal Arts, think they may as liberally deal with this
particular Art, and thereupon will undertake to give Physic, yet not for your
money but virtues sake (as they pretend it) yet when you have reckoned with
their Apothicaries, and summed up their bills and extrauagant charges, as a
bushel or two of corn, Hens, Capons, Chickens, and other such like gifts of
gratuity (which cannot but ever accompany a thankful nature) you will find
that the counsel of a truly learned and worthy Physician had been more
easy, more cheap, and a million fold more auailing for your health and
preservation: Therefore as before I said, after the grieved party has purged
and made clean his body by the advice of learning and experience, he shall
then take the water of Copporis and Bolearmoniack, which was at large set down
in the former Chapter, and with it dress and wash his eyes in such sort
(morning and evening) as was there declared, and with the same cautions,
limits, and observations, as was there expressed. And if the eyelids (as before
said) shall grow raw, sore, or bleared, he shall then with the ointment of
Cream (mentioned in the last Chapter) annoint them therewith in the same
manner, as has likewise been mentioned, without alteration or augmentation.

Now for as much as the distilling down of the rhewme into those weak parts of
the eyes, is both the greatest nourisher of the disease and infirmity, and also
the greatest cause of the pain and anguish: to stay the flux thereof, and to
make the member more apt, and fitter to receive cure; you shall take half a
handful of Bay Salt, and spreading it before the fire, dry it exceedingly,
then having a little bag of linen cloth ready; put the salt so dried into
the same, and being of a reasonable warmenesse, apply it to the nape of the
neck in the hollow part, next to the iuncture of the head; and there let it
rest the space of four and twenty hours, and then renew it, and apply to
another in the same manner: and thus do once in four and twenty hours till
ease be found, and that the rhewme cease to oppress you, which questionless
will quickly be effected, if any true care be taken.

Again, for the staying of the rhewme, if you use to take of the Copporis
water (before said) and therewith wash your eyes, the temples of your head, and
behind your ears, suffering the water to dry in, and not to be wipte away, it
is of great virtue and efficacy, for it not only stays the rhewme, but is
also very sovereign against the head-ake, and all pains of that nature, as
tooth-ake and the like; and it safely heals both the watery eye, which
smarteth sometimes, and itcheth other sometime, as also all other eyes that are
enflamed.

Now if it so fall out (as in great causes and corrupt bodies it may easily
do) that these things before prescribed, work not in all points according to
your expectation, then you shall for refuge fly to this receite which
hereafter follows, and doubt not but by the grace of God you shall with much
safety and contentment ariue at the full end of your purpose.

You shall take a quarter of an ounce of Cantharides, and lay them to steep in
the best wine vinegar, for the space of four or five hours; then take yellow
Treat or green Treat, or any sticking plaster, and spread it on a linen
cloth plaisterwise, so as the quantity may be divided into three plasters;
then take the Cantharides, and on each plaster lay some of them, then lay one
of the plasters to the nape of your neck, and to each wrist of your arm
another, and do this at night when you go to bed, taking great care that you
bind the plasters so fast, that they by no means fall away, until you
remove them (which would be the next morning) then when you have taken them
off, you shall see blisters (which the violence of the salve will raise) and
those you shall presently let out, making the water euacuate, and with the same
plaster without the Cantharides heal the sores again; then use the first
water as aforesaid, and no doubt by Gods grace but the cure will be soon
finished.

This last receite is sharp and painful, and therefore I would not advise any
man to use it, but only in cases of extremity, and where the cure is tedious
and doubtful.

CHAP. 7. For sore waterie eyes proceeding of a cold rhewme, or for such as
begin to grow dark, and do ever present to the party a double object.
THere is another sort of sore eyes which proceed of a cold rhewme, and they
are best known by their exceeding much moystnesse and continual weeping,
putting the Patient to no pain more then private vexation; it is a disease of
great danger and difficulty, and by most professors of the Art held almost
incurable; yet certes, it sildome or never brings blindness, only the
trouble and noysomnesse is much worse then the danger, and therefore I would
wish every one in this case, not to tamper too much with their eyes, or try the
experiment of many medicines; for that may bring blindness perforce, only I
would have them use the bag of dried salt, in such manner as has been
before declared in the former Chapter, for assuredly where it fails, other
medicines will but work other worse imperfections.

Now for the other sort of sore eyes, which beginning to grow dim and dark,
present to the party grieved a double object; making every single thing he
looks on, appear as it were two, or a double body; you shall for the cure
thereof take the powder of Eyebright, Bettony, etc. mentioned in the first
Chapter, and either drink it with new Ale, bottell-Ale, or the like; or else
ear it dry, as has been formerly declared in the third Chapter, with the
same observations and cautions; and questionless there is no doubt of most
speedy and easy cure, as experience has found out, and I doubt not but all
men shall find to their benefit and comfort.

CHAP. 8. For the Pin and the Web, and the like infirmities in eyes.
THis disease which is called the Pin and Web in the eyes, are little white
spots in the eyes, which growing in or near unto the sight, does by process
of time increase and wear away the sight, leaving the party altogether blind
and incurable; which to prevent, and take away these spots ere they come to the
height of mischief, you shall take a little English honey, and a few Dazie
leaves or roots (according to the season) and having stamped and strayned the
leaves or roots, mix with it the honey, then add to them a little woman's
milk, and mix and incorporate all well together, then at night when you go
to bed; and likewise in the morning when you rise, drop a drop or two thereof
into your eyes; and thus do for the space of a week or thereabouts, and by the
grace of God the cure will be finished to your comfort: also if to this receite
you add a little of the juice of the true ground Iuie, which by some is called
Tunhoofe or Alehoofe; you shall find it very available, especially in great
and dangerous cures, for it is more sharp and strong then the other, and
works his effects with more strength and violence.

CHAP. 9. For the imperfections which happen to eyes by means of the small
Pockes, or for eyes that are troubled with worms.
Diverse imperfections do happen to the eyes by means of the small Pocks,
either to old or young persons, especially when the master Pock sets in
the eye, or in both the eyes (as it often happens) for cure whereof many do
use to administer sharp biting waters, but in so doing, they take not away the
blemish, but the sight for ever, therefore by no means meddle with those
coroding medicines, but rather use these gentle receites hereafter mentioned.

Take a pretty quantity of white Sugar-candie, or else some of the thunderbolt
stone, or for want of both a piece of the Cuttell-bone which the Goldsmithes
do use, and having beaten any of them, and searst it to as fine a powder as is
possible; with a small quill blow some of it into the offended eyes, and it is
a most certain cure.

For those eyes which are troubled with little worms, like those in men's hands
but smaller, causing an extreme itching in the eyes, so that some rub them
with their hands, some with clothes, and some with a piece of silk, all which
is both unwholesome and offensive (for they should not be rubbed at all)
because any rubbing does provoke the rhewme to distill and settell to that
part: and much touching or handling of the eyes, causes both tenderness and
soreness; which to prevent and to kill those worms which annoy you, you shall
take the Copporis water before mentioned, and with it wash your eyes morning
and evening, and compel your self to sneese as much as is possible, and it is
a present cure.

CHAP. 10. For the filme upon the eyes, or things of like nature, or for hurts
with powder or shot.
FOr such eyes as are troubled with filmes or thin scummes, growing and
spreading over the sight, you shall take the marrow of a Goose wing, and Ginger
beaten and searst to a very fine powder, and mix them very well together, then
with a quill take up a good drop thereof, and put it into the eye which has
the filme; and thus do every morning when you rise, and every evening when you
go to bed, or for want of this you may use the powder of the thunderbolt
stone before spoken of, in such manner as has been before recited, and it is
a cure both safe and certain.

Now if any man shall happen either by shooting in a Piece, or by other casual
means to receive any hurt in his eyes, either by the burning of the Gunpowder,
or by having the same blown into his eyes, or if they be offended with the
rust of the Piece, shiuers or such like, you shall presently get one that has
a good sight, and a nimble stedie hand, and taking a fine quill, make it as
sharp as a needle, and with the same let them pick out the spots, corns, or
shiuers, and wipe them clean away with the fine tassell of a Handkerchiefe,
then wash it with fair running water, and fine Sugar Candy well mixed together,
and dropped gently into the eye, and the cure will soon be finished.

CHAP. 12. For certain particular wounds in the eyes, as with door latches,
cudgels, etc.
IF any man of what age or degree so ever, shall by going in the dark, or
other casualty, rush upon the latches of doors, bolts, nails, or the like, or
by thrusts with cudgels, foyles, or blows with cat go far, thorn, billets, or
the like, receive any blow or stripe upon the eye, or have the eye-ball thrust
out, so that it lie upon the cheek; you shall then first put up the eye into
the place, where before it was; and do it with great lenity and gentleness,
then with a cloth stay the eye so placed for the space of two or three hours;
then take whitebread crumbs finely grated and new milk, and seethe it till it be
thick, and so apply it warm to the eye; or for want of it Parsley and Butter,
as has been before declared; but by no means any sharp waters, or smarting
medicine, and the cure will in few days be finished.

CHAP. 12. Of weak eyes, and the causes of their declining, the helps and
preuentions.
THe sight is weakened two ways, that is to say, either naturally, or
accidentally; if naturally, it is by means of old age, weakness of the
brain, or else by the ouer-flowing of gross and unwholesome humors, if
accidentally, then it is by the means of ill diet; the use of naughty
applications, disorder in exercise, wounds, rushes, bruses, and the like.

Now that you may know when your sight declineth and waxes weak, when (...).
observe ever that when you see better far off then near hand (as when you
look on a book or the like) that then your sight begins to wayne, also
such eyes as do never run, but are always dry, they are weak eyes, and
very subject to Catharacks: again, if the eyes be clear as glass, but yet
troubled, and that the sight of the eye does shake and quiver like the needle
of a Dial, holding a continual motion without ceasing, such an eye is also a
weak eye, and declining.

Now for the cure of any of these imperfections (for they are all natural)
there is nothing more sovereign then the powder mentioned in the first Chapter,
being prepared and used as is there set down.

As for those weaknesses which come by accident, they are ever to be cured by
their contrary, as if any proceed by riot and disorder, they must be amended
by temperance, if by violent labor, then by moderate exercise: if by ill
applications, then by wholesome receites, and if by wounds, then by wholesome
salues, to any of which if you add the benefit of the Coporis water before
specified, the cure will be much sooner finished.

Now besides these defects already spoken of, there is another as gross as
any, and exceeding frequent amongst all young wives, maids, and women of each
degree and quality, and that is the wearing of Mastick patches or plasters on
the temples of their heads; which howsoever pride for fashion sake, or care for
health sake do produce, yet can nothing be more hurtful or noisome: some will
say they wear them for the head-ake; some for the tooth-ake: yet I affirm
except your eyes be too exceeding moist and dropping, you cannot use any thing
more hurtful; for if the eye be dry and do not water, then the staying of
that comfortable moisture which should quicken the eye, weakens it and the
strength being taken away which should preserve it, there does not follow
Disease but Blindness, and therefore let this my Caveat warn you if you will
preserve good fights, to cast away those playsters, and in stead thereof only
take running water and wash the temples of your head therewith, and behind
your ears, and wipe not the water away but let it dry of it self and thus
doing every morning, it will take away all head-ake and tooth-ake, and stay the
Rewme and other griefs, for which your Masticke patches, and Gum playsters
were used; for believe me it neither adds Beauty to the face, nor health to
the Body, but on the contrary takes away all strength from the eyes and
brings blindness ever too early, as I have found by experience, and for
better proof I will repeat unto you one true instance.

There was a young woman dwelling in Downham in Norfolk, which was troubled
much with the head-ake, and sending for advice (as she thought to the skillful)
was directed to take one of these plasters, and to wear it on her temples,
but presently it took away her sight in few hours after, yet it cured her
head-ake, now if this plaster had been applied to the nape of the neck, and
not to the temples, it had prevailed, and no evil had ensued. The plaster
which she applied was compounded of wine vinegar, a Rose-cake, an egg roasted
hard, and Commin-seede; all which ingredience are good if they had been
applied to the right place; but being misplaced on the temples, it drew away
the strength of the eyes, and brought blindness. Therefore I advise every
(...) for (...)
one that is troubled with the head-ake or the like, only to take a little
strong wine vinegar, and a little oil of Spike, and to mix them very well
together, and then to bathe therewith those parts where the pain is, and it
will not only give ease to the pain, but also add strength and comfort to
the eyes, as I have found by most certain and infallible experience.

There is another defect to which I must give a great Caveat, and especially to
all you Schoolemasters and Schoolemistresses which have the charge of young
Children, be they Boys or gyrles; that in any case you observe and note well
the strength or weakness of your Scholars eyes: and where you find
imperfection or imbecillitie in the sight, there by all means to abstain from
forcing them to look on very small Prints, or to sow on very fine Samplers,
or in curious works, especially black works, for they are not only hurtful
and bring exceeding much weakness to the eyes, but also the more they strive and
endeavor to behold the object they look on, the more hurt they do to their
eyes, and the weaker their sight grows, Therefore in these cases where you
see such weak sights besides reforming the faults before said, you must
provide for them large brim'd Hats to shade their eyes, for they have not any
greater enemy then the light: and also you must give them of the Powder
(mentioned in the first Chapter) to drink in such sort as is there prescribed.

CHAP. 12. An excellent and approved Cure for any Inflammation in the face, for
the Corny face, the Rich face, and the like.
Whosoever is troubled with any inflammation in his face, whether it be plain
red which is heat, or pumples and red pustuls which is corny or universally
over all the face pimples and pustuls both red and purple, which is called the
rich face; let him know that all such inflammations, besides the noysomnes and
unseemliness thereof, it is also hurtful and troublesome to the sight,
therefore for the Cure of such an Infirmity, let him take running water, and
roch Allome, and put them together into a Glass or violl, and by shaking and
tossing, symbolize and incorporate them so as the Allome may be wasted, then at
night when you go to bed, take a fine Napkin and wet it in the water well and
apply it to your face, and let it there lie till the water soake in and dry on
your face, and then renew it, and do thus as often as you shall think good; and
with all abstain (as much as you can) from strong drinks and hot Wines, and
the cure will be more speedy; Now if the cure prove slow, you shall take of
Brimstone, of large Mace, of Goose-grease or Capons-grease, of each alike, and
mix and temper them well together, then put them into a gally pot and with
this ointment, annoint your face as often as you shall think good, and doubt not
but the cure will be very speedy and certain: but if you find that this
inflammation proceeds from the liuor only; if then besides these outward
applications before said, you take the advice of a learned Physician, and now
and then purge your body, there is no doubt but your face will be as clear and
well complectioned as it was before.

A caveat to all sorts of people for the truest use of the powder, and drink
mentioned in the first Chapter.
FOr as much as the powder compounded of Eyebright (or for want of it red Sage)
of wood Bettony (or for want of it the garden Bettony) and of Fenell or
Fenell-seede, in such manner as is at large set down in the first Chapter, is
of such excellent use and virtue, that a man cannot speak too much of it; nor
be too careful to instruct how to apply it (whether it be for weak eyes, sore
eyes, dim eyes, or declining sight whatsoever) I thought good therefore to
conclude this my small Treatise with this Caveat, that whosoever shall have
occasion to use this compound, they may freely choose whether they will use the
powder in such sort, as is showed in the first chapter, or else take the herbs
green, and infuse them in Ale, in such sort, as is showed before for the Nurse
in the first Chapter also, provided that they fail not to continue the use of
this drink, for the full space of twenty, or four and twenty days at the
beginning, then after at pleasure.

FINIS.
Written by Richard Seabrooke, Practicioner in the Art of the Occulist, and
dwelling in Kings-Linne in Norfolk. 1620.

A Table of all the principal things contained in this Book.
OF blindness both curable and incurable in Infants, the cause, prevention and
cure. Chap. 1. The sovereign powder. ibid. Of Catharacks in the eyes, their
diverse kinds, signs, cure and prevention. Chap. 2. An approved receite for
the cure of all sorts of Catharacks of what nature soever. 3. Of accidental
wounds in the eyes by what means so ever, and of the cure thereof. 4. Of red
furious eyes which are troubled with a hot scalding rhewme, the cause,
offenses, and cure. 5. Of the red fiery eye, which is oppressed with gross
humors, and accompanied with a corrupt breath. 6. For sore waterie eyes
proceeding of a cold rhewme, or for such as begin to grow dark, and do ever
present to the party a double object. 7 For the Pin and the Web, and the like
infirmit^^^ ^

(...)
