A SERMON AGAINST HALTING BETWEEN TWO OPINIons; preached at S. Martins in the
fields, BY JOHN SELLER, BACHELER IN DIVINITY.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed, for William Welbie. 1611.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, AND MY VERY HONORABLE GOOD LORD George,
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all
England.
IT may seem strange (most reverend, and mine honorable good Lord) that in
this learned age of the world, wherein the truth of Jesus Christ has given so
clear a light, and that God of his mercy has restored the Gospel unto us,
and caused the beams thereof to shine over all Countries, in such sort, as now
the simple, the unlearned, the rich, the learned, the worshipful, the
Honorable, the States and Princes of the world are become the Professors, D.
Bishop in his Epistle Dedicatorie to the King.
and maintainers of it, there should notwithstanding, eue^ in this kingdom
remain such a number of recusant Papists, as the Papists themselves have made
their crakes and vaunt, stiling them all, with the name of Dutiful and well
deserving Subjects. How Dutiful subjects they have been, quid audiam verb^^um
videa^ facta? Let the sundry intended invasions against this Kingdom, and
foreign practices abroad, procured only by their means: let their
traitorous, and rebellious enterprises, their piuate plottes, machinations,
poisonings, murders, let the powder treason, the eternal shame of that
murtherous and bloody generation, the memory of which most detestable and
damnable fact, all the indices expurgatorij in the world shall never be able to
blot out, make manifest to all the Christian world, how unjustly, and untruly
they challenge to themselves the name of dutiful and faithful subjects, whose
deadly hatred and unnatural practices against our Church and Commonweal,
have proved by many degrees far more dangerous, then ever were the practices,
and plottes, and rebellions of that cursed seed of the Cananites, Ammonites,
and Iebusites against the state and government of the Israelites, the chosen
people of God. Touching the number of recusant papists in other shires, I have
no great skill: it may be, it is greater in tale then it is in strength. But
howsoever it be, the greater the number of the^ is, the greater danger accrueth
both to the Prince and state of this Land. Only thus much I may truly affirm,
that if all the Province of Canterbury were as free from that leprosy and
contagious infection of Popery, as is the Diocese of Canterbury, the Papists
should have small cause to make their boast and crakes of so many and so many.
For whereas there are in the Diocese of Canterbury and Rochester, some 398.
parishes, between 90. and an hundred thousand co^municants, there were not (as
I am very credibly informed) found of record the last assise above the number
of ten recusant papists. So that thus much I may truly report, for the honor
of the County of Kent, that as in the time of Julius Caesar, they alone were
in his judgment of all the Britains, accounted to be omniu^ humanissimi: and
in the time of Edward the first reputed to be omnium bellicosissimi, and
therefore as Geruasius affirms by a prehemine^ce, in right of their manhood
challenged to themselves the foreward of all battles, as of right belonging
unto them, because they were the only people of the land, that were never
vanquished by the Conqueror, but yielded themselves by composition: even so at
this day, considering the small number of recusants, and withal, the great
number of reverend Preachers and Pastors dispersed over all the Country, men
furnished and qualified with very rare and excellent gifts, for the work of
the ministry, they may deservedly be reputed, omniu^ fidelissimi: the most
loyal and faithful subjects of this kingdom. A large proof of whose
fidelity, the late Queen of most blessed and happy memory, found in her
greatest need, when upon the sudden arrival of the Spanish ships upon our
Seas, by the policy and vigilancie of S. Thomas Scot, being then one of the
Deputy Lieutena^ts for those parts (a knight of whom I can neither speak nor
write without much honor, there were gathered together within the space of 24.
hours, the number of eight thousand valiant fighting men, ready to encounter
the enemy. At which time there were sundry preachers of us in that Camp, some
preaching on our horse-backes, some upon the tops of trees, others in pulpits
made of turfe, where we might behold and see that huge Armado of Spain, whom
the Pope had blessed, and christened, by the name of the invincible Navy, which
in very few days after, how it fell from an unmeasurable high joy to an
unmeasurable deep despair, their great castles of comfort being overthrown,
and brought to the ground: I need not further relate, the story thereof being
yet fresh in the memories of many thousands living this day.

This which I have here set down for the honor of our Kentish people, I have
written it partly to note one special sweet fruit of the Gospel, wheresoever
it has free passage; that is, that it seasoneth the hearts of all that
sincerely profess it, with fidelity, loyalty, and all manner Christian
subjection to the higher powers.

Partly again, that it may add some encouragement to your Gra: the more
willingly (as leisure and opportunity shall fit) to come among us, specially
when your Grace shall come to a people so civil, and so ingenuous, so kind, and
so religious, and so loving, and respective of their Diocesan, as no one
country of this Kingdom can afford us the like president. Which to be true,
the late most worthy B: mine old Master, B: Whitgift, of most learned, and
godly memory, found by good proof, at his first coming down into Kent, whom
the whole Gentry of that Diocese entertained, no otherwise then the Galathians
did the Apostle S. Paul: that is, like an Angel of God, with such
obsequiousnes, esteem, and reverence as was fitting for the condition and
state of so grave a Bishop, and so worthy a Prelate.

As for us both of the Laity and Clergy of your Graces Diocese, as we have
great cause of rejoicing offered unto us all, to stir us up to a thankful
congratulation of your Lor: late deserved preferment, and withal, to magnify
the great goodness of God toward us, in that he has advanced your Grace to
that height of honor, to make your Grace a glorious instrument of much good to
this Church of England, the charge and government whereof, next under our
gracious Sovereign, is principally committed; So for mine own particular,
considering the continual flow of those manifold favors your Grace has
been pleased to show unto me, which with all due thankefulnes, I most
willingly acknowledge, having no other means out of my small fortunes to do
you honor, I have presumed in a Christian boldness, by way of Dedication, to
offer this paper present unto your Grace, a Sermon which this last month I
preached before a very honorable, worshipful, and a most learned and
religious auditorie of the parish of S. Martins in the fields. Thus presuming
(as you see) of your Graces acceptance, and bold dedicating this small and
simple discourse unto your Grace, which I confess to be much unworthy your
worthiness, I will not cease to pray unto God to requite, and recompense
seuenfolde into your bosom, both this, and all other your undeserved favors
toward me. And thus beseeching the God of heaven and earth again and again,
to multiply his richest blessings and mercies toward you, by giving you
honor here, and honor ever, in his happy Kingdom of eternal comfort, I
rest.

Your Graces humbly devoted Chaplin, in all duty to be commanded. John Seller.

TO MY CHRISTIAN AVDItors of S. Martins in the fields.
Beloved in the Lord, this Sermon was lately preached in your parish; it is now
to be acted (if I may say so) upon a Theater; Theatrum mundus.
and I am entreated (as it were a prologue) to say unto you, Come and see. Ioh.
1.46.
I need not to do it, for you, who are careful to come and hear, will (I
hope) be as careful to come and see. Come therefore, I beseech you, and behold
another John Baptist, in the spirit of Elias, preparing in your hearts a way for
the Lord: Luke. 3.4.
and saying unto you as God says to all, This is the way, walk in it. Isay.
30.21.


Are you desirous of a guide in this way? here are two offering of themselves,
God and Baal; the one will conduct you to the land of Canaan, Ios. 1.2.
the other will lead you blindfold to Samaria 2. King. 6.19.
. If you follow the one, you will worship in mount Zion; Is. 2.2.3.
If the other you, must go up to mount Gerizim; Ioh. 4.20.
and there adore Ieroboams calves, 1. King. 12.28.


This latter is a way pleasing now a days to many, but the issues thereof are
the ways of death? Prou. 14.12.
And when the passing bell calls, there is so little comfort in that passage,
that many, who have gone it, forsake it at the last.

I read of a learned popish doctor in Germany, who at the hour of his death,
entering into a meditation of the insufficiency of his merits, cried out after
this manner, Selnec Instit. page 386.
Alas what shall I now do? No works do me any good; none comfort me; none
cheer me; Since then I find nothing in myself to stay upon, this will I do;
Have mercy upon me O Lord, for thy son Christ's sake, and receive my soul. It
is the safest way as Bellarmine confesses, and the only way, as the scripture
proves.

Look not then upon Baal with his 450. false Prophets; 1. King. 18.22.
but look upon God with his servant Eliah. 1. King. 18.30.
Baal as an Ulysses will transform you; as a Siren seduce you; as an Helena
corrupt you; and as Naash the Ammonite make no covenant with you, unless he may
pluck out your right eye of knowledge, and so bring a shame upon Israel. 1.
Sam. 11.2.


Our God is not like their God, our adversaries being judges. Deuteronomy. 32.31.
He is our sun, Psalm. 84.11.
without him it is night: our star, Reu. 2.28.
without him it is darkness, our life, Ioh. 11.25.
without him it is death; and our guide, without him we shall never make our
paths straight. Ps. 25 8.


It is better to limpe in the strait ways of God, then to run and rampe on
in the broad paths of Baal; you know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them. Ioh. 13.17.
In a word, learn by this godly treatise, to detest that faith, not of Jesus,
but of the Jesuits, which teaches, that you must eat your God; and may kill
your King.

Qui cum Jesus itis, non itis cum Iesuitis, You that do follow Jesus trace,
will never like the Jesuits pace.
The Lord make you as beautiful in the eyes of God, as you have made your
Church to the eyes of man.

April. 16. 1611. Your ancient servant in the Lord, Robert Hill.

A SERMON AGAINST HALTING between two opinions.
1. King: Cap: 18. Ver. 20. and 21. Ahab sent to all the children of Israel,
and gathered the Prophets together to Mount Carmel:

Elias came to all the people, and said, how long halt ye between two
opinions? If the Lord be God follow him: If Baal be he, go after him. And the
people answered him not one word.


AMong other blessings which God bestows upon his Church, a good Prince is
one of the greatest, being set over his people, for the defense and maintenance
of true religion and virtue. And for this cause it is, that the Apostle S.
Paul wills us, first and above all other things, to pray for Kings, and for
all that are in authority, 1. Tim: 2.1.2.
that [vnder them] we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty. In the which words the Apostle sets down three special good
things which we enjoy under the government of a godly and religious Prince;
namely, godliness, honesty, and peace, which being joined together, are the
only supporters and vpholders of all Christian Commonwealths and Kingdoms:
but being severed one from an other, there falls out a clean contrary
sequel. For what is godliness without honesty, but plain hypocrisy? or what
is honesty without godliness, but mere heathnish gentilitie? or what is peace
without honesty and godliness, but carnal security? Now as for honesty and
godliness without peace, there can be no great practice of either of them both.

It was a great hindrance to the people of Israel in their devotions, when by
the cruelty of Pharao they might not be permitted to go into the wilderness to
serve God. And afterward in the captivity of Babylon, they were forced to sing
the Lords song in a strange land: Peace and tranquillity are ever an occasion
of great increase and edification. In the Acts when the Churches had rest
thoroughout all Judea and Galilie, and Samaria, they were edified, Acts, 9.31.
and walked in the fear of the Lord, and were multiplied by the comfort of
the holy Ghost. Where we may see how in a quiet and peaceable Church, daily
teaching and preaching is of very great force to plant godliness and the fear
of God in men's hearts, and withal, discipline of manners: whereas in a Church
which is under the cross, it falls out still for the most part, that
ecclesiastical assemblies are hindered and forbidden to be practiced.
Ministers and Preachers are either imprisoned, driven away, or put to death:
Parents, and fathers of Families driven away out of their houses; whereby such
houses being dissolved, children are bereaved of good education, godly men are
severed one from another: in which dissipation sound doctrine is not to be had:
Faith languisheth: all godly exercises in training up of youth lies still, and
all other godly and Christian meetings quite given over: Far otherwise then
it was under the reigns of David, Ezechias, Josias and Iehoshaphat, in whose
days the people enjoyed those three blessings before remembered; namely,
godliness, honesty, and peace. All those godly and religious Kings, not only
by words encouraging the people to serve God, but by their examples, drawing
great multitudes to imitate the same zeal and feruencie, which they saw to be
in such Princes under whom they lived. But on the other side, when God in his
anger and just indignation sends wicked Princes to sit in place of judgment
and authority, religion and virtue goes to decay, Gods honor is defaced, the
people drawn to idolatry, the worship and service of God profanely abused:
the truth whereof as it appears by diverse and sundry examples of wicked
Kings in the holy scriptures, so in none more plainly then in King Ahab, of
whom I shall have occasion hereafter to speak, of whom the Scripture thus
records, that he sold himself to do wickedly in the sight of the Lord,
that he did exceeding abhominably in following idolles, 2. King: 10.30.31.
according to allthat the Ammonites did, being provoked thereunto by Iezabel his
wife. For it was a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam,
except he took Iezabel also the daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Sydonians to
wife, and served Baal, and worshipped him. In whose days what an havoc there
was made of the Saints and servants of God, what an increase there was made of
most gross idolatry, by joining Gods worship and Baals together; what
slaughter of the Prophets of God living in those times, which went up and
down, wandering in sheepes-skinnes and goats skins, being destitute,
tormented, and afflicted; and for the safeguard of their lives, being glad to
wander in the wilderness and mountains, and dens and caves of the earth,
Heb: 11.37.
is plainly to be seen by the complaint and request of the Prophet, 2. King:
19.14.
which he made unto God against Israel, saying, O Lord the children of Israel
have forsaken thy covenant, cast down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophet
with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away.
(Albeit the answer of God said unto him, I have reserved to my self seven
thousand men, Rom: 11.3.4.
which have not bowed the knee to Baal:) In this great and miserable
desolation, and confusion of his Church, the Lord remembering his people of
Israel, when they little looked for it, and less deserved it, sent Elias the
Prophet unto them, who, the more forciblie to draw both the King and his
Subjects to a serious consideration of their sins, and to show how greatly
the Lord was displeased for their idolatrous worshipping of Baal, 1. King: 17.1.
told king Ahab to his face, As the Lord lives, before whom I stand, there
shall be neither deaw nor rain these years, but according to my word: which
indeed according to the saying of the Prophet came to pass. For as Elias
(moved by the instinct of Gods holy spirit) prayed unto God earnestly that it
might not rain, Iam: 5.17.
so according to his prayer, it rained on the earth, for three years and six
months. By means whereof, the famine was so great in Israel for lack of
rain, that man and beast were ready to perish: and rain they could have none
but at Elias word, as Elias had told the king before the drought began. At
the end of the three years and six months of drought, 1. King: 18.1.
the Prophet Elias was commanded to show himself to king Ahab, and albeit
he was greatly dissuaded so to do by Obadiah, whom he met in the way, yet
the Prophet was resolute, solemnly protesting to Obadiah, As the Lord of Hosts
lives, in whose presence I stand, I will surely show my self unto Ahab this
day. 1. King: 18: 15.
Meeting therefore with Ahab, and being challenged by him as the author of that
famine, and troubler of Israel, he discharged himself, and protested before
the King, that God plagued the whole Land, because he and his Fathers house
had forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and followed other Gods. And to
justify his speech, he offered to prove before all Israel, on the danger of
his own head, that the king and the Land were but seduced and abused by the
Prophets of Baal, and that he would prove by no worse means then by
miraculous fire from heaven, which should show them whose sacrifice was
accepted, assuring them of rain abundantly after their conversion to the true
GOD, for which cause at this time he was sent unto them.

To this the King gave his consent, and by the persuasion and motion of Elias,
sent by his Princely authority, for all Israel, that they should gather
themselves together in mount Carmel, together with the Prophets of Baal, 450.
(which were dispersed throghout all the tribes of Israel,) the prophets of the
groves, 400. which did eat at Iezabels table. The King, and the chief heads of
the people of Israel, and the prophets of Baal, being thus assembled together
in mount Carmel, Elias comes to the people, and says thus unto them; How
long will ye halt between two Opinions, etc? In the which words of the
Prophet, I observe four special things worthy of consideration.

Diuisio.



Baal and God together, and that religion is not a thing indifferent.





In the reproof of the Prophet.

I observe these four points.

Elias.



Ahab.



In the person of Elias, The person of Elias.
we have to observe the great zeal, constancy, and boldness, which should
be in the ministers and preachers of the Gospel. For unto them it belongs to
preach the preachings the Lord has bidden them, and to proclaim his
vengeance against sinners, yea even to stand at the gates of paradise with a
flaming sword in their mouth against obstinate and unrepentant sinners. That
which the prophet Micheas says of himself, Mich. 3.8.
that he was full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of
strength, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Jacob his sin, was
as truly verified in his own person whom neither the Courtlike persuasions of
the Eunuch that went for him, nor the consent of 400. Prophets, nor the favor
of two Kings, nor the danger of his own head could drive him from the word of
God: And when the Eunuch had said unto him, behold now the words of the
Prophets declare good things unto the King with one accord: 1. King. 22.13.14.
let thy word therefore, I pray thee be like unto the word of one of the^, and
speak thou good, Micheas answered him roundly, As the Lord lives, whatsoever
the Lord says unto me, that will I speak.

The like zeal and courage we read in Scripture to have been in Elizeus the
Prophet, unto whom when King Iehoram, Ahabs son had sent to know of him what
success his battle intended against the King of Moab was like to have, the
Prophet very boldly answered the King after this manner; What have I to do
with thee? get thee to the Prophets of thy Fathers, and to the Prophets of thy
mother, 2. King. 3.13.14.
and said moreover unto him, as the Lord lives, in whose sight I stand, if it
were not that I regard the presence of Iehosaphat the king of Judah, I would
not once have looked toward thee nor seen thee. But of all others commended
in scripture for zeal and courage, the prophet Elias may carry the praise from
them al: Of whom in Ecclesiasticus it is thus reported, Ecclesiast. cap. 48.1.
that he stood like a fire, and his words burned like a lamp, and because the
people of Israel could not away with the commandment of the Lord, by the word
of the Lord he shut the heaven, and so brought a famine upon them. He was
appointed to reprove in due season, and to pacify the wrath of the Lords
judgment before it kindled, Malac. 4.6.
and so to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and the hearts of
the children to their fathers. Unto the which place the Angel Gabriel
prophesying before hand unto Zachary, what manner of person his son John
Baptist should be, alludeth, saying; Luke 1.17.
that he should go before the Lord in the power and spirit of Elias, to turn
the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom
of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. O that all the
Preachers and Ministers of this kingdom were so possessed with the power and
spirit of Elias, that by beating down sin and wickedness, by the sword of
the spirit, and by giving knowledge of salvation to the people of God, they
might prepare the ways of the Lord by pulling down the mountains, by raising
and filling up the valleys, by making crooked things straight, by making rough
ways smooth; By the mountains are understood, men that are very high and
proud in the opinion of their own righteousness, which by the preaching of the
Gospel shall abate their pride, and so come to Christ. By the valleys are
meant, men that are utterly despair of all men, and altogether living in
despair: such shall be raised up to the fellowship and communion of the kingdom
of heaven: By crooked things are signified such things as have been warped and
writhed sundry ways, Psalm. 119.9.
which shall be made straight by the level and squire of the Gospel. For how
shall a young man (says David) cleanse his ways, but by ruling himself after
the word of God. As for the rough ways that shall be made plain, they are
called rough by reason of the thorns of manifold vices, and naughty desires
and lusts, the short is, that the course of all things shall be changed to such
contraries, that all impediments and lettes that shall hinder the course of the
Gospel, shall be broken, and so the Preachers of Christ's sacred word and
Gospel, shall make ready a people prepared for the Lord. But alas we are
fallen into these miserable days, even the worst and last days, that we are
so far off from suffering ourselves to be reproved when we sin, that we do
rejoice when we do wickedly.

We cannot abide to have our faults touched. Our Pride is grown as high as
the Heaven: our covetousness is sunk as deep as hell; and yet we cannot in
any wise suffer ourselves to be reproved. We say to the preachers, Peace, and
talk not unto us in the name of the Lord; tell not us of the Scripture: Tell
not us of Christ, of Peter, of Paul: we bid the preacher speak us fair, and
we bid him bless those things, which are accursed by Gods own mouth. Nay,
many there are which are already weary of the Gospel, and weary of their
preachers, they call them Pulpit-men of the spirit, Priests, and I know not
what, as though themselves had nothing to do with the spirit of God. They say
the Preacher is too busy, he medleth with that he knows not. Yes, thou
foolish man, he knows it well enough. He knows that pride is pride: that
extortion is extortion: that covetousness is covetousness: that sacrilege is
sacrilege: that usury is usury: that sin is sin: and thou, and thine
own conscience knows it too, if thou would be known of it.

But God is just, and as the extreme disdain of Gods truth, and his holy
Gospel, deserves the extremity of Gods vengeance; So can it not be without
speedy, and earnest repentance, but that this Gospel, that we are already so
weary of, shall be taken away from us; even the kingdom of God, which is the
true understanding of Gods word, shall be taken away from us: And then, what
can there remain, but blindness and ignorance, which is the kingdom of the
devil.

But this is the only comfort that Preachers have in this great contradiction
and opposition of the world, that if they have a careful endeavor to
discharge a good conscience in crying out against wickedness: and lifting up
their voices, like a Trumpet against the disorders of common life, God
Almighty will so arm all such zealous preachers, with such an invincible
strength and constancy, that all the powers of the world shall never be able
to overcome them.

Be not afraid, (says God to the Prophet Jeremy) of their faces, for
behold (says he) I have this day made thee a defenced city, and an iron
pillar, and walls of brass against the whole land, against the kings of Judah,
and against the Princes thereof, Ier. 1.18.
against the Priests thereof and against the people of the land. They shall
fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee. For I am with
thee, to deliver thee, says the Lord.

What says S. Cyprian, Shall the invincible Tents of Christ, defended with the
strength of the Lord, Lib. 1. Epist. ad Cornel:
give place to the terrors and threatenings of men? Shall the Church yield to
the Capitol? Shall the outrages of mad men be greater then the judgments and
censures of ministers? No, God forbid, it must not be so. For, are not the
preachers the lights of the world, and therefore appointed by God to epsy
faults? are they not the voice of John Baptist? why then should not they cry
out against sins? Seeing therefore, they are the seers of the Lord, they
must not be blind: and being the Lords criers, they must not be dumb, nor
tongue-tyed. And thus much touching the person of Elias.

In the person of king Ahab, I note how strongly and forciblie an evil
example of a wicked Prince, draws the people to imitate, and to make all the
subjectes with whom they live, as like unto them in naughtiness, as Bees are
like unto Bees.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis.

We all know the force of Example, Like people, Esa: 24.2.
like Pri^st: like servant like Master: like maid, like Mistress: like buyer,
like seller: like lender, like borrower: like giver, like taker to usury. So
that the greater the example is, the greater authority it has to draw to
similitude.

When Abimelech cut down his bough and bare it on his shoulder, then all the
people did so and followed him. Iudi, 9.48. 1. King: 12.28.
When King Jeroboam made two golden Calves, no great marvel if the people
straight-waies began to Sacrifice in Dan and Bethel. Dionysius had no sooner
left off the study of Philosophy, but all the Courtiers by and by gave it over.

Princes therefore, and such as are placed in higher degrees, had need to take
heed, and diligently to beware how they sin the sin of Jeroboam, which not
only sinned himself, but caused Israel to sin, and so bind two sins
together. The reason is, because the very credit, and countenance, and
prioritie of their places, being so eminent, makes others the bolder to sin,
because they sin with such actors. And yet this may seem strange in the
corruption of man's nature, that the common people are more easily given to
follow their evil examples and offenses, then ready to take benefit of the
good government of godly and religious Princes.

2. Chron: 17.6.
Iehoshaphat was a good king, who lifted up his heart unto the ways of the
Lord, walking in the first ways of his father David: yet was not his good
example so potent and forcible to retain his people in the profession of the
true worship and service of God, as the evil example of Ahab was of power to
entice his Subjects to become worshippers of Baal the Idol of the Sydonians.

And whereas Iehoshaphat in policy joined affinity with Ahab, and gave his
Son in marriage unto Athaliah, daughter of Iezabel: being persuaded that by
this match there would grow a perpetual peace between the two kingdoms,
being by blood so nearly conioined together; and withal, concerning an
assured hope, by this means to reduce the ten Tribes to the true worship of the
God which then flourished in Jerusalem: he was deceived, and so far off from
attaining to his wished and desired end, that the Kings of Israel stood most
stifflie in maintenance of their priest-mate idolatry, and by their wicked
example, drew almost all Judah to the same most abominable worship of Baal. For
as the story of the scripture records, Iehosaphat was no sooner dead, but
Iehoram his son by the counsel of wicked Athalia his wife, being placed in
the kingdom of his father, and making himself strong, slew all his brethren
with the sword, and so continued to walk in the way of the kings of Israel, 2.
Chro. 21.4.
the reason whereof is set down by the holy ghost, because he had Athalia the
daughter of Ahab to wife, but the Lord plaguea him, because he made Judah and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, 2. Chro. 21.13.
as the house of Ahab went a whoring, and had slain the brethren of his father
which were better then himself. So that after many calamities that befell
Iehoram the king for his falling away from God, the Lord smote his bowelles
with an incurable disease, and so after two years his guts fell out with his
disease.

His son Ahaziah partly moved by the example of his father to commit
idolatry; partly egged on by the persuasion of his mother Athalia, who
counseled him to do wickedly, and principally choosing only such to be his
counselors, which were of the house of Ahab, which were indeed to his
destruction, going with Iehoram his uncle the son of Ahab to fight against
Hazael king of Aram, was slain by the hands of Iehu, whom the Lord had
anointed to destroy the house of Ahab, whose destruction came of the Lord,
because he joined himself with gods enemies. After his death Athalia seeing
that her son was dead, to the intent there should remain none of the royal
progeny of David, that should make title and claim to the crown and kingdom
of Judah, she arose and destroyed all the kings seed of the house of Judah. But
God almighty because of the covenant which he had made with Diuid, and because
he had made a promise to give a light unto him, and to his sons for ever,
stirred up the heart of Iehoshabeath the daughter of the king, and sister of
Ahaziah to commiseration, who took Ioes the son of Ahaziah, and stole him
away from the kings sons that should be slain, and put him and his nurse in
the bedchamber, and so by hiding of him in the house of God during those six
years wherein Athaliah reigned over the land, preserved his life. Thus we may
see what it is for godly Princes to join affinity with the house of Ahab, and
how quickly Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem were enticed and drawn to
go a whoring, as the house of Ahab went a whoring; whereas none of all the
kings of Israel could ever be drawn by the voices of the Prophets of God sent
unto the^ to worship the Lord in Jerusalem which was the place, where the Lord
commanded his name to be called on. We read how the Egyptians notwithstanding
the people of God continued many years among them in Egypt, where they might
see how God was truly to be worshipped, yet for all their conuersing with them,
were little or nothing the better for them: but plain it is, that the
Israelites after their departure from Egypt, did many years after smell of the
leven of Egypt, where they saw before their eyes both calves, sheep, and oxen
worshipped in stead of gods, which caused them many times to commit most
gross, and abominable idolatry, the reason why the nature of man is so
pliable to learn all manner of wickedness (for dociles imitandis turpibus and
prauis omnes sumus), is because the nature of sin is such, so potent and
strong, that easily and quickly, it creeps, and corrupts, which in good
things a man shall hardly see. A little sour will spill a great deal of
sweet, but it is no small store of sweet, that will take away but a little
bitterness. A little black will mar a great deal of white: but it is not so
in the contrary. It is not so easy for a drop of water to quench a great
fire, as it is for a little spark to burn up a whole city. By this which has
been already said, it may sufficiently appear how strongly the evil example
of wicked Princes does induce, and draw the common people to imitate such vices
as they see in their Princes under whom they live. And let this suffice to have
observed in the person of Ahab.

Touching the people whom the Prophet reproves in this, for their halting
consciences, and doubling in matter of religion, we may see the pronenesse and
inclination of man's corrupt kind and nature to the most abominable vice of
idolatry. True it is, that man's nature at the first had understanding granted
to the end that the truth might be learned by them, and the true worship of the
one God, the only Lord and maker of all. But the devils malice craftily came
in place, and caused men to forget their own estate, and the majesty of God
for their own imaginations. So that flesh delighting in her own devises, has
made us prone above all other faults, to superstition and wicked worshippings.
Sundry laws and ordinances almighty God delivered to his people to be kept:
yet concerning none other matter, did he give either mo, or more earnest, and
express laws than those that concerned the true worshipping of him, and
flying of idolles, and images and idolatry, and yet it is strange to consider
how the Jews the only chosen people of God, notwithstanding they were so
often, and earnestly warned, so dreadfully threatened concerning images; so many
times and so extremely punished therefore, should yet for all this, like
blind men without all knowledge and understanding dishonor and diminish the
high majesty of the living God by the baseness and vileness of sundry and
diverse images of dead stones, and stocks, and mettalles to whom they bowed
and gave worship.

The means how the people of the Jews fell to such gross idolatry, was
partly by the inclination of their own corrupt nature, and partly occasioned
by the gentiles and heathen people dwelling round about them, which were
idolaters: for thus the Prophet Ezechiel testifies of them, that they were
wont to say, Eze. 20.32.
we will be as the heathen, and as the families of the countries, and we will
serve wood and stone. We see how the Jews forced Aaaron before his brother
Moses could descend from the mount, to make them a golden calfe: Up say they to
Moses, Exodus 32.1.
and Aaron, make us gods that may go before us. Ezechiel affirms, that
when the Israelites were yet in Egypt, they had rebelled against the Lord, and
had not cast away the abominations of their eyes, nor yet forsaken the idolles
of the country. Yea when they were in the land of Canaan, they had no sooner
tasted of the sweetness thereof, but when they saw every hie hill, and all the
thick trees, they offered there their sacrifices, Eze. 20 28.
and there they presented their offerings of provocation: there also they made
their sweet savor, and powered out there their drink offerings. We may read
and see in the book of Judges, that notwithstanding God sundry times most
grievously plagued them for their idolatry; yet still they went a madding
after their idolles. We see that after the zealous kings Ezechias and Josias
had reformed religion, and reduced it to his ancient purity, the people were
so prone to the contrary, that immediately the people after their decease,
returned to their vomit again. Yea when the ten tribes were brought to
Captivity for serving God otherwise then he would, the tribe of Judah was not
by this their brethrens plague amended: nor when they were brought under yoke
themselves, they considered any whit, the cause of their distress, which was
the forsaking of the Lord their God. When they were in Babylon, they went as
near as they could to the rites of gentilitie, and returning again into the
land of promise, under Antiochus they fell again. Such is, and such has
always been the violent persuasion of error, and such is the force of
superstition, that as soon as ever occasion is ministered, our corrupt nature
inclines to it, desiring always of our selves to attemper gods service to
our outward senses. That blessed impe, our late Josias, K. Edward the 6. was no
sooner departed this life, but the common people of the land, as though they
had never heard of God, never heard any Preacher that showed them the good and
right way, were mad after pilgrimages, pardons, etc: with other such idle
toys. No marvel then, if al men generally being as well inclined of their
own corrupt nature to spiritual fornication as to carnal, and that the
nature of man is no otherwise bent to worshipping of images (if he may have
them, and see them) then to whoredom and fornication in the company of
harlots, no marvel I say, if so many occasions being ministered partly by the
Priests and Jesuits remaining in prisons, and lurking in diverse parts of this
kingdom, and partly by the coming in of foreign Ambassadors into this land,
which are in right permitted to have the free use and exercise of the present
Roman Religion, there are so many of our people, specially of women (a sex
ever too credulous and apt to believe) which are like the idolatrous Jews,
even mad in running to hear and see a Priest say Mass, which Mass they are
strongly borne in hand, that it is the most precious treasure, and inualuable
jewel that ever Christ left to his Church, that the want thereof is to be
redeemed not only with the loss of an 100 marks, but with the loss of an
100. thousand lives. But to speak of the Mass, as the truth of the thing
requires, and as hereafter I will more largely prove, this I say, that the
popish Mass, as now it is used in the Church of Rome, is a very sea of
abominations, a gulf, a hell of iniquity, the vilest villain that ever crept
into the Church of God, being so many ways derogatorie to the death and
bloodshedding of Jesus Christ, wherein poor simple souls are forced to
attribute divine honor to a piece of bread, which the Papists teach them to
call their Lord and their God, and also made believe that the very hearing of a
Mass is auailable unto them ex opere operato, that is, only because it is
said and done; and lastly, that the Mass in all respects of power and virtue
is as auailable and effectual for the remission of sins, as was the
sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, the absurdity of which positions shall
receive a just confutation, when I come to lay down such arguments and proofs
as may be produced out of the word of God, for the disprouing of their daily
Sacrifice of their Mass.

Having thus far spoken of the person of Elias, and of the person of Ahab,
and of the people, whom the prophet Elias thus reproves; The thing he
reproves.
it remains now that I speak of the special thing which he reproves in
them: that is, their halting between two opinions, not being resolved whether
God were the Lord, or Baal. Which may seem the more strange, that this people
which were the seed of Abraham, the Lords own inheritance, the dearly beloved
of Gods own soul, a people whom the Lord had chosen among all Nations, to
be a precious people to himself, above all people on the earth, in Name,
praise, and glory: A people that so many times, and so solemnlie had
protested, God forbid we should forsake the Lord our God, to serve other Gods:
the Lord our God we will serve, and his voice we will obey: that this people
(I say) should stand in doubt, whether that GOD that had wrought so many
miracles for their deliverance, which had brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, with a strong and a mighty hand, which had led them, and fed them in
the wilderness with Manna from heaven, for the space of 40. years, preserving
them in all the way which they went, and destroying their enemies before them,
and lastly in the end, bringing them into the Land of Canaan, whether he were
the only true God to be worshipped and followed, or rather Baal, in so much,
that when the prophet Elias had said unto them, If the Lord be God follow
him: if Baal be he, go after him. Silence was the only answer they made
him, being not able otherwise to answer him one word.

Unto this base irresolution the people were thus desperately brought; partly
being moved through fear of so great and mighty a Prince, and so greatly
advancing the worship of Baal, as king Ahab did, by the inticement and
provocation of his wife. So that perceiving how both the King and Queen, and
almost all the Nobility, being wholly affected and addicted to the worship of
Baal, by reason of the weakness and infirmity of their faith, were not able
to resolve in themselves, what they might do, or how they might believe,
standing in a mammering this way and that way, one and the same man would
sometimes worship the Lord, and an other while Baal, and sometimes both
together, being persuaded that religion was a thing indifferent, and that it
did not matter how they served God, if they had any care at all to serve him,
whether they served him alone, or served him with any other. But little did
this people understand that religion is not as every common matter of man's
life: but a thing to be measured, not by opinion, but by truth; to be chosen,
not by example, but by judgment; to be holden, not for company, but for
conscience sake.

In this irresolution and wavering inconstancy of the people of Israel, we
may as in a glass, behold and see our selves, even the state and condition of
our own people; how many there are yet in our days, which notwithstanding
they have been bred and brought up in this religion, which by Gods great mercy
this day is professed in the Church of England, yet partly by the corruption of
their own nature, partly led by the moving persuasions of recusant Papists,
but specially being enticed thereunto, by those false impostors and deceivers
of the world, I mean the Priests and Jesuits, begin to call the truth of
our religion into question, standing in a maze, what they may do, whom they
may follow, what they may believe; sometime in love and liking of our
religion, otherwhile again, being weary of the Gospel, embracing the Roman
religion, falsely called by the name of the Catholic Religion, and so daily
wavering between two opinions, declare themselves indeed to be of no
Religion. For whom as my daily prayer to God is and shall be, that he would be
pleased to grant them a solid and strong persuasion in the profession and
defense of the true, and only ancient Catholic faith of Christ delivered unto
us in the holy scriptures of God, and withal, such a measure of heavenly
wisdom, that they may be able to discern things that differ one from
another, and to give a sound judgment between that which is counterfaite, and
the true Catholic faith and religion of Christ. So I could wish, that they
would consider with me, and that they would seriously ponder with earnest and
upright aduisement these few reasons, or motives, which here I will set down,
which may serve in steed of so many several demonstrations, to prove that this
same doctrine we preach this day in all the reformed churches of Christendom,
is the very truth of the Gospel of Christ.



been shed over all the world, has had a strange and wonderful increase, so
that the more our religion has been persecuted, the more still it has
increased, and this was ever reputed by the ancient fathers, to be the proper
privilege and excellency of truth, about all other sects, to come out of
persecution as gold out of the fire, more bright, more illustrious, more
eminent then before.

Esaias speaking of that abundance of knowledge, which should be under the
kingdom of Christ, in the time of grace, has these words, Esa. 11.9.
The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover
the sea: and likewise the Prophet Joel, Joel. 2.28.
I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters
shall prophecy: Your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions, and also upon the servants, and handmaides will I pour my spirit. We
may truly say in this accepted time, and this day of salvation, that these
scriptures are fulfilled in our ears, even our enemies being judges, who have
confessed that the word of God was never in any age so plainly taught and
delivered, as in this time wherein we live, that we may truly and justly say,
applying the words of our Savior Christ to ourselves, blessed are the eyes
which have seen those things which we have seen, there having been many
millions and thousands of our forefathers, which detesting the Antichristian
pride, and other loose behavior of the Roman Clergy, endeavoring to serve
the Lord after the prescript of his own word, desired to have seen, but one
of the days which we have seen and could not: who although with Lot, they
vexed their righteous souls in the mids of a spiritual Sodom, yet like
Seafish, which is always most fresh in salt water, they kept themselves
unspotted of the world, and would not spot their souls with such horrible
co^taminations, wherewith the whole world almost was defiled in those times of
great darkness and superstition.

The conclusion is this; that seeing over all the Christian world, where the
Gospel has had free passage, all those places wheresoever the sound thereof
is heard, are full of the knowledge of the Lord; and that on the other side,
where popery prevails, there is nothing but ignorance and superstition, the
truth with tyranny and cruelty being kept under, by reason of the Spanish
inquisition, that this is a very strong motive to persuade, that the Gospel
this day preached in the reformed Churches of Christendom, is the infallible
and undoubted word of God.

Caesar, or unto God.

And verily one reason to persuade any man's conscience, that popery is not
of God, may be this: that whereas the doctrine of the Gospel is a doctrine of
obedience, which Christ both taught and acted; his Apostles both by precept and
practice confirmed: and whereas the whole current and stream of antiquity
runs the same way, that all manner of persons, yea the BB. of Rome
themselves for many hundred years together, did acknowledge the Emperor for
their Lord, liege Lord and Master; the doctrine of the present Church of Rome
persuades flatly to disobedience and plain rebellion. It teaches that the
people upon the Popes warrant may lawfully bear arms against their
sovereign: that by dispensation from the Pope, they may lawfully renounce
their allegiance, yea further upon the Popes iubet, they may lay violent hands
upon him. And so the Jesuits have delivered it for the resolute and undoubted
judgment of the Church of Rome, that it is a thing both lawful, and
meritorious to kill and to murder Christian Princes professing a contrary
religion to the doctrine and faith of that Church, popery therefore that
professes, not a lawfulnes only, but a merit in such desperate attempts,
contrary to the manifest voice of God, Thou shall not kill, does clearly
convince it self, and show it self to be a religion of the devil, and not of
God. Let this then suffice for a conclusion of my fourth motive, to show, that
this is the alone property of the Gospel, wheresoever true religion
flourishes, to season the hearts both of young and old with true subjection
and Christian obsequiousness to the higher and superior powers.

religion professed by them wherewith he is well pleased. For of all the Kings
of Judah, who ever more abounded with all peace and worldly felicity then those
who were most religiously addicted and affected to the service of God, as
Josias, Ezechias, Iehosaphat, David, Solomon? Thus the Lord spoke to king
Iehoiaekim by his Prophet Jeremy; Iere. 22.15.
Did not thy father Josias eat and drink and prosper when he executed
judgment and justice? and was not all this because he knew me, says the Lord?
What Prince was there ever in the world either more honored or feared then
Constantine the great was after he had once received the Christian religion?
all the kingdoms this day possessed with protestant Princes, all the free
cities and Commonwealths of Heleutia, never were in more riches or settled
tranquillity: never so potent, nor so orderly governed as they be at this day,
religion there having so free a passage, and course among them as it has, and
to come nearer home to our own days, if we do but consider with our own
selves the long, peaceable and prosperous reign of our late dread sovereign
Queen Elizabeth, the very joy of Christendom, whose land in her days, was a
sanctuary to all the world groaning for the liberty of true religion, we shall
perceive that from the beginning of her most happy reign until the day of
her dissolution, by gods singular goodness, this kingdom of great Britain,
has enjoyed more universal peace, the people of the land increased in greater
numbers in more strength, with greater riches, and less sickness, the earth
has yielded more fruits, and generally al kind of worldly felicity has more
abounded since, and during the time of the Popes thunders, bulls, curses and
maledictions, then in any other long time before, when the Popes pardons and
blessings came yearly into the Realm, as they did in Queen Mary's days. And
thus much for proof that the outward blessings of God, which he has bestowed
upon such Kings and Princes, and states as have embraced the Gospel of his
son Christ Jesus, are undoubted arguments and demonstrations of the true and
sincere religion professed by them.

Martine Luther having his enemies so many, so malicious, so mighty, should
notwithstanding after nine and twenty years preaching, die quietly in his
bed, in peace both of body and mind, and be buried with that honor, that few
of his rank and sort was ever before? Who could ever have thought that after
such a strange and a most cruel massacre in France about the year 1572.
there should have been remaining so much as any one Protestant alive? and yet
notwithstanding all that cruelty, though few in number forsaken and destitute
of all worldly assurances, being brought as it were to nothing, have yet
strangely and indeed miraculously lifted up their heads again to the terror
and confusion of their proudest enemies.

Again how can we conceive it possible, that the city of Geneua should ever
be able to hold out so long against so many intended invasions and plottes by
the Duke of Sauoie entending their utter ruin and desolation, but that the
hands of their armies were strengthened by the hand of the mighty God of
Jacob, their strong redeemer, who maintaining their cause against the rage of
their enemies, compassed them about with many joyful deliverances, hiding them
as it were a shaft in the quiver of his most careful, and merciful providence.

What was purposed and intended by that invincible Navy of the Spaniards in
88. the Christian world can witness, that it was nothing else but to bring
this noble Realm of England into slavish bondage. And did not almighty God
the son stand upon our guard by getting himself honor upon Pharao, and upon
all the Egyptians, even upon that great Armado, which had been so long in
preparing, so that their Altar-God, their Crucifix God, their Capitolian God,
were not as our God, our enemies being judges, sundry of the soldiers of
Spain confessing, that during all the time of the fight at sea, Christ had
showed himself a plain Lutherane. But let us look a little further into the
exceeding favor of God showed in particular to the late Queen Elizabeth, how
many and sundry times was her dearest blood sought, and how near the bloody
traitors have been to the very execution of their devilish designements, some
of them and more then once or twice, in nearest and private places with their
murderous weapons in their hands, and yet behold how still they were prevented,
the Lord striking them with such a sudden trembling of heart, and
astonishment of mind, that they had never the power once to lay violent hands
upon her?

If all this do not suffice for proof of the truth on our side, and not with
the Papists, let gods special favor miraculously showed to the Kings
majesty that now is, and his exceeding blessings upon this our country by his
most happy entrance unto this crown, and success to this kingdom, be to us
as it is indeed, an argument that the religion professed this day, is the true
religion acceptable to God, and conformable to his word: but as God in all ages
has showed his power in the miraculous and gracious deliverance of his Church,
and protection of his holy and eternal truth, so did it never more clearly
show it self, then in the wonderful and mighty deliverance of our gracious
K. James, the Queen, the Prince, and the rest of the royal branches,
together with the Nobility, Clergy, and the Commons of this Realm, by the
pouder-Traytors, the papists, appointed as sheep for the slaughter. And let
thus much be sufficient to have spoken touching the strange and wonderful
things which almighty God has showed in these last days, for the honor of
his Gospel, for the better satisfaction of them which as yet stand in doubt,
whether the Gospel we preach, be the only true and Catholic faith of Christ.

But besides those men which stand at a stay, and are not yet resolved, which
religion, I mean ours or the papists is truest, there is risen another
generation of men, that are of opinion, that there is no real difference
between the doctrine of the present Roman church, and the religion of the
protestants, and so make a favorable compromission, that the questions of
religion between us might easily be accorded, which I take to be a thing
altogether impossible, the Papists standing in such terms of opposition
against us as they do. I remember my self preaching at a certain country
parish, some three years ago, a simple country man comes unto me, and thus
begins to question with me: Sir, your preachers make us simple men of the
country believe, that there is a wonderful great difference between the new
and old Religion. Pray Sir, says he, what odds is there between Our Father,
and Pater noster? None at all, said I, but only this, that the one is in
Latin, and the other in English. You have answered right (says he, and so I
am persuaded) that there is no other difference at all between the Mass and
our English Communion, but only that the one is in Latin, the other in
English. And of this opinion it seems there be many, which think and are
persuaded, that our religion, and the religion of Rome, are all one for
substance. For satisfaction therefore of them which think our English
Communion and the popish Mass all one for substance, I will set down certain
real differences, whereby it may evidently appear, that the doctrine of the
popish Mass, neither has, nor can have any agreement at all with the Lords
supper. I speak at this time to men of great understanding and knowledge,
judge ye what I say.

S. Paul's time, were done in the congregation, in a known language, the whole
service of the Mass is said either in the Greek or Latin tongues, not
understood of the common vulgar people.

Drink ye all of this; the Church of Rome will at no hand suffer and permit
the Lay People to drink of the Cup, calling them Heretics, and Calixtions,
that desire to receive the Cup together with the bread, in the celebration of
the Lords Supper.



Maundie instituted a Sacrament of thanksgiving, and commanded us by eating
and drinking to be partakers of his body that was wounded, and of his blood
which was shed the next day, for the remitting and pardoning of our sins.

Rome has turned this Sacrament into a Sacrifice. And whereas the Son of God
said, Take this and eat it in remembrance of me, the Church of Rome says,
take and offer this to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the
dead.

Rome commands to be done in their popish Mass: but as Christ took the
bread, so he left it bread, whereas the popish Priest takes bread, and
coniureth it away, by breathing upon it.

Eucharistia. And whereas Eusebius says, that Christ commanded us to offer up
a remembrance of his death in steed of a Sacrifice, the popish church not
conte^ting themselves with this sacrifice of praise, and thanksgiving, wherein
we celebrate the remembrance, and as Nazianzene calls it, A figure of that
great mystery of the death of Christ, they hold that their Mass, which they
call The daily Sacrifice of the Church, is not a commemoratiue, but a real
sacrifice, not a figure and remembrance of that which is past, but the thing it
self: that the sacrifice Christ offered upon the Cross, and theirs in the
Mass is all one: that the same body of Christ which was borne of the Virgin
Marie, and which was offered up, upon the Cross for our Redemption, is the
very same, even idem numero, with that which is offered up by the Priest, to
God the Father in the Mass, for the remission of sins. By these material
differences, which here I have set down, it is plainly manifest, that the
popish Mass does in many things vary and swerve from the institution of
Christ, as most plainly is to be seen, in the 11. cha: of 1. Corint: verse. 23.
where the Apostle at large does describe the whole order and institution of the
Lords Supper.

And thus it is evidently to be perceived, that the Mass as now it is used, is
nothing else, but an heap of sinful devises, and abuses, invented by Satan
and broached by Antichrist, to deface and frustrate the Lords supper: where
besides their fruitelesse prayers, and superstitious ceremonies, their private
and half communion subuerteth the Lords institution: their sacrifice
derogateth from his death and bloud-sheading: their adoration of bread and
wine, conuinceth them of heinous Idolatry.

But to prove that Protestancy and popery cannot be reconciled: First, the
Papists themselves bold the differences between us to be such: that it is
impossible for any Protestant to be saved.

Again, all the grounded divines of the Protestants religion insist upon the
same difference. That sundry points of popery do quite raze the very
foundation of Christian religion. Mark (says Bishop Jewel to D. Harding)
What ye were lately, and what ye would now seem to be: what way ye trod
then, and what way ye tread now: the difference is no less then between
light and darkness; life and death; heaven and hell: so great a change (says
he) would require some good time of deliberation. Which asseueration of that
worthy Bishop, how agreeable it is to the truth, and consonant to the practice
of the ancient Catholic church, and Doctors thereof, who would never yield, I
will not say in an opinion, but not so much as in a form of speech, or in the
change of a letter, sounding against the orthodoxall faith: and whether there
be not in sundry fundamental points of faith, great and many differences
between Rome and us, let it be duly considered by these instances following.

free justification by faith alone, which doctrine D. Bishop in his Epistle
dedicatory to the K. Majesty, sets down as a maine heresy, that Luther
laid for the ground of his religion: namely, that a man is justified by faith
alone. But I demand of any sober Papist, not too much wedded to the prejudice
of his own opinion, what other, or what better foundation could any man lay,
then that which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ, which doctrine is the
very life and soul of the Church.

For this was the Catholic faith of the church of Rome, when S. Paul wrote
his Epistle unto them, that a man is justified gratis, Romans 3.24.
for God a mercy, for nothing, and that by the grace of God without the works
of the law. Quite contrary to which doctrine of the Apostle, the Papists hold
justification by works of grace, auouching that we are not justified before
God, only by the merits of Christ, but also by our own doings, affirming
that good works are truly and properly meritorious, and the causes of our
salvation, and that heaven is as truly the reward of good works, as hell is
the stipend of evil works: that good works do fully satisfy the law of
God, and worthily deserve eternal life: and that good works wrought and done
in the state of grace, are so far meritorious, as that God should be unjust,
if he rendered not heaven for the same, charging the justice of God, not in
respect of his promise, as the Apostle does, but in respect of merit, and
desert of works. Where we clearly perceive and see, that there is a great
difference between the Church of Rome and us, even in the principal Article
of our faith touching the Salvation of our souls; we believing steadfastly,
that it is to be ascribed to the merits of Christ, they expecting it for the
merit of their works.



Heb. 9.25.26.

But now in the end of the world he has appeared once to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. Heb. 9.26.

Therefore he cannot now any more be offered in the Mass.

Heb. 10 12.14.

This must then be the conclusion, that there is no necessity why we should
offer up Christ any more for remission of sins.

Heb. 10.11. But the sacrifice of Christ once offered has sanctified the
comers thereunto: for we are sanctified even by the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once made, Heb. 10.10.

Therefore seeing that Christ by that one oblation of himself has purchased
for us eternal redemption, Heb. 9.12. there needs no more propitiatory
sacrifice to be made for sin.

Heb. 14.18. But Christ has been offered once to take away the sins of
many, Heb. 9.28. and by his own blood he has entered once to the holy place to
obtain eternal redemption for us: Heb. 9.12.

Therefore the Mass cannot be a propitiatory sacrifice for sins, seeing
already by the death of Christ we have remission of sins.

Heb. 9.22.

But in the daily sacrifice of the Mass there is no shedding of blood, for
they call their Mass an unbloody sacrifice.

Therefore in the sacrifice of the Mass there is no remission of sins, and
so by consequent the Mass can be no true propitiatory sacrifice. Thus we see
how the doctrine of the popish Mass is ex diametro repugnant to the doctrine
of the Apostle, and to the whole order and institution of the Lords Supper.

thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve: Math.
4.10.
contrary to the commandment which the Angel gave to John, when he fell at
his feet to worship him: See thou do it not, Reave. 19.10.
I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren which have the testimony of
Jesus, worship God: contrary to the examples of Peter and Paul and Barnabas,
Act. 14.15.
Which utterly refused all manner of adoration, Paul and Barnabas renting their
clothes crying out to the people of Lycaonia, O men why do ye these things? We
are even men subject to the like passions, ye be, and preach unto you that ye
should turn from these vain idolles unto the living God, which made heaven
and earth, and the sea, and all things that in them are: Act. 10.25.
and Peter speaking to Cornelius, (Who at his first meeting of him fell down
at his feet and worshipped him) said thus unto him, taking him up, stand up:
for even I my self am a man, contrary to the continual and constant practice
of the ancient Catholic primitive Church of Christ, which as S. Hiero^
witnesses, did neither worship Sun nor Moon, nor Angel, nor Archangell,
nor Cherubin, nor Seraphin, nor any other name, that is named either in this
world, or in the world to come, least they should serve the creature in steed
of the creator, who is God blessed for ever: contrary to the determination of
Gregory the great and first of that name, who also himself was Bishop of
Rome, and therefore his voice to be accounted as an oracle of God, who albeit
he did well like the having of images in the Church, yet he utterly condemns
the idolatrous worshipping of them alleging for proof thereof the place of
scripture before named, Lib. 7. episto. cap. 109.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

All this I say notwithstanding the Church of Rome this day, even in this
clear light of the Gospel maintains and defends the worship and adoration of
Angels: the worship of Saints departed: the worship of the images of the
trinity: the worship of the cross and crucifixe: the worship of images which
they set up in their Churches, to the intent the people may attribute divine
honor unto them, and lastly the worship of their breaden-God, their sacrament
of the Altar, as they term it, whom they call their Lord and their God, crying
out to a piece of bread, O Lord, O God, O Lamb of God that take away the
sins of the world, have mercy upon us, and receive our prayers.

And verily were there no other cause to induce all good Christians to depart
from the fellowship and communion of the Church of Rome, this one doctrine of
adoration, wherein they teach the common people to call the sacrament their
Lord and God, and so by giving the honor of God to a creature that is no God,
to commit gross and manifest Idolatry, this point alone were cause sufficient
for them to detest both them and their religion for ever.

Iere. 2.27.
For what odds I beseech you is there between those blind Jews, which said to
a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone thou have begotten me, and those
wilful and blind Papists which cry upon the Sacrament of the Altar, in
substance a base and corruptible creature, Lord I am not worthy, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner: O Lord, O God, O Lamb of God receive our prayers.
The one sort the H. Ghost has traduced for a memorable, and detestable crew of
idolaters; and so may we by the like reason, and upon as good ground and
warrant condemn all the Papists living this day for most vile and shameful
idolaters, for adoring and worshipping a piece of bread. O most horrible
idolatry!

Tully himself being an heathen man could say, Who was ever so very a fool,
De natu. deorum.
as to believe the thing he eats to be his God? The very children in Grammar
School can tell us, that the heathens that adored Bacchus and Ceres, which
first found out, and taught the use of bread and wine, whereas before they had
fed on achornes, and drank water: yet notwithstanding they were never so
foolish, or so besotted as to give godly honor to bread and wine.

By this then, which has been already spoken, it is clearly proved, that
there is no compatibilitie between Protestancie and Popery, and that the
diversity between us, is of so material and needful points, that if they be
right, we are wrong: if we be right, they are wrong: both they and we cannot
be both together Catholic members of the true Church.

The reason why we cannot account Papists for members of the true Church, is,
because they maintain sundry points which go directly against the Christian
faith, they do not content themselves only with Christ, nor with his
Sacraments, but set up other mediators in heaven, other doctrines and
sacraments on earth. Besides that, as I have already proved, they adore the
creatures of bread and wine, in steed of Christ. They bow their knees to
painted and carved images: they join nature with grace: man's merits with Gods
mercies: unwritten verities with holy scriptures: their own satisfactions
with the blood of Christ, and so directly impugn sundry fundamental points
of the Christian faith, which generally otherwise they will seem to hold.



Absalom made against his Father David, there were many true subjects of
David, that went after Absolon, to take his part in their simplicity, 2. Sam:
15.11.
as the scripture records, knowing nothing, whereunto the treacherous plottes
of Absolon did tend. So no doubt charity moves me to think that there are
many in this Kingdom, honest men, blinded with some opinions of popery, as
in the questions of the real presence, or in the number of 7. Sacraments, or in
the doctrine of Auricular confession, or some such school question, not
knowing or believing all points of popery, which indeed is the very mystery
of iniquity. Of such I say, that in the simplicity of their hearts, think of
the Popes doctrine, no otherwise then David's subjects did of the rebellion of
Absolon; I will not despair, but verily hope that such may be saved,
notwithstanding their misperswasion in some points of religion, which do not
destroy any article of faith, and Christian belief.

But as for the rest of our wilful recusant papists, which both err in the
foundation, and hate the truth of the Gospel revealed unto them, which hate
instruction, and stop their ears against the word, we offer unto them, holding
the infallibility of the Popes judgment; the universality of his
jurisdiction and power, to dispose of the Kingdoms of the world, which believe
free will to perform, and to do the actions of virtue without assistance of
special grace: which hold and maintain perfections of inherent
righteousness, satisfactions, merits of condignitie, propitiatory sacrifice
of the Mass: which give Gods honor to images, maintain justification by
works, and such like, of such I say, I may without breach of charity affirm,
that if they so live, and so die, in the arms of the whore of Babylon, they
can never be saved.

we hold this day.

2. Tim: 2.19
The foundation of God stands firm and sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows who are his: and according to the scriptures thus we believe of them
all, that such as held the only foundation which is Christ Jesus, in a true
and lively faith, were all saved, although they built upon this foundation,
chafe, straw, or wood: and doubt not therefore, 1. Cor: 3.15
but that many thousands of our ancestors, even in those times of great
blindness and corruption, holding only the same foundation Jesus Christ were
saved, and so died the servants of God: notwithstanding they were misled and
carried away with sundry errors and superstitions, for want of due knowledge
of the word of God, which their pastors and leaders should have instructed them
withal.

But for a further answer to this objection, I say, that the case of our
recusant Papists living at this day, and the case of our forefathers, living
in times of great corruption are not peers, nor nothing like at all.

The disparison is this: our forefathers lived in a time of great blindness,
wherein there was a general decay of learning, wherein all good liberal Arts
and learning were abolished. The sky growing even dark with the mistie fogges
of ignorance, when their pastors and leaders were not only Sir John lack
Latins, but S. John lack honesties, who could neither speak Latin, nor read
English, nor understand the articles of our faith, nor any part of the
scriptures, clouds without rain, lanthorns without light, salt without
savor, blind guides, dumb dogs, that (as one says) seem to have their
souls given them in steed of salt to keep them from stinking; and what
marvel then, if the people being led by such blind guides, became blind
themselves, and fell into sundry errors? But as for our recusant papists,
they live in the learned age that ever was, since the time of the Apostles,
when as the word of God and knowledge of saving truth, was never so plentiful
and flourishing as now it is.

Again, the errors of our forefathers proceeded of mere simplicity and
want of judgment. Lib. I. de bap. cap. 18.
Of whom I may say the same that S. Augustine said of Cyprian and his
colleagues, erring in the doctrine of Rebaptization; That if they had been in
his time, when upon exact and full discussion of things, it was resolved
otherwise, they would have been of an other mind: So verily, if our
forefathers, whose zeal was exceeding great, and a religious care to serve
God, had lived in these latter times, and had seen the true grounds of our
religion, they would most willingly have embraced the same truth we profess
this day: many thousands of them in their life time, desiring to have seen and
heard those things which we to our unspeakable comfort have both heard and
seen. And howsoever many of our forefathers were in some points deceived,
yet it is manifestly to be proved that the worthiest and best learned men in
former times thought no otherwise then we do in all substantial points of
Christan belief, complaining even as we do of the intolerable burde^s which
the Popes laid on them in those days, wishing the removing of such things as
we have removed.

But as touching the errors of our obstinate and wilful recusant Pap: they
proceed of mere obstinacy, pertinaciously defending most dangerous errors,
He that is deceived, Cypri. ad Iuba.
and erreth of simplicity may be pardoned: but after the truth is once
revealed, who so nevertheless continues in his former errors wittingly and
willingly, sins without pardon of ignominy, as being over borne by
presumption and wilfulness. And this I take to be the very case of all our
recusant Papists this day. So great an odds there is between simple error
and wilful defense. Verily for my part I am persuaded, that there is never a
sober and learned papist in this land, that can deny (if he will truly say,
and as he thinks in his own conscience) but that we are come as near, as
possible we could to the Church of the Apostles, and Catholic Bishops, which
Church was sound and perfect, and spotted with no kind of idolatry, and have
directed according to their customs and ordinances, not only the doctrine
this day professed in the Church of England, but also the sacraments, and form
of common prayers, and divine service established here among us: the psalms we
sing, are David's: the books we read are canonical: the prayers we make are
consonant to the rule and proportion of faith, and true godliness. And so it
appears, that our whole leiturgie with great judgment, and reasonable
moderation, was purposely so framed, out of the grounds of religion, wherein
both sides do agree, that the papist himself might resort unto it, without
any scruple or scandal, if faction more then reason did not prevail.

A third difference between our forefathers, and our Romish recusants is this:
our forefathers never for their part ever understood the mystery of popish
iniquity, but in singleness of their hearts embraced the general doctrine of
the Gospel, concerning salvation by faith in Christ: those damnable and
treasonable positions which the Church of Rome proposes to be holden, as
verities of the Catholic faith, were never known in the days of our
forefathers, that is, these fundamental points of popish religion, viz:









The secrets of this occupation were never so much as heard of in those days,
I mean this king-killing, and Queene-killing Doctrine of the papists, for
proof whereof I will allege unto you one famous and memorable example as I
find it recorded.

In the woeful wars with the Barons, when King John was viewing of the
Castle of Rochest held against him by the Earl of Arundel, he was espied by a
very good Arcubalaster, who told the Earl thereof, and said that he would
soon dispatch that cruel tyrant, if he would but say the word. God forbid,
vile varlet (quoth the Earl) That we should prove the death of the holy one of
God. What said the Soldier, swearing a monstrous oath, he would not spare
you, my Lord, if he had you at the like advantage? No matter for that quoth the
Earl, Gods good will be done, and he will dispose thereof, and not the king:
an answer fitting and beseeming that most noble Earl far contrary to the
practice of our powder-Traitors, and likewise contrary to the practice of the
late popes of Rome, who have been so far off from saving, and sparing the
life of Christian Kings and Princes, that as Pope Hildebrand gave the first
president, they have hired Assacinours to murder them, and to lay violent
hands upon them, as it is plainly to be proved by the practice of Pius
quintus, Gregory the thirtee^th, Sixtus quintus, who not only resolved that
parricide of Princes was lawful, but promised both earthly and heavenly
recompense to such as would offer their service to kill and murder them. The
truth whereof is clearly to be justified by the letters of Cardinal Como
written to William Parrie, wherein contrary to the manifest voice of God
himself, Thou shall not kill, he encourages him to the slaughter of his liege
Lady and Mistrisse, as to an honorable and holy exploite.

James, or Saint Paul in English. And therefore we conceive this good hope of
them, even of all such, who sought so carefully to use all the good means;
whereby they might attain to the saving knowledge of truth, although deceived
in some points, yet that they had mercy showed unto them, and do rest in peace
with God, and that the same God, who gave them some measure of knowledge, and
would require of them according to that which they had, and not according to
that, which they had not, did receive them into the number of his blessed and
elect. But the case of our recusants is a clean other case. They refuse almost
al manner of conference with learned men: they will not, nor in deed dare,
only for the fear of displeasing the Popes holiness, resort to our Churches,
as for 11. years together, in the reign of the late Queen of most precious
and worthy memory, all the papists of this kingdom did, and that without any
scruple of conscience, until they had received a countermand from the Bishop
of Rome, commanding them upon pain of the black curse to come no more to the
Church: they are forbidden to read the Scriptures: the Bishops in Queen
Mary's days, caused it not only to be accounted heresy, but to be proclaimed
fellonie for any lay man to have an English Bible in his house, for his private
solace and comfort: the learned treatises written by our men, they permit not
their Disciples once to read, but interdict them even to many of their
Seminary Priests; no marvel then if taking this course, the Jesuits and
Priests keep their lay followers in a perpetual ignorance of true religion,
having once framed them to this principle, that it is a deadly sin, either to
read the books of the Protestants, or to hear their sermons, or to be
present at their service, or to communicate with them in any religious duty
whatsoever. And let thus much be spoken touching the Prophets reproving of the
Israelites for wavering and halting between two opinions: It follows in the
next part to make proof unto you, that God and Baal cannot both be joined
together in one service.

There is a speech of Socrates greatly commended by S. Augustine, De consen.
Euang. Li. 1. cap. 18.
vnumquemque deum sic coli oportere, quomodo seipsum colend m praeceperat. That
is, every God was to be honored, as u he himself had given in commandment.
Upon which principle the ancient Romans in the time of Tiberius the Emperor
grounding themselves, albeit they did admit the religion of all other gods, yet
by no means they could be induced to receive the religion of the God of the
Hebrewse. The reason was this, they saw it necessary that either all their
idols must be excluded, and only the true worship of God entertained: or he
only not admitted, the rest to be honored. For by the word of God they found
they could not agree together, and contrary to his word they would not seek
to serve him, and therefore chose rather to be without Christ altogether, then
to worship him and others with him against his will and commandment. And
verily God will take it in better part that thou deuote thy self to any
religion, be it never so bad, then to make a hodge podge of religion, and so to
have a mixture of good and bad religion together, insomuch that I am persuaded
that the worship of Mahomet less offends God, then when such as are by
profession Christians, shall give divine honor to a piece of bread. Eze. 20.39.
As for you o house of Israel, (says God by the Prophet Ezechiel) go you and
serve every one his Idol, seeing you will not obey me, and pollute my holy
altar no more with your gifts, and with your Idols. Where the Prophet
intimates, that God had rather that the Israelites should be professed
Idolaters, then to pretend his holy name with such corruptions. True religion
will admit no mixture, but is simple. God himself said, Thou shall not let thy
cattle gender with diverse kinds. Leui: 19.19.
Thou shall not sow thy field with mingled seed: neither shall a garment of
diverse colors come upon thee: signifying that we must stick to one religion,
which indeed requires the whole man, and cannot endure any doubling in the
worship of God, nor any blending of Iudaisme, and Christianisme together: nor
any reconciliation at all between Christ and Belial: between the table of the
Lord, and the table of devils: between God and Melchom: It is not possible
that one womb should contain Jacob and Esau: one house the Arc and Dagon:
one temple prayer and merchandise: one heaven Michaell and the Dragon, and so
God having ordained his Law stricktly to be kept without declining either to
the right hand or to the left, gives us to understand, that he himself will
be served alone, without corriualles of his glory, with all our heart,
strength, and soul. Son (says God) give me thine heart: Pro: 23.26.
and let thine eyes delight in my ways: but Satan willing to part stakes with
God, cries out with the Harlot, Nec mihi, nec tibi, sed diuidatur: Let honor
and glory, and worship be neither mine nor thine, 1. King: 3.
but let it be divided. But the Lord our God being a jealous God, will not be
crowded in a corner of the heart, but he will have either all thine heart, or
no part at all, either all glory, or no glory: aut Caesar, aut nullus.

And so we are taught by the word of God in Deuteronomie: Deu. 61.4.5
Hear o Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only; and thou shall let the Lord
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might,
that is: we must love God sweetly, strongly, perseuerantly.

Love God with all thine heart, that is, kindly and affectionately. Love God
with all thy soul, that is, wisely and discreetly. Love God with all thy
might, that is, steadfastly and constantly; Let the love of thine heart inflame
thy zeal toward him: Let the knowledge of thy soul guide it with discretion:
Let the constancy of thy might and strength confirm it: That is, let thy love
be fervent, circumspect, and invincible. So that thou may say with the
Apostle, I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, To: 8.38.
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate me from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus my Lord. Out of that which has been already spoken
touching this point of mingling Gods worship with the worship of any other,
this conclusion or corollarie may be derived, which is this, that if either
thou serve God with my other, as Saints, Angels, or any creature, which the
Papists do.

Or if thou serve him alone, any other way, then he prescribes, thou love
him not, but thou do hate him, yea, extremely hate him, and shall find at
his hands the reward of a deadly enemy. Strange therefore must needs seem to
be this Doctrine of the Papists, wherein they teach, that we may honor God,
as we our selves can best devise.

That if our intent be good, and our meaning be good, it skilleth not how, or
in what manner we worship him: That these kinds of worshippings of God, which
come of our own heads, without the express commandment of God, are the more
agreeable unto him, the more they proceed of our selves. Which doctrine of
theirs is the maine proppe of all idolatry, and the very root of all
superstition. For the ways of God are not as our ways: his thoughts are not
as our thoughts: he has bridled our devotion, and has taught us to worship
him not in such sort as may seem good in our eyes, but only as he has
commanded us. God commanded Moses to build the tabernacle, according to that
order and form showed him in the mount, neither durst Moses add or diminish
any thing, or to do more or less, then God appointed him. Certain it is,
that our good meanings make not our doings good. Neither is our zeal a rule
whereby we may measure out either our Faith, or our good works, but only the
known will and pleasure of God.

There wanted no good intent, or good meaning either in the Israelites, when
they made a golden calfe: Exodus: 3.2.4
or in Nadab and Al thu, when they offered strange fire: or in Saul, when he
spared king Agag: or in Vzza, Leuit: 10.2. 1. Sam: 15.22. 2. Sam: 6.6. 1. King:
12.28.
when he put his hand to the Arc to hold it: nor in Ishu, when he would
needs join the worshipping of Ieroboams golden Calves, with the worship of the
true God of Israel: and yet we see how that jealous God which could never
abide to be worshipped otherwise then he himself had given in commandment,
executed his fierce wrath upon them all, for their confected religions, and
halting consciences.

And this for all the world, is the very guise and manner of worship the
papists use: True it is, they worship God, and they worship Christ, but not
according to his prescript, but in joining the worship of other creatures with
the worship of the only true God, they prove themselves to be plain Idolaters,
holding this for a most certain doctrine, that the Crucifixe is to be
worshipped with the very selfsame worship, wherewith Christ himself is to be
worshipped. The difference then between the Papists and us, in the doctrine of
the worship and service of God, consists both in the manner and the matter of
Gods worship. In the manner of Gods worship, we upon just grounds do vary
from them, because that whereas God being a Spirit, loves only such
worshippers, as worship him in spirit and truth, and to that end would have
religion it self to be free under very sure and most manifest ceremonies of
divine service, and therefore has delivered unto us some few in steed of
many, and the most easy to be done, John: 4, 29. Aug. de doct. Chri. l. 3. c.
9.
most honorable for signification, and most clear and pure to be observed.
The religion of the Papists is so laden with ceremonies, presumptions, and
devises of men, that their manner of worshipping of God in their Temple, is
become now altogether Jewish and carnal, consisting in nothing else but
altogether in outward and ceremonial exercises, in the doctrine whereof, there
is neither faith nor spirit, nor any working of the holy Ghost almost required.

Touching the matter of Gods worship, wherein we differ from the Papists, thus
it stands, we teach and hold, that only God the Father, God the Son, and
God the holy Ghost, are to be worshipped with divine honor, and no creature
besides: grounding our selves upon this principle and maxim in divinity, that
adoration is due only to God, and therefore that God only is to be
worshipped. Lu: 4. Deu: 6. De vera religi. cap. 54.
And so S. Augustine says, It is very well recorded in the Scriptures, that
man was prohibited by an Angel to worship none, but only God, under whom he
himself was a fellow servant. And therefore he says; Ecce vnum Deum colo,
Behold, I worship and adore none but God alone. And thence he deriueth the name
of religion, quod ei vni religet animas nostras, because it religeth our souls
only to him: But the papists (as before has been alleged in their service)
join with the worship of God, the worship of Angels, the worship of the
Crucifix, the worship of images, the adoration of the Sacrament of the Altar,
as they call it, whereunto they ascribe divine honor and worship.

Having thus far proved unto you that God and Baal cannot both be served
together, no more then God and Dagon can stand together, it remains now in
the third place that I entreat of the Prophet Elias his exhortion to the
people wherein he exhorts to constancy in religion and following God.


Constancy, preseuerance and continuance in the true knowledge of God, are
virtues required of all such as intend to lead a godly, and a Christian life,
and finally resolve to finish the period of their lives in defense and
maintenance of the true religion of Jesus Christ. Math. 24.13. Reave. 3.11.
He that continues to the end shall be saved. Behold says God to the Angel
of the Church of Philadelphia, behold I come shortly: behold that which thou
have, that no man take away thy crown. And in the 2. of the Revelation, thus
the son of God speaks to the rest of them of Thiatyra, which knew not the
deepenesse of Satan, I will put upon you none other burden, but this, holdfast
that which you have until I come. Reave. 2.24.25. Heb. 10.23.
And the Apostle to the Hebrews gives us this advise and counsel, that we
should keep the profession of our hope without wavering, so that being rooted
and grounded in true knowledge, and built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head and chief corner stone, we
should not henceforth be children any more wavering and carried about with
every blast of doctrine, Ephe. 4.14.
by the deceit of men, and with craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive.

The devil knowing full well what this hope of our salvation is, cease not
continually to bend his force against the foundation and fortress of our
faith. And surely, if Satan by his principal Ministers the Jesuits and
Seminary Priests, can once shake the ground work whereon we build our health
and Salvation (which is the affiance in Christ our God, and credit to his
word) if he can but once persuade us to retire from that hold and ground we
stand upon, as upon an immovable rock, then has he won his desire: then
enters he with banners displaied upon us, tossing us up and down with every
blast of doctrine, and beats us down to the pit of damnation. For the easier
compassing of this his wicked designement, some be persuaded by arguments, and
by reasons to forsake their faith, and so by this means draws them to
sundry heresies and errors: others he forces by torments and persecutions
quite to give over their hold: others again he wins, and allureth to
himself with baits of pleasures to deny Christ: and so Julian perceiving
that torments could not prevail to cause the Christians to revenge their
profession, gave them the greatest rooms and honors of his kingdom, even as
Satan when he could not by argument overcome our Savior Christ, offered him
all the kingdoms of the world, if he would fall down before him and worship
him. The only powerful means to withstand all the forcible assaults of
Satan is, whenever he offers us to run to the walls of faith, betaking
our selves each man to his defense, as in the certain truth of gods eternal
testament. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. 1. Cor. 16.13,
Stand fast, says the Apostle to the Thessalonians, and keep the traditions,
which ye have been taught. And to the Corinthians to the same purpose he says
watch ye, stand fast: and quite your selves like men, and be strong. Let the
fear of the Lord be upon you. Stick fast unto the Lord, and cleave unto him
with a perpetual covenant which shall never be forgotten. Three ways there
are whereby we may grow to this resolution: first by remembering the intolerable
pains of hell if we do revolt; secondly by thinking of the unspeakable joys
of heaven, if we continue firm: Thirdly looking upon such who have suffered
before us, and to propose them unto us for examples of imitation. And so to
show the like constancy in cleaving unto God which they did. We have recorded
in scripture the examples of David; of the three children, of Eleazar and
sundry others who for the zeal they bare to the religion of their God, were
resolute to endure most cruel torments. The Apostle to the Hebrews mentions
such, who being strong in faith, when they were tried by racking, yet would
not, or cared not to be delivered that they might receive a better
resurrection. Heb 11.35.
We have again in the Ecclesiastical Histories, the examples of eighteen
hundred thousand Christians in the time of the ten primitive persecutions
which were done to most cruel deaths, only because they would not forsake
their Christian religion. And to come nearer home to our own days we have
examples of our own brethren in Queen Mary's days, who for the zeal they
bare to the house of God, were content to yield their backs to the scourge,
their necks to the tormentours, their bodies to the furious flames of fire,
their souls with joy into the hands of him that made them. Concerning whom I
doubt not, but that every true member of the Catholic Church, may wish from
her very heart, that his soul might die the death of those righteous persons,
and that his latter end might be like unto theirs.

This is then the exhortation which Elias gives to those wauing and wavering
Israelites, which could not resolve whether God or Baal was to be worshipped,
if God be the Lord, follow him, cleave fast unto him, and serve him with all
the desire of your hearts: but God is the Lord, yea the only Lord, therefore
he only is to be worshipped. It is the Lord only that forms the light, and
creates the darkness: it is he that has made all things, which has spread
out the heavens alone, and stretched out the earth by himself, it is he that
can foretell things before they come to pass: it is he alone that can say my
counsel shall stand, and whatsoever I will have come to pass, shall come to
pass: it is he that brings Princes to nothing, and makes the judges of the
earth as vanity: yea it is the everlasting God that has created the ends of
the earth, and brings out all their armies by numbers, and calls them all
by their names: And therefore he only is the Lord.

As for Baal, if he be a God, let him plead for himself against him that cast
down his Altar, Iudi. 6.31.
says Ioas the father of Gideon, after that his son had destroyed the Altar
of Baal, and cut down the grove that was by it. Baal can give you nothing: he
can do neither good nor evil, and therefore he is no god: though a man cry
unto him, yet cannot he answer him, nor deliver him out of his tribulation and
therefore he is no God.

The Papists are much grieved with us, because we will not acknowledge the
Sacrament of the Altar to be our Lord, and our God, and thereupon cast this
unjust aspersion upon us, and falsely charge us, that We call the body of
Christ an abominable idol. True it is indeed that we call that an abominable
idol. Which they term the body of Christ, and under that pretense fall down
before it to worship it, and call it Lord and God, in doing whereof what other
thing do they but make a God of a piece of bread, and under the name of the
body of Christ, set up an Idol in the Church of God. But as for the body of
Christ we have evermore confessed with Chrysostom that it is worthy of the
highest honor, 1. Cor: Homil. 14.
as being inseparably joined to his God-heade in one person, sitting now at
the right hand of God: and we adore it, and worship it, even as the body of
the son of God: not only for the turning of an hand, as the Papists use to
do, while the priest is able to hold up the Sacrament, and that with doubt of
our selves whether we do well or no, which thing is utterly uncomfortable,
and dangerous, and full of terrors to the conscience: but we worship that
blessed and glorious body, as that blessed Martyr S. Stephen did, being in
heaven, at the right hand of the power of God, and therefore without doubt or
danger; and that at all times, and for ever: and we believe, and thus we
teach, that Jesus Christ, even in the nature and substance of our flesh, is the
Lord in the glory of God the Father.

Howbeit we say Christ's body is one thing, the Sacrament another. The
Sacrament is an earthly thing, Christ's body an heavenly thing: the Sacrament
is corruptible, Christ's body is glorious: the Sacrament is received into our
bodies, Christ's body is only received into our souls, and enters not into our
bodies.

S. Luke reports how that the Disciples of Christ being abashed at Christ's
sudden presence among them, Luk: 24 38.39.
and through fear, supposing they had seen a spirit or Ghost, our Savior
spoke unto them in this manner: Why are ye troubled? and wherefore do doubts
arise in your hearts? behold mine hands and my feet, for it is I my self:
handle me, and see me: for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me
have; and so showed them both his hands and his feet. Even so verily, the
Sacrament it self, if it could speak, would speak in this manner, at the
time of the elevation to the standers by: why do such thoughts arise in your
hearts, as to think that I am your Lord and God? Why stand ye thus gazing, thus
knocking your breasts, and bending your knees to me. Handle me, taste me, and
look upon me, and see whether I have not all the natural properties of true
bread: that is, whether I have not the very form, shape, savor, smell,
color, and weight of bread. As for the body of Christ, it cannot be broken
with hands, or grated with teeth, or conveyed into the belly, as you see that
I am. The bread of life cannot be felt, seen, or tasted, or discerned by any
outward sense, as you see that I am: and therefore believe them not which teach
you otherwise, for I am bread, I am no God.

Quarta Pars.
Having thus far spoken of the exhortation of the Prophet Elias, wherein he
exhorts them to be constant in religion, and constant in the confession of
him, which is the only true God: it remains now in the last place to show
unto you, what the success was, which insued upon the Prophets reproof, which
at the first was thus, that the people answered him not a word, standing in
doubt, whether he were the only God or no. But a little afterward, when they
saw how miraculouslie the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt
offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water
which was in the ditch, 1. King: 18.38.
being moved with this strange and miraculous work of God, they were suddenly
changed in their opinions, and falling on their faces, cried out, the Lord is
God, the Lord is God: Where we may see, that howsoever it may be, that God
permits his own people for some certain time, to fall into many dangerous
errors, yet such is his great mercy toward them, that first or last he
calls them home again, and will not suffer them finally to perish, as here
he dealt with his own people of Israel.

There is no one thing more commonly objected by Papists against the religion
of the Protestants, then that, as they say, we have no miracles in our church.
If your Church be the true church, if the doctrine you teach be the true
Catholic faith of Christ, where be your miracles, (say they) and where be
those signs and wonders among you, which may prove unto us, that your religion
is of God?

To the which objection I answer with Chrysostom, Opere imperfecto. Hom: 49.
that there was a time wherein of old it was known by miracles, who were true
Christians, who were false, and where a man might find the true Church of God
indeed: but now says he, the working of miracles is quite taken away, and is
rather found among them that are false Christians. Which speech of that learned
father is truly verified this day in the church of Antichrist, where the
Papists can make their Crosses to speak, their Idolles to go, their images to
weep, to sweat, to laugh, to shift themselves from place, to light their own
lamps: Yea, the unholy fathers of the society of Jesus, to set a glorious
countenance of their miracles, tell us in great sadness, that with their
holie-water, they have calmed the Sea, chased away mice out of the country,
and have made barren women to conceive, and bear children. But against such
miracle-mongers, says Augustine, My God has armed me, saying, Tractat: in
Ioh: 13.
in the latter days there shall arise false Prophets, working signs and
wonders, to deceive the very Elect of God, if it were possible.

True it is, the Apostles wrought miracles, but it was thereby to confirm the
Gospel, they preached, as the Evangelist writes, The Lord wrought with them,
Mar: 16.20
and confirmed the word with signs that followed. And the Apost: to the
Hebrews likewise says, that salvation at the first began to be preached by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him (meaning the Apostles)
bearing witness thereunto with signs and wonders, and with diverse gifts of the
holy Ghost, Heb: 2.3.4.
according to his will. In the first beginning then, and gathering of the
church, miracles were necessary. But as when we go about to plant a tree, so
long we water it, until we see it has taken root, but when it is once
substantially grounded, and branches spread abroad, we take no more pain to
water it. So likewise, as long as the people of the world were altogether
faithless, this means of miracles for confirmation of doctrine, was of
Indulgence granted then. But when once spiritual instruction had taken better
place, the corporal signs surceased straight. The kingdom and Church of
Christ was planted in the power of doctrine and miracles by the power of the
holy Ghost. Now therefore it is against faith, if any look for miracles
again to confirm the Gospel, which is already so confirmed, that if an
Angel from heaven, should preach unto us any otherwise, then that which has
been preached unto us, let him be accursed. Seeing then the doctrine this day
taught, professed, and preached in the Church of England, is the very same
doctrine which Christ himself delivered to his Apostles, and they, to their
aftercommers, there needs no other confirmation by miracles to be wrought by
us.

Thus have I with what perspicuitie and brevity the proportion of the time
allotted unto me would permit, run over this portion of holy scripture. The
Lord give a blessing unto the words which you have heard this day with your
outward ears out of my mouth, and by the secret working of his holy spirit,
give such force unto them, that they may become fruitful in the hearts of you
all. And forasmuch as the Lord in these Halcion, and happy days of ours, has
dealt with us in far greater mercy, then he has done with any other nation
besides, in that we have of his great clemency these many years together
enjoyed with liberty of body, and freedom of conscience, the greatest joy
and felicity that ever betided any people, even the sincere preaching of his
most sacred word and Gospel, with the right and due administration of his
Sacraments, with health, peace, liberty, and quietness, under the wise,
godly, and most peaceable government of his chosen servant Elizabeth, our late
Queen and Mistrisse, and now at this time under the government of our most
gracious Soueraign Lord King James, whose life the Lord preserve, and long
continue among us: that considering how the Lord has multiplied his graces,
and blessings upon us, that we may evermore continue constant and steadfast in
the profession of his eternal truth, that what opposition soever we find in
the world of fawning flattery or persecuting cruelty, that we never suffer
our selves to be removed from the same, but that we may strive for the truth
even to death, holding fast that which we have until the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ: that we never halt or double in matter of religion, nor wave
between two opinions, but that we may steadfastly cleave unto the Lord all the
days of our life, that we never admit any fellowship, or communion with the
Church of Rome, knowing that the whole religion of popery, wherein it
differs from us, is nothing else but a most wicked apostacy from the ancient
faith. So that being confirmed and strengthened, and established in that
Gospel, which has been preached unto us, which we have received, wherein we
continue, and which is able to save us, we may every day more and more, grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, to the which
Christ Jesus, together with the father, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all
power, glory, dominion, and Majesty, both now and evermore; Amen.

FINIS.

