VOX POPVLI. OR NEWS FROM SPAIN, translated according to the Spanish coppie.

Which may serve to forwarn both England and the United Provinces how far to
trust to Spanish pretenses.

Imprinted in the year 1620.

VOX POPVLI. OR NEWS FROM SPAIN translated according to the Spanish coppie.
HIs Catholic Majesty had given commandment that presently upon the return
of Seigneur Gondomar his Leiger Ambassador from England, (1618) a special
meting of all the principal States of Spain (who were of his Counsel) together
with the Presidents of the Counsel of Castile, of Arragon, of Italy, of
Portugal, of the Indies, of the Treasure, of War, and especially of the holy
Inquisitio^, should be held at Mouson in Arragon, the Duke of Lerma being
appointed President, Who should make declaration of his Majesty's pleasure,
take account of the Ambassadors service, and consult touching the state and
religion respectively, to give satisfaction to his holiness Nuntio, who was
disired to make one in this assembly concerning certain overtures of peace and
amity with the English and other Catholic proiects, which might engender
suspicion and jealousy betwixt the Pope and his Majesty, if the mystery were
not unfolded and the grond of those counsels discovered aforehand.

This made all men expect the Ambassadors return with a kind of longing,
that they might behold the issue of this meeting, and see what good for the
Catholic cause the Ambassadors employment had effected in England, answerable
to the general opinion conceived of his wisdom, and what further project
would be set on foot to become matter for public discourse.

At length he arrived and had present notice given him from his Majesty, that
before he came to Court he should give up his account to this assembly. Which
command he gladly received as an earnest of his acceptable service, and gave
thanks that for his honor he might publish himself in so judicious a presence.

He came first upon the day appointed to the Counsel chamber (exc. the Secr.)
not long after all the Counsel of state and the presidents met, there wanted
only the Duke of Lerma and the Popes Nuntio who were the head and feet of all
the assemble. These two stayed long away for diverse respects, The Nuntio that
he might express the greatness of his master, and loose the sea of Rome no
respect by his oversight, but that the benches might be full to observe him at
his approach.

The Duke of Lerma to express the authority and dignity of his own person,
and to show houw a servant put in place of his master, exacts more service of
his fellow servants then the master himself. These two stayed til all the rest
were weary of waiting, but at length the Nuntio (supposing all the Counsel set)
launched forth and came to road in the Counsel chamber, where (after mutual
discharge of duty from the company and blessing upon it from him) he sat
down in solemn silence, grieving at his oversight when he saw the Duke of
Lerma absent, with whom he strove as a competitor for Pomp and Glory.

The Duke had sent before, and understood of the Nuntios being there, and
stayed something the longer that his boldness might be observed, wherein he had
his desire, for the Nuntio having a while patiently driven away the time with
several compleme^ts to several persons, had now almost run his courtship out
of breath, but that the Duke of Villa Hermosa (president of the counsel of
Arragon) fed his humor by the discharge of his own coffeehouse, upon
occasion of the Duke of Lerma his absence, and beckned Seigneur Gondomor to
him, using this speech in the hearing of the Nuntio after a sporting manner:

How unhappie are the people where you have been, first for their souls, being
heretics; then for their estates, where the name of a favorite is so
familiar? how happy is our state, where the keys of life and death are so
easily come by, (poynting at the Nuntio) hanging at every religious girdle, and
where the door of justice and mercy stand equally open to all men without
respect of persons? the Ambassador knew this Ironicall stroke, to be intented
as a by blow at the Nuntio, but fully at the Duke of Lerma (whose greatness
began now to wax heavy, toward declension) and therefore he returned this
answer: your excellency knows the state is happy where wise favorites
govern Kings if the Kings themselves be foolish, or where wise Kings are, who
having favorites whether foolish or of the wijser sort will not yet be governed
by them. The state of England, (howsoever you hear of it in Spain or Room)
is too happy in the last kind: They need not much care what the favorite be
(though for the most part he be such as prevents all suspicion in that kind,
being rather chosen as a scholar to be taught and trained up, then as a tutor
to teach,) of this they are sure, no Prince exceeds theirs in personal
abilities; so that nothing could be added to him in my wish, but this one, that
he were our vassayle and a Catholic.

With that the noise without gave notice of the Duke of Lermas entrance, at
whose first approach the whole house arose, though some later then other, as
envy had hung plummets on them to keep them down, the Nuntio only sat
unmooved, the Duke cherished the observance of the rest with a familiar kind of
carriage too high for courtesy, as one not neglecting their demeanors but
expecting it, and after a filial obeisance to the Pope his Nuntio, sat down,
as president under the cloth of state, but somewhat lower; then after a space
given for admiration, preparation, and attention, he began to speak in this
manner.

The King my master (holding it more honorable to do then to discourse, to
take from you the expectation of Oratorie used rather in schools and pulpits
then in Councels) has appointed me president in this holy, wise, learned, and
noble assembly; A man naturally of a slow speech, and not desirous to quicken
it by art or industry, as holding action only proper to a spaniard as I am by
birth, to a soldier as I am by professiion, to a King as I am by
representation; take this therefore briefly for declaration both of the cause
of this meeting and my master his further pleasure.

There has been in all times from the worlds fou^datio^ one chief commander or
Monarch upon the earth. This needs no further proof the^ a bak loking into our
own memories and histories of the world, neither now is there any question
(except with infidels and heritiques) of that one chief Co^mander in spirituals
in the unity of whose person the members of the visible Church are included,
but there is some doubt of the chief co^mander in temporalls, who (as the moon
to the sun) might govern by night as this by day, and by the sword of justice
compel to come in, or cut off such as infringe the authority of the keys.
This has been so well understood long since, by the infallible chair, as that
thereby upon declension of the Roman Emperors, and the increase of Romes
spiritual splendour (who thought it unnatural that their sun should be
sublunary) our nation was by the Bishop of Rome selected before other peoples
to conquer and rule the nations with a rod of Iron, and our Kings to that end
adorned with the title of Catholic King, as a name above all names under the
sun (which is) under Gods Vicar general himself the Catholic Bishop of
souls. To instance this point by comparison, look first upon the grand
Seigneur the great Turk who has a large title but not universal. For besides
that he is an infidel, his command is confined within his own territories, and
he styled not Emperor of the world but of the Turks and their vassals only.

Among Christians the defender of the faith was a glorious style, whilst the
King to whom it was given by his holiness, continued worthy of it. But he stood
not in the truth, neither yet those that succeed him. And beside it was no
great thing to be called what every Christian ought to be, defender of the
faith, no more then to be styled with France, the most Christian King, wherein
he has the greatest part of his title common with most Christians. The
Emperor of Russia, Rome, Germany, extend not their limits further then their
styles, which are local, only my master the most Catholic King is for
dominion of bodies, as the universal Bishop for dominion of souls over all
that part of the world which we call America (except where the English
intruders usurp) and the greatest part of Europe with some part of Asia and
Africa by actual possession, and over all the rest by real and indubitable
right, yet acknowledges this right to be derived from the free and fatherly
donation of his holiness, who as the sun to this moon lends luster by
reflection to this Kingdom, to this King, to this King of Kings my master, what
therefore he has, howsoever gotten, he may keep and hold. What he can get from
any other King or Co^mander by any stratageme of war or pretense of peace he
may take, for it is theirs only by usurpation except they hold of him from
whom all civil power is derived, as ecclesiastical from his holiness. What the
ignorant call treason, if it be on this behalf is truth; and what they call
truth, if it be against him is treason: and thus all our peace, our war, our
treatises, marriages and whatsoever intendement else of ours, aims at this
principal end, to get the whole possession of the world, and to reduce all to
unity under one temporal head, that our King may truly be what he is styled,
the catholic and universal King. As faith is therefore universal and the
Church universal, yet so as it is under one head the Pope, whose seat is and
must necessarily be at Rome where S. Peter sat: so must all men be subject to
our and their Catholic King, whose particular seat is here in Spain, his
universal every where; this point of State or rather of faith, we see the
Roman Catholic religion has taught every where, and almost made natural, so
that by a key of gold by intelligence, or by way of confession my master is
able to unlock the secrets of every Prince, and to withdraw their subjects
allegiance, as if they knew themselves rather my master his subjects in truth,
then theirs whom their birthes have taught to miscall Sovereigns. We see this
in France and in England especially where at once they learn to obey the
Church of Rome as their mother, to acknowledge the catholic King as their
father, and to hate their own King as an heretic and an usurper. So we see
religion and the state are coupled together, laugh and weep, flourish and fade,
and participate of eithers fortune, as growing upon one stock of policy; I
speak this the more boldly in this presence, because I speak here before none
but native persons, who are partakers both in themselves and issues of these
triumphs above all those of ancient Rome, and therefore such (as besides their
oaths) it concerns to be secret. Neither need we restrain this freedom of
speech from the Nuntio his presence, because that besides that he is a Spaniard
by birth, he is also a Jesuit by profession, an order raised by the providence
of Gods Vicar to accomplish this monarchy the better, all of them being
appropriate thereunto, and as public agents and privy Counselors to this
end, Wherein the wisdom of this state is to be beheld with admiration, that as
in temporal war it employes or at least trusts none but natives, in Castile,
Portugal or Arragon; so in spirituals it imployes none but the Jesuits, and
so imployes them, that they are generally reputed, how remote soever they be
from us, how much soever obliged to others, still to be ours, and still to be
of the Spanish faction, though they be Polonians, English, French, and residing
in those countries and Courts; the Penitents therefore and all with whom they
deal and converse in their spiritual traffic must needs be so too, and so
our Catholic King must needs have an invisible kingdom, and an unknown
number of subjects in all dominions, who will show themselves and their faiths
by their works of disobedience whenever we shall have occasion to use that
Jesuitical virtue of theirs. This therefore being the principal ends of all
our counsels (according to those holy directions of our late pious King Philip
2. to his son now reviving) to advance the Catholic Roman religion, and the
Catholic spanish dominion together, we are met now by his Majesty's command to
take account of you (Seigneur Gondomor) who have been Ambassador for England,
to see what good you have effected there toward the advancement of this work,
and what further project shall be thought fit to be set on foot to this end.
And this is briefly the occasion of our meeting.

Then the Embass. (who attended bare headed all the time) with a low obeisance
began thus. This most laudable custom of our Kings in bringing all officers to
such an account where a review and notice is taken of good or bad services upon
the determination of their employments, resembles those Roman triumphs
appointed for the soldiers; and as in them it provoked to courage, so in us it
stirs up to diligence. Our master converseth by his Agents with all the
world, yet with none of more regard then the English, where matter of such
diversity is often presented (through the several humors of the State, and
those of our religion and faction) that no instructions can be sufficient for
such negotiations, but much must be left in trust, to the discretion, judgment
and diligence of the incumbent, I speak not this for my own glory, I having
bee^ restrained and therefore deserved (...) the behalf of others, that there may
be more scope alovved the^ to deal in as occasion shall require. Briefly this
rule delivered by his excellency was the card and Compass by which I sailed to
make profit of al humors, and by all means to advance the state of the Romish
faith, and the Spanish faction together, upon all advantage either of oaths,
or the breach of the^; for this is an old observation but a true, that for our
piety to Rome, his holiness did not only give, but bless us in the conquest
of the new world, And thus in our pious perseverance we hope still to be
conquerours of the old. And to this end whereas his excellentie in his excellent
discourse, seems to extend our outward forces and private aims only against
heretics and restrain them in true amity with these of the Romish religion:
This I affirm, that since there ca^ be no security, but such princes though
now Romish Catholics, may turn heretics hereafter; my aims have ever been
to make profit of all, and to make my master, master of al, who is a faithful
and constant son of his mother Rome. And to this end I behold the endeavors
of our Kings of happy memory, how they have achieved kingdoms and conquests
by this policy, rather the^ by open hostility, and that without difference, as
well from their allies and kinsfolks, men of the same religion, and profession,
such as were those of Naples, France and Navar, though I do not mention
Poitugall now united to us, nor Savoy (that hardly slipped from us) as of an
adverse and heretical faith. Neither is this rule left of, as the present
kingdom of France, the State of Venice, the Low Countries, Bohemia, (now al
laboring for life under our plots) apparently manifest. This way therefore I
bent my engines in England, as your honors shall particularly hear. Neither
shall I need to repeat a Catalogue of all the services I have there done,
because this state has been acquainted with many of them here to fore by the
intercourse of letters and messengers. Those only I will speak of that are of
later edition, done since the return of the Lord Rosse from hence, and may
seem most directly to te^d to those ends formerly propounded by his
Excellentie; that is, the advancement of the Spanish State and Romish Religion
together.

First it is well observed by the wisdom of our State, that, the King of
England, who otherwise is one of the most acco^plisht Princes that ever
reigned, extremely hunts after peace, and so affects the true name of a
Peacemaker, as that for it he will do or suffer any thing. And withal they
have beheld the general bounty and munificence of his mind, and the
necessity of the state so exhausted, as it is unable to supply his desires, who
only seeks to have that he might give to others. Upon those advantages they
have given out their directions and instructions both to me and others, and I
have observed the^ so far as I was able.

And for this purpose, whereas there was a marriage propounded betwixt them and
us, (howsoever I suppose our State too devout to deal with heretics in this
kind in good earnest, yet) I made that a cover for much intelligence, and a
means to obtain whatsoever I desired, whilst the State of England longed
after that marriage, hopeing thereby (though vainly) to settle peace, and fill
the Excheaquer.

Here the Arch Bishop of Toledo* Inquisitor general stepped up and interrupted
Gondamor* saying, that marriage was not to be thought upon; first for religions
sake, lest they should endanger the soul of the young Lady and the rest of
her company, who might become her^ticks: secondly for the state, lest by giving
so large a portion to heretics they should enrich and in able them for
wars, and impoverish and weaken the Catholics.

To the first objection the Popes Nuntio answered, that his holiness for the
Catholic cause would dispense with the marriage, though it were with a Turk
or infidel. 1. That there was no valuable danger in hazarding one for the
gaining of many, perhaps of all. 2. That it was no hazard* since women
(espetially young ones) are to obstinate to be removed from their opinions, and
abler to work Solomon to their opinions, then Solomon to work them to his
faith. 3. That it was a great advantage to match which such from whom they might
break at pleasure, having the catholic cause for a color, and besides, if
need were to be at liberty in all respects since there was no faith to be kept
with heretics. And if his Holiness may dispe^ce with the murder of such, and
dispose of their crowns (as what good Catholic doubts but he may?) much more
may he, and will he in their marriages to prevent the leprous seed of heresy,
and to settle Catholic blood in the chair of State.

To the second objection the Ambassador himself answered, saying, that though
the English generally loathed the match, and would as he thought buy it off
with half of their estates, (hating the nation of Spain, and their religion,
as appeared by an uproare and assault a day or two before his departure from
London by the Apprentices, who seemed greedy of such an occasion to vent their
own spleenes, in doing him or any of his a mischief) yet two sorts of people
unmeasurably desired the match might proceed. First the begging and beggarly
Courtyers, that they might have to furnish their wants. Secondly the Romish
Catholics, who hoped hereby at least for a moderation of fynes and laws,
perhaps a tolleraaion, and perhaps a total restoration of their religion in
England. In which regard (quoth he) I have known some zealous persons protest,
that if al their friends and half their estates could procure the^ the
service of our Lady (if she came to be married too their Prince) they would
freely use the means: faithfully to fight under her colors, when they might
do it safely. And if it came to portion, they would underhand contribute
largely of their estates to the Spanish Collector, and make up half the
portion out of themselves, perhaps more. So that by this marriage it might be so
wrought, that the state should rather be robbed and weakened (which is our aim)
then strengthened, as the English vainly hope. Besides in a small time they
should work so far into the body of the State, by buying Offices and the like,
whether by sea or land, of Justice civil or ecclesiastical, in Church or State
(all being for money exposed to sale) that with the help of the Jesuits, they
would undermine them with mere wit (without gunpowder) and leave the King but
a few subjects whose faithes he might rely upon, whilst they were of a faith
adverse to his. For what catholic body that is sound at the heart, can abide a
corrupt and heretical head?

With that the Duke, Medina del rio Secco, president of the council of war and
one of the council of State rose up and said his Predecessors had felt the
force and wit of the English in 88. And he had cause to doubt the Catholics
themselves that were English and not fully Iesuited, upon any foreign
invasion would rather take part with their own King (though a heretic) then
with his Catholic Majesty a stranger.

The Ambassador desired him to be of another mind since first for the persons
generally their bodies by long disuse of arms were disabled and their minds
effeminated by peace and luxury, far from that they were in 88. when they were
daily flesht in our blood and made hearty by customary conquests. And for the
affection of those whom they call Recusants (quoth he) I know the bitterness of
their inveterate malice, and have see^ so far into their natures as I dare say
they will be for Spain against all the world. Yet (quoth he) I assure your
Honors I could not imagine so basely of their King and State as I have heard
them speak. Nay their rage has so perverted their judgments that what I my
self have seen and heard proceed from their King beyond admiration, even to
astonishme^t, they have slighted, misreported, scorned, and perverted to his
disgrace and my rejoicing, magnifying in the mean time our defects, for graces.

Here the Duke Pastrana president of the Council for Italy, steps up and said,
he had lately read a book of one Camdens called his Annalles, where writing of
a treaty of marriage long since betwixt the English Elizabeth and the french
Duke of Andiou, he there observes that the marriage was not seriously intended
on either side, but politickly pretended by both States, counterchangeably,
that each might effect their own ends.

There (quoth he) the Englisch had the better, and I have some cause to doubt,
since they can dissemble as well as we, that they have their aims underhand,
as we have, and intend the match as little as we do; And this (quoth he) I
believe the rather because their King as he is wise to consult and consider, so
he is a constant master of his word, and has written and given strong reasons
against matches made with persons of contrary religions, which reasons no
other man can answer, and therefore doubtless he will not go from or conncell
his son to forsake those rules laid down so deliberately.

Your Excellency mistakes (quoth the Ambassador) the advantage was the^ one
the side of the Englisch, because the French sought the match: now it must be
on ours, because the English seeck it, who will grant any thing rather the^
break off, and besides have no patience to temporize and dissemble in this or
any other disigne as the French have long since well observed: for their
necessities will give them neither time, nor rest, nor hope else where to be
supplied. As for their King I cannot search into his heart, I must believe
others that presume to know his mind, hear his words, and read his writings,
and these relate what I have delivered: But for the rest of the people as the
number of those that are truly religious are ever the least and for the most
part of least account, so is it there, where if an equal opposition be made
betwixt their truly religious and ours, the remainder which will be the greatest
number will stand indifferent and fall to the stronger side where there is most
hope of gain and glory, for those two are the gods of the magnitude and the
multitude, Now these see apparently no certain supplies of their wants but
from us.

Yes (quoth the Duke) for even now you said the general state loathing this
match would redeem the fear there of with half of their estates. It is
theaefore but calling a Parliament and the business were soon effected.

A Parliament (quoth the Ambassador) nay therein lies one of the principal
services I have done in working such a dislike betwixt the King and the lower
house by the endeavor of that honorable Earl and admirable Engine (a sure
servant to us and the catholic cause while he lived) as the King will never
endure Parliament again, but rather suffer absolute want then receive
conditional relief from his subjects. Besides the matter was so cunningly
carried the last Parliament, that as in the powder plot the fact effected should
have been imputed to the Puritans (the greatest zelots of the Calvinian sect)
so the proposition which damde up the procedings of this Parliament howsoever
they were inve^ted by Roman Catholics and by the^ intended to disturb that
session, yet were propounded in favor of the Puritans, as if they had bee^
ha^mered in their forge. Which very name and shadovv the King hates, it being a
sufficien aspertio^ to disgrace any person, to say he is such, and a sufficient
bar to stop any suite and utterly to cross it to say it smells of or inclines
to that party. Mareover there are so many about him who blovv this cole
fearing their own stakes, if a Parliament should inquire into their actions,
that they use all their a^t and industry to withstand such a council;
persuading the King he may rule by his absolute prerogative without a
Parliament, and thus furnish himself by warying with us, and by other domestic
projects, without subsidies: when, levying of subsidies and taskes have been
the only use princes have made of such assemblies. And whereas some free minds
amongst the^ resembling our Nobility who preserve the privilege of subjects
against sovereign invasion, call for the course of the common law, (a law
proper to their nation) these other time servers cry the laws down and cry up
the prerogative, whereby they prey upon the subject by suites and exactions,
milk the estate and keep it poor, procure themselves much suspicion amongst
the better and more judicious sort, and hate amongst the oppressed commons, and
yet if there should be a Parliament such a course is taken as they shall never
choose their sheere Knights and Burgesses freely, who make the greater half of
the body thereof, for these being to be elected by most voices of Freeholders
in the country where such elections are to be made, are carried which way the
great persons who have lands in those countries please, who by their letters
command their tenants, followers and friends to nominate such as adhere to
them, and for the most part are of our faction, and respect their own benefit
or grace rather then their countries good, yea the country people themselves
will every one stand for the great man, their Lord or neighbor, or master,
without regard of his honesty, wisdom, or religion. That which they aim at
(as I am assured of by faithful intelligence) is to please their la^dlords and
to renew their lease, in which regard they will betray their Country and
religion too, and elect any man that may most profit their particular.
Therefore it is unlikely there should ever be a Parliament, and impossible the
Kings debts should be paid, his wants sufficiently repaired, and himself left
full handed by such a course, and indeed as it is generally thought) by any
other course but by a marriage with us. For which cause whatsoever project we
list to attempt, enters safely at that door, whilst their policy lies a
sleep and will not see the danger, I have made trial of these particulars,
and found few exceptions in this general rule.

There by I and their own wants together have kept them from furnishing their
Navy, which being the wall of their Hand, and once the strongest in Christendom
lies now at road unarmed and fit for ruin. If ever we doubted their strength
by sea, now we need not, there are but few ships or men able to look abroad
or to live in a storm, much less in a sea fight. This I effected by bearing
them in hand the furnishing a Navy bred suspicion in my master and so would
avert his mind from this match, the hope of which rather then they would
loose, they would loose almost their hope of heaven.

Secondly all their voyages to the East Indies I permit rather with a
colorable resistance then a serious. Because I see them not helpful but
hurtful to the state in general, carrying out gould and silver bringing home
spece, silks, feathers, and the like toys, and insensible wasting the common
stock of coin and bullyon, whilst it fills the Custom house and some private
purses. who thereby are enable to keep this discommodity on foot by bribes;
especially so many great persons (even Statesmen) being venturers and sharers
in the gain. Besides this wastes their Mariners, not one of ten returning.
Which I am glad to hear, for they are the men we stand in fear of.

3. As for their West indian voyages, I withstand them in earnst because they
begin to inhabit there and to fortify themselves; and may in time there
perhaps raise an other England to withstand our new Spain in America, as this
old England opposes our present State, and clouds the glorious extent thereof
in Europe. Besides there they trade for commodities without wast of their
treasure, and often return go^ld for knives, glasies, or the like trifles, and
that without such loss of their Mariners as in other places. Therefore I crossed
whatsoever intendements were projected for Virginea or the Bermudas; because I
see they may be hereafter really help full unto them, as now they serve for
draines to unloade their populous State, which else would overflow its own
bancks by continuance of peace, and turn head upon it self or make a body fit
for any rebellion.

And so far I prevayled herein, as I caused most of the Recusants who were
sharers to withdraw their venters and discourage the work, so that besides
private persons unable to effect much, nothing was done by the public purse.
And we know by experience such voyages and plantations are not effected without
great means to sustain great difficluties, and with an unwearied resolution
and power, to meet al hazards and disasters with strong helps and continual
supplies, or else the undertaking proves idle.

4. Fourthly. By this means likewise I kept the voluntary forces from Venice,
till it was almost too late to set out. And had a hope that work of seacrecy
should have broken forth to action, before these could have arrived to succor
them.

5. Fifthly, I put hard for the Cautionary towns (which our late King Philip
of happy memory so aimed at, accounting the^ the keys of the low Countries)
that they might be delivered to his Catholic Majesty as the proper owner. And
had perhaps prevailed, but that the professed enemy to our State and Church, who
dyed shortly after, gave counsel to restore them to the rebellious States; as
one that knew Pouillar Common wealths to be better neighbors, surer friends,
and less dangerous enemies, tha^ Monarchies; and so by his practice rescued
them from my hands, and furnished the Excheaquer from thence for that time.
Neither was I much greeved at this; because the Dependancy they had before of
the English seemed now to be cut off, and the interest the English had in the^
and their cause to be taken away, which must be sully and finally effected
before we can hope either to conquer them or England, who holding together are
too strong for the world at sea, and therefore must be disunited, before they
can be overcome. This point of State is acknowledged by our most experienced
Petioner and sure friund Monsieur Barnevelt, whose succeeding plots to this
end, shall bear witness for the depth of his judgment.

6. But the last service I did for the State, was not the least; when I
underwrought that admirable Engine Raleigh, and so was the cause his voyage
(threatening so much danger and damage to us) was overthrown, and himself
returning in disgrace, I pursued almost to death, neither (I hope) need I say
almost, if all things hit right, and all strings hold. But the determination of
my commission, would not permit me longer to stay to follow him to execution,
which I desired the rather, that by concession I might have wrung from the
inconsiderate English, an acknowledgement of my masters right in those places,
punishing him for attempting there, though they might prescribe for the first
foot, And this I did to stop theit mouths hereafter, and because I would
quench the heat and valor of that nation, that none should dare hereafter to
undertake the like, or be so hardy as to look at our sea, or breathe upon our
Coasts. And lastly because I would bring to an ignominious death, that old
Pyrat, who is one of the last now living, bred under that deceased English
Virago, and by her flesht in our blood and ruin. To do this I had many
Agents, first diverse Courtiers who were hungry and gaped wide for Spanish
gould; secondly some that bare him at the heart for inveterate quarrels;
Thirdly some foreigners who having in vain sought the Elixer hitherto, hope
to find it in his head; Fourthly all me^ of the Romish faith who are of the
Spanish faction, and would have been my bloodhounds, to hunt him or any such to
death willingly, as persons hating the prosperity of their Country, and the
valor, worth, and wit of their own nation, in respect of us and our Catholic
cause; Lastly I left behind me such an instrument composed artificially of a
secular understanding and a religious profession as he is every way adapted to
serve himself into the closet of the heart, and to work upon feminine leuity,
who in that county have masculine spirits to command and pursue their plots
unto death. This therefore I account as done, and rejoice in it, knowing it
will be very profitable to us, grateful to our faction there; and for the
rest, what though it be cross to the people, or the Clergy? we that only
negotiate for our own gain, and treat about this marriage for our own ends,
can conclude or break off when we see our time, without respect of such as can
neither profit us, nor hurt us; for I have certain knowledge that the commons
generally are so effeminate and cowardly, as that they at their musters (which
are seldom and slight, only for the benefit of their muster-master) of a
thousand soldiers, scarce one hundred dare discharge a musker, and of that
hundred, scarce one can use it like a soldier. And for their arms, they are
so ill provided, that one corselet serves many men, when such as show their
arms upon one day in one place, lend them to their friends in other places to
show when they have use. And this if it be spied, is only punished by a mulct
in the purse, which is the officers aim, who for his advantage winkes at the
rest, and is glad to find and cherish by connivence profitable faults which
increase his revenue. Thus stands the state of that poor miserable country,
which had never more people and fewer men. So that if my master should resolve
upon an invasion, the time never fits as at this present, security of this
marriage and the disuse of arms having cast them into a dead sleep, a strong
and wakening faction being ever amongst them ready to assist us, and they being
unprovided of ships and arms, or hearts to fight, an universal
coffeehouse filling all men. This I have from their muster-masters and
Captains, who are many of them of our religion, or of none, and so ours, ready
to be bought and sold, and desirous to be my masters servants in fee.

Thus much for the state particularly, wherein I have bent my self to weaken
them and strengthen us, and in all these have advanced the Catholic cause,
but especially in procuring favors for all such as favor that side, and
crossing the other by all means. And this I practice my self and give out to
be generally practiced by others, that whatsoever success I find, I still
boast of the victory, which I do to dishearten the heretics, to make them
suspicious one of an other, especially of their Prince and their best
Statesmen, and to keep our own in courage, who by this means increase,
otherwise would be in danger to decay.

Now for religion, and for such designs as fetch their pretense from thence, I
beheld the policy of that late Bishop of theirs ( Bancroft) who stird up and
maintained a dangerous schism, between our secular Priests and Jesuits, by
which he discovered much weakness, to the dishonor of our clergy, and
prejudice of our cause. This taught me (as it did Barnevelt in the Low
countries) to work secretly and insensibly between their Conformists and
Non-conformists, and to cast an eye as far as the Orcades; knowing that busynes
might be stirred up there, that might hinder proceedings in England, as the
French ever used Scotland to call home the forces of England, and so to prevent
their conquests. The effect you have partly seen in the Earl of Argile, who
sometimes was Captain for the King and Church against the great Marquis
Huntley, and now fights under our banner at Bruxels, leaving the crosses of S.
George and S. Andrewe for the staff of S. James. Neither do our hopes end
here, but we daily expect more revolters, at least such a disunion as will never
admit solid reconcileme^t, but will send some to us, and some to Amsterdam. For
the King (a wise and vigilant Prince) laboring for a perfect union betwixt
both the kingdoms, which he sees cannot be effected, where the least ceremony
in religion is continued, diverse sharp and bitter braules from thence arising,
whilst some striving for honor more then for truth, prefer their own way and
will, before the general peace of the Church and the edification of souls) he I
say seeks to work both Churches to uniformitie, and to this end made a
journey into Scotland, but with no such success as he expected, for diverse of
ours attended the train, who stirred up humors and factions, and cast in
scruples and doubts to hinder and cross the proceedings; yea those that seem
most adverse to us and adverse from our opinions, by their disobedience and
example help forward our plots, and these are encouraged by a factious and
heady multitude, by a faint and irresolute clergy, (many false brethren being
amongst their Bps.) and by the prodigal Nobility who maintain these stirs in
the Church, that thereby they may safely keep their Church livings in their
hands, which they have most sacrilegiously seized upon in the time of the first
deformatio^, and which they fear would be recovered by the Clergy if they
could be brought to brotherly peace and agreement; for they have seen the King
very bountiful in this kind, having lately increased their pe^sio^s and settled
the Clergy a co^pete^t maintenance, and besides out of his own means which
in that kingdom is none of the greatest, having brought in and restored whole
Bishopriks to the Church, which were before in laymens hands, a great part of
the Nobilities estates consisting of spiritual lands, which makes them
cherish the puritanicall faction, who will be content to be trencher-fed with
scraps and crummes and contributions and arbitrary benevolences from their
Lords and Lairds and Ladies, and their adherents and followers.

But (quoth the Inquisitor general) how if this act of the Kings, wherein he
is most earnest and constant, should so far thrive, as it should effect a
perfect union both in the Church and Common wealth? I tell you it would in my
conceit be a great blow to us, if by a general meeting a general peace
should be concluded, and all their forces bent against Rome; and we see their
politic King aims at this.

True (quoth Gondamore) but he takes his mark amiss, howsoever he understand
the people and their inclination better then any man, and better knows how to
temper their passions and affections; for (besides that he is hindered there in
Scotland underhand by some for the reasons before recited, and by other great
ones of ours who are in great place and authority amongst them) he is
likewise deluded in this point even by his own Clergy at home in England, who
pretend to be most forward in the cause. For they considering if a general
uniformitie were wrought, what an inundation would follow, whilst all or most
of theirs (as they fear) would flock thither for preferment (as men pressing
toward the sun for light and hear) and so their own should be unprovided;
these therefore (I say) howsoever they bear the King fairly in hand, are
underhand against it, and stand stiff for all ceremonies to be obtruded with a
kind of absolute necessity upon them, when the other will not be almost drawn
to receive any. When if an abatement were made, doubtless they might be drawn
to meet in the midst; but there is no hope of this with them, where neither
party deals seriously, but only for the present, to satisfy the King: and so
there is no fear on our side that affections and opinions so diverse, will ever
be reconciled and made one. Their Bishop of S. Andrews stands almost alone in
the cause, and pulls upon himself the labor, the loss and the envy of all,
with little proficiencie, whilst the adverse faction have as sure friends and
as good intelligence about the King as he has, and the same Post perhaps that
brings a packet from the King to him, brings another from their Abettors to
them, acquainting them with the whole proceedings and counsels, and preparing
them aforehand for opposition: this I know for truth, and this I rejoice in, as
conducing much to the Catholic good.

But (quoth the Nuntio) are there none of the heretical preachers busy about
this match? Me thinks their fingers should itch to be writing and their
tongues burn to be prating of this busynes, especially the puritanicall sort,
howsoever the most temperate and indifferent carry themselves.

The truth is my Lord (quoth the Ambassador) that privately what they can, and
publicly what they dare, both in England and Scotland all for the most part
(exc^pt such as are of our faith) oppose this match to their utmost, by
prayers, counsels, speeches, wishes; but if any be found longer tongued then
his fellows, we have still means to charm their sauciness, to silence them,
and expel them the Court, to disgrace them and cross their preferments, with
the imputation pragmaticke Puritanisme. For instance I will relate this
particular; A Doctor of theirs and a Chaplain in ordinary to the King, gave
many reasons in a letter against this marriage, and propounded a way how to
supply the Kings wants otherwise, which I understanding, so wrought underhand,
that the Doctor was committed, and hardly escaped the danger of his
presumptuous admonition, though the state knew his intent was honest, and his
reasons good. Wherein we on the other side, (both here and with the Arch Duke)
have had books penned, and pictures printed, directly against their King and
state, for which their Ambassadors have sought satisfaction of us in vain,
not being able to stay the print, or so much as to touch the hem of the Authors
garment. But we have an evasion, which heretics miss, our Clergy being
freed from the temporal sword, and so not included in our treaties and
conditions of peace, but at liberty to give any heretical Prince the Mate
when they list: whereas theirs are liable to account and hazard, and are muzled
for barking, when ours may both bark and bite too. The Council table, and the
Star Chamber do so terrify them, as they dare not riot, but run at the stirrup
in excellent co^ma^d, and come in at the least rebuke. They call their
preaching in many places standing up, but they crouch and dare not stand up nor
quest, behave themselves like Setters, silent and creeping upon their bellies,
lick the dust which our Priests shake from their beautiful feet.

Now (quoth the Duke of Lerma) satisfy me about our own Clergy how they
fare.. For there were here Petitions made to the King in the name of the
distressed, afflicted, persecuted and imprisoned Priests, that his Majesty
would intercede for them, to free them from the intolerable burdens they
groned under, and to procure their liberties: and letters were directed from us
to that end, that you should negotiate this demand with all speed and diligence.

Most excellent Prince (replied Gondamore) I did your command with a kind of
command my self; not thinking it fit to make it a suite in your name or my
Masters, I obtained them liberty to walk freely up and down, to face and
outface their accusers, Judges, Magistrates, Bishops, and to exercise their
functions almost as freely altogether as safely as at Rome.

Here the Nuntio objected, that he did not well to his judgment in procuring
their liberty, since they might do more good in prison then abroad. Because
in prison they seemed to be under persecution, and so were pitied of others;
and pity of the person, prepares the affection further. Besides, then they
were careful over their own lives to give no offense: but abroad they might
be scandalous in their lives, as they use to be in Rome and Spain, and other
Catholic countries; and so the opinion of their holiness which upholds their
credit and cause (against the married Clergy) would soon decay.

But the Ambassador replied, he considered those inconveniences, but besides a
superior command, he saw the profit of their liberty more then of their
restraint. For now they might freely confer, and were ever practicing, and
would doubtless produce some work of wonder. And besides by reason of their
authority and means to change places, did apply themselves to many persons;
whereas in prison they only could deal with such as came to be caught, or were
their own before. And this (quoth he) I add as a secret, that as before they
were maintained by private contributions to devout Catholics even to excess,
so much more now shall they be able to gather great sums, to weaken the
State, and furnish them for some high attempt, by the example of Cardinal
VVoolsey barrelling up gold for Rome. And this they may easily do, since all
Catholics rob the heretical Priests and withhold tithes from them by fraud
or force, to give to these of their own to whom it is properly due: And if
this be spied, it is an easy matter to lay all upon the Hollander, and say, he
carries the coin out of the land (who are forward enough indeed, in such
practices) and so ours shall not only be excused, but a flawe made betwixt
them to weaken their amities, and beget suspicion betwixt them of each others
love.

But amongst all these priests (quoth the Inquisitor general) did you remember
that old, reverend, father Baldwin, who had a finger in that admirable attempt
made on our behalf against the Parliament house? such as he deserving so
highly, adventuring their lives so resolutely for the Catholic cause, must
not be neglected, but extraordinarily regarded, thereby to encourage others to
the like holy undertakings.

Holy father (quoth Gondamor) my principal care was of him, whose life and
liberty when I had with much difficulty obtained of the King, I solemnly went
in person, attended with all my train, and diverse other well willers to fetch
him out of the Tower where he was in durance. As Soon as I came in his sight I
behaved my self after so lowly and humble a manner, that our adversaries stood
amazed to behold the reverence we give to our ghostly fathers. And this I did
to confound them and their contemptuous Clergy, and to beget an extraordinary
opinion of holiness in the person, and piety in us, and also to provoke the
English Catholics to the like devout obediencie, and thereby at any time
these Jesuits (whose authority was somewhat weakened since the schism
betwixt them and the Seculars, and the succeeding powder plot) may work them
to our ends, as Masters their servants, Tutors their scholars, fathers their
children, Kings their subjects. And that they may do this the more boldly and
securely, I have somewhat dashed the authority of their high Commission; upon
which whereas there are diverse Pursevants (men of the worst kind and
condition, resembling our Flies and Familiars, attending upon the inquisition)
whose office and employment it is to disturb the Catholics, search their
houses for Priests, holy vestments, books, beads, crucifixes, and the like
religious appurtenances, I have caused the execution of their office to be
slackned, that so an open way may be given to our spiritual instruments for
the free exercise of their faculties. And yet when these Pursevants had
greatest authority, a small bribe in the Country would blind their eyes, or
a little greater at Court or in the Excheaquer frustrate and cross all their
actions, so that their malice went off like squibs, made a great crack to
fright children and newborn babes, but hurt no old men of Catholic spirits.
And this is the effect of all other their courses of proceeding in this kind,
in all their judicial Courts, whither known catholics (convicted as they
style them) are often summond and cited, threatened and bound over, but the
danger is past as soon as the officer has his fee paid to him, then the
execution goes no further. Nay upon my conscience they are glad when there are
offenders in that kind, because they are bountiful: and the officers do
their best to favor them, that they may increase, and so their revenue and
gain come in freely.

And if they should be sent to prison, even that place (for the most part) is
made as a Sanctuary to them: as the old Romans were wont to shut up such by
way of restreint, as they meant to preserve from the peoples fury; so they live
safe in prison till we have time to work their liberty and assure their
lives. And in the mean time their place of restraint is as a study unto them,
where they have opportunity to confer together as in a College, and to arm
themselves in unity against the single adversary abroad.

But (quoth the Inquisitor general) how do they for books, when they have
occasion either to write or dispute?

My Lord, (replies Gondamor) all the Libraries belonging to the Roman
Catholics through the land are at their command, from whence they have all
such collections as they can require gathered to their hand, as well from thence
as from all the Libraries of both Universities, and even the books themselves
if that be requisite.

Besides I have made it a principal part of my employment, to buy all the
manuscripts and other ancient and rare Authors out of the hands of the
Heretics, so that there is no great Scholar dies in the land, but my Agents
are dealing with his books. In so much as even their learned Isaac Causabons
library was in election without question to be ours, had not their Vigilant
King (who foresees all dangers, and has his eye busy in every place)
prevented my plot. For after the death of that great scholar, I sent to
request a view and catalogue of his books with their price, intending not to
be out-vyed by any man, if money would fetch them; because (besides the damage
that side should have received by their loss, prosecuting the same story
against Cardinal Baronius) we might have made good advantage of his notes,
collections, castigations, censures and criticismes for our own party, and
framed and put out others under his name at our pleasure. But this was
foreseen by their Prometheus, who sent that Torturer of ours (the Bishop of
Winchester) to search and sort the papers, and to seal up the ^tudy: Giving a
large and princely allowance for them to the ^elicks of Causabon, together with
a bountiful pension and pro^ision for her and hers. But this plot failing at
that time, has of ever done so. Nor had the University of Oxford so triumphed
in their many manuscripts given by that famous Knight S. Thomas Bodly, if
either I had been then employed, or this course of mine then thought upon; for
I would labor what I might this way or any other way to disarme them, and
either to translate their best authors hither, or at least to leave none in
the hands of any but Roman Catholics who are assuredly ours. And to this end
an especial eye would be had upon the Library of one S. Robert Cotton (an
ingrosser of Antiquities) that whenever it come to be broken up (either
before his death or after) the most choice and singular pieces might be gleaned
and gathered up, by a Catholic hand. Neither let any man think, that
descending thus low to petty particulars is unworthy an Ambassador, or of
small avayle for the ends we aim at, since we see every mountain consists of
several sands; and there is no more profitable conversing for Statesmen then
amongst scholars and their books, specially where the King for whom we watch
is the King of Scholars, and loves to live almost altogether in their element.
Besides if by any means we can continue differences in their Church, or make
them wider, or beget distaste betwixt their Clergy and common Lawyer, who are
men of greatest power in the land, the benefit will be ours, the consequence
great, opening a way for us to come in betvveene, for personal quarrels
produce real questions.

As he was further prosecuting this discourse, one of the Secretaries (who
waited without the chamber) desired entrance; and being admitted, delivered
letters which he had newly received from a Post directed to the President and
the rest of the Council from his Catholic master, the contents whereof were
to this effect.

Right trusty and vvelbeloved Cousens and Counselors, we greet you well:
Whereas we had a hope by our Agents in England and Germany, to effect that
great work of the Western Empire; and likewise on the other side to surprise
Venice, and so incircling Europe at one instant, and enfolding it in our arms,
make the easier road upon the Turk in Asia, and at length reduce all the
world to our catholic command. And whereas to these holy ends we had
secret and sure plots and proiects on foot in all those places, and good
intelligence in all Courts;

Know now that we have received late and sad news of the apprehension of our
most trusty and able Pensioner Barnevelt, and of the discovery of other our
intendements; so that our hopes are for the present adjourned till some other
more convenient and auspicuous time. We therefore will you presently upon sight
hereof, to break off our consultation, and repair straight to our presence,
there to take further directions and proceed as the necessity of time and cause
should require.

With that his Excellency and the whole house struck with amazement, crossed
their foreheads, rose up in sad silence, and brake off this Treaty abruptly,
and without tarriance took horse and posted to Court. From whence expect
news the next fair vvinde.

In the mean time, Let not those be secure, whom it concerns to be rovvsed
up, knowing that this aspiring Nebuchadnezzar will not loose the glory of his
greatness, (who continues still to magnify himself in his great Babel,)
until it be spoken, thy kingdom is departed from thee.

Dan. 4.

