THE SPIRITVAL Conflict. Written in Italian by a devout Servant of God: and
lately translated into English out of the same language

Militia est vita hominis super terram

Job cap i. ver. i.

Printed at Antwerp 1598.

To the right reverend Mothers, the Abbess and Sisters of the Monastery of S.
Andrew in Venice, desirous of christian perfection.
I Find my self so much bound to the fervent desire which I know to be in
you, of walking on apace in the love of Christ crucified; that seeing the
needs of your souls, I cannot any way satisfy my self with the labors which
hitherto I have taken, as well for that I account my self to have received
already full payment by the comfort which assured hope has given me of the
plentiful fruit which the word of god would bring forth in your hearts; as also
for that I have done much less then you desired, or then was answerable to
the debt I owe you.

Therefore being desirous in some part to supply it, and having in my hands at
this time some written papers concerning the mortification of our passions (of
the which thing I have so many times discourced with you) I thought it good for
your great comfort and help, to put them in print, and dedicate them unto you.

For our life in earth being a continual warfare, they may serve you to fight
against your selves, since that by our Lord you are called and particularly
chosen to this no less glorious, then hard conflict. We declare not here how
to va^quish cities, but how to overcome our will; not to conquer foreign
kingdo^s, but how to get the dominion of that Kingdom which is within our
selves.

To this spiritual Batrell I inuit you, and so does also our Captain* who
for us having left his life upon the cross, and by his death overcome the
world, aleth us to this victory and death of our selves, that we may live
eternally with him.

Your servant in Christ, Hierome Count of Portia, the elder.

The spiritual Conflict.
Non coronabitur nisi qui legitime certauerit.

2. Tim. 2. He shall not be crowned that does not strive lawfully.


Wherein the perfection of a christian man consists: and of four things
necessary to obtain the same.

Chap. 1.
IF thou have a desire (most dear daughter in Christ) to attain unto the
height and top of perfection, and by little and little to draw near unto God,
and to become one spirit with him, (which is the greatest and most excellent
enterprise that possibly can be named or immagined.) First of all, thou must
know wherein consi^^es the truth and perfection of spiritual life: for that
many without any farther cogitation of care, suppose it to be placed in the
rigor, and austeritie of life, in maceration of the flesh in waring of hair
cloth, inwatch ing, in fasting, and other like sharpenes and bodily labor.

Others, and especially women persuade themselves that they are near unto it
when they say many vocal prayers, hear many Masses, and long service,
frequent the church and Sacraments.

And many other also, (amongst the which you may find some clad with
religious habit living in cloisters) persuade themselves that this perfection
whollye consists of the frequenting the Quire, in silence, in solitariness,
and in well ordered discipline. And thus some in these, and some in other
external exercises believe, that the perfect state of spiritual man is
founded: but yet notwithstanding it is not so, for although the foresaid
exercises are sometimes means to obtain spirit, sometimes fruits of spirit,
yet cannot it be said, that in these only consists christian perfection,
and the true spirit: they are without dowt forcible means, for obtaining the
spirit to those that do well, and discrectly use them, for the better getting of
strength and force against their proper malice, and frailty, to arm
themselves against the assaults of our common enemies; and to provide us of
those spiritual helps, which are very necessary to all the servants of God,
but specially to young beginners. They are also fruits of the spirit in them
that are indeed spiritual and illuminated; who chasten their body because it
has offended their Creator, and to subdue and keep it under in his service:
they keep silence and live solitarily, to eschew even the least thing that
might offend God, and to have spiritual joy and their conversation in heaven.

They attend to the worship of God, and works of piety, they pray and
frequent the most holy Sacraments, for the glory of his divine Majesty, and
to unite themselves always more and more in love with him.

But now unto others, who place their whole foundation in these aforesaid
external exercises they may minister sometimes (not for any desert in
themselves (for they are almost holy) but through the default of them that use
them) more occasion of ruin, then do apparent and manifest sins: whilst
they being only addicted to the^, do leave the inward man forsaken, and in the
hands of their natural inclinations, and of the invisible devil; who seeing
them out of the right way, permits them not only to continue the aforesaid
exercises with great delight, but also to walk according to their own vain
fancy as it were amidst the delights of Paradise, where they persuade
themselves to be elevated amongst the quiers of Angels, and seem in a manner
to feel God within them: at which times they find themselves altogether
swallowed up in certain meditations, full of high curious and delightful
points, and as yet were forgetting the world, and all creatures, they seem to
be rapt to the third heaven, but in how great errors they find themselves
entangled; and how far they are from that perfection which we go about to
find, may easily be perceived, if we consider their life and manners: for
these kind of people are wont to be too much addicted to their own judgment,
curious and diligent obseruers, and murmurers at other men's actions and words;
but if they be touched in any one point of their vain reputation, or debarred
from those devotions which they commonly use, or restrained from their
accustomed often receiving, they are without measure offended, and disquieted.

And if God (to bring them to true knowledge) send them or permit them to
suffer any trouble, infirmity, and persecution, (which never happen but by his
divine will, and are the very touchstone of the loialtie of his servants) then
they discover their false foundation and the inward rottennes and corruption of
their pride; so that in every accident, whether it be sorrowful, or joyful,
they will not resign or humble themselves under his divine hand, neither
according to the example of his humbled and afflicted son, do they abase
themselves under every creature accompting their persecu tors for their dearest
friends, and embracing them as the instruments of his divine goodness, and
workers of their spiritual health, true reformation and mortification.

Wherefore it is most certain, that all such are in very great danger, for
having their internal cie dimmed, and beholding only their external acts,
(which are good) they attribute to themselves many degrees of perfection.

And thus puffed up with pride, they become judges of others, and there is left
no means of their conversion, but by the extraordinary goodness and help of God;
for it is more easy to reduce to well doing an open and public sinner, then
one that sins secretly, and is covered with the cloak of apparent virtue

Thou see therefore good daughter most plainly, that the truth of
spiritual life, is not to be found in the aforesaid things, in that manner that
we have spoken of. And thou must understand, that it consists in no other
thing, but in a true knowledge of the bounty, and greatness of God, and of our
own littleness, or nothing, and natural inclination to all evil; in the
hatred of our selves, and in the love of God, in the full abnegation of our
own will, and in resigning it to the will of God, subiecting our selves not
only to him, but for his love to every creature, and all this for no other end,
but only to please him, and because he deserves thus to be loved and served.

This is the denying of our selves, which our Redeemer does seek in us. This
is the obedience whereunto he calls his faithful servants, both by word and
example. This is the cross which by his sweetest law of love is laid upon
their shoulders.

To this love, and true charity, so often and particularly in his last Supper he
inuiteth his dear Disciples, with all his friends and children.

And because thou aspiring to the top of so great perfection, must use force
with thy self, and courageously overcome thy own will, both in great and
little things: it behooves thee of necessity with all readiness of mind to
prepare thy self to this combat, since the crown of so great a victory is
not given, but to them that fight valiantly. This battle, as of all other, it
is the hardest: so the victory gotten by the same, is of all other most
glorious and most dear unto God.

For if thou attend to tread down and to kill all thy disordered appetites,
and desires, even the very least; thou shall do a thing more pleasing, and a
greater service to Almighty God, then if keeping any one of them voluntarilye
alive thou should whip thy self till the blood ran down; or should
fast more then the old Hermets and Anchorites, or should convert to good
life thousands of souls: for although the conversion of souls be more dear
to our Savior in it self, then the mortification of one sinal passion of our
will; yet notwithstanding thou ought not to will or work any thing more
principally, then that which the same Savior most stricktly wills and requires
of thee: and he without doubt is more pleased that thou should labor with
thy self to mortify thy passions, then that leaving one unmortified in thee,
thou should serve him in any other thing, though greater and of more moment
in it self.

Now then O daughter, since thou feast wherein Chri stian Perfection
consists: and that to obtain the same, thou must take upon thee a
continual and sharp war: it is necessary that thou like a valiant champion
and enemy of thy self, do provide thee of four things, as necessary armor,
to the end thou may get the victory and remain a conqueresse in this
spiritual battle, and these be, first, distrust of thy self, second,
confidence in God, third, exercise, fourth, and prayer; of al which by the
help of God I will entreat particularly and briefly.

Of the Distrust of our selves.

Chap. 2.
THe distrust of thy self is obtained three manner of ways. First, that thou
acknowledge and consider deep ly thine own vileness and nothing, and that
indeed thou can not obtain any thing that is good of thy self: a man
being no more able to do any good meritorious work, then a stone that (I
may so say) is abl of it self to go upwards; and we having noles inclination to
evil, then the said stone to the center of the earth.

The secondis, that thou with humble prayers demand the same of God, for it is
his gift; and to obtain it thou must first of all behold thy self as bare and
naked of the same and altogether unable to attain unto it of thy self: and
having done this, then present thy self before the majesty of God, with an
assured hope, that his divine bounty will grant it unto thee: and thus
presenting thy self oftentimes before thy Lord, and with perseverance expecting
it from his liberal hands so long as shall seem best to his divine
providence, without doubt thou shall obtain it.

The third way is, that as often as thou shall chance to fall into any defect,
thou suddenly turn the eyes of thy mind unto thy before said weakness and
unableness to do good, which until it be known to the botome, and
acknowledged, thou shall never cease to fall.

For every one that will be united unto that light and uncreated verity, the
true knowledge of himself is necessary: which knowledge the divine clemency
is accustomed commonly to give to the proud and presumptuous, by suffering
them to fall, calling them by the same to true knowledge of their own
impotency and nothing. And so much God permits them to fall, more or less,
by how much their pride is greter or less; so that where there were no
presumption or pride, (as in the blessed virgin. Mary there was not) there
likewise there should be no fall. So that if at any time thou happen to fall,
have recourse presently with thy cogitations, to the humble acknowledging of
thy self, and with earnest prayer beseech thy Savior to give thee true light
that thou maist-perfectly know thy self, if thou be not willing to fall again
into more grievous defaultes.

Of the Trust and Confidence in God.

Chap. 3
THe distrust of our selves, although in this battle it be so needful as we
have said before, yet notwithstanding, if we have but it only, either we shall
run away from the battle, or abiding still, be vanquished and overcome of our
enemies. And therefore, besides this, it is also necessary to have our whole
trust and confidence in God, hoping and expecting from him alone, all good and
help whatsoever. And this in like manner is obtained three manner of ways.

The first, in demanding it of his divine majesty.

The second, by considering and beholding with the eieof our faith, his
omnipotency and infinite wisdom, to the which nothing is impossible or
difficult. And that his boun tie being without measure, with an unspeakable
desire he stands ready, and prepared every hour, yea every moment, to give
unto us all that which is needful for spiritual life, and the entire victory
of our selves. And how can it be possible, that our heavenly shepherd, who for
the space of thirty three years followed this strayed sheep with so loud
cries, that there with he became as it were hoarce, and that also by a way so
laborious and thorny, that he shed al his precious blood, and finally, lost his
life. Now when this same sheep follows him, calls upon him, and prays
unto him, he will not turn his eyes of life unto it, and hear it, and lay it
upon his divine shoulders, rejoicing thereof with his neighbors and Angels
in heaven? And who can ever be leeue, that God who stands continuallye
knocking at the heart of man, desiring to enter in, and to suppe with him, and
communicate his guiftes unto him; when man opens his heart and inuiteth him,
will then notwithstanding in good earnest turn a deaf ear unto him, and
refuse to enter?

The third mean to obtain this holy confidence and trust, is, to call to mind
the verity of the holy scriptures, which in so many places do teach us, that
he which trusted in God, was never confounded.

There may be added to these aforesaid another mean to obtain at one time
both the distrust of our selves, and the confidence in God: and it is this.
When thou take any thing in hand, before thou determine it, and resolve to
do it, consider thy own debility, and the power and goodness of God, and then
determine to begin thy work.

And if thou observe not this order, although it seem to thee, that thou do
all thy actions virtually in the confidence of God: yet thou shall find thy
self very far deceived; for man of himself being very apt to presumption,
the right way to work with the distrust of our selves, and with confidence in
God, is, that the consideration of our own nothing, and of Gods omnipotency
go always before our work: And it is also to be observed, that it shall
oftentimes seem unto thee, that thou have obtaind this distrust of thy self,
and confidence in God, and yet it is not so: and the effect which will proceed
of thy often fallinges, shall make this manifest unto thee.

If therefore when by chance thou fallest, thou be unquiet, dejected, and
perceive thy self to be brought to a kind of despair of being able to go
forward, and to do well: it is an evident sign that thou did trust in thy
self, and not in God: and if thy sadness and distrust be great, great was thy
confidence in thy self, and little was thy trust in God. For he that
altogether distrusteth himself, and trusts in God, when he falls he
woondereth not at it, he is not dejected or discouraged, acknowledging that
this does happen through his own weakness: neither does diminish his confidence
in God, but hating above all things the sin which he is fallen into, with a
quiet and a peaceable sorrow for the offense of his divine majesty with less
trust in himself, and greater confidence in God, and with greater courage tha^
before folows his enterprise, and pursues his enemies even to death.

Would to God that these things were well considered of certain persons, that
pretend to be spiritual, who when they fall into any defect, can not nor will
not be in quiet, and some times by reason of this anxiety rather then for any
other respect, will needs out of hand go and seek their gostly father: unto
whom they ought to have recourse principally to wash themselves from sin, and
also to get strength against the same, by the most holy Sacrament of the altar.

Of Exercise: and first of the Understanding, which we ought to keep free from
curiosity, and ignorance.

Chap. 4.
IF we have but only the distrust of our selves and confidence in God, we
shall never be able to get the victory of our selves, but rather shall run
headlong into all kind of evil. And therefore besides these, Exercise (the
third thing mentioned before) is necessary.

This Exercise must be practiced principally with the Understanding and Will.

The Understanding must be kept from two things, from ignorance, and from
curiosity.

From ignorance that it may be bright and clear to know that which is
necessary for the ouercomming of our vicious passions: which light may be
obtained two manner of ways.

The first and principal, is prayer, praying unto the holy ghost, that he will
vouchsafe to infuse the same into our hearts.

The other a continual exercise, of a profound consideration of things as they
are in themselves, and not as they appear to be; for thus exercising our
selves, we come to know the truth of those things which are truly good: and
the falsehood and vanity of the other, which never perform that which they
promise in show, and take away the peace of our heart.

Now dear daughter be attentive to that which I shall say unto thee, for it is
of great importance, that thou may well know the nature and quality of those
things, which by sundry occasions present themselves before thee; it behooves
thee to have a special care, to have thy will purged, and free from all love
and affection that is not God, or a mean to bring thee to God.

For that the understanding may discern well and rightly: it is necessary that
it do behold and consider the object set before it, before that the will do
fasten the affection upon it, for at that time the understanding is free and
clear, and well able to discern: but if the will have once placed thaffection,
the understanding then, does not discover the thing as it is. For so much as
that affection which is placed in the midst, darkneth in such sort the
understanding, that it esteems better of the same, then it is in effect, and
for such shows it unto the will, which by that is brought to love it more
ardently.

By which increase of love, the Understanding is yet more blinded; and thus
blinded, it makes the thing, to seem unto the will far more lovely and good
then before, whereby it comes to pass, that these two powers miserably continue
ever to walk as in a circle from darkness, into more obscurity, and from
error into greater errors: and therefore thou must be very diligent, and
vigilant in this point, never to set thy affection upon any thing whatsoever,
if it be not first known, and well examined by the light of understanding,
but especially by the light of grace, and prayer: the which I exhort thee to
do, not only in all other things, but even in them also, which are holy and
good: for although they be so in themselves, yet it may happen, that for
circumstance of time, of place, and of measure, or in respect of obedience they
be not so for thee, and therefore many persons in very commendable, and holy
exercises have indaungered themselves.

Also we must keep our understanding with great wariness from curiosity,
that it know not any thing that may let or hinder our victory, for which cause
thou must pursue to the death all curiosity of earthly things not necessary,
although they be lawful: restrain ever thy understanding what thou can, and
love to make it foolish news or alterations of the world (be they great or
little) let them be to thee as though they were not at all.

And if they be offered unto thee, oppose thy self against them. In the desire
of knowing heavenly things, be sober, and humble, not willing to know any other
thing but Christ crucified, and his life, and death, abando^ all other things,
for so thou shall greatly please God, who accompteth them his dear friends,
that only desire of him that which is sufficient, to love his goodness, and to
hate them selves, every other thing which men desire, and seek after, is all
but self love, and spiritual pride. If thou do thus, thou shall escape many
deceipts, for the Devil seeing that in them which attend to spiritual life,
the will is coragious and strong, assaieth to batter the understanding, that by
this way he may be Master both of the one and the other: wherefore sometimes
to these men he gives deep and curious conceits, especially to those that
have sharp and great wits: to the intent, that being occupied in the same
wherein they falsely persuade themselves to enjoy GOD, they may forgett to purge
their heart, and to attend to their own mortification, and the knowledge of
them selves: Thus they fall into the snare of pride, and make to them selves an
Idol of their understanding, where upon it ensues that by little and little
(at un awares) they begin to be persuaded, that they need not the counsel
and direction of others: A thing very dangerous and very hard to be cured the
pride of the understanding being more dangerous then that of the will; for he
that is proud of will, will sometimes obey because he houldeth an other man's
opinion to be better: But he that does assuredly believe his own opinion to
be best, by whom can he be cured; how will he submit himself to another man's
judgment, when he takes it not to be so good as his own. If the eye of the
soul which is the understanding, wherewith it ought to see, and heal the pride
thereof be blind, and full of the same pride, who can cure it? and if the light
become darkness and the rule, be crooked, what will become of the rest? Therefore
see that thou in time oppose thy self to such a dangerous pride, before it
pearce the marrowe of thy bones. Blunt the sharpnes of thy understanding,
submit easily thy indgment to an other man's, become foolish for the love of
God, and thou shall be wiser then Solomon.

Of the Will: and of the end whereuuto we must direct all our actions.

Chap. 5.
To become one spirit with God, it is not enough to have good desires, and to
be prompt and ready to good works; if we do not all as moved by him, and to
the end only to please him. In this we shall have a great conflict with nature:
for nature being drawn and moved by some particular commodity or delight,
many times more subtillie, and sweetly, does fasten and feed it self in
spiritual things than in other things, where upon when any thing hapeneth,
proposed and willed by God, suddenly it does will, and desire it, not as moved
by the will of God, nor to the end only he may have the same will with him,
but for some good or contentment, which it deriueth from willing the things
willed by God. To avoid this snare, which will hinder thee in the way of
perfection; and to accustom thee to will, and work every thing, both as moved
by god, and with pure intention to please him only (who will be only the
beginning and final end of all our actions and thoghts) thou shall observe
this manner; when any thing willed by God, shall offer it self unto thee, do
not incline thy will unto it, before thou have first lifted thy under standing
into God, to see that it is his will: that thou desire it, both because his will
is such, and also to please him only. And by this will thy will being moved,
and drawn, let it afterward bend it self to will it, as a thing willed by
God and for his good pleasure only, and glory: And in like manner when thou
would refuse the things not willed by God refuse thou not until first thou
haste fixed the eye of thy mind, on his divine will, in such manner as we have
said. And consider that many times it shall seem unto thee that thou have this
motive, and yet it is not so: for nature does secretly seek itself, wherefore
it oftentimes happens, that that which is willed, or is refused merely or
principally for our own interest, does seem to us to be willed, or not
willed, to please or not to displease God.

Therefore in the beginning of every action, spoil thy self as much as thou
can of all mixture, whereby thou may intermeddle any of thine own
interest: and determine not to work or refuse any thing, till first thou feel
thy self moved and drawn unto it by the only and pure will of God. If in
those actions which quickly pass, thou can not always actually feel this
motion, content thy self with a virtuall intention, to please in every thing
thy Lord God alone: but in the others, it is expedient to feel it actually in
the beginning, as I have said, and when the long continuance of the said
actions bring danger to make this exercise forgotten: take heed that thou
renew it often, and keep it waking, even to the last, to avoid the deceits of
nature, which is ever ready to turn to it self, and therefore very often in
process of time alters the objects, and changes the ends of our works.

The servant of God which is not circumspect in this, many times begins a
work with a motion for to please his Lord only; but after, by little and
little, not taking heed to himself, holds on in such sort, delighting in
the same, that he forgets the divine pleasure, and does so convert him
self to this delight, or some profit or honor that may happen unto him, that
if the same God do hinder him by infirmity, or other accident, or by the
means of any of his creatures, he remains wholly troubled, disquieted, and
malecontente, and with great difficulty is he drawn to will so much as his
Lord would have of him. Wherefore recollect thy self well, and keep always
this holy motive quick and liuelye in all thy works. The which is of so
great force and virtue, as a man would hardly believe, so that a thing,
(let it be base and little as thou will) done with this intent, to please
God only, and for his only glory, is infinitely more worth than many other
things, of most great price, and value, which are done without this motive.

Of two Wills which are in man, and of the Battle between them.

Chap. 6.
THou must understand O daughter, that in us the rare two Wills the one of
reason, and therefore called reasonable, and superior: the other of sense,
which is called sensual, and inferior: the which is also usually signified by
these names of sense, appetite, flesh, and passion.

And although both these may be called Will, yet nevertheless, because reason
it is which makes us men, when we will any thing with the sense only, it is
not understood that it is truly willed by us, until such time as we incline by
our superior will, to will it.

Hereupon all our spiritual Battle principally consists in this, that this
superior Will being placed as in the midst between the divine will, which stands
above, and the inferior, which is that of the sense, continually assaulted by
the one and the other, whilst either of these assaieth to draw it and to make
it subject, and obedient unto them.

To those that have already got the habit of virtue, or vice, and intend always
to proceed in the same, this fight is not painful, for the virtuous easily
agree unto the divine will, the other follow that of the sense without any
difficulty.

But they which are full of the evil habites of vice, (especially in the
beginning) find great pain and travel, when they resolve to change their
wicked life into a better, and taking them selves from the world, and from the
flesh, do give themselves to the love and service of Jesus Christ.

For the strokes which the superior will then sustaineth of the divine will, and
of the inferior, (which always are skermishing with it) are mighty and
strong, and makes it well to feel them, not without great noyance of the
combatants.

None may presume ever to ariue to any degree of virtue, nor to be able to
serve God, if he will not labor in good earnest, and support the pain which is
to be felt in leaving those delights, whereunto at first his affection was fast
tied.

Hence it comes to pass that very few attain to the state of perfection,
because like cowardly soldiers they will not stand fast, and constantly fight,
and suffer the dints, which the resistance of an infinite number of their self
wills brings with it, which does always fight against them: but retiring
back, leave their weapons and themselves in the power of their enemies who
tirannize over them.

Here is laid open a deceit by so much the more dangerous, as it is less
perceived, that many which attend to the spiritual life, being lovers of
themselves, more then is requisite (and yet in truth they know not how to love
themselves) for the most part choose those exercises, which most do please their
taste, and they leave the other which touch the quick of their natural
inclinations and sensual appetite against the which all reason would they
should turn all the force of their fight.

Of the manner how to fight against the motions of our sensuality and of the
actions which the Will has to bring forth for to make the habit of virtue.

Chap. 7.
Whenever thou art assaulted by the will of the sense: that thou may draw
nearer to the will of GOD, (which knocks and calls upon thee, to the end
thou may oppose thy self, and make resistaunce against thy sensuality) in
diverse manners thou must exercise thy self.

First when thou art assaulted by the sense, it behooves thee to resist
couragiouslye, that the superior will, consent not to his motions.

Secondly, when they be ceased, thou must stir them up again in thee, to
repress them with greater voilence.

Afterward it is necessary that thou recall them to another new combat, to
the end that thou may drive them from thee, with a certain disdain and
abhorring.

These two stirrings up, and and prouocations to battle, thou must use in
every passion, and disordinate appetite, except in carnal motions, whereof I
will speak hereafter in their place.

Last of all, thou must make acts of contrary virtues: let us put an example.
Thou art peradventure tempted with the motions of impatience; if thou then
retire thy thoughts, and ponder with thy self attentively, thou shall feel
that they beat continually against the superior will, to make it yield and
incline unto them.

In this thou must exercise thy self with redoubled feruor, opposing thy self
to every motion, so that thy will do not consent, nor ever give over this
fight, until thou see that thy enemy as weary, and dead, render himself
vanquished.

But thou must understand that when the devil perceives that we courageously
oppose our selves against the motions of any passion, he does not only, not
stir them up in us, but being stirred up, he assayeth (for that time) to
apease them, for fear we should by exercise, obtain the habit of the
contrary virtues.

Therefore when thou find thy self in peace, reduce sometimes to thy
memory, and recall to battle, those things which provoked thee to impatience,
and stir them up in such manner that thou feel thy self moved by them in
thy sensitive part, and then enforcing thy self to a new combat, with often
and forcible wills, repress his motions.

And because it often happens, that although we do put back our enemies,
(because we know we do well, and do please God therein (yet notwithstanding,
for that we have them not in hatred, we are not out of danger, another time to
be overcome of them.

Therefore thou must anew set upon them, and beat them back from thee, not only
with a repugning, but with a disdainful will, until thou have made them odious
and abominable unto thee.

Finally to adorn thy soul with habits of virtue, it suffiseth not, that with
these exercises aforesaid thou resist thy vicious passions, but it is
necessary also thou bring forth acts of the virtues wholly contrary to these
passions.

For example, if one give thee occasion of impatience, thou ought not to
content thy self to drive away this passion, but moreover thou must desire
often, and very often to be provoked in the same manner, and by the same person,
enforcing thy self to feel contentment in the former travel, expecting and
purposing to suffer as yet much greater.

And if the virtue be such as do require it, thou must also put in practice the
exterior works thereof, as in the example before said, using toward him
which molested thee, words of humility and love, showing thy self ready
(according to thy estate) to do him any pleasure or service.

And although these works accompanied with so great faintness, and weakness
of spirit, that it should seem thou do the same wholly against thy will, yet
thou must not in any case, leave it undone: for although they be never so
feeble, yet they keep thee firm in the Battle, and make thee way to obtain
the victory.

And further thou must observe, that thou ought not only in the aforesaid
manner, to fight against the great and effectual wills of any vice, but also
against the little, and slow motions of the same vice: for these are they which
open the way to the greater, which work afterward in us the vicious habites.

And of the little care which some have had to root out these little wills,
after they have ouercom the greater, it has happened unto them afterward, that
when they least thought upon it, they have found them selves assailed afresh,
and taken by the same ennemies, more forciblye then at the first.

And besides this also, thou must mortify and break some times the wills of
lawful things (so they be not necessary) for by this means thou shall make thy
self more ready to mortify thy self in the other, and thou shall do a thing
most grateful to thy Lord and Master.

Dear daughter, I tell thee plainly, that if thou hold on in these
exercises, within short time, by the help of GOD thou shall profit much in
spirit.

But if thou proceed in any other sort, and with other exercises, although
they seem excellent unto thee, and of so great taste, that they hold thee
always as it were in a sweet conference with Christ crucified: yet do not
persuade thy self, that thou shall ever obtain to be truly spiritual.

And thou must understand that as the vicious habites are caused by many and
often actions of the superior will whilst it gives place to the sensual
appetites, so on the contrary part, the habites of the Euangelical virtues are
gotten with conforming our selves more and more often, to the motions of the
divine will.

And as our will can never be virtuous and divine, although it be earnestly
called upon, and asit were fought withal by inspirations and grace, from God
whilst it does not consent unto it: So shall it never be vicious, and earthly,
although it be much assailed by the inferior part, until it give place, and
incline to the same.

What we ought to do when the superior Will seems to be overcome, and wholly
suffocated.

Chap. 8.
ANd if sometimes it seem unto thee that the superior will is not able to
prevail against the inferior, because thou do not feel in thy self, a
certain effectual will: notwithstanding stand fast, and give not over the
fight, for thou must account thy self superior, till manifestly thou do see
thy self to have yielded. For our superior will having no need of the
concourse of the inferior wills, although in these it finds al manner of
resistance, yet may it notwithstanding will, what thing soever, and as often,
and for what end it seems best, howsoever nature in the mean time does kick
and resist; howsoever the world does murmur, and the devil rage.

And if these ennemies at sometimes should assail thee and as it were hold
thee fast with so great violence, that thy will as it were suffocated or
choked (that I may so say) should seem to want breath, and have no power to
bring forth any act of contrary wills; in this case, help thy self with thy
tongue, and defend thee, saying: I yield not unto thee, I will none of thee;
after the manner of him, that having his enemy upon his back, holding him
down, not being able to thrust at him with the point, does smite him with the
pummell of his sword. And as a man in this case will assay to leap backward,
that he may be able to give him the thrust, so thou being retired into the
knowledge of thy self, (that thou art nothing, and can do nothing) and with
confidence in God, that can do all things; give a blow to this ene mie thy
passion, with saying, help me O Lord, help me my God, help me sweet Jesus,
and blessed Mary.

Thou may also when thy enemy gives thee any time, help the weakness of
thy will, with recourse unto thy understanding, considering diverse points; by
consideration whereof, it comes to pass, that thy will may take breath, and
force against her enemies, As for example, if thou be in any persecution or
travel so assailed by impatience, that thy will may seem not to be able, or
at least is not willing to bear it, thou shall then help thy self with
consideration of these points following, or some other.

First, thou shall consider whether thou have not deserved this persecution, or
travel; and if thou deseruedst it, having even occasion unto the same: then all
equity and justice requires, that thou bear the blow which thy own proper
hand has given.

Secondly, but if thou find thy self not to be faulty in that particular
matter, then turn thy thoghts to thy other sins, for the which God has not as
yet chasticed thee, nor thou thy self as thou ought have punished them. And
seeing that his mercy has changed the punishment of them, that should have
bin eternal, or at the least temporal (but that of purgatory) with a little
present affliction, it is thy part to receive it willingly, and with
thanksgiving.

Thirdly, and if perhaps thou should seem to thy self to have done
great penance already, and to have little offended the majesty of God, (which
thing notwithstanding thou never ought to believe) thou must consider, that
into the kingdom of God none do enter, but by the gate of denying themselves,
and of patience; for by this way also the Son of God did enter, and all his
other members.

Forthly, if thou could enter by any other way, yet for the law of love,
thou ought not to desire it, seeing that the Son of God himself with all
his followers are entered by the way of thorns and crosses.

Lastly, remember that the greatest and principal consideration which thou
art to use, not only in this, but in every other occasion to give force unto
thy will, is this: that thou turn thy thoughts to the delight and contentme^t
which almighty God (for the love he bears thee) is to receive by every act
of virtue, and by the mortification of any sensual appetite, which he shall
perceive thee to labor in, like a noble warrior, in the battle which thou
have undertaken for his sake.

That we ought not to fly the occasions of Combat.

Chap. 9.
BEsides all this that I have said unto thee, which thou must do, to cloth
thy self with the habites of virtue: I put thee in mind, that it is not
convenient, that thou fly from the occasions of combat, which offer themselves
unto thee; and that if thou will get the habites of any virtue, (as for example
of patience) it is not good that thou should withdraw thy self from those
persons, actions, or thoughts, that move thee to impatience: wherefore thou
ought not to shun, but rather, to hold as dear, the conversation of any
person, that may be grievous unto thee, and conuersing with him, thou ought
to keep thy mind ready and prepared to suffer any troublesome, or displeasing
thing whatsoever which may happen by him: for doing otherwise, thou shall never
accustom thy self to patience.

So also in like manner if any work be noisome, and irksome to thee, either by
it self, or for the person, that has imposed it upon thee, or because thou
would do some other thing, that does better content thee: leave not for all
that to take it in hand, and to continue the same troublesome actions although
in doing of it thou should find thy self unquiet, and leaving it, thou
should be in rest: for thus thou should never learn to suffer, neither
that should be any true quiet, thy mind not being purged from passion.

The same thing I say unto thee concerning thoughts, which sometines disturb
and trouble thy mind, that they are not wholly to be driven from thee, but
rather to be esteemd, for with the trouble they bring thee, they accustom thee
to suffer crosses and contrarieties.

And he that shall otherwise instruct thee, does rather teach thee to fly the
grief which thou feel, then to obtain the virtue which thou desire.

Yet notwithstanding it is very true, that it behooves a young champion or a new
beginner to behave himself, and skirmishe in these aforesaid occasions, with
wariness and dexterity, sometimes to encounter them, sometimes to give
ground, according as more or less he has obtained the habit of virtue.

But for all this he must never quite turn his back from the fight, and fly
in such sort that he seek wholly to forsake all trouble and irkesomenesse, for
he which at that time should save himself, being at another time assailed,
should not have then in his need, wherewith to defend himself from the blows
of impatience, unto the which he should lie open, with great danger when they
do fall upon him, because he should not be armed, and strengthened with the
habits of the contrary virtue. These admonitions serve not in carnal vices, of
the which (as I have said) I will entreat by themselves.

Of the manner how to resist the sudden motions of Passions.

Chap. 10.
HE that is not yet accustomed to beat back the sudden blows of injuries,
or other contrary things, to obtain the use thereof, must accustom himself
to foresee them, and to wish them oftentimes, expecting them with a prepared
mind.

The manner to foresee them is, that thine own state and condition being
weighed, thou consider also the persons and the places, where and with whom
thou art to deal, whereby thou may easily conjecture that which may happen
unto thee.

And if any other adverse, or contrary thing not thought upon before do happen
unto thee, besides the help which thou have already gained, by preparing thy
mind for other things which thou did foresee, thou may further help thy
self with this other manner.

Suddenly when thou beginnest to feel the first touches of an injury, or
other painesull thing, be ready to enforce thy self, to lift up thy mind to
God, considering his ineffable bounty, and love toward thee, with which he
sends this adversity, to the end that thou suffering it for his love, may
draw more near and be united unto him: and seeing how much it delights him,
that thou suffer it, turn thee afterward to thy self, in manner of
reprehension, saying in thy mind: ah why will thou not suffer this cross?
which not these, or those men but thy heavenly father most lovingly does send
thee. Afterward return to the cross, and embrace it with the greatest
patience, and joy that thou can.

And if in the beginning thy passion so prevail in thee, that thou can not
lift up thy heart unto God, but should remain wounded, seek notwithstanding
this, to do it as if thou had not bin strooken. But for a true and effectual
remedy against these sudden motions, thou art to take away in time, the cause
from whence they proceed.

For example, if by the affection which thou have to any thing thou do find,
that when thou art troubled in the same, thou art wont to fall into some sudden
alteration of mind, the manner to provide for that in time, is, that thou
accustom thy self to take away the affection unto the same, but if the
alteration proceed not of the thing, but of the person in whom (because thou
have no liking of him) every little action does grieve and move thee, the
remedy is, that thou enforce thy self to love the same person, and to hold
him dear.

Of the manner how to fight against the sin of the flesh.

Chap. 11.
AGainst this vice thou must fight with particular, and different means, from
other vises, therefore thou must have regard unto three times, that is to say:
before we be tempted; when we are tempted; and after that the temptation is
past.

Before the temptation, thou must not strive with the vice of the flesh, but
with the causes from which it proceeds.

First, wherefore thou must fly all conversation (which is never so little
dangerous) as much as thou can, enforcing thee not to show familiariti, or
utter words of affection, but with a modest gravity, briefly to deal so far
as necessity shall require.

Secondly thou must fly idleness, and keep thy self ever busied with
thoughts and works, agreeable to thy vocation.

Thirdly, never resist the will of thy superiors, but yield thy self, and
execute al things which they shall command thee.

Fourthly, never judge rashly of thy neighbor, especially concerning this vice;
but if he should apparently fall, yet have compassion upon him, disdain him not,
despise him not, but gather the fruit of humility, debase thy self even unto
dust and tremble at thy self, and with prayer draw nearer unto God: for if
thou be ready to judge and despise others, God will correct thee, (but to thy
cost) by permitting thee to fall into the same vice, that by this means thou
may know thy pride, and being humbled, thou may procure remedy, both to
this and that, or if thou do not fall, it may nevertheless be doubted in what
slate thou stand.

Fifthly and last, thou shall take heed that when thou feel abundance of
spiritual delights, thou do not vainly please thy self: as being persuaded
that thou art worthy of some account, and that thy enemies are no more to
assail thee.

In the time of temptation, consider first, whether it proceed of an
external, or internal cause: external I mean the conversation and speeches
which may stir up this vice: and the remedy thereof is, to fly, as I said
before.

The inward cause proceeds, either of the lustiness of body, or of the
thoghts of the mind, which come by our evil habites, or by sugestion of the
devil.

Touching the first, it is needeful to chastise the body, with fasting, and
disciplines, hairecloth, watchings, and otherlike austerity, as discretion and
obedience shall appoint thee.

Concerning thy thoughts, the remedies are, Meditation, Prayer, and to occupy
thy self in sundry exercises, convenient for thy estate.

I would not have thy meditation to be about certain points, which many books
set forth for remedy of this temptation, which are to consider the vileness
of such a vice, the insatiablenesse, the coffeehouse, the punishment, the
dangers, the consuming of goods, of life, of honor, and eternal damnation:
for that is not always a secure mean to overcome the temptation; the true
remedy being to fly altogether, not only from those thoughts themselves, but
also from every thing that represents those thoughts, although they be never
so contrary to the same, for although the understanding by one way drive them
away, yet by another it gives occasion and danger of delight.

Therefore thy meditation for this matter ought to be upon the life and passion
of our Savior. And if in this meditation against thy will, these thoughts come
into thy mind, and more then they are wont molest thee (as assuredly sometimes
it will happen) yet for all that be not discouraged, nor leave thy meditation,
no not to resist them: turn not thy self in any sort to them, but follow thy
Meditation attentively, not esteeming at al those thoughts, as if they were not
thine, this is the true way to resist them, although thou should find thy
self continually assaulted with them; neither ever dispute with such thoghts,
whether thou have consented to them or no, for this is a deceit of the devil,
under pretense of good, especially seeing that when thou art quiet afterward,
and by the counsel of thy spiritual Father thou may know the truth. And see
that always thou faithfully discover to thy ghostly father every thought, and
be not ashamed; for if against al our enemies we had need of humility to
overcome them, in this we have more need, then in any other whatsoever.

Concerning prayer for this effect, it must be made with often lifting up thy
mind to God, with virtuall intention to pray for victory over this vice,
without turning thy thought actually unto it, for that is a dangerous thing:
and let this suffize thee now for thy defense in the time of temptation.

That which thou have to do when the temptation is past, is this, although
thou seem never so free, and secure to thy self: yet that thou stand aloof,
and not so much as ever remember those objects which did cause the temptation,
although for some respects of virtue, or some other good, thou feel thy self
moved to do otherwise, for this is a deceit of our vicious nature, and a snare
of the devil.

Of the manner how to fight against negligence.

Chap. 12.
THat thou may not fall into this most dangerous vice, thou must endeavor by
all means possible to answer with readiness of mind, every good
inspiration, and to fly all earthly consolation, curiosity, and superfluous
business, that appertain not to thy estate.

And because to him that is fallen into negligence, there is no better remedy,
then to do some good work, and the negligent man loatheth every work though
never so good, having his eye more upon the labor that it shows, then upon
the good which it promises: therefore it is needeful to discover this good
unto him, making him to understand, that one only lifting up of the mind to
god, and one bowing of the knee to the earth, for his honor is more worth then
all the treasures in the world. But the labor that is to be taken, in so doing,
must be hid in such sort, that it seem to be less then it is.

Thy exercise peradventure requires a whole hour of prayer, and to thy
negligence this seems too much. Therefore with this behooueful and sweet
deceit, as it were persuading thy self that half a quarter of an hour is
enough settle thy self to prayer for this little space of time.

For in this manner breaking thy negligence, thou may with facility hold on
another half a quarter and thus continue from space to space. And if in this
also thou should find difficulty, leave off for a while thy exercise that
it irke thee not too much, but after a little space return to it again.

Of the government of the senses.

Chap. 13.
THy senses (by the which our enemies are wont to enter) thou shall keep in
such sort, that they may be gates, by the which thy God may enter in. When thou
do perceive thy self too much busied about any creature, penetrate with the
internal eye of thy soul, to thy God hidden there in, who gives being to the
same thing, and then return to thy self, and behold him also in thee, in like
manner, to whom thou may say in this fort.

Thou art (my Lord) present indeed, more unto me, then I am to my self, and I
ungrateful and careless think not on thee, love thee not, honor thee not. Or
again; some other times thou may lift up thy understanding to the
incomprehensible greatness, and perfection of the same Lord, rejoicing in thy
self to see in him so great good as he possesses, yea more then if it were
thine own, feeling greater joy that he is inco^prehensible, then if he did not
exceed thy capacity. And when thou see in any reasonable creatures, power,
wisdom, bounty, justice, and other perfections, lift up thy self to God and
say in thy mind: behold the little rivers of the fountain uncreated, and of the
infinite sea of all goodness.

And feeling thy self to be delighted with the beauty of creatures, quickly
pass from that with thy thought to the supernall beauty, and delighting
thyselfe only in it, thou shall say, when shall I my Savior take only in thee
all my delight?

By another manner, thou may avoid this delectation: as soon as thou
perceiuest thy self to be drawn with any delectable object, behold with thine
understanding, that under this delight, there lies the infernal serpent,
prepared to kill thee, or at the least to wound thee, against whom thou shall
thus say: ah thou cursed serpent, how secretly do thou lie in wait to venom
me?

Afterward thy mind being lifted up to God, thou shall say: Blessed be my Lord
God which has discovered my enemy which did ly in wait to kill me.

In the variety of diverse other accidents, thou may thus exercise thy self,
when, for example, thou art oppressed with sorrow, or do suffer heat,
cold, or any other painful thing, thou shall lift up thy mind to that
eternalwil, whose pleasure it is, that thou in such measure, and at such a time
do feel that discommoditie: wherefore full of loye thou shall say in thy
heart: behold in me the accomplishment of the divine will, which from the
beginning thou have disposed that I, in such time, and with such measure should
receive and suffer this; and the same thou shall do in other accide^ts also:
as when the skies are filled with clouds when it raineth, is windy or fair
weather, and in another thing that does happen unto thee. And that even when
thou dooest read, thou may keep our Lord in thy presence, ascend with thy
thought to him, and behold him under those words, and receue them as from his
divine mouth, and when any good thought comes to thy mind, suddenly turn
thy self to God, and with lowly (...)

(...) of thy nature, before thou put in practice thy desire, yea although it
should be from God; for that the work following such a mortification, shall be
more grateful unto him, then if it should be done with the greedines of
nature; and sometime the mortification will more please him, then the work it
self.

And thus abandoning the desires not good, or not embracing the good, til first
thou have repressed thy natural motions, thou shall be sure to keep in peace,
and in security the castle of thy heart; which also is needful, that thou keep
from certain inward reprehensions against thy self, which sometimes are of
the devil: although (because they accuse thee of some defect) they seem to
come from God; by their fruits thou shall know from whence they do proceed.
If they make thee humble, keep thee peaceable, and diligent in doing good, and
take not from thee thy confidence in God, receive them as from God: but if they
confound thee, and make thee full of pusilanimity, distrustful, and slow to do
good, and especially in that that thou art reprehended in: hold thee assured,
that they come from the adversary, and therefore give no ear unto them, but
continue thy exercise.

(...) an inflamed heart unto him: behold O my Lord I have done even like my
self, neither can I expect any other thing of my self then to fall: O my Lord
and Savior I am sorry for it, neither could I have stayed my self here, if the
hand of thy goodness had not stayed me, for the which I yield thee humble
thanks: do thou O Lord like unto thy self permit me not to live in thy
disgrace, neither that I may any more offend thee. And this being ended, do
not turn thee to think, whether God have forgiven thee or no? for so to do is
pride, disquietnesse of mind, loss of time, and a snare of the devil.

Therefore leaving thy self freely in the hand of the divine piety, continue
thy exercise, as though thou had not fallen. And if thou happen to fall many
times a day, and be wounded, do the same things with no less trust the second,
the third, and also the last time then the first.

This exercise by so much displeases the devil, by how much heseeth it
pleases God, and therefore he does hold us as it were fast bound, and seeks
to make us so very slothful, that many times we leave to do it. Therefore by
how much thou find the greater difficulty in this, by so much thou oughtst
to use the greater violence, renewing it more then one time in one fall. And if
yet after the fall thou find thy self disquieted, ashamed, and discomforted:
the first thing that thou must do, is, that thou recover the peace and
tranquillity of heart, and being so quieted and set in peace, turn thy self
then afterward to God; for that disquietnesse that uses to remain after sin
committed, has not for the obiecte, the offending of God, and the love of him,
but thy own private loss and damage.

The way to recover this peace, is; that thou forget thy self to have fallen,
and settle thy self to consider the ineffable bounty of God, and how he
desires, to unite himself to thee, and make thee blessed in his eternal joy.
And after that with this or such like consideration, thou have settled thy mind:
thou shall turn thy self to thy fall, doing as I taught thee before, and at
the time of thy going to confession (which should be often) call then to mind
all thy defects, and open the^ sincerely to thy confessor.

That a man should always keep himself in peace.

Chap. 16.
THat thou may keep thy heart, on every side, free from disturbance, and
disquietnes, thou must ever have a guard watching, the which as soon as it
discouers any thing, that may disturb, or disquiet the heart, suddenly may
give thee warning, to the end thou may take thy weapons to defend thee.

And if it happen (as many times and too often it does) that thou be troubled
or disquieted, by any sudden assault, al other things set aside, attend first
of all to pacify thy mind, for that being quiet, many things are done, and
well done, and without this, thou can not do any thing of any value; besides
that, thou do thereby ly open to the blows of thine enemies.

The devil does so much fear this peace (as a place where God does dwell for
to work therein woonders) that oftentimes with the banners or ensigns of a
friend he attempteth to deceive us with inspirations, which in appearance are
good, stirring up in us sundry good desires. The deceit whereof is known by
the affects, because they take from us the peace of our hearts. Therefore when
thy scowtewatch gives thee a sign of any new desire, let it not enter in, but
free from any propriety, or will of thine own, present it unto God, confessing
thy blindness, and ignorance, and earnestly beseech him, that with his light
he make thee see whether it come from him, or from the earth. And see that thou
mortify, the pronenesse

How the devil by way of purposes seeks to hinder sometimes the obtaining of
virtue.

Chap. 17.
With another false bait also the devil assaieth to deceive us, and that is
with desires and purposes which we make against those enemies, which be a
far off, and more stronger: leaving to fight against those which are near
unto us: with the which it is needful for us actually to fight for to overcome
our selves.

Hence arise great losses, because we are continually wounded, and we care
not for the hurt, and esteeming such purposes as if they were facts, vainly we
become proud; whereupon at that very time, when we will not so much as bear
one cross word: we spend forsooth, long meditations, in purposing to sustain
for the love of God, even the pains of purgatory.

And because in this the inferior part feels no repugnance, (as of a thing a
far off:) therefore we poor wretches, persuade our selves, to be in the degree
of those that patiently, and actually sustain great things. Thou therefore to
avoid this deceit, purpose and fight with those enemies, that are at hand, and
really make war against thee: for by this thou shall plainly perceive, if thy
purposes be true or false, strong or weak: but against those enemies which are
not wont to trouble thee; I counsel thee not to wage battle, except thou
probably perceive, that within a short time after they are for to assail
thee: for that thou may find thy self more strong at that time, it is
lawful to purpose before: but for all that, do not judge thy purposes, as
facts, if for some time indeed thou have not bin exercised in the works of
that virtue. For in this case although we cannot overcome some little defects
which at sometimes (for the humble acknowledging of our selves) our Savior
leaves unto us, vet then it is lawful notwithstanding to make purposes of
more high degrees of perfection. But when in small things we are careless, not
using any force to overcome our selves in the same, the purposes of greater
things is no other, but vanity, and presumption, and deceit of the devil.

In what manner the devil enforces himself to remove us from the way of
virtue.

Chap. 18.
THe malignant ennemie uses another deceit against us, whilst he seeks to
remove us from the way of virtue. A person finds himself sick, and seeks
with patience to support the infirmity: the adversary seeing that if he
continue thus, he shall get the habit of patience, opposes himself, and
proposes unto him a desire to do this or that other good deed: and suggesteth
unto him, that if he were in health he might better serve God, help himself,
his and some others: and by little and little he continues heating this desire
in him, in such fort, that he makes him unquiet, because he cannot attend to
those good exercises: and by how much more the desire is kindled, by so much
more the disquietnesse is made greater, in such sort, that before he be aware
thereof, he is brought to be impacient, with his infirmity, not as an
infirmity, but as an impediment to do those works, which unquietly he
desired; when afterward he has brought him to this point, the crafty enemy
by a subtle mean, takes from his mind the intention of the divine service,
and leaves him the naked desire to deliver himself, from the infirmity. And
because this succeeds not as he would, he becomes altogether unquiet, and
impacient, and thus leaving virtue, falls into vice.

The remedy of this is, when thou find thy self in any troublesome estate,
to beware thou give no place in thy self to the desires of what good so ever
which at that time (thou being not able to perform them) may happen to
disquiet thee for thy great profit. To this purpose I do advertise thee, that
it often happens that a man being impacient, for the pain or trouble that
does grieve him, covers the vice of his impatience, under the pretense of
zeal of some good, whereupon the sick man, impatient for his disease, says
that his impacience is not for the pain of sickness, but because he has bin
the cause of it, or because he is a trouble or hinderaunce to others, or
because he cannot attend to sundry exercises and works of the spirit.

Thus the ambitious man that cannot obtain his desired dignity, whilst he
complains of others, does cover himself with saying, that this does not
grieve him, for himself, but for his family, for his friends, or for other
respects. And that these men do deceive themselves, it is (...) apparent,
because they are not troubled, nor disquieted, when by some other means, or by
other persons, the same effects come to pass, which they seemed to mislike,
under the which they covered the vice, and their defect. For example, thou
say that thy disease does not trouble thee for thy self, but for the
irksomeness of them that serve thee, notwithstanding, if those same persons,
feel the same irksomeness, through the infirmity of others, thou take no
thought for it, whereby it is evident, that the whole root of thy sorrow was in
thee, and for thy felfe only, and not for others; and this may be said in
every like thing.

Moreover I advertise thee, that if thou patiently bear any cross, thou never
suffer thy self to be overtaken with a desire to lay it alway^ because from
this proceed two losses: the one is, that if this desire take not away thy
patience at that time, yet by little and little, it will dispose thee to
impatience. The other is, that thou shall merit only then for that small time
wherein thou suffer: whereas if that thou had not desired thy deliverance,
but had fully resigned thy self unto God, although in effect thy suffering,
had bin but for one hour only: thy Savior would have aknowledged it, for a
service of a long time.

Wherefore in this, and in every other thing, let it be a general rule, always
to keep thy desire so spoiled of every other object, that only thou desire
always and in all things purely and simply, the divine pleasure. For in this
manner seeing that nothing can happen to thee (without thy own fault) but as
much as pleases the divine Majesty thou shall never be afflicted, nor
troubled, nor shall leave off the way of perfection. And the lawful means which
some times are needful to be used, to deliver thy self from hurtful things,
let them not be with touch of self-love, because thou love to be delivered,
but because it pleases God, that thou use them.

In what sort our adversary endeavors with all his force, that the virtues
which we have obtained, may be an occasion of our ruin.

Chap. 19.
THe crafty and malignant serpent does not fail to tempt us also in the
virtues which we have obtained, that they may be the occasions of our ruin,
whilst we delighting in them, come to be lifted up on high, to fall
afterward into the vice of pride. But to avoid this danger, fight always,
sitting in the plain and sure field of a true and profound knowledge of thy
self, that thou art nothing, know no thing, thou can do nothing, and thou
have no other thing of thy self, but eternal damnation.

And be always watchful, and vigilant that thou keep aloof off, every
thought that brings thee from this know ledge; for the same being thy enemy,
if it cannot kill thee, at least it will leave thee wounded: and that thou
may the better comprehend the truth of this, mark well this case following.
As often as thou shall turn thee to the consideration of thy self, always
consider thy self with that which is thine, and not with that that is of God,
and of his grace, and esteem thy self such, as with thine thou do find
thee to be.

If thou consider the time, before thou wast, thou shall see, that in all that
eternity, thou wast a mere nothing, and that thou did not work, or
could work any thing to deserve thy being. In this time after sithence
that by the only goodness of God, thou have thy being, leaving to god that
which is his: (that is, the continual government, with the which he rules
and preserves thee) with that which thou have of thy self, what other thing
art thou, but in like manner a nothing? It is therefore evident, that in this
thy first natural being, standing with thine own, thou have not in any
respect reason to esteem thy self, or to desire to be esteemed of others.

Now as concerning thy good estate of grace, and ability to do good things;
thy nature spoiled of Gods divine help, what good thing could it ever do of it
self? where also considering thy many evils past, and more then that, the
multitude of other evil; which even until this time thou had continued to
work, if God of his great mercy had not stayed thee: thou shall find, that
thy iniquities, not only by the multiplication of days, and years, but also
by the number of thy actions, and of thy evil inclinations, should have bin
multiplied infinitely, insomuch that thou would have become like another
infernal Lucifer: whereupon if thou be not willing to steal that to thy
self, which is due unto God, but rather choosing to rest within the compass of
thine own, thou ought to account thy self every day worse then other.

But note well that this judgment of thine, be accompanied with justice, for
otherwise it would be no small loss unto thee: for if in this knowledge thou
do excel some other (who through his blindness does account himself somewhat
worth, and desires so to be reputed of others) thou notwithstanding do
loose very much, and do make thy self worse then he: if notwithstanding thy
knowledge thou will be had in estimation of men, and used for such as thou
know thou art not; if therefore thou will that the aknowledging of thy
baseness, and wickedness be true, and that it may make thee beloved of God, it is
needful that thou not only acknowledge thy self wicked and vile, but as such
a one to use thy self and will, in like manner to be also used of others.

And if it happen at any time for some good, that God vouchsafe to work by
thee, that thou be loved as good, or be praised of others, abide in thy self
well collected, and move not one whit from the aforesaid verity and justice,
and turn thy self first unto God, saying this in thy heart: let it not please
thee (O Lord) that I steal from thy goodness. And afterward turning thy
thoughts to him that praised thee, say within thy self: whence does it
proceed that this man thinks me good, if my God be only truly good? and if
thou do thus, and give unto God that which is his, he will no doubt dispose
thee unto greater grace.

That in the spiritual Battle we ought never to persuade our selves to have
overcome our enemies, but always as new combatants to renew our exercises.

Chap. 20.
I Advertise thee O daughter that thou never persuade thy self to have gotten
the victory over any passion, although a long time thou do not feel in thy
self the motions of the same. But as a new warrior, and as a child newly borne
for to fight: renew always thy exercises, as at the first, as if thou had
done hitherto nothing. And so much the rather, for if we behold the perfection,
whereunto God does call us, although we have gone never so far in the way of
virtue, yet shall we not dare to say that we are so much as entered into the
first bounds thereof: besides that, sometimes that is a vice, which through some
secret pride seems unto us a virtue.

Of Prayer.

Chap. 21.
WE have by the help of God, treated of the distrust of our selves, of
confidence in God, and of exercise: which are three necessary things to obtain
the victory of our passions. Now follows the fourth, that is, Prayer, the
only and potent mean to obtain any good thing, from the most bountiful hand
of our Lord and Savior. And to the end that this thy prayer, may be effectual
and acceptable to God, it is needful that thou have the habit of these things
following.

First, that there be in thy heart an earnest desire to serve God, in such
manner as may best please him.

Secondly, a lively faith, that God will give thee all that is needful for his
service, and thy good.

Thirdly, that thou go to prayer with intention to will the will of God, and
not thine, as well in demanding, as in obtaining that which thou do demand,
that is to say; that thou be moved to prayer, because God does will it, and
that thou desire to be heard, because thou hopest that such is his will. And
finally, thy intention ought to be, to join thy will with the will of God, and
not to draw the will of God unto thine.

Fourthly and lastly, thou must join with prayer the exercise, to overcome thy
self in such sort, that the one as in a circle may follow the other: for
otherwise to demand any virtue, and not to labor by all means possible to
obtain it, should be rather to tempt God then otherwise. After thy prayer have
a firm and lively trust in God, that through his bounty he will grant thee the
grace demanded, or some other greater, or both together: although it should be
slow in coming, and that thou should see the contrary signs, neither for
all this thou ought to leave off thy prayer, and confidence.

Yea the more thou seem to be put back, the more do thou humble thy self in
thine own sight, and increase thy faith in God, the which continuing firm and
steadfast, by how much it is the more tried, by so much it is more dear unto
God. And afterward render always thanks unto God, acknowledging him for
good, wise, and loving nothing the less even when thou doubtest that thou art
not heard, as if thou had indeed obtained the grace requested, remaining
stable and joyful in every event, in the humble submission unto his infallable
providence.

What thing mental Prayer is, and in what sort it is to be made.

Chap. 22.
Mental Prayer is a lifting up of the mind unto God with a virtuall, or
actual demanding of that which is desired.

By virtuall is meant, when the mind is lifted up to God, to obtain any grace,
showing unto him our needs without any words, or discourse; as when I lift up
my mind unto God, and there in his presence acknowledge my unableness to do
any thing that is good, and to defend my self from evil: and this
acknowledging thus made before God, is a prayer virtually demanding that which
is needful unto me.

There is also another kind of virtual mental prayer, more restrained, that is
made with a simple look of the mind unto God, which is no other thing, but a
quiet remembrance and demand of that grace which in former (...) we have
demanded. And see that thou learn well this sort of prayer, and make it
familiar unto thee, because (as experience will teach thee) it is a weapon
which easily in every occasion and place, thou may have ready at hand, and it
is of great value, and help unto thee.

The actual demand is made, when with words of the mind grace is asked, in
this or in the like manner; my Lord my God, for thy glory give me this grace
or benefit. Or thus: O Lord I do believe that it is thy pleasure that I demand
this virtue of thee; accomplish in me this thy divine pleasure. And sometime
thou shall present before his majesty the enemy which fights with thee, and
with all thy weakness, to resist him, saying: behold O Lord thy creature, the
workmanship of thy hands, redeemed with thy precious blood, behold also thy
enemy and mine, who assaieth to take me from thee, and to devour me. To thee O
Savior I run, in thee only I trust, thou see my weakness to resist, and my
promptness voluntarily to yield unto him if I want thy help.

Of Prayer by the way of Meditation.

Chap. 23.
IF thou will pray for a certain space of time, as half an hour, an hour,
or more; thou shall join to thy prayer, the meditation of the life and passion
of Christ, applying always his actions to that virtue, which thou most
desire: as for example; thou desire to obtain the grace and virtue of
patience, and peradventure thou will meditate upon some points of the passion,
how our Lord was spoiled of his garments most cruelly, and his sacred flesh
rent, of cleaving fast unto them: how the crown of thorn was taken from his
head; and afterward fastened upon the same again: how he was nailed upon the
cross: how hanging (...) the hard wood, he was lifted up on high, with
extre^me grief of all his most sacred wounds, and of all his most holy body,
and other points: to which points first of al thou shall apply thy senses to
feel the pain, which in every part, and in the whole together, our Lord did
feel.

From hence thou shall pass to his most sacred soul, penetrating, as much as
thou can, the patience and meekenes, with the which he suffered so great
afflictions; never satisfied for all that, in his great desire of suffering,
for the honor of his father, and our benefit greater and more cruel torments.
Behold him afterward how he is inflamed with a fervent desire, that thou
resolve willingly to suffer thy present travail: and how he turns to his
father, and prays for thee, that he will vouchsafe to give thee grace, to
suffer patiently the cross that then thou do sustain, and what other thing
whatsoever. Afterward bending thy will many times to resolve to suffer, turn
thy mind to God the Father, and demand of him the virtue of patience, by the
same prayer of his dear Son for thee.

Of another manner of Prayer by way of Meditation,

Chap. 24
THou may also pray and meditate in any other manner, and that is this: when
thou shall have considered attentively the passions, and the travails which
thy Savior did suffer, and having applied thy senses to feel them, and with
thy thought penetrated the promptnes of mind, wherewith he did suffer from the
greatness of his sorrow, and of his patience: thou shall proceed to two other
considerations: the one of the merit of the same Savior: the other of the
co^tentment of the eternal Father, that he took in the perfect obedience of
his Son. The which two things represented to the same Father: in their
virtue thou shall demand the grace that thou desire. And this like demand,
thou may make, not only in every mystery, but also in every particular
internal, or external action, which the same our Lord at any time performed.

Of Meditation Of another manner of prayer by means of the B. Virgin.

Chap. 25.
BEsides the aforesaid, there is another way to meditate and pray by means of
the most holy mother of our Lord: turning first thy mind to the Father,
afterward to the Son, and last of all, to the said glorious Virgin.
Touching the Father, consider two things, and present them before him, that is,
the delights which from the beginning he of himself did take in her, even
before she had her being in this world: and in her virtues and actions after
she was brought forth into the world.

About the delights thou shall thus meditate, lift up thy self on high with
thy thought above al time, and above every creature, and being entered into the
very eternity, and mind of God, consider the delights and joy that himself
did take in the virgin Mary, and her perfections, and finding God amidst these
delights, by the virtue of them, securely demand grace and force to destroy
thy enemies, and particularly, that ennemie which does then assail thee.

Proceeding afterward to the considerations of her so great and singular
virtues and actions, sometimes present unto the sight of the eternal Father,
some of them particularly, sometimes al of them together. And for these in like
manner crave of this divine goodness, that which thou desire. And concerning
the Son, thou shall offer to his sight, that virginal womb, which did bear
him nine mo neths, the reverence with the which the tender Virgin after his
birth adored him, and did acknowledge him true man, and true God, her son,
and creator, the pitiful eyes wherewith she beheld him, so poor the arms
which embraced him, the kisses she gave him, the milk wherewith she nourished
him, the great trauelles and sorrows, that in his life, and at his death she
sustained for him. By virtue of which things, thou shall use a sweet violence
to her beloved son that he may hear thee. Turn thy self afterward to the
B. Virgin, and put her in mind, how that by the eternal wisdom and
goodness of God, she was chosen for mother of grace, and of pity, and our
advocate, wherefore we have not (next unto her blessed son) more potent
recourse than unto her. And moreover bring into her mind, that verity which
of her is both known and written, that never any has faithfully called upon
her to whom she has not pitifully answered.

Finally, thou shall lay before her the travels of her only son, beseeching
her, that to the glory and content of him, they may take that effect in thee,
for which they were sustained.

How to meditate by mean of the Angels, and of all the B. Saints.

Chap. 26.
The Aungelles, and all the Saints in heaven may be another potent means, the
which will serve thee two manner of ways. The one is, that thou turn thy
self to the eternal father, and present unto him the love and praises,
wherewith he is exalted by all the celestial court, and the labors and
trauells which the Saints have sustained for him in earth, and in the virtue of
al these things crave thou his divine aid. The other is, that thou have
recourse to those glorious sprits, as to them that do, not only desire thy
perfection, but also, that thou may be placed in a most high room amongst
them, demand their succor in thy combat against vice, and sometimes also
their defense at the hour of thy death.

Thou shall also now and then purposely considder the many and singular graces
they have received of the highest Creator, stirring up in thy self a lively
feeling of love, and joy that they posses so great gifts, as if the same were
thine own, yea and more also thou shall rejoice that they, and not thou had
them, since that the will of God was so. And that thou may do this exercise
with the better order, and more facility, thou shall divide the quiers of that
blessed company, by days of the week in this manner:

The Sunday thou shall take the nine quiers of Angels. Monday, S. John Baptist.
Tuesday, the Patriarks and Prophets. Wednesday, the Apostles. Thurseday, the
Martires. Friday, the Bishopps, with the other Confessors. Saturday, the
Virgins, with the other holy women.
But omit not any day to have recourse to the glorious Virgin, to thy
Angels guardian, to S. Michael the Archangel, and to some other Saint, to whom
thou must have par ticular devotion.

Of meditation of Christ crucified, to stir up our affections.

Chap. 27.
HItherto I have treated of Prayer and of Meditation of Christ crucified, by
way of prayer, now I will treat of the same meditation, to show thee how thou
may gather out certain affections, whereof I will here set down some.

Thou do purpose to meditate for example the coronation of our Savior in
this these points may be taken.

How our Savior in scorn was clad with purple.

How his reverent head was crowned with thorns, and smitten with a reed.

How his divine face was spit upon.

How the King of eternal glory adored in heaven with so many legions of
Angels, was in earth with fained reverence and honor scorned and mocked by a
most vile and infamous people.

By these or other points if thou be desirous to kindle in thy heart, the
affection of love, enforce thy self with meditation of them, to increase more
and more in the knowledge of the infinite goodness of thy Lord, and of his
love toward thee, who for thee has suffered so much, and also to inflame thy
self more and more in a loving affection toward him: out of this same goodness
and love of his, thou may easily bring forth in thy self contrition, and
sorrow for having offended so good and loueing a Lord, who for thy iniquity
was thus evil handled, and abused in so diverse manners.

To raise thy self in hope consider that a Lord so great was brought to such
misery, to deliver thee from the snares of sin, and of the devil, to
reconcile his eternal Father unto thee, and to give thee firm confidence, in
all thy need, to have recourse unto him.

In like manner thou shall procure spiritual joy, by passing from his pains
to their effects: that is, considering that by them he purged thy sins, and
the sins of the whole world, he pacified the wrath of his father, drove away
the prince of darkness, killed death, brought unto the fold again the
strayed sheep, and filled again the vacant seats of Angels. Moreover move thy
self to joy by memory of that joy that the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, and all the Church triumphant, and millitant thereby received.

To move thee to sorrow and compassion of thy most afflicted Savior, besides
the meditation of the aforesaid pains of his body, enter with thy thought to
other greater, of his most sacred soul. That he knowing the most high dignity
and goodness of his father* and loving him above all understanding, did grieve
above measure for the offenses of his creatures committed against him: and
moreover he sustained inspeakable sorrow, for so many precious souls, that he
did see should be condemned eternally for their sins.

And besides this, that sword of sorrow did pearce his heart, that pierced the
heart of his most afflicted mother.

And his tender heart felt exceeding grief for the torments, that he did
foresee in his eternal wisdom, so many Martyrs and tender virgins were to
suffer for his love.

Besides this advise (that in all these sorrows, thou have to take compassion
of thy Savior in such manner as I have said) withal I advertise thee, yea the
same Savior does also require of thee, that thou have another kind of more
true compassion, the which is, that thou attend hereafter to persecute thy self
wills, which have caused these his wounds, the which thou may as it were
anoint with sorrow for thy ingratitude.

But to move thee to the hatred of sin, thou shall apply all the points of thy
meditation to this end only, as if thy Lord and Savior had suffered for no
other end, but to enduce thee to hate thy evil inclinations, and that evil
especially which does most molest thee, and most displease his divine
goodness.

Last of all, to move thee to admiration, consider attentively who he is that
suffers, to wit, the word incarnate, the same God, who for thee was made
man, for whom he suffered, for us most vile creatures, that always have
offended him. Of whom he suffered; of all kind of most wicked people, and the
refuse of the common sort. The pains that he suffered, and they are most
unworthy, full of shame, and of torment, great and horrible above al
estimation. And that thou may more marvel, weigh well the manner and the
mind wherewith he suffered. But believe that thou art not able to comprehe^d it
as it was indeed, since that it passes all understanding, how that poor and
most humble Savior amongst so many anguishes and shames showed an in uincible
patience, and toward those cruel minds fierce and enraged against him, he
always kept the same heart full of sweetness, and pure love.

Of sensible Devotion, and of Ariditie, or Drienesse.

Chap. 28.
SEnsible Devotion proceeds sometimes of nature, sometimes of the devil, and
sometimes of grace; by the fruits thou shall know from whence it comes: for
if there folownot in thee amend meant of life, thou art to doubt lest it be of
the devil, or else of nature: and so much the more, by how much it shall be
accompanied with greater taste of sweetness.

And therefore when thou shall perceive thy mind to be sweetened with spiritual
taste, stand not to dispute, from whence it comes, nor leave unto it, neither
let thy self be drawn from the knowledge of thy nothing: and with greater
diligence, and hatred of thy self, remove from thy heart, all affection of what
thing soever, desiring God only, and his pleasure: for by this mean, whether
it be of nature, or of the devil, it will become to thee as of grace.

Ariditie or Drienesse may proceed in like manner from the three aforesaid
causes: from the devil, for to make thy mind lukewarm, and draw it back
from the spiritual exercise, to worldly delights, of our selves through our
fault and negligence: of grace, either to admonish us, that we be more
dilligent to leave every occupation that is not of God, and that tends not to
him: or to unite our selves more nearely unto him, with a full resignation of
our selves even in spiritual delights, to the end that our affection being
fastened to these things, we may not divide our heart which he would have wholly
to himself.

Therefore if thou feel thy self dry or cold, enter into thy self, and see
for what defect the sensible devotion is withdrawn from thee, and wage batle
against that, not to recover the sensibility of grace, but to take away that
which displeseth the eyes of God. And see that in no sort, thou leave off thy
spiritual exercise; but continue them with all thy force, though they seem
unto thee never so unprofitable, and be willing to drink of that bitter cup
which that drines presents unto thee; the which although it should be
sometimes accompanied, with so many obscurities, and such thick darkness of
mind, that thou know not whither to turn thee, nor what course to take, yet
nevertheless, content thy self with present desolation, and stand firm in
thy cross, far off from all earthly delights, although they should be
offered unto thee, by the world, or by creatures, conceal thy passion from any
person, except thy ghostly father (if thou may have access unto him) unto whom
thou shall discover it, not to have comfort, but to be instructed how to
support it according to the pleasure of God. As for thy receiving, prayers, and
other spiritual exercises, or what other thing soever, use them not to ease
thy pain, but to receive strength to suffer it: and if thou be not able
through the confusion of thy mind, to help thy self with thy understanding,
to pray, supply with a good will and with iaculatorie prayers, and lifting
up thy mind often to God: and above al, suffer the burden of thy Aridity thy
dryness with patience and humble resignation, for this above all others is
prayer most acceptable to God. Thus if thou will do, thou shall be truly
devout, true devotion being a readiness of will, to follow Christ with thy
cross on thy shoulder, by which way soever he inuiteth and calls us unto
him, and to will God for God; and sometimes to leave God for God. And if by
this many spiritual persons, and especially women would measure their profit,
and not by sensible devotion, they would not grieve so unprofitably, and also
ungratefully at this good turn which our Savior does sometimes unto them, and
they would attend with more feruor to follow his divine will, which wholly
woorketh to our benefit.

And in this also they much deceive themselves, but particularly women, that
when they are molested with fearful thoughts, they are confoun ded and
discoraged, believing that they are wholly forsaken of god (not understanding,
that in a mind full of such thoghts, his divine spirit can dwell) and they
remain much dejected, and almost become desperate, easily leaving off all good
exercise: whereby they show themselves little grateful to GOD, who permits
this temptation in them to bring them to a more clear knowledge of themselves:
and that they like distressed persons might draw near unto him.

That which thou ought to do in such a case, is this, that thou enter into a
deep consideration of thy wicked inclination, the which God would have thee to
know, to be so rea die to all evil, that without his help thou woulst fall
down headlong.

Afterward begin to receive hope and confidence, seeing that thy God by this
danger which he does show thee, would draw thee more near him, with prayer and
with recourse to him, for which thou art bound to render him humble thanks.

And understand, that such thoughts are better driven away, with a skillful and
patient sufferance* then with an anxious resistance.

How the most Blessed Sacrament is a most potent means to overcome our
passions.

Chap. 29*
THe most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist is received for diverse ends, but if
thou will particularly receive it for aid to destroy thy evil inclinations,
thou shall dispose thy self in this manner.

Before thy receiving, having convenient time, begin ouernight to consider the
desire the son of God has, that thou receive him in the holy Sacrament of
the Alter, thereby to unite himself unto thee, to the end thou may overcome
every vicious passion. This desire in God is so great, that it cannot be
comprehended of any understanding created. But that thou in some sort may
perceive it, consider two things. First how much that great God delights to
be with us, since he calls this his delights, and requires again of us, that
we give him also in like sort our heart. Secondly, consider that he hates
sin above all measure, as an impediment to his union with us, and as
altogether contrary to his infinite perfections: for he being the chief
good, pure light, and all beauty, cannot but hate, and have in great
abomination, sin, which is no other thing but darkness, defect, and the
blot of our fowls.

And the better to imprint in thy mind, this inflamed desire of thy Savior,
turn thy thoughts to the works of the old and new Testament, and
particularly to that of his death, and passion, for all this was wholly
performed to deliver us wretches from our sins, and from every will of ours
that is contrary to him.

Whereupon the illummated servants of God do affirm that our blessed Lord, to
annihilate in us any little passion whatsoever, and self-wil, would again, if
it were needful, expose himself to a thousand deaths.

By the which considerations, knowing the desire thy Savior has, to enter
into thy soul, thou shall stir up in thy self a fervent will to receive
him, with these or such like iaculatory prayers.

Ah, come my Savior, and succor this thy miserable creature against his
adversaries* when will that hour be that I may receive thee? when will the
time come that I comforted by thee the bread of life, shall overcome my own
proper will.

Afterward being strengthened with the hope of the com ming of thy Savior, call
often times to battle that passion, with the which thou dooest fight, and
enforce thy self to repress it with redoubled and disdainefull wills, and to
bring forth afterward, acts of desires, of the virtue contrary to the same
passion. And thus thou shall continue the evening (as I have said) and the
morning after thou shall be awaked.

When the time of receiving comes, a little before thou shall briefly consider
thy defects, and unfaithfulness, which thou have used toward thy Savior, from
the time of thy last recei uing the Blessed Sacrament, and with shamefastness,
and with a holy fear, thou shall be confounded, for thy ingratitude, and
unworthiness. But thinking afterward upon the unspeakable goodness of God
(who although thou have bin rebellious unto him, yet notwithstanding, he
wills that thou receive him) thou shall go confidently to that sacred
banquet. After thou have received, withdraw thy self as soon as thou can
into the closet of thy heart, and lay open to thy Savior thy defects and wants,
saying thus in thy mind: thou see my Savior, how easily I offend thee, and
how much I want, how strong this passion oppresses me, and that it is not
possible that by my self I can be delivered. Therefore this battle is thine,
and from thee only I hope for victory: afterward turn thy self to the
father, and offer up to him, for the same effect, his most blessed Son, whom
now thou have within thee: and with faith expect his divine succor, the which
will not fail thee although thou should not presently feel his help.

How by this same Sacrament we may stir up in us the affections of Love.

Chap. 30.
TO the end thou may stir up in thee with this most holy sacrament the
love which destroys, and consumes all self-will, thou shall turn thy
thoughts to the love of God toward thee; meditating in the night before, how
that great and omnipotent Lord, not contented to have created thee to his own
image and likeness, and to have sent down to the earth his only begotten
Son, to serve thee three and thirty years, in thy iniquities, suffering so
great travails, and the most painful death of the cross to redeem thee, he
would further leave him unto thee, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for thy
food, and for thy needs, in the which most precious gift, to inflame thee
wholly into his love, consider: first the giver, who is God himself, that power,
wisdom, and increated goodness which has no end, whose highness and
perfection infinitely exceed the reach of any understanding created. Secondly
consider the gift which is his only Son of majesty, and of greatness equal
with his father, and of the same substance and nature with him.

Now if a little and vile thing that comes from the hand of an earthly King, be
so much esteemed, and accounted of in respect of the giver, what account shall
be made of this celestial gift, and the same of inco^prehensible excellency,
being indeed the very true Son of God, true God, and given us by God himself.
Moreover lift up thy self to think of the eternity of this Love, by the
which before all times it was decreed in his most high wisdom, to give thee
himself, being an infinite good rejoicing from the bottom of thy heart: reason
thus with thy self; and is it even so, that even in that endless eternity, my
misery was so greatly loved and esteemed, that my God did think upon me, and
desired with an ardent will to give me himself for food? Finally turn thy
thought to the purity of the love, that so great a Lord has showed unto thee,
weigh ing well that it is not as wordly loves are, mingled with some interest of
his, or desert of thine, because only through his own bounty, and charity,
he has wholly given him self to thee.

Thus sweetly pondering with thy self, thou may say in thy heart. Ah my
Lord, wherefore love thou me so much thy unworthy creature? what would
thou with me, O King of Glory, that am but a little dust? I perceive well O
Lord in the fire of thy charity, that thou have one only dissignement, which
shows me thy divine love, to be the purer, since that thou give me thy love
for no other end, but that I may give thee mine, and wholly thou give thee to
me, that I may wholly give my self to thee, and this not for any need that thou
have of me, but because that I living in thee, may by the union of love be
united unto thee, and that the vileness of my earthly heart, may be made one
divine heart with thee. The which thing considered, thou shall offer thy self
to the good pleasure of God, with the greatest affection that possibly thou
can, being ready with an inflamed desire always to follow his most blessed
will. And when thou shall feel this desire well kindled in thee, thou shall see
with thy mind a great will and desire that he has, that the next day
following thou do open thy heart unto him, that he may enter and abide with
thee, and suppe with thee, and delight himself together with thee. Whereupon
thou shall stir up in thy self, a desire to receive him, with these
iaculatory prayers: Ah heavenly and divine Manna, when shall that hour come,
that I may receive thee to thy contentment? When shall I be united unto thee by
true love? When for thee (O life of my soul) shall I forsake all mine own
will, and all my imperfections.

And with these and other like iaculatory prayers, and with consideration of
the points aforesaid, both the evening and the morning, thou shalt kindle
this desire in thee to receive him, to be united unto him, and to please him.

And see that being collected into thy self, thou keep the powers of thy
soul void and free from all curiosity, vain thoughts, and earthly
affection, and the senses of thy body, as it were fasting from the delight of
their several objects. And after thou have received him, shut up thy self in
the closet of thy heart, and in this, or such like manner talk with thy Savior:
O King of kings, what has brought thee unto me, that am wretched, miserable,
poor, blind and naked? and he will answer thee, Love: O love uncreated, O
sweet love, what desire thou of me? No other thing (says he) but love; no
other fire would I have to burn in the earth of thy heart, but the fire of my
love, that it may consume all other love, and burn up all thy self-will; this
I demand, because I desire to be wholly thine, and that thou may be wholly
mine. The which ca^ never be whilst thou not making a full resignation of thy
self (which so much delights me) still do remain fastened to the love
of thy self, and to thine own judgment, and conceits, to every little will
of thine, and to the reputation of thy self.

I demand of thee the hatred of thy self, for to give thee my love, I demand
thy heart, that it may enter, and unite it self with mine, for this was the
cause why mine was opened upon the cross. I desire of thee (O my loving
soul) that thou will nothing, think nothing, understand nothing, see nothing,
out of me, so that I also may will, understand, think, and see all things in
thee, in such manner that thy nothing may be swallowed up in the depth of my
infinite goodness, and be converted into it. And thus thou shall be in me most
happy, and I content in thee.

In the end after this, thou shall offer to God the father, his son, for thy
self, for the whole world, and for the souls departed, with the memory and
union of that oblation which then he made of himself, when he hanged bloody
upon the cross. And thou may in this manner offer up all the sacrifices which
are offered up that day in the holy Church.

Of spiritual Receiving.

Chap. 31.
ALthough thou can not receive thy Savior more then once a day sacramentally,
notwithstanding thou may receive him spiritually, every hour and moment.
And this cannot be taken from any creature, but by their own negligence, or
other voluntary fault. And sometimes it may prove, that this spiritual
receiving shall be more profitable to our selves, and acceptable to God, then
many other Sacramental receiuings in respect of the wants, and defects of them
that receive. Therefore how often soever thou shall dispose and prepare thy self
to this spiritual receiving, thou shall find the Son of God ready with his
own proper hands to feed thee spiritually with himself. And thou may
prepare thy self in this manner.

Turn thy self to him for this end; and briefly consider thy defects, be
sorry that thou have offended him, and with a loving affection, crave of him,
that he will vouchsafe to come into thy poor soul to feed it with himself: or
otherwise, when thou go about to use violence to thy self, or to mortify
any passion in thee or to exercise any act of virtue, do it to this end, and
turn thee to thy Savior, and call upon him with a fervent desire in the secret
of thy soul. Or again, finally, calling to mind the last time that thou did
receive before, say with an inflamed desire: when (my god) shall I receive thee
another time in the Scrament of the alter? ah why come thou not now with the
same virtue spiritually unto me?

Of Thanksgiving.

Chap. 32.
BEcause all the good we do is of God, and from God, we are bound to render
unto him alone humble thanks, for every good action of ours, and victory, and
for all his benefits particular and common. And to do this in dumaner, consider
the end that moves our Lord to give his graces unto us; for upon this
consideration, depen death the true giving of thanks. And because in every
benefit our Lord intends principally his honor, and our profit: acknowledge
first of all his power, wisdom, and goodness, which appears in the benefit
Then consider, that in thee, there is not any thing worthy of the benefit: yea
nothing else but demerit and gratitude. And sinally obey his divine will,
performing that which he in lieu of the benefit requires of thee: to witre,
that thou serve and love him. And therefore add hereunto a full and entire
oblation of thy self, the which thou shall do in this manner following.

Of the oblation of thy self.

Chap. 33.
TO the end that the offering of thy self may be acceptable to God, consider
that his blessed Son whilst he lived on earth, not only always offered up
himself, and all his works, but us also together with himself, to his
eternal Father.

When therefore thou will offer up thy self to God, first look upon Christ
our Lord, how at this day he offers up himself in the aforesaid manner, and
make thy offering in the virtue, and union of his; or rather make that very
self same offering of Christ, wherein he included thine. And more then this,
let this thy offe ring be without propriety, or any part of thy own interest,
not respecting, either earthly or heavenly goods, but the pure will of God, and
divine providence, unto the which thou ought to submit thy will, and to
sacrifice thy self a perpetual holocaust, and thus for getting every creature,
thou shall say, behold my Savior and Creator, a piece of clay in the hand of
thy divine providence; make of me that which seems best to thee: and
pleases thee in life, in death, and after death, as well in time, as in
eternity.

So in like manner, when thou will offer up thy fastings, pray ers, or other
good works, behold how the Son of God, does offer to his Father the same
fastings of thine, thy prai ers, and works, together with his own, and then
being thus united and offered up by his Son, do thou also offer them, and
thou shall know, that thy oblations do proceed from a sincere heart, when
thou shall make them in time of adversity, which thou do patiently suffer,
and when with effects and deeds thou shall execute the divine pleasure. And
when thou will offer up the works of Christ to his father, for thy spiritual
debts, thou shall do it in this manner.

Look first upon thy sins confusedly or sometimes in particular. And seeing
plainly, that it is not possible, that thou can of thy self pacify the
wrath of God, nor satisfy his divine justice, thou shall have recourse to the
life and passion of our Lord and Savior, thinking upon some work or pain of
his: as for example; when he did fast pray, or shed his blod, where thou shall
con sider, that for to pacify his father toward thee, and for the debt of
thine iniquity, he does offer up that work or pain, as it were, saying:
behold O eternal Father, that I do satisfy thy divine justice fully for the
sins of N. may it please thy divine majesty to forgive him and to receive
him into the number of thy elect, and at that present time, offer thou up for
thy self and for others, that same offering and prayer to God the father,
humbly beseeching him, that in the virtue of them and to his honor, he will
forgive thee al thy sins, and this thou may do; not only passing from one
mystery to another, but even from one act also to another of every mystery.

The Conclusion.
THere might be many other things said concerning this exercise of so great
importance; but let this suffice, forasmuch as now I am able to discourse unto
thee, which for all that thou shall find to be not alittle, if thou do
force thy self to effect the things which I have propounded. But respecting
the capacity of thy understanding, and the brevity which was needful for me
to use, it behooves thee to join thereunto an attentive consideration; for
thereby (but much more by continual exercise and practice) thou may get
always greater strength and force by thy victory.

Resolve thy self courageously in the name of God to take up thy weapons: for
this is a battle that no man can fly and he that does not fight, of necessity
remains vanquished and slain: and hope of peace there is none; since thou
have to deal with those enemies that most cruelly kill them, who most seek to
join in friendship with them. Be not dismayed because they are fierce and
mighty, seeing that all their might and force is in the hand of that captain,
for whose honor thou do fight: and in this battle none can loose but he
that will for himself: and if thy Lord whom thou do wage this battle,
should not so readily grant thee the victory, yet faint not; for thou
ought to be more then assured (and this also shall help thee to fight
confidently) that he by his goodness and power, turns all things even those
that seem most contrary (be they of what sort soever) unto the good of his
faithful warriors. Therefore if thy victory be prolonged, rest assured, that it
is either to deliver thee from pride, and to keep thee under; or to the end,
thou may increase in virtue, and become a more expert, and well practiced
soldier, or for some other good of thine, which he then for thy profit hides
from thee.

Thou therefore my dearest daughter, that thou may not be ungrateful to this
Lord which loves thee so much, and for thee has suffered death, and ouercom
the world; take this battle in hand with a coragious heart, and attend
according to the good pleasure, and commandment of thy captain, to the total
destruction of al thy enemies, for if thou leave but one alive, it shall be as a
chip in thy eye, or a lance in thy bowels, which shall hinder thee in the
course of so glorious a victory.

Pugnabis contra eos vsque ad internecionem i. reg. xxv

Sit nomen Domini Jesus benedictum


