NATVRALL PHILOSOPHY: OR A DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD, NAMEly, Of Angels, of Man,
of the Heavens, of the Air, of the Earth, of the Water and of the Creatures in
the whole World.

2. KING. 4.34. He spoke of Trees, from the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even
to the Rosemary that springs out of the wall: He spoke also of Beasts, and of
Foul, and of creeping things, and of Fishes.

These little leaves the Worlds huge load sustain,
And what besides the great World can contain.
LONDON Printed by I. D. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at the South
Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1621

TO THE HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM PARSONS Knight, Barronet, his Maties Survayor
General, Commissioner in the Court of Wards, and one of his Maties most
Honorable Privy Counsel of Ireland, etc.
HONORABLE Sir,
I do present to your view a small frame of the world, and of the Creatures
therein contained, drawn with the Pensilles of judicious Scribon, and of D. W.
A work in nature not unlike to our Survayes in Ireland, that represent most
lively, vast Countries within a small Map. I offer this to you, having
heretofore given you an account of those services that I have lately done in
the survay of Ireland, you being Survayor General of that Kingdom, wherein I
have spent the most part of thirty years, in the service of my Prince and
Country, Tam Mart quam Mercurio, both with Pike and Pen, with great toil,
much hazard, and many hurts, but little profit. Notwithstanding your demerits
and worth be such, as Gratitude has chosen your Patronage: and Devotion
wishes all honor, health, and happiness to you, to my good Lady, and to yours.

At your HONORS Command, I: WYDOVVES alias WOODHOVSE.

PHILOSOPHY is a knowledge of Natural things. Things (her subject) either
are he who alone is; from, by, and for whom all things are: or else such they be
as are numbered by time, and measured by place, and subject unto motion. God is
a Spirit infinitely good and great. God is but one divine Essence, consisting
of three distinct Persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The actions
of God are either, the Creating or Governing of the world. The World consists
either of things invisible, as of Spirits or Visible, as the heavens, the
elements, and the bodies composed of elements. The heaven of the blessed, vide
Genesis 1.1. is counted the third heaven, the Orbs are the second, the Air is
counted the first. The third Heaven visible is of al substances most perfect.
The invisible Spirits, viz. Angels were created here. Angel signifies a
messenger, by nature he is a spirit. Angels appear sometime in dreams and
visions, sometime in bodies apparent, and sometime in true and real bodies,
their number is great; their office is to celebrate Gods glory, to watch over
the world, to preserve us, to declare and do Gods will, to put good motions
into our minds, to resist ill spirits. The Devils were Angels cast from heaven
for sin, into the lower parts of the World, and here they continue seeking to
deface the Image of God in man and all creatures.

THings visible contained in the world, are Substances, or Accidents. Accidents
are either general to all things, as motion, time, and place, for these belong
to all: or proper to some things, as Qualities.

There be two kind of Mouers, 1. God. 2. Things created by him.

Things created move from God, and are of finite power in moving in a prefixed
matter, and in time* they be of two kinds, without, or within the thing moved;
the one called violent, the other natural: Motion is an imperfect act, moving
to that it was not, from that it was: Five things are in natural motion, the
mouer, the thing moved, the term from which, the term to which it is moved,
and time.

There be six kinds of motion, generation, corruption, increase, decrease,
alteration of quality, and change of place.

Qualities are either manifest, or secret: Manifest are either principal, or
such as proceed from them: the chief of the principal, are heat and cold.

Heat gathers together things of one kind, and seperateth things of
contrary nature; as Gold from Silver or dross. Cold joins together things,
as the frost in winter.

The weaker qualities are moisture and dryness. Moisture is hardly contained
in his own bounds. Drines keeps his own bounds, as for example, Earth etc.

Qualities coming from the first are either seconds or wrought from them.

Second qualities from one or more, are derived.

From Heat comes Rarity, and Leuity. For Heat opens and enlarges the
poores.

Raritas or Thinnes is that which has hollow parts or spongie, as a sponge,
clouds etc.

Lightness proceeds from heat, drawing easily upward. Thicknes and heaviness,
are of cold. For cold gathers together, and stops bodies, by which,
bodies become heavy.

Thicknes has his parts shut up together as stones

Heaviness, moves downwards: thus is Mercury, heavier then gold, and gold
then Lead.

Tactile or qualities that may be touched: coming from moisture, are softnes:
and tenuitie from the Air: smoothnes and sliperines from the water.

From dryness proceed hardness and roughnes, easines in breaking and drought.

From the first qualities diversely disposed, arise others called sensible
qualities.

Their Original is obscure or more manifested.

Qualities of obscure original, are such as do not always plainly and
clearly declare the ground whence they arise. Of this nature are collors:
which is the splendour of the body, illustrated by light, with which all bodies
are dyed according to their moystnes, decocted more or less apt to receive
greater, or smaller light. Color, is either simple or mixed.

A Simple color consists of none other, as black and white.

White consists of much light in a thin body, of an Ayery moisture well
concocted.

Black, is in a thick body containing but small light, of moisture either a
dust or raw watrish mixed with the earth: as appears in the iner parts of the
earth.

Mixed colors are from these two, mingled either in a mean or unequal
portion, of equal mixture is red. Other are made of this mean, and one of the
extremes. Yeallow is of much white and a little red, viz. two parts of white
and one of red, Saffron color or Orang-tawny, is of greater redness, and of
lesser whiteness.

Purple is of much red, and less black. Green is of much black and less
red. This being a clear moisture is most pleasant to the eye.

Qualities, of a more manifest original are perceived in smells and tastes.
Taste is made from the straining of dryness, through moisture is either hott or
cold, in a high or meanest degree. Very hot tastes are biting, bitter or salt.

Tastes meanly hot are sweet: Cold tastes are either thicker or thinner, thick
as sour and sharp: or thin as tartnes: where also we place freshness.

Smell, is a quality coming from a dry earthly heat, made thin by mixture of
vapors. If it be well mingled, it is good: if not, it is stinking.

These qualities come from the first, there are others that come by Means from
the first, such are, generating flesh by dryness, and binding in, healing and
joining together, but more moderate. Hid qualities are only known by long
experience, coming from the form and essence of a thing, which in most things
makes is hard to discern. Hid qualities are either in bred or passionate.
Native or in bred, come from forms taking their original from heaven, and
therefore are governed, most according to the position of the heavens and
stars, being of most efficacy in their subject matter rightly prepared, and at
certain times.

As the Lodestone in drawing Iron. The Pionie for falling sickness, Polypody
in the diseases of the liver, etc.

Passionate qualities, are effected by an agreeing or disagreeing concord.

Concord is the natural agreement of things, whereby a feirce Bull tied to a
fig tree is made gentle.

An Olife taken up and replanted by a virgin, brings forth abundance of
fruit.

Ocymum a Pulse, being at the sowing banned grows the better: The bleeding of
a dead body at the presence of the killer. Discord in natural things, whereby
the horse-fly is killed with the smell of roses, so goats are poisonous unto
plants.

Natural things are simple or compact: Simple are stable or unconstant, stable
are the heaven and stars. Heaven is as it were a vaulted body made of water,
think like a skin and moveable.

The firmament is the orb of the moveable heaven: containing the world, which
consists of Ethereall and elementall parts.

The Ethereall part compasses the Elemental: and is not variable: it
contains, 10* spheres, and is in continual motion being moved from the East
to the West in 24. hours and makes the natural day. A star is a firm
essence, in heaven, giving light. One star is brighter then another, and they
are of diverse motion, either simple, as from west to the east, or diverse, as
their variable motion, north and south: and they have their opperation over
inferior bodies, which they work by themselves, or by aspect with others;
which is either coniunct, or opposite: coniunct, is either in the same or
several places:... carecters be of conjunction. Sextile Trine quadrat:
opposition aspects. Their Poetic rising or falling is either true or apparent,
the true is Acronicke, which is of such stars as rise and set about the sun
setting: Cosmick ascend with the and set with the sun rising. Those stars
which rise Cosmically fall Acronically. Apparent rising is called Helical which
is of stars getting out of the sun beams, and so if the star get into the
beams at setting: or when any star sets with the sun. Stars are either
fixed or wandering, fixed are the stars of the firmament, whose motion is not,
sensible; For in 72. years they move scarce a degree: keeping still one like
distance. Stars are known from planets, by their twinkling. The stars are far
bigger in compass then the earth, and they are of sixfoold order, first bigger
then the earth 107. fold, second 87. third 72. forth 54. fifth 31. sixth 18.
times. These stars are more or less glistering: the most glistering are
disposed into 48. Images and are divided into three parts the zodiac and both
sides thereof. The zodiac contains 12 signs,............ of the East are...
fiery signs North... watery,... Ayery of the West:... earthly Southern signs.
Fiery and Ayery are Masculine: Waterish signs and earthly feminine.

Aries the Ram is the first sign of the Zodiac consisting of 13. stars,
representing the image of a Ram, it has 2 stars in his horn of the 3.
bigness and 3. in his tail, and one in the tippe of his right foot of the 4.
bigness.

Taurus the Bull consists of 32. stars, 5. of these in his forehead are
called Hyades, causing rain, the greatest is called the Bulls eye, being
somewhat pale. 7. stars in his shoulder are little and called Virgiliae, and
Plecides, because they show the time of navigations by their rising in the
spring and setting in the Autum.

Gemini the twins of 18. stars: in each head, is a bright star, called Castor
and Pollux.

Cancer the Crab consists of 9. stars somewhat obscure.

Leo the Lion is a bright sign of 27. stars, one in his heart and one in his
tail, are of the first bigness, near his tail are 7. stars called Berenices
hair.

Virgo the maid with wings of 26. stars, one in her left hand is called
Spica.

Libra the Balance is expressed with 8. stars.

Scorpion has 21. stars of which but 14. are notable.

Sagitarius the Archer consists of 31 stars.

Capricornus the Goat, has 18. stars of which 12. are most conspicuous.

Aquarius the water-bearer of 24. stars, like a man pouring water fourth of
his pitcher, the star in the extreme of the water is of the first bigness.
total. 364.

Pisces, the fishes consist of 34. stars.

The other stars that are not in the Zodiak are either northern or southern
stars.

The Northern Constellations are Cynosura, the little Bear has 7. Stars.
Helice the greater bear has 27 stars, of which 12 are more visible. Draco
the Snake 31. Boots the Heardman 22. betwixt whose legs is Arctur. Ariadnes
Crown 8. Hercules 28. Cepheus 11. The Vultur or Lira 10. The Swan 17.
Cassiopeia 13. Perseus 19. The Carter 13. he bears upon his left shoulder the
Goat, Asculapius 24. The Serpent 18. stars. The Arrow 5. The Eagle 6. The
Dolphin 10. Pegasus 20. The foale 4. Andromeda 23. stars. The Triangle has 4
stars. The total 360.

The Southern constellations are 15. The Whale has 22 stars.

Orion has 38. Eridanus 34. The Hare 12. The great Dog 18. The Whelpe. 2. The
ship 45. Hydra 5. The Crow 7. The Centaure 37. The Wolf 19. The Altar 17. The
Crown 13. The fish 12. stars The total 316.

Plannets are stars in the nearer part of Heaven, and are of diverse motions,
and are therefore called wandering, which motions happen not according to the
course of other stars, because in the spheeres attributed to the several
plannets, they moving themselves circularly are stayed either in their hiest or
loest Absis, or else are made to go backward. Plannets are stayed when at
their set bounds they stay they course and turn to some other part, and so
seem to stand still.

Absis or Aux, the highest place of the plannets, to which being moved, they
can ascend no higher, is called Apogaeon, viz. farthest from the earth.

Absis or Aux the lowest contrary to the other, and nearest unto us, is called
Perigaeon.

Plannets are said to go back, when removing themselves they go not forward
their course, but return back the way they came, in some part.

The virtues and force of Plannets, are as diverse as their motions be: stronger
by the proper habitation of the house, or by conjunction: otherwise they be
weak.

The proper house of each Plannet is that sign of the Zodiac, in which first
at the creation they were placed after the opinion of Astronomers.

Thus far in general. Now some shine with one particular light, other with
more. They that have the same shinning, are moved with equal or unequal
course. Plannets of uneven course have a proper motion to themselves....

Their conjunction is common or special. Common are of these three together,
and it is called the greatest conjunction, this through his slow motion
foresheweth wonders, as Astrologers say, though their grounds are uncertain,
yet we will set down what they say, not all as truths, yet some may be
probable. (Especially the sun regarding) destruction to kingdoms etc. If
such conjunction be in a fiery sign it presageth great drought. In a watery
sign it argues rain, in Aerie mighty tempests. In earthly extreme cold, In
Masculine death of men, In feminine death of women. Special conjunction is
either mean or extreme. Mean of Saturn and Mars betokens wars,
contention, strife of kings and Princes, and to these prosperous successors,
if the dominant be good in conjunction.

The extreme conjunction of Plannets, is great or less, greater of. Juit;.
betokning new sects, and other like. If. be all stronger, shall be for the
best, if. be stronger, then follows loss, tribulation and great discord,
say the Astrologers.

. Saturn is a star of a leaden color, finishing his course in thirty years,
he is a Plannet masculine of cold and dry nature, therefore melancholicke, bad
and not fortunate, whose proper house is in.. governing malancholike persons,
and diseases of that humor, and those of a tough and congealed phleme as Lepry
and Morphew. But if he govern in his proper house in due aspect and degree,
most profitable experiments may be made against these infirmities. His rule
appears in conception of men, as in the first month, and in the eight month
much more. wherefore the child borne in this month through the bad aspect, and
coldness of Saturn can scarce live long, he rules also the lives of men
especially in their end, when old men be cold and full of fleame, as say
Astrologers.

. Jupiter is a bright Plannet, which runs his course in 12. years, his
light is so great, that it causes a shadow, being near the earth, of which he
is called Phaeton: He is hot and moist of nature, good, masculine, and his
house is in. and. he rules over the sanguine, young men and merry sportes, and
over diseases springing of blood not adduft: and rightly disposed In his house,
remedies are best applied for cure of such infirmities. Under his power is the
child in the second, but more in the ninth month, and the child that is then
borne is of long life.

Mars, is the 3 wandering star, in color red or fiery shining his course is 2.
years, is a masculine exceeding hot, schorching and dry nature, after a sort
malignant and unfortunate: His house is and he shows his force most upon
Cholerike persons, and upon motions of youth, stirring to sedition and war:
if he be well disposed in his house in fit aspect and degree there may be
remidies used for the Frenzy, agues, and other hot sicknesses. He governs
the 3. month of conception, and from 40* to 50. of man's age.

Now of stars, that finish their course in like space of time... in a year
space. The Son is the brightest of all wandering stars, appointing seasons,
norishing life, being the fountain of light, of heat and all vital powers,
he is hot and meanly dry, his house is. he rules hot and dry affections, and
therefore in his rule is fit remedy for such.

In man's conception he rules the 4. month and governs from 22. till 41.
years of age by being nearest or farthest from the earth, makes Solsticium,
which is our Summer, and Winter summer is. being in. at the highest, winter
solstic is. being farthest from us the motion of. causes like length of day
and night. in and the Sun in these points of heaven is equally moved in the 6.
signs of our hemisphere, and also in the six opposite, although the points and
times of both Equinoctialls vary and change.

Venus is a very white star, she goes near, sometime before him, sometimes
after him, in the morning going before him, she is called Lucifer, in the
evening, following, she is called Vesperugo and Hesperus. is could and Ayery,
and moist, her house is in and. She loves youth, women, and wives, rules cold
and moist diseases, happning most about the genitalls. Therefore in her house
in due aspect is best remedy for such, she uses her power in the 5. month,
and disposes life, from 14. to 20. years and two, according to Astrologers.

Mercury is the least wandering star somewhat white, his nature is changeable,
and full of turnings, he is hot with the hot, cold with the cold, of the
nature of him with whom he is joined, his house is and and is of force in
merchandise, of which he has his name and mathematickes are under his rule, he
begins and follows studies, and reports rumors and news. He guides the 6
month, and from 4. to 14. years, if he join with the higher Plannets, he
denounces wett and floods, which also he does meeting Venus in a wet house, in
his proper house, winds etc.

. The Moon is the lowest wandering star finishing her course in 27* days 7.
hours, although this star have light of her own, yet does she borrow her
shining from the Sun. But because her essence or body, is not alike but
thicker in one place, then another, therefore she is not in all places
enlightened alike from the Sun. That part which is turned from the Sun, is
all of it shadowed and darkish, but that which looks upon the. is full of
light and only so much light as stands toward us, seems to gain or lose
light, as it is farther off, or nearer the sun, where as indeed ever the one
half is enlightened from the sun.

The face seems to be enlightened, as joined with or departing from him.

The joined with the in the 4. first days is covered with greater light of the
beams and is called the new Moon, but departing from she appears still more
enlightened, and it is either in part or whole.

In part before and after, the 8 day, called the increase and the wayn of the
Moon. In part less or more, the less is when she is horned, or half moon
about the 4. day, being distant from 2. signs, and after 8. in the 26. day,
the half is seen about the 7. day and after 22. day when she is distant 3.
signs or degrees from. The greater apparition of the Moon in part is, she
being near her roundnes, which is about the 11 day and after the 19. day
distant from 4 signs.

The full apparition of is when in a right line she is opposed to at 14 days
or full Moon. Although she finish her couse in the foresaid time in the circle
of the Zodiac, yet is allowed to every Moon 29: and a half day, because she
is to pass forward 2 days and 4 hours, before she can overtake the which
makes 29 days, 12 hours, And in 9 year she ends all her diversity of
conjunctions and aspectes, and a new begineth her former revolution, etc.

A Commet is a wandering star of diverse motions shining in the region of the
Plannets, this appears seldom, sometime above, and some times below the the
Plannets. It foretells grievous accidents.

Others say that a Commet is a fat substance drawn by the heat of the sun
from the earth, and the heat of the highest region of the Air* is set on fire
appearing like a star* and is sometime moved in the air.

It foreshewth war, Pestilence, drought, and barrennes of the earth.

The light of some Plannets sometime fail especially of and The defects happen
in the Zodiac, if these 2. stars be in the knotts of their circles, or near
to them, which knotts are cuttings, made by the course of the and, and is
called the dragon. The higher is called Dragons head, the lower the Dragons
tail. The Ascendant or higher* is where, departing from the middle Zodiac,
does come nearest unto us.

The descendant, when the is removing from us. The Eclipse of those stars is
in whole or part. In whole all being obscured, as in the midst of them.

In part it happenth near one of the knotts.

The Eclipse of, is by coming of between our eyes and the, in the conjunction
of both Plannets.

A great Eclipse of, is when the centure of these stars, proceed in a direct
line to our eye.

The Eclipse of is the depriving her of the light of, in the opposition, the
earth shadowing her, coming in a straight line between them, her Eclipse is
sooner seen in the East, then in the West.

Elements are simple essences, less durable then the heavens, and are the
wombs of mixed things etc.

Of the Elements 2. are clear, air and water. Air, which is cold and moist,
and of these there are described 3. regions, the first is hot and dry, this is
termed the fiery which causes it to be called an Element Air the flame being
but inflamed air, the middle region colder and darker, the third region, in
which we live, is hott or cold, by the more or less reflection of the sun
beams.

Air, is so needful to creatures, that none can live without it, the thinner
the better, and more healthful.

Water, is an element less thin and clear, moist and most cold. Water warmed
in channells in the earth causes hot springs, this is heated by running by
some hott mineralls, and helps moist and cold bodies.

Water, is greater or less. The greatest is the Sea, which is salt, because of
the stars draw forth the thin substance leaving the earth behind. The Ocean
ebbeth and flows after the motion, and from the new moon to the full, humors
increase and after decrease, and the tides are known by the Moon. Particular
Seas take their name of some country, or of some accident, as the red Sea, etc.

Water are in floods or fountains, fountains are best which come of
Mountains, or Rocks, etc.

Waters is of diverse colors and tastes. Milky, Green, Red, Salt, sharp,
bitter, and like wine.

The earth is a thick element, cold and dry, and is immovable, about which all
things move, it is round and althings tend as near the centure as they can.

It is in compass with the water, 21600. miles, and is but as a point to the
whole world.

Concreat and mixte bodies or natures, are essences mixed of parts severally
disposed. For from sundry things of diverse forms, one form may be formed: and
things of one mixture according to the diverse affection of their elements are
diversely affected.

As some are Ayery, some Fiery, and some Earthly, But the proportion makes
temperature, which is a proportion of qualities, cleaving together in mixture,
it is equal or uneven, and is either simple or compound: simple is in act or
power: compound as heat with dryness, etc.

Mixed natures are either liuelesse or living. Liuelesse as meteors which are a
hot smoke lifted up by the attractiue force of stars, some 15. German miles
into the air and no higher: this smoke is a vapor or exhalation* A vapor is
a moist smoke drawn from water and is easily resolved into water. Exhalation
is a dry smoke drawn from the earth, easy to fire, from exhalatio^ arise
fiery impressions which burn like fire, as pillars, darts, candles, goats,
shooting stars, fiery Dragons, dark streams, fools fire, and such like
fiery meteors.

Mixed fiery meteors whose exhalation is somewhat vnpure thicker and long, her
mixture is thunder which is a fiery exhalation, breaking forth of the clouds,
with a sound. Lightening small and great is a flaming light of a burning
exhalation shining before thunder. Though we hear not the thunder, it is at
the present breaking out of the flash, the eye being quicker then the ear. The
great lightening is thicker and burns more, if it be hardened with heat of
the suune, and it self, it makes a stone which is cast out at the crack,
this does much harm.

Lightening is thick or thin, this boreth through without leaving any sign of
it. The thicker scorcheth and burns, it has much earthy matter, setting on
fire steeples and such like, and in great flashes is but some small deal of
this earthy matter, else all things would be fired.

Watery meteors, are vapors more fully compact together, and appear in the
lowest part, or midst of the Air, as clouds and such like. A cloud is a
vapor joined together by the extreme cold of the middle region. Clouds hang
in the Air by the suns heat, which draws them up, and by the moving of the
winds are tossed up and down.

In these Clouds by and, are framed diverse shapes, having no proper matter,
but only appear in the clouds, either about and or opposite to them as:

A false Sun which is imprinted in the cloud by the reflection of his beams,
in a cloud being watrish, so that sometime the shape of 2. or 3* suns are
seen, so of the moon. Bright circles in the clouds, being black, are from
the reflecting beams, seeming to compass the or: yet they are far lower.
These circles appear more often about the moon: she being not able with her
beams to consume these vapors.

The shape in the clouds opposed to the Sun, is the rainbow of diverse
colors, in a hollow, thin and in an unequal cloud, fashioned by reflection
of the suns beams* and the rainbow is greater the nearer it comes to the
Horizon. If many raine-bowes be seen, the latter is made by the shining of the
other, and are more obscure then the former.

The colors of the Rainbow, be light, read, green, sky color and yeallow:
the rainbow is a foreteller of rain, it shows that many vapors are
dissolved, which will shortly be rain. The hayle is like this, but it is
always under the sun.

Meteors of dissolved clouds, are either hardened, or moist as rain, which is
as it were a cloud melted and turned unto water, if the cloud be near the
earth the drops are great, if hie, the drops are smaller. The rayning of
frogs, fish, milk, flesh, and such like, come of such matter being carried
up, which does again fall with the rain as worms etc. are begotten of dead
carkases in summer time.

Meteors made hard, after the cloud has been melted are snow and Hail.

Snow is a cloud, prepared for rain before it fall, being congealed by cold,
is by the motion of the winds dispersed into fleakes, and falls only in
winter.

Hayle is rain, made hard in the fall, the higher the fall, the rounder and
lesser, because in the fall it melts. It hayleth most in Autumn and in the
spring, For then the sharp air, has most power over the drops, and in
winter, the extreme cold makes it snow being yet in the clouds.

In the lowest region of the Air, are dew and frost. Dew is a vapor thickened
with some earthly matter, which in falling is presently turned unto water.

Dew falls only in summer, for then the vapor is dissolved with the Sun.

A fat kind of dew like melting honey, especially at the shining of Syrius being
gathered from leaves of trees, is Manna, called also wild honey, or meldewes.

This Manna hardened by the heat of into lumpes, is called Tereniabin.

Frost is a dewish vapor, made very hard by cold in winter before it be
dissolved.

Meteors made of both kinds of smoke, joined together are winds and such
like.

Wind is a subtle smoke, beaten downward by the cold in the middle of the
air, and is moved sideling on the earth: Ancients noted out 12. principal
winds, all which in regard of matter are hot and dry, but differ for their
situation of their quarter.

The wind being great, carried with force, darkens the Air, and is called a
storm. If it do roll about, it is a Whirle wind, if it be but small, it is
called Air.

An Earthquake is a fume, contained in the earth: when it finds no vent, it
shakes it, and is made according to the breadth or depth of the earth. In
breadth it causes sometime such trembling, that it shakes down whole
cities, that in depth causes a gaping or swelling. A Gaping is when the Earth
opens, as it were her mouth, and does swallow down trees walls etc. A
Swelling is when the earth being lifted up like a mountain, either remains
so or else falls down again.

NAtures mixed perfectly are living and corporal essences, indeued with a
Vegetative soul; A Vegetative soul is a faculty giving life to bodies.
Therefore so long as any part of this shall exercise her power in any body, so
long is that alive, and remains safe. But her chief operation, and so life
it self, consists either in preserving several bodies or whole kinds.
Nourishment is the preserving of several bodies, and is the making of food
received, like to the body norished. Under that name is every thing which is
received to sustain our bodies, of which sort is the air it self.

Some other faculties are required to perfection of nourishment, as concoction,
and his companions: Concoction is a working or framing of nourishment, and it
is made either of temperate, or increased heat of the parts to be nourished.

By temperate heat is made ripening: which is a concoction of nourishment with
moisture, by how much therefore the moisture shall be better tempered with heat,
by so much is the ripening sooner, and more perfect, as in a summer too moist,
the increase of the earth is later made ripe. Concoction arising from greater
store of heat, is either elixation or assation. Elixation is a concoction more
perfectly working the thick or watrish moisture, with a strong moist heat: As
flesh is sod in water, whose moist heat alters and consumes the fomy
moystnes of meat: if this elixation remain imperfect, it is called rawnes,
and the norishment is not refined, for want of moist heat: For it was not of
power to finish concoction.

Assation is concoction, by means of dryer heat fully strengthening the
moisture of nourishment. If this strength of bodies be somewhat weak, it is
called thickning, if concoction be vicious, it is turned unto putrefaction.
Moist and hot things do most easily corrupt, if the bodies be not open to the
Air.

In stopped bodies, heat having no vente is increased. Whence comes
inflammation, which putrefaction does follow, causing greater heat. This of
concoction.

The Companions of concoction, are faculties, fitly serving for the perfection
of it.

Of these, one goes before, the other follows. The former is Attraction and
Retention.

Attraction, is a faculty supplying matter of convenient nourishment, as is
seen in things drawing out of the flesh Arrow-heads or thorns deeply
fastened. So wheat draws water out of an earthen pot, it being set upon the
heap. Retention which retayneth norishment, until it be concocted, and does
norish the body. Nourishment, is first put to and afterward united. The
companion following concoction is expulsion.

Expulsion, is a driving back of unprofitable matter: when concoction is once
made, it is within or without the body. Within, when the stronger thrust
superfluities to the weaker, until they come to the weakest of all. Increase
which is joined to the nourishment, is continued but to a certain age, and
then the nourishing growing weak it cease. Now follows conservation of the
whole stock.

Generation is a faculty of the body, procreating any thing like to it self.
This faculty preserves all kinds of things in their estate, though
continually they perish.

The object of generation, is the procreating seed of every thing.

The changing faculty, alters the seed into parts of the body to be begotten.

The Ministerial virtues of this faculty, of generation, do change or form.

The forming faculty fashioneth the thing into distinct form.

THe Vegetative soul being explained: now follow the kinds of such natures
as have persit, or imperfect growth. Those of imperfect growth are Mettalles
which are decocted in the veins of the earth. Mettalls are to be melted easily
or hardly. Those that are easy to be dissolved, are either first, or such as
spring from them.

Principal, or first, are of themselves from the original, as brimstone and
Quicksiluer.

Brimstone is the fatt of the earth with fiery heat decocted unto his
hardenesse, which is the cause that it so speedily is enflamed, and burns
even in water, yea sooner then the fat of the Beasts, which though it be fatter
then Brimstone yet is it far colder. So that for his fat drines, it helps
scabbes of all kinds, and the leprie.

That Brimstone is counted the best, which is green and clear.

Quicksiluer is a slimy water, mixed with a pure white earth, which metal for
the matter whereof it does consist, is thin, cold and heavy.

It is in continual motion, and his thinness causes that it peirceth
mettalls.

Mettalls derived from the first, are more or less pure, purer, are Gold and
Silver. Gold is a metal made of most subtle and pure red Brimstone, and of
the like quicksiluer. Gold has the most perfect mixture, as it is most thin,
so it is most solid, whose substance is not corrupted, with either earth,
water or air, nor consumed with fire, but is more purged in it.

And for his thin solidnes, it is most soft and easy to be melted. So that is
most worth, which is most red and glistering and soft, that easily it may be
wrought.

Experience teaches that the 3 part of one grain of gold can gild a wyre of
134. foot long, upon plaites of silver one ounce of gold will suffice to gilde
eight pound weight of silver. His nature is to be meruelled at. It waxes cold
toward day light, so that those that wear rings of it, may perceive it, when
it waxes day.

It is found in the mountains of Arabia and else where, and the best, in the
mountain Terrat, near the City Corbachiam.

Silver is a metal begotten of pure white Mercury, and the like clear white
Brimston. It differs from gold almost only in color, it being gold not
perfectly refined, yet in pureness, firm solidenesse, and thinness, it is
next to gold, and one ounce of it may be drawn 3200. foot long, so that it
can scarce be discerned from gold. Yet it is thicker an hundredth fould.

When it is found, it has the shape of hairs, twigs, fishes, serpents and
such like.

Mettalls less pure, consist of greater store of Brimston or quicksilver, of
greater store of Brimston, come Brass and Iron.

Brass is a metal, begotten of thick red Brimston, and Mercury somewhat
impure, that coming from Cyprus, is called Copper, the matter of Brass is
more burnt then that of other mettalls, and indureth long and is fit in any
work. For it is without all moisture, whether it be kept in earth or water.
Mineralls near brass are copperas, etc.

Copperas, is a mineral mixed of humors strained by drops into small holes,
and it shines like glass. It is hot and dry in the 4 degree, vehemently
binding, being of great force to season and preserve raw flesh. It also
begets found flesh in festered sores, and stancheth blood. It is of a
green, yealow, and a sky color, the best has in it white spots, his kind
are Roman victriall, and red vitriall, or the some of Copperas.

Iron is of store of mercury, and of thick sulphur impure and aduft. It may be
softened by quenching in ioyse of bean shulls or mallows. It being red hot
and cooling of himself, becomes pliable.

But if it be often quenched in cold water, it becomes thereby, very hard and
brittle.

Mettalls of greater stoore of Mercury, are Lead and Tynne.

Lead is an vnpure metal begot of much vnpure, thick and drossie Mercury,
and likewise of vnpure Brimstone, his impurity causes blacknes, which by
refining is made whiter. It increases in weight, if it lie in moist ground.

Yea it is thought to increase with rain. It is of a cold and binding nature,
and therefore scarce wholesome for man's use.

Tynne is a metal mixed of Mercury, white without and red within, and of
Brimstone not well mixed, as it were Lead whited with silver.

Thus far of mettalls pliable.

Mettalls less pliable are those which are not easily wrought, or melted, and
are hard or Brittle.

Those that be altogether hard, are stones. These are engendered of a watery
moisture, and fat earth mixed hard together. Of stones, some be rare, some
common, Of the rare and strange: some are of more estimation then others.

The more esteemed are precious stones, which are more beautiful and fine, in
regard of their pure and subtle matter: Of Gemmes some are of one color,
some of sundry colors. More or less transparent be either white, or of other
colors.

White are Crystal or Adamant. Crystal is a gem, bright through, begot of a
most pure stony moisture, and is found in mines of Marble, etc. His quality is
binding: therefore his oil or powder is helpefull in Laxes, and increases
milk in women's breasts.

The Adamant or Diamant is a gem clear and most hard, it can scarce be broken
(and thence it is named) unless steeped in the warm blood of a Goat that has
drunk Wine or eaten Parsley.

Transparent Gemmes not white, as the Saphir, Sardonix, and Smaragde have the
same coullour in all their kinds.

The Saphir is a gem clear through, of a sky coullour, growing in the East,
and specially in India: Being drunk, it helps against the stinging of
Serpents, poison, and pestilence.

The Smaragde is of a green coullour, making green the air near about it;
the stone of Brytaine is the best. It preserves the wearer from the falling
sickness: eight grains of his shauing drunk expels poison, etc, as some
affirm.

The Sardonyx is a clear gem, representing in coullour the nail of a man's
hand: it preserves chastnes, and heals ulcers about the nails.

The Selenites is a transparent gem like glass, it seems to increase and
decrease with the moon: Whose shape in the night it bears, and is called
therefore the Moone-stone, etc. It is of a white, black, and yellow coullour.
His scrapings heal the falling sickness. Bright shining Gems do follow.

The Carbuncle is a gem shining in the light like fire, it is the noblest and
has most virtues of any precious stone.

The Calcedonian is of a purple coullour, shining like a star, it expels
sadness and fear by purging and chearing the spirits. It hinders ill visions.

The Astarites is a Christaline stone, having in the midst like a full moon.
Bright stones not shining do follow: or the less shining.

The Rubie is a red gem, shining in dark like a spark of fire: it clears
the sight, it expels sad and fearful dreams.

The Topaz is of the cullor of gold, casting beams in the Sun: being laid to
a wound it stancheth blood: or cast into hot water keeps the hand from
scalding.

The Hyacinth is of watrish coullour, it is exceeding hard, and cloudie in the
dark, but pure and clear by day. It is cold, moderating the spirits of the
heart, and of the other parts, and causing mirth, which being worn obtains
favor.

Precious stones of less shining, be Corrall, Asbestos, Magnes, and Galacte.

Corrall is a stone growing in the Sea like a slimie shrub, which by the air
presently is made hard. It is taken up full of moss, but being vnbarked, it
appears clear in his proper coullour. The spongie Corrall is white and
cold. The solid is more stony, and is red and black. Red and full of
branches is the best, which worn of one shortly to be sick, waxes pale. His
tender substance is affected by the bad vapor, which yet is unable in the
body to afflict it. It is good for sore eyes, for the stone, and falling
sickness.

Asbestos is of an Iron coullour, being once fired it cannot be quenched; It is
found in Arabia.

Magnes or Loadstone is of a sky coullour, or an Iron coullour: It draws
Iron. It has like virtue with the Adamant. It purges the dropsy, helps the
flux; respects the North and South poole.

Galactites is of an Ash coullour, it seems to sweat as it were milk, it
increases milk, and helps running of the eyes, and ulcers.

Now follow stones of diverse coullours.

Achates is a stone of diverse coullours, resembling a Lions skin: sometime it
is black with white veins and yellow: sometime it is as it were sprinkled
with blood, it is very variable in coullour. Eagles lay it in their nests to
preserve their young from poison.

Turcois is dark, of a sky coullour, and greenish: It helps weak eyes and
spirits.

Corneolus is like water of washed flesh. It helps against the Pyles in the
fundament, and to stop fluxes. In a ring it restrains anger.

Chrysoprasus is of a green coullour with golden spots. It shines a little in
the dark, it is rare and dear. It comfort the heart, helps dim sight,
etc. Hematite is of an Iron coullour with bloody veins: It is cold and dry,
cools hot waters, stancheth blood, and helps against the scorching of the
Sun, as Authors write.

Also the qualities of other stones depend rather upon authority then upon
proof.

Stones be found in Beasts, Birds, and Fishes.

Stones found in Beasts be;

1. Chelidonius is a small stone in the belly of young Swallows. It is found in
those of the first hatching in the new moon: if two be found, the one is red,
the other black. The best is of a sprinkled red. The red in a linen cloth
carried under the left arm, expels madness, the falling sickness, and
gets favor, say some.

2. Alectorius is of a crystal or watrish coullour. It is found in the Maw of
an old Capon. as big as a bean in one of nine year old, small in one of five
year old. This stone quenches thirst, being held in the mouth. It makes
warlike and courageous.

3. The Rubet or Toadstone, grows in the head of a Toad: It is of a white
brown coullour, sometime it has a sky coulloured eye in the middle: It is to
be taken before the Toad touch any Water. It is a remedy against all poison.
If it come near poison it changes coullour, and sweateth as it were drops.

In fishes are found stones which are made of the cold hardening their matter.

4. The Crabs eye, of the female, is like an eye, it dissolveth blood
congealed, and expels stones.

4. The Perch stone found in his head is white and as big as Hemp Seed.

6. The Carpe stone found in his chap, is trianguler, white without, yellow
within. It helps against abundance of choler. Thus far of precious stones.

These following are of price, because of their beauty, but not so rare.

Porphirite, is a Marble shining like purple. Alabaster is a marble like in
coullour, to spotted Honny. At this day it is clear, and smooth, like Plaster.

The Ophite is a most hard marble, of a sad green spotted, and Serpent-like
coullour.

Common stones are of vnpure slimie earth, thick, and dark: some be solid, as
the Flint, Boulder, the Whet-stone, etc. Some be full of poores as the Pumise,
Gravil-stones, and Freestone.

SAlt is a fryable metal, begotten of a watrish and earthie moisture, mixed
and decocted together: It binds, scowreth, purges, disperseth, represseth,
makes thin and hard. It is gotten in pits or waters. The sorts of dug salts
be;

Salt Amoniack is found in plates under the hot sands of Cyreniae. It is hot
and dry in the fourth degree, and serves to purge slimie humors. That which
Apothecaries sell in black clods, is made of Camels stale, and because store
of Camels be in Armenia, it is called Armeniack.

Salt Peter is found in dry places under the ground, and in hollow Rocks: It
is sometime called Nitre, of a Region in Egypt. Of this kind is the salt
called Borax.

Salt Gem, is a white kind of Euen-salt, shining like Crystal: It is also
called Stony, marbly, salt Sarmaticke, or Dacian.

Salt of Indie is a blackish Salt, or ruddy. It is in clods cut out of mount
Oremen.

Salt of Water is taken on the Sea coast or from some lakes and springs, and it
is sod and congealed of the Sun, or by fire.

Allome is a salt sweat of the earth, it is either liquid or hard.

Liquid Allome is called Roch or Rock-Allome, with it is paper washed, etc.

Hard Allome, or Allome Sciffile is thick, and cleaves: It is as it were gray.

Bitume is a fat and tough moisture, like pitch, and is called Earthy pitch.

Liquid, is like an oylely moisture flowing, and is of diverse coullours, after
the variety of the place, of which Naphtha is a white fat of Bitumen, which
enflamed by water, does easily draw to it fire, through store of oil that is
in it.

Naphtha Petreolum is found in rocks. It is for his fatness of some called
Oil.

Ambar of Arabia is Bitume of an Ash coullour.

Hard Bitume is tough, like foame swimming on the water, but being taken forth,
it waxes hard: of this kind is Asphaltus, which is black Bitume, hard like
stone pitch: The best is gotten in the dead Sea of Judea, etc.

Pissaphaltus is Asphaltus, smelling of Pitch, mingled with Bitume: It is
called Mummie. Where this wants, they sell us counterfeit of Syria, for poor
men that die there, be stuffed with Bitume, but the rich are dressed with
Mirrh, Alloes, etc.

It also is found in clods roling from mount Cerauine into the Sea.

Succinum is Bitume, like a stone, exceeding hard, named, Ex succo, the Juice
of the earth. It is white or yellow, which is called Ambar, or black as Iet.
His fatness is so great that it burns like a Candle, and smells like the
Pine tree. It draws to it chafe, and such other light stuff, by a certain
hid nature.

Metallar Earths which are dug forth of mines, be,

Terra Lemnia, an exceeding red Earth of Lemnos I Will, dug in a red hill: It
is sometime used for Armenian^ In old time this had Dianaes seal upon it,
printed by her Priests, who were only wont to wash this earth.

It is of force to expel poison, it heals wounds festred and old, and
poisoned.

Bole Armenian is earth of Armenia, it is of a pale red coullour, smooth, and
easy to break as chalk: It is a dryer, and profitteth against all fluxes.

Terra Samia is white, stiff, and tough, coming from the I Will Samos.

Ampelite is a pitchie Earth, cleaving and black, it is named of anointing
vines to kill the Worms. This earth is like that we call Stone or Sea coal.

Chalk is white earth of Creet, and there is found of it in many other places.

There is also some sound that is black, which is called Pignitis.

So far of Mineralls; Now follow Natures perfectly living.

Natures perfectly living, are Planets, or bodies endowed with a soul. In all
these bodies are sundry virtues, according to the temperature of the principal
qualities. For the form uses their qualities as Instruments: Whence come
diverse distinct degrees of those qualities, as some are hot, cold, dry, moist
in the first, second, third, and fourth degree. These qualities in the first
are obscure, and scarce to be perceived: in the second they are apparent and
manifest: in the third they be vehement; and in the fourth immoderate, and not
to be endured. And again each of these has a beginning, middle, and end.

Plants grow from a stalk or a trunk. Those from a stalk have but one stalk
or many. Trees are Plants having but one stalk, full of Boughs, and rising on
high from the earth. Some grow only in hot Countries: others grow
indifferently in all places: those that prosper best in hot Regions, are
Frankincense, Mace, Pepper, Palm, Balsame, Pomegranet, Lemmon, Ceder.

The Frankincense tree grows chiefly in Arabia, it is tall, and has leaves
like the Mastike tree, his gum is soft, white, fat, and round, and is apt to
perfume, and the stiffer and liker Rosen it is, so much the better. This
perfume was used for sacrifice.

Myrrh is a tree in India, of hard wood, wrythen toward the earth, with a
smooth bark, the leaves sharp poynted toward the end: his gum is fat, like
Rosen, thick, and shining red. The distilled liquor of fresh Myrrh was once
called Stact, but now it is named Storax. It is hot and dry in the second
degree. It dries and closes wounds, it expels the worms: it is of force
against an old cough, and short wind. It is bitter: It is good to heal wounds
of the head.

Mace is an Indian tree, growing in the I Will of Banda. It is almost like the
Peach tree, it has narrow and short leaves, whose fruit is the Nut-meg covered
with Mase.

The Nut-meg has an husk like a Filberd: the fruit is covered with a rind
like our Wal-nut, which with ripeness opens and shows the Mase, which does
cover the Nut-meg, etc.

The new and best Nut-meg is full of juice or oil, smelling sweet. It dries
and heateth in the end of the second degree, with a kindly binding.

Pepper grows in India. Of it be two sorts of trees, and two sorts of fruits,
one long, the other round. The round grows on branches like vines, which
imbraceth trees that stand by it; and his fruit is in clusters, first green,
then being dried, it turns black and rough: it is gathered in October.

Long Pepper grows like the long bud on Nut-trees. It is hot and dry.

Palm tree grows most in Egypt, and Arabia, always green, with a long
round body, his bark is like scales of a Fish, and the more it is pressed,
the better it grows: therefore was it used as a reward for the Conqueror.

The wild Palm in India, is called Thamarind, the Date is his fruit, it being
ripe is black and sweet: Of these be three kinds. Our Dates come from Egypt:
they are hot temperately.

Balsame is a low tree, his trunk is not much unlike the Turpentine tree; it
has leaves like Rue, but whiter, never falling. It grows in the valley of
Hierico, and Egypt: being cut it sends out a milkish liquor: it is to be cut
in the upper part of the bark with glass or bone, and not with Iron, least it
die. His juice is gathered with wool into small horns: of it is scarce got
each year six Congies: a Congie is about three Pints.

Native Balm mixed with milk does easily separate: and easily dissolve in
water, neither does it stain cloth. It is hot and dry in the second degree: it
is of thin parts, and hard to come by. In his stead most commonly is used the
Oil of Nut-megges.

The Pomegranet do follow. The Orange do follow. The Ceder tree. do follow.
1. Pomegranet, is a low tree that has narrow shining leaves, red flowers, and
his fruit filled with graynes. It came from the Country in which Carthage
stood; the juice of this Apple helps the stomach: It is very good in a
burning Fever.

2. Pomecytron, Lemmon, and Orange trees are always green, the leaf of the
Cytron is like the Lawreil, endented. The fruit is rough, and always
fruitful; his juice cures inflammations, and other diseases in the skin: the
bark comfort the heart, etc.

The Orange has a smoother skin, and leaf.

3. The Ceder is like to Juniper, his leaves being sharper: the tree is
exceeding tall, chiefly of that of Cyprus; It never rotteth, his nature
destroying sound things, preserves corrupt things.

The trees less hot are either fruitful or barren. The fruitful have fruit
that has a rind thick, or thin. The thinner rind is of Apples, or Berries.
Apples are round, as the Fig, Olive, Plum, Cherry.

The Fig tree is not high, it has a smooth bark like the Walnut tree. It
yields a long fruit like a Pear, full of grains. It is so fruitful that it
brings forth three or four times in a year: so that one Fig thrusts off
another. They are of two kinds, great and little.

The Olive: the Apple tree: and Peach be common.

The Quince tree is lower then an Apple tree, his fruit has downie hair; it
is called Cidonia, of a city in Crete, where first it grew. The fruit is cold
and binding, and does much profit hot stomachs.

The Pear, the Plum, the Medler, and the Cherry be common.

Now follow those trees that bear Berries.

The Laurel is a tree growing in hotter countries, which in cold does hardly
prosper; it has sharp and thick leaves ever green, with a thin smooth
bark: his leaves be hot and dry, his oil for hot and softning nature helps
diseases of the breast; and other springing of cold. The powder in wine causes
urine, breaks the stone of the bladder and reins.

Juniper bears a small fruit, the space of two years, and before the first
be ripe, it brings forth other. This tree has short and sharp leaves, and a
straight back, and slit almost in every place: the gum sweating out of it, is
Vernix, called so because it congealeth in the spring. It is hot and dry in the
third degree. It heals and gleweth, and also heateth a cold stomach. His
berries are hot and dry in the first degree, comforting the spirits, and
healing putrifactions. It consumes rotten and moist humors. The oil helps
the Gout, if you anoint the backe-bone therewith: it cures deafness, and
eaten helps melancholy, and stays the Rhume, and the Flux.

Now follow trees whose fruit has a shell.

1. The Almond tree.

2. The Wal-nut tree.

3. The Chestnut tree takes his name of a town in Magnesia, the tree is much
like the Wall-nut, yet the leaf has more veins, and is edged like a Saw. His
fruit is covered with a sharp husk, and within it has a red husk. It is of
two kinds: both hot and dry in the first degree; and for their earthie matter
binding. They are hard to digest, and beget lice: but good if roasted and eaten
with Salt, Pepper, and Sugar.

The powder of dry Chestnuts voydeth Urine.

The Beech is tall with a thick white bark, or a sad red. It has leaves like
Laurel, nicked on the edge. His fruit is a thre'angle Nut, closed in a little
pricking husk. His fruit is hot, sweet, and binding. His leaves are cool,
which being eaten, do help much the grief of the gums and lips. If they
be stamped, they much strengthen dead members, being anointed with it. Swine
and Mise delight much in this fruit.

Trees whose fruit is but half covered:

The Oak is a tall tree, having a thick rough bark, his leaves are deep
gashed, and his boughs are knotted: his proper fruit is the Acorne: the gall
and his glue are but accidental. It is moderately hot and dry, it binds, and
especially the little skin which covers the Acorne. Distilled water of Oak
leaves cures Fluxes, and rottenness of the Liver: and expels all congealed
blood. His leaves stamped and applied to green wounds heal them.

Likewise they draw heat from swellings, and pimples arising by heat.

Galls grow especially in old Oaks, and in the night, in the Summer, the Sun
then leaving Gemini: they be of two sorts: small and rough, and great and
smooth.

Galls have in them sometime Spiders, Flies, and Ants: Some think Spiders do
presage pestilence, Flies war, and Ants dearth. The powder of Galls does
heal wounds without any scarre. Robur is very hard and during: It has less
fruit.

The Ilex is very tall with leaves, Lawrell-like, ever green, but lesser and
sharp: a thick wood and of a black red coullour; and is very rare.

Another kind is the Cork tree, having like leaf, fruit, and greenness, yet
is it lesser, and has a most thick bark, which though it be taken of, yet
does not the tree wither: it is called the female Ilex: his wood is full of
poores and holes, and most light, and not to be sunk.

Now follow trees that bear gum, whose Nut has scales.

The Pineapple is a tree full of boughs, with hayrie leaves like Comb teeth,
of whose sharp top it takes his name. His fruit is Pine-nuts, these are hot
and dry, and bind. They are good against coughs, and consumptions,
strengthening, and heating.

The wild Pine is a great high tree with hairy leaves.

The Pitch tree is tall with a black bark, tough and stiff, and running
along his boughs like a cross, from both sides of the trunk: his leaves are
broader, softer, and smoother then Rosemary. From between the bark and wood
of this tree flows a gum like Rozen.

The Fur tree is a kind of Pitch tree, but somewhat whiter, his leaves on
one side are of an Ash coullour: from this flows also a Rozen, which sod with
honey profitteth against the destillations of the head and throat, against the
Quinsey and other maladies, it asswageth the inflammation of wounds, and
joins them: it soden with Barley bran and wine, cures hard kernells.

The Larix is a high tree with a thick bark clifted on each side: his boughs
grow by degrees about the trunk: his leaves are thick, long, soft, and
hairie, his fruit is almost like the Cypres, and has a pleasant smell. The
wood of this, for that it is dry and full of Rozen, burns vehemently, and
soon melts metal. His Rozen is in smell, taste, and working better then
common Turpentine.

In coullour it is like honey, tough but not hard. In the body of the tree
grows Fungus Agaricus, a swamp or mush-rome. The best is white, thin, full of
pores, light, and easy to break: it purges fleame.

Now follow trees that bring forth no fruit of note, called Barren trees.

The Elm is tall with rough leaves and sharp: his wood is yellow, hard, and
deformed: the bark, boughs, and leaves have a healing faculty in scabbes. It
also closes wounds.

The Alder has a long straight trunk, his wood is soft, his leaves like
Peare-tree, but greater, thicker, and rounder: it grows in moist places, and
by ryuers. His wood is hot and dry, and indureth long under the earth, or in
water. His thin and fat leaves laid upon tumors with hot water cure them, and
help all swellings.

The Teile is a large and broad tree, with a thick stalk: his leaves like
Ivy, but softer and sharper. It binds: his other qualities are like the
wild Olive.

The Box has little round leaves always green, his stalk is rough, for
most part full of knotts, and black: the wood is hard and heavy, it sinketh
in water, and never decays with age. Of this, boxes are named, because most
of them were wont to be made of Box. It is dry and binding: the powder of his
leaves, with Lauender and water, profits against madness. Lie of Box makes
yellow heirs.

The Birch is a tender tree: his bark is black at first, but after white, his
wood is soft and weak above other. It has a sweet sap: In the rude age his
bark was used for Paper. His sap taken in the spring heldeth the stone, I
aundies, and rottenness of the mouth: also being put in milk preserves the
Cheese made of that milk from Maggotts.

Willow grows apace: it endures long, for though it be hollow and rotten,
yet it lives. It is of two sorts, solid or brittle: the solid is black or
yellow: the black is the greater and better, and is most apt for binding.

The yellow grows chiefly near water, it is sometime white. The brittle
Willow is most white and unapt for binding. Willowes are dry and thick: his
leaves and bark sod in Wine helps grypings of the belly.

The Poplar delights in moist and watrish places. It is white or black: the
white has a long straight trunk, and a smooth bark: his leaf round and
after sharper, green beneath, hoarie above, and do continually shake it, is
moderately hot and dry. The root taken in drink desendeth from gripings in
the belly. Black Poplar is like the white: but greater, softer, and has
narrower leaves, and green below, and of an Ash coullour above. It is hot and
dry: the boughs held in the hand (some say) forbid weariness of hand and
foot: his gum stamped helps looseness.

Now follow shrubbs: which spring up with many stalks: and are noble or less
noble: The noble, as first, Cynamon, which is a bark of a shrub of that name
growing in India: of a black coullour with thin boughs, which if they be
broken, cast forth a sweet sent: His bark is of two sorts, thick and thin.
The thin is of the sharpest and best taste. The thick is more slowly
disgested, it comfort the heart: the best is red and sharp with some
sweetness. It is of subtle parts, hot in the third, and dry in the second
degree. It helps a cold stomach, it strengthens the sight, heart, and
liver, and begets pure blood.

Cassia Fistula is a round, great, and purple Cane, having a very black pith,
the heauiest and reddest Canes are best. Of the black pith is made a good, and
gentle purgation, called Cassia extract. This helps much against fevers, and
many other diseases, if one ounce of it be taken with as much Rose water.
Shrubs less Noble.

The Hasell is an high shrub with a slender stalk, and full of white spots.
His leaves are broader, and have more gashes then the Alder. The tree bears
the Filberd, and the Nut: these Nuts are hot and moist, and make fat: but hurt
the stomach, and procure a laske. If stamped in water and sugar, they be
applied, they help an old cough. The Ashes burnt with Swines, or Boares
grease, and applied to the head, causes the hair to grow.

The Elderne has boughs of an Ash coullour, and in it is store of pith, and
his leaves are much like to those of the Wal-nut tree, it bears purple
berries, having red iuyse.

Dwarf Elderne is low and short, with a foure-square stalk; these plants are
hot and dry, and have power to purge and digest: Also it heals and closes;
the root or leaves of Elder sod in wine purge the dropsy, and nothing is more
effectual to that purpose then the root of Dwarf Elderne. Water in which the
leaves of Elderne are sod, help to rid the dry cough. The Pitch or an
electuary of the berries, expels sweat, and all poison.

Barberryes are not much unlike the wild Pear, although they be far less,
and in the boughs some two or three pricks grow together. His leaf is like
Quince leaves, but narrower. Barberries be hot and dry in the second degree.
The iuyse of the berryes profitteth against the inflammation of the liver, as
also against inward impostumes^if it be applied with night shade, it quenches
thirst. The bark of his root or fruit stamped, plucketh out a thing fast in
the flesh: his syrrope tempered with sugar comfort the heart, restores
appetite, profits against burning Fevers, and all inward diseases of much
blood.

The small Raisin has purple boughs, and pampin leaves, but less, and of
blackish green. It has round red berries, upon long stalks, his fruit and
leaves are cold and dry in the second degree, having power to close. The iuyse
of the fruit taken helps against trembling of the heart, and inflammations of
the body: but chiefly it helps the plague: his iuyse with Endive water
profits to remove specks of the face.

The Rose grows up with small twigs, of a black green, full of crooked
pricks: his leaves are dented on the edge: his fruit, namely, Roses be of
diverse coullours. All Roses be cold and dry, and help both inward and
outward affections of the body.

The iuyse sod in Wine helps griefs of the head, eyes, and gums. Honey and
Rose water strengthen all parts, and purge melancholy and fleame; sodden with
Fennel and Salt, his oil heals burnings, and laid on the forehead takes
away heaviness, and hot sicknesses. The funge of wild Rose trees in powder
with wine expels the stone. Water of Roses helps sore eyes, comfort and
cools the brain, it being drunk, relieueth the heart and stomach: it
keeps the spirits, and natural heat.

The Bramble is full of pricks, and crawleth about: the leaves of sweet bryer
on the one side are white, on the other black, his fruit is the black berry,
full of iuyse, the berry is dry, cold, and close. His fruit, leaves, or
sprouts quench inward heat. The top of his leaves sod in Wine stay the bloody
flixe, help ulcers of the mouth, and fasten loose teeth.

Poterion, vua crispa, Gooseberries is full of boughs, has ash coulloured
bark or white, full of sharp thorns, his leaves are less then ground Ivy
and crooked, his berries from green turn to redish: it is cold in the first,
dry in the second degree; his green leaves cure inflammations, and apostumes,
and assuage Ignis sacer.

Colutea in leaf not unlike to Fengreke, has a round fruit, as big as a
Lentle in a puffed shell. It is hot in the beginning of the second degree, and
dry in the first: it purges the panch: scoureth away chiefly melancholy,
without trouble, from the head, brain, and the Instruments of the senses.

Thus far of^Plants growing from a trunk or stalk, etc.

Now follow Herbs which have but a thin small stalk, consisting most upon
leaves: These do nourish more or less, as Corn and Pot-herbes, which nourish
more.

Wheat is a kind of Corn, having an ear upon the blade, stuffed with many
graynes, it is moderately hot and dry, and of much nourishment, and helpefull
for many diseases, as well within as without the body: the best is hard to
break, heavy, and of gold color, smooth, and growing in fat ground.

Leaven of Wheat does draw, ripen, and open ulcers, and apostumes: Biscuit
profitteth against rhume.

Barley is cold and dry in the second degree, and purges. His flower and new
milk in plaster cure Biles, and such tumors, by easing their pain, and
drawing forth heat. Bread made of it begets cold and slimie humors, and
nourishes less then wheat. Barley water makes the skin fair and smooth.

Spelte or Zea is of a middle temperature, between Wheat and Barley: it is a
kind of Wheat, and commonly goes under that name.

Rye is not so hot as Wheat, and hurts much, except it be well disgested.

Oats are colder then Wheat, and of operation almost like Barley.

Now follow of Pulse:

Millet is a most fertile Pulse with sharp leaves, broad below, and sharp
toward the top: his cod has in it around long fruit. It is cold in the
first, and dry in the third degree, it stops the belly, and nourishes but
little.

Rize is smaller then Millet, and far less, it grows in moist and watery
places: it binds.

Lentells grow like small pease, and have a virtue to bind.

Pease are either of the field or garden; bearing a white, or a purple flower.

Beans are meanly cold, and moist, inflaming, windy, hard to digest.

Now follow Pot-herbes.

Coleworts have very broad leaves, which enclosing one another round about
become Cabbedges. These be cold and moist; and in Egypt be very bitter. The
Romans for the space of six hundred years used this only herb to cure all
diseases. His broth expels the stone and gravel, his leaves applied by
themselves, or with the flowers cure inflammations: his iuyse heals festred
sores: it cures the falling of the hair. Broth made of his leaves with an
old Cock, cures the Collicke, and other gripings.

Spinagh has an high stalk, and bears sharp seeds, his leaves being
sharp and triangular; it is cold and moist in the first degree. His iuyse
expels hurtful rhume: It mollifieth the belly, and cures hardness of the
back and belly. His Iuyse takes away the pain and heat of the stomach and
liver: it helps the biting of Spiders.

Lettise has his leaves gathered into a curled roundnesse, that which grows
in the field has a shorter stalk and leaf, then Garden Lettise, being
bitter, and full of milk.

It is moderately moist and cold, like Spring water, it is wholesome in
Summer, to restore appetite to meat. Yet too much of it hurts the eyes: and
boyld with woman's milk cures burnings.

Beetes have two coullours, the one white, the other black and red, both of
them for their salt digest and cleanse, but the white is more salt, and
binds, yet being boiled, it looseneth: It cures obstructions of the liver,
especially if it be taken with vinegar and mustard: It also cures those that
be sick of the spleen.

Purslaine has round, thick, fat, and white leaves on the back, a red
stalk, yellow flowers like a Star: They of the Garden have broad leaves, and
a thick stalk: the wild, lesser, and more leaves. It is cold in the first,
and moist in the second degree: it is tart; his iuyse helps a hot stomach,
and hot diseases, it being somewhat binding, helps fluxes, and euacuations of
blood, if it be used with Barley flower.

Garden Mallows grow with a round leaf, and high stalk, his flowers be red,
or white: wild Mallows mollify, and a little digest: Garden, are moist, and
weaker. The decoction of Mallows drunk, cures an old cough: his leaves sod
and used with common oil heal burning.

The Onion has a subtell stalk, round and hollow, arising from a round root,
wound about with many fouldings: it is hot almost in the fourth degree: it is
of thick parts: his iuyse is a dry substance, and hot. An Onion all night
laid in cold water and drunk, kills worms, and being beaten with salt, it
draws away warts by the roots: his iuyse put in the ear cures deafness.

The Leeke grows almost like Onions, and is of the same quality, it does
dissolve swellings, and congealed blood, being applied like a Plaster.

Parsley has leaves like Cycuta, it is hot and dry in the third degree, it
peirceth and dissolueth, provoking urine; the seed is more effectual then the
herb. It dissolueth the stone, it consumes ill moisture, and sores of the
head.

These herbs following are used for Garlands, or physic; some of them
smelling sweetly.

The Violet has leaves lesser and thinner then Ivy, but more black, his
stalk comes from the midst of his root, bears a purple flower, and a seed
full of graynes. It springs in woods, and shadowie places, wild, but not
sweet: it is cold in the first, and moist in the second: and cools hot
diseases and inflammations. Of it there be diverse kinds, and colors: as the
Pancey or Harts-ease.

The Daisie has leaves somewhat round above and small below, and the root in
the ground wheeling about: it is cold in the second degree.

The Ielly-flowre has sharp leaves, growing like grass with flowers of
sundry coullours: it has an attractiue force, and the iuyse heals wounds in
the head.

Maioram has almost a wooden stalk, with many rough round leaves, and it
smells sweetly. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it is of thin parts,
and of a disgesting faculty. It heals, disgesteth, and provoke urine.

Rosemary is hot and dry in the third degree, and smells like Frankincense.
It mollifieth, disgesteth, and dries.

Spicknard is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree.

Lauender heateth and dries in the second degree.

White Daffodill is hot and dry. It is of diverse kinds.

Rose Campion is an herb with an Ash coulloured stalk, as it were cotton,
long leaued, and white, bearing purple flowers, growing up like the Prim-rose:
his seed is hot and dry almost in the second degree: it prevails against the
stinging of Scorpions.

Herbs used in medicine, are Aromatike, or ordinary. Aromatike do comfort and
strengthen the spirits. Thence they take their name.

Saffron is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree, it a little
binds, and concocteth; it may with good keeping be preserved five years.

It comfort the heart and stomach, it makes pure blood, and provoke
urine, it scowreth the breast, it is deadly, if it be taken too much.

Ginger waxes green twice or thrice in the year, it heateth in the third,
and is moist in the first, it is of more subtell parts then Pepper.

Zadury or Wormeseede heateth and dries in the second degree, it is that we
do call the root of China, like Ginger but not so biting.

Gallingall is the root of a plant growing in Memphis and Syria, it grows
like the flouredeluce, but with pricks, and is broader and thicker from the
root. It is hot and dry in the third degree, as is the root of Cyprus.

Callamus Aromaticus is an herb of India, growing like reeds or figs. It is
hot and dry in the second degree, and a little binding.

Acorus is a plant growing with leaves like Iris, but smaller, or like segges,
the root is white, sweetly smelling. It is hot and dry in the second degree.

There be sexes of Herbs, as of other living things, some of which more help,
namely, the Male or Female according to their kinds.

A Feeling soul is a power apprehending and perceiving things placed without
the body of living creatures. This faculty is exercised by the senses, and by
motion accompanying the senses. The senses are outward or inward. The outward
only perceive things present: And every one of these have their proper
subject: and the most have a middle instrument: of all which, if there be a
certain mutual consent and just proportion: the senses become of morce force:
but if any one of them have too excellent an object, or his instrument be
corrupt, they are dull and unfit to be used; This is the cause of blindness to
those that walk in snow, and of deafness unto Smithes, etc. Furthermore,
senses are common to the whole body, or proper to some part thereof. The sense
in the whole body is touching. This is a sense by means of flesh, full of
sinews, apprehending tactill qualities.

His instrument is flesh, full of sinews, or rather a nerve like a hair
dispersed throughout the whole body. In man for the abundance of nerves is
this sense most quick; his means is flesh and skin, for though the skin be
removed, yet a man feels hurt. Senses of certain parts are more or less
noble. The nobler are Seeing, and Hearing: whose means are the water, and
air: Sight by the eye perceives bright and colloured things: The subject
thereof is light, etc. Green a most temperate coullour is most acceptable to
the sight. His instrument is the Nerve Optic, which from the brain comes to
both the eyes.

Hearing is a sense perceiving soundes: his instrument is a little skin in the
lowest winding, or turning of the ear, dry and full of holes: the skin is
double, one below, which covers a little bone like an Anvile: Another above,
containing a little bone, as it were a small Mallet. The upper stricken by the
soundes, strikes the lower, and stirs up the spirits in the nerves to
perceive the sound.

The more vn-noble senses are Tasting, and Smelling: Tasting apprehends
tastes. His instrument is a nerve stretched like a Net upon the flesh of the
tongue, which is full of little pores. His means is a temperate salt humor:
which if it do exceed the just quantity, it does not exactly perceive
tastes: but if it be altogether consumed, no tastes are perceived.

Smelling judges qualities fit for smell: his instrument is the entrance into
the first ventricle covered with a small skin, the dryer it is the quicker of
smell, as in Dogs and Vultures: but man for the moystnesse of his Brain, has
but a dull smell.

Now follow the inward senses, which beside things presently offered, do know
forms of many absent things. By these the creature does not only perceive,
but also understands that which he does perceive. These have their seat in
the brain: They are either conceiving or preserving: Conceiving exercises his
faculty by descerning, or more fully judging: it is called, Common sense, and
the other is Fantasy. Common sense more fully distinguishes sensible things,
his instrument is the former ventricle of the brain, made by dryness fit to
receive. Fantasy is an inward sense more diligently examining the forms of
things: This is the thought and judgment of creatures, his place is the middle
part of the brain, being through dryness apt to retain.

The preserving sense is Memory, which according to the constitution of the
brain is better or worse. It is weaker in a moist brain then in the dry
brain. His instrument is the hinder part of the brain.

Memory calling back images preserved in former time, is called Remembrance:
but this is not without the use of reason, and therefore is only attributed to
man.

The witty excel in remembrance, the dull in memory.

Sleep is the resting of the feeling faculty: his cause is a cooling of the
brain by a pleasant abounding vapor, breathing forth of the stomach, and
ascending to the brain. When that vapor is concoct, and turned into spirits,
the heat returns, and the senses recovering their former function, cause
waking. There be certain appointed courses for watch and sleep, least
creatures languish with overmuch motion.

Affections of sleep are Dreams, Nightmare, and Ecstasy, etc.

A dream is an inward act of the mind, the body sleeping: and the quieter
that sleep is the easier be dreams: but if sleep be unquiet then the mind
is troubled.

Variety of dreams is according to the diverse constitution of the body.

The clear and pleasant dreams are when the spirits of the brain, which the
soul uses to imagine with, are most pure and thin, as toward morning when
concoction is perfected.

But troublesome dreams are when the spirits be thick and vnpure. All
natural dreams are by images, either before proferred to memory or conceived
by temperature alone, or by some influence from the stars, as some think.

From dreams many things may be collected, touching the constitution of the
body.

The Nightmare, is a seeming of being choked or strangled by one leaping
upon him: fear following this compression, the voice is taken away. This
affection comes when the vital spirits in the brain are darkened by
vapors, ascending from melancholy and phlegm, insomuch, that that faculty
being oppressed, some heavy thing seems to be laid upon us.

Therefore this disease is familiar to those, who through age or sex are much
inclined unto these humors.

An Ecstasy or trance, is a vehement imagination of the departure (for a time)
of the soul from the body. A deep sleep lasting some days enseweth, for
the soul giving over it self to cogitation, cease to serve the body.
Wherefore men wanting motion and sense seem to be dead. And with what humors
the brain shall be compassed such phancies does it conceive, although sometime
spirits working on such phatasies, imprint other things.

Now follows Motion, which accompanies sense, and is caused either by
appetite, or change of place, for we desiring things perceived in sense, cannot
attain unto them without moving our body to that thing.

Appetite is a faculty desiring such things as are objects to our sense. It
chiefly follows touching, or thinking. Delight follows touching. Delight is
a desire of an agreeing Object. Grief is his contrary, which is a turning
from the hurtful object, or from that we count unpleasant. Appetites following
cogitation, are all the motions of the heart, which be called affections, and
are either good, or bad. The good cherish and preserve the nature of our
sensitive faculty, as mirth, love, hope, which come of heat: when the heart
dilating it self, desires to enjoy the thing, with which it is delighted.

Motion is a faculty of living creatures, stirring a body, entised by
appetite from one place to another. It is either of the whole body, or of
parts: Of the whole body, as by going, etc. Of parts, as breathing, which is
made either by enlarging of the parts, which serve for the taking in of the
air, or by the closing of them for the expelling of corrupt air.

Now follows to entreat, Of the bodies of living creatures.

The matter of the body in which the foresaid faculties be: is the seed of
both sexes. Seed is most pure blood* perfectly concocted in the testicles, and
it is gathered from the whole body. For the testicles lacking nourishment,
draw blood from the hollow vain and change it.

Conception is the action of the womb, by which the power is stirred up to
execute his inbred gift: Then that power being stirred up does diversely
distract the matter, separating his diverse parts: and thus all parts alike get
together their shape. Likewise all of them together are adorned with the
faculties of the vegetative, or sensitive soul. Amongst the natural faculties
of the parts of the body, if there be putrefaction, a fault of the concocting
faculty, there is made a certain generation of matter: This is natural, or
extraordinary.

Natural is by an inbred heat, not altogether subdued, but slackly exercising
force, through disposition of the matter. Such is to be seen in inflammations,
botches, and impostumes. For in these, nature so far as it can, labors to
bring this his subject matter to the best form. Therefore such suppuration is
wont to argue a certain strength of nature, wherefore often with convenient
helps, it is carefully increased. In this kind, especially is praised white,
thick, smooth, equal, and least smelling matter.

Extraordinary mattering is, when nature altogether subdued, the humors or
parts themselves are made full of corrupt matter through store of rottenness.

But nature, or the concocting faculty, is overcome either through proper
weakness, or by corrupt matter: this is observed in all rotten, malignant, and
stinking botches, in which according to the diverse fashioning of abounding
matter, are found diverse sorts of solid bodies, as hairs, and such other like.

Of parts of the body which appertain to the making up of the whole body,
some are containing, and some contained. The contained for their fluent nature
are sustained by help of others. Such are humors and spirits. Humors are
moist parts begot of the first mixture of nourishment in the liver. These are
in the seed of creatures, and are called the beginning of things endued with
blood. Any of these if they fail of their proper nature, are not fit to be in
the body, but are become unnatural.

Humors are of the first, and second sort. The first are hot or cold, and
moist, and dry: Blood is hot and moist, and it is a thin, red, humor, and
sweet. With this the other parts be chiefly nourished, amongst whom this is
the chief. The faults of this is in substance, as putrefaction, or mixture of
vicious humors: or in quality, as too thick or too thin; or is affected with
some other badnesse. The humor that is hot and dry, is choler, this is a
thin, yellow, pale, and bitter humor. His use is to help the expelling
faculty, and chiefly in the Guts. Gall besides nature, through adustion is
yellow, like an egg yolke, in the stomach it is like rustie brass.

The cold and moist is phlegm, which is a tough slimie, and whitish humor,
and tastles. If this have a fuller concoction, it is turned into blood. His use
is to moysten the joints. When it declineth from his proper nature, it is salt
or tart, according to his mixture. The cold and dry humor is black choler.
This is a thick, blackish, tart, bitter humor. It serves to strengthen the
stomach, that it may more easily retain, and receive meat. When it declineth
from his proper nature by immoderate burning, it has diverse kinds. Humors of
the second sort are begotten of the first, being wrought with concoction they
are like dew or glue. Dew is a humor contained in the hollownes of the members,
and joined to their substance, like dew, with which they are nourished.

Glue is a humor immoderately congealed, and being firmly fastened to the
members, begins to be changed unto their substance, of which change it is
called Cambium, and carni fornis, like the flesh.

Now follow the spirits, which are a fluent part of the body, most thin, and
begotten of the blood of the heart. The spirits are the chief instrument, and
as it were the Chariot of the souls faculties, for with most speedy, and
swift motion, it carries them over all the body.

Spirits having root in the heart, be either absolute or rude, and to be
finished in other parts. Vital spirits be absolute in the heart, and are of a
fiery nature, and from the heart by arteries are spread in the body, by whose
communication all parts do live.

Spirits to be perfected in other parts be Animal, which from the heart be
carried into the brain, and there made subtell by nerves, flowing unto all the
other parts; and this is the Chariot of functions or faculties of all living
Creatures.

Parts containing are more solid, which are sustained by themselves; all these
either are as a stay or covering. The stay to other parts, is either bone, or
gristle. Bone is the hardest and dryest part and stay to all the body. Bones
are knit together by ligaments, which are like hard and thick threeds, being
as bands to the bones of the body.

Gristles are somewhat softer then the bones, and sustain all other parts.
The covering of the other parts, is the skin, which is tender without blood,
and covers the whole body. The membrane is tender skin, covering some parts.

There is yet in these parts a common excrement of concoction, which is sweat,
and is a moystnesse of the veins, expelled by secret pores, of this is to be
seen a diverse coullour, according to the die of the moystnesse, or matter
thereof: the usual is watrish, through the white substance of the channels,
through which it runs. But if the pores be large, and open, that without
delay, and long change it may slide through them: especially, if for some all
action of mind or disease, it become thinner, then is it speedily expelled,
and tainted with some other coullour, etc. Therefore from the coullour of
sweat, the bodies constitution may be known. Cold sweat is worse to be
liked then hot, but either is bad if they be unequal.

Also the containing parts aforementioned are animal, or vital and each of these
are more, or less principal. Animal parts are, in which the animal parts
are most exercised, as sense and motion together, or alone. The chief member
of motion and sense, is the brain contained in the head; whose substance being
hurt, it is danger to loose both sense and motion.

The Brain is softer then the other parts, white, and covered with a double
skin closely. The skin of the brain is either called Pia, or Dura matter. The
scalpe is a thick bone, covering the whole head, and has upon it a skin with
hayres. The scalpe is distinguished with certain seames in certain parts,
which are true or feigned, etc.

The excrements of the brain are either thick or thin: The thin are tears
bursting from the brain by the angles of the eyes. The greater the flesh of
those angles be, so much more plentiful be tears, chiefly if the complexion
be cold and moist, as of women. Tears be caused by heat which opens, or
cold which presses the flesh, and causes tears.

The thicker excrements which are expelled from the brain, either are by the
ears or nose.

In the ears is a moist excrement of the brain, gathering and rotting in
their hollownesse.

That of the nose is a thicker excrement then that of the briane: which
although it be like phlegm, yet it is altogether of another nature. The pithe
of the back bone is near to the nature of the brains excrement, save that it
is harder and something hotter. The back is bonie, round, and in his length
has twenty four joints. The Nerves are less principal parts of sense and
motion, which if they be out of order, the parts in which these be, become
unfit to move. Nerves or sinews are thin parts, round, etc. white much like
to thick threeds. Some are softer, some harder. The softer are of more use, of
which are six pair, by two and two, from the brain arriving to other parts.

First, to the eyes. Secondly, To move the eyes. Thirdly, to the tongue and
taste. Fourthly, to the pallet, and skin of the mouth. Fifthly, to the hearing.
The sixth, to the mouth of the stomach, by which sense and motion descend.

Hard Nerves have a duller faculty, and less serving to the senses, of which
are thirty pair, which by couples come from the marrow of the back bone: by
whose conduct the back easily executes his faculties.

Of the parts to breath.

The principal parts of breathing are in the breast: being either Lights or
Heart, wherefore these being touched, breathing is immediately hurt, and such
wounds be deadly. The Longes are a spongious and thin part, soft, and like
foame of congealed blood, declining something to the right side. Breath is
brought unto the Lights by a rough Artery, knit to the root of the tongue.
This Artery is a long channel made of many gristle rings on a row, which
ends in the Lights. If any thing fall into the hollownesse of this, the
breath is hindered, and there is danger to be choked.

The Heart is a fleshie part, solid, and well compacted, almost like a Piramis:
it has two ventricles, the right and the left. The right by an arteriall vein
communicates blood to the lights. This vein is so called of a proper
substance and office. From the left ventricle of the Heart arises Aorta the
root of all the Arteries. These are hollow vessels in the Heart begotte: and
are thick, distributing spirits throughout the whole body.

The excrements of the principal parts of breathing be spittle and cough.
Spittle is a windy foame cast out of the breast, and his parts: If it be
avoided with noise, it is called coughing. Superfluity of this matter is
judged by the coullor, for red spittle is of blood, yellow of choler: white of
phlegm, and black of melancholy.

The less principal parts of breathing, are the midrife, and the mediastin.
The midrife is a thin skin, like perchment, fastened ouerth wart to the sides,
and includes the parts of the breast. The mediastin is a double skin in
length, dividing the breast into two sides.

The vital parts are those which serve to the preservation of the spirits of
living creatures, and are appointed to nourishment, or generation. The
principal parts for the perfection of nourishment be the stomach and the
liver.

The Stomach is a part like perchment, sticking to the throat, round, but
long, and as it were, twisted with many small threeds, and it is the kitchen of
nourishment to be concocted.

The throat is a channel, full of nerves, carrying meat from the mouth to the
stomach. The Fibers are as it were, very small threeds, by benefit whereof the
stomach enjoys her faculty. These if they be straight and right, draw
nourishment unto them: if crooked they are oblique or transuerse: those retain
nourishment received: these expel excrements.

The casting forth of excrements by the upper parts of the stomach, is called
vomit, which expels that which abounds in the stomach: yet such excrement
is many times sent back from other parts into the stomach. The liver lies
upon the stomach on the right side, enclosing it with his laps, and is a
fleshy part of nourishment, red, like congealed blood, placed next under the
Midrife. In the Liver is made the second concoction, namely, of nourishment in
the belly, turned into a red mass: from the Liver arises a hollow vein, the
root of all other veins. These are hollow parts, round, and guide the blood
unto all the body, the substance of these is thinner by six fold then the skin
of the Arteries, whose substance ought to be thicker for the vehement motion of
the spirits. That the office of the liver may be made perfect by means of
veins, other particles are allotted thereunto: which receive the abounding
humors, choler, etc. The Gall receives yellow choler, and the Milt black.
The bladder of the Gall is a slimie part in the hollow part of the Liver, of
the figure of a Pear: the Milt is a long part like a shooe-sole, on the left
side over against the liver, but somewhat lower. Water from the liver is
received by the reins and bladder. The substance of the reins is thick, and
solid flesh; they stick on both sides about the loins, and have emulgent
veins arising from the hollow vein, from the trench of the veins hang
downward white, narrow veins guiding water from the reins unto the bladder:
The bladder is a slimie part, round, and containing urine in it. Urine is a
whey separated from blood in the reins, and more fully purged in the bladder.
This in the body of a temperate man, and sound, is of a mean substance, and
in quantity answers the drink received: in the chollericke it is yellow, or
red. His sediment is white, smooth, and equal without bubles, etc.

A sound body is known by voyding urine, which in the morning is white, and
after something red. For the one signifies that it does, and the other that it
has concocted. Urine is of a mean substance betwixt thin and thick. Thin
urine argues the weakness of the body, and coldness predominant, and
rawnesse of the parts of concoction. And this either remains the same or
becomes troubled. That shows concoction is not yet begun, and therefore
raw, or This, that it is but new begun. Thick urine like that of beasts,
notes excess of matter or concoction. Urine does vary according to age or
complexion, or according to diet and affections of the mind. For the urine of
Infants for the most part is white and milkie, the urine of boys is thicker,
and not so white, the urine of young men is like gold, and of old men white
and thin.

Touching complexions, the chollerick have orange coullour: Phlegmatike pale,
and thick: the Sanguine, red and mean. The melanchollicke, wan and thin.

Diet changes urine, as Saffron or Cassia causes Orange coullour. Urine of
those that fast long is yellow, of those that eat too much, it is white.

The less principal parts of concoction, are the gutts and mesenterion. The
gutts are long, round, hollow, and are knit to the lower part of the stomach.
These are thick or thin. The thinner are the three uppermost, as Duodenum,
Ieiunum, and Ileos.

Duodenum is the uppermost gut, twelve fingers long. The Ieiunum begins
where the Duodenum begins to turn unto rundells, Ileos is a thin gut having
in wrapped windings. The thicker guts of a thicker skin, are Caecum, Colon, and
Rectum.

The blind gut is thick, large, and short, having but one mouth. The Colon
has many turnings. The right goes straight to the Tuell: The excrement of the
belly, if it be but softly compact, and made at the appointed time, and
somewhat yellow, and not much smelling, argues good concoction. If it be red,
it argues, that much choler flows in the stomach: if it be white, it
shows cruditie and want of choler.

Blew shows mortification, and cold of the inward parts. Too thick or thin
egestion, argues bad concoction: if fattish, or slimie, it notes a
consumption. Above all, in these things it must be observed, what meat has
lately been received.

The guts are wrapped about with the Mesenterion, which is a skin in the end
full of kernells, and wouen with many thin veins, which meeting together, make
a multiplying of Vena porta in the hollow of the Liver.

Thus of the common parts of all creatures: their kinds follow.

All Creatures are reasonable, or unreasonable. They which want reason, are
Beasts, who live on Land or in Water. Those which live on the earth, move on
the earth, or in the air. Beasts moving on the earth, are fourefooted, or
creeping. Fourefooted Beasts, bring forth young shaped as themselves, or eggs.
Those that bring forth living Creatures, some have solid feet, and some
cloven feet. They have solid feet who want horns, as Horses, Mules, and
Asses, etc. The cloven footed Beasts, for the most part have horns, as the
Ox, Goat, Heart, etc.

Land Beasts bringing forth eggs, are the Crocodiles, and some which have a
shell.

Frogs, Liserts, and some Serpents have four feet.

Creatures creeping on the earth, are all kind of Worms, Ants, Earwigs: to
whom may be added, Spiders, Lice, Gnatts, and such other.

Fowls are hotter and dryer then Creatures, living only on the land, and all
of them bring forth eggs, and have but two feet. They have either whole feet
or claws. Geese, Duckes, Swannes, have whole feet to row in the water.

Other Birds for the most part have claws, as Doves, Swallows, Hens,
Sparrowes, etc.

The insect of Fowls, are Waspes, Bees, Hornetts, Gnatts, Flies. These
Creatures are they which live upon the earth: those that live in the water, are
Fishes, or of that kind, as the Seahorse, the Sea-Dog, etc.

Fishes many of them are like to Creatures living on the earth in their parts:
but they have not so much blood: therefore they are colder and moyster.

Fishes are soft, or hard: the soft have scales, or only a skin.

Of the scaly be the Carpe, the Perch. Of the slimie be Eelles.

The harder fishes have plates, as the Crabbe, the Lobster, etc. Or shells, as
Oysters, Mussells, etc.

MAn is a Creature that has reason, and as he is most excellent, so has he a
more perfect shape in body then others. His members are formed, and begin to
appear distinctly about the sixth and twentieth day. And they are all perfect
in Males at thirty days, and in Females at six and thirty days. About this
time the Child begins to live, and to feel. The Male is moved in the third
month, but the female in the fourth month: then it is nourished and increased
till the ninth month, and after the ninth month, when it is grown great, it is
brought forth. This is the forming, and procreating of Man, for whose sake all
other Creatures were made.

FINIS.

