SYMMACHIA: OR, A TRVE-LOVES KNOT. TIED, BETWIXT GREAT Britain and the United
Provinces, by the wisdom of King JAMES, and the States General; the Kings of
France, Denmark, and Sweden, the Duke of Sauoy, with the States of Venice
being Witnesses and Assistants.

FOR THE WEAL AND PEACE OF CHRISTENDOM.

TO THE READER.
I Am to let all men know, that besides those grieuances which I have
favorably and sparingly mentioned and minced in these following Papers, I
hear of another one arising which is of greatest moment and likeliest to
produce most alteration, if it be not prevented. And that is the hard and
extreme measure which the Merchant Adventurers here settled, meet with in their
Staple commodity. Concerning which if there be not order presently taken, to
give them contentment, in some good and indifferent manner, but that they be
forced to seek courses for relief of themselves by their Petitions and
Complaints to his Majesty (whereabout I hear they are meditating) a worse
business then that of East Indya will break forth to trouble both States, and
alien hearts from each other. For it concerns the King: Peers, and Commons
when the Wool is pulled from their backs by any abuse; since every condition
of men in the Land, and almost every person, have interest in that Commodity.
This breach therefore, I wish with all my heart were stopped by timely provision,
and the rude, boorish and proud disposition of such, in these parts,
restrained, as by their too strickt, surly, and imperious courses, for their
private profit provoke the complaint of our people, and drive them to seek
ease and remedy by the shift of place and trade where they may hope to be
better used, and to find love, respect, and justice, with indifferency.

SYMMACHIA Or A true-loues knot.
AS there is nothing of more moment (in humane considerations) for the
advancement of religion, then the supportance, favor, and protection of
potent Princes and States, who are or ought to be nurseing Fathers and nurseing
Mothers to this end: so there is nothing of more moment to enable the Kingdom
of great Brittanie and the United Provinces to be such (since the chief
butthen and honor of this work lies upon their shoulders) then to unite
themselves in perfect amity together. The enemy both to our Religion and
State seems to observe this better then our selves; since they have used all
endeavors to make breaches betwixt us, and to keep us off from each other at
an unprofitable distance, where the force of our cold amity could have no
powrefull effect to assist each other, or oppose them. They have prevailed very
far to their end, especially upon that part where they had least hope, and
where they imployde the least force of their wit, I mean upon the
Netherlandish side where jelousie (to see us treat with the enemy) has
caused many people in the United Provinces to behave themselves toward us, as
Coy Dames use to do, who think to win their lovers to more longing, by rude
tricks of unkindness.

I intend not to repeat the particulars, least I should be thought, rather to
revive old quarrels by renueing there memory, then to stop farther breaches
by burying all fomer injuries in oblivion. Yet I must say, that if they should
think, we put up those affronts offered to our Nation in Groenlant and the
east Indyes, either out of fear of their strength, or our own weakness, they
should injury us no less in the conceit, then they have done in the act.
Religion only has bownd our hands, and we are satisfied that the State does
disclame it, and cast it upon private persons; otherwise we were as well able
to scourge them, as to defend them from scourging. It were an ungrateful part
in them, whilst we endanger our selves by houlding up their chinnes, to keep
them from sincking, that they s'hould with their heels kick us under water.
But because we believe and know, that these wrongs proceed not from the
State, but from such persons (for the most part on both sides) as love Mammon
better then Christ, and count gain the only godlyness, therefore we are not
apt to hear or believe all that is suggested, nor to see all that is true, but
to hope and promise our selves better use for the future; since they know and
must confess, that neither themselves, not the proudest or potentest Nation
upon earth, can upon equal terms (without politic surprisall) assure
themselves to beat us and be our Masters; nor dare (without manifest
advantage) provoke us to the trial.

But since humor has been so stird upon both sides, that Prudence and
moderation has had enough to do to keep us from breaking out into blows, it
was a timely work of wisdom in their State to seek to stop the gap, and a
gracious work of our prudent prince to give them audience (notwithstanding the
contrary noise which buz'd about his ears) and to renew that ancient league
betwixt us, which was like to break into enmity. The fool hardy can charge
hotly and engage a State in war, it must be the wise and advised who only
know how to make an honorable retreite. It is fit upon both sides, that now
this league is renewed, we should be more careful hereafter to preserve it,
then heretofore we have been. And to indeere the merit of our State in this
respect, it is fit to touch upon some particulars whereby our Kindenes to them
may be discerned, thereby to beget reciprocal kindenes in them toward us.

1. Observe first we were the parties wronged, and they the wrongers: yet they
stood stiffly out and sought no reconcilement, till we underhand, seeing their
necessity, both enticed them to seek, and assured them to find what they
sought. Herein, being their superiors in force, we showed our selves not to
be their inferiors in wisdom, which the wisest amongst them will acknowledge,
though the weak will not see it, but attri, bute all to our duty; as if they
ouer-reached us in wit, when it is only we that ouer-reach them in Kindenes.

2. Observe the motion of the whole body of the State in Parliament, the
concurrance of Nobles, Clergy, and Commons in this case of theirs; their
humble earnest and unanimous sutite to his Majesty for this end, their speedy
and careful (that I may not say curious) penning of the Law for their
assistance, equally as for our own Kingdoms, in these words. Most gracious
souvereigne, we your Majesty's most humble, faithful, and loueing subjectes,
by your Royal authority now assembled in your high Court of Parliament,
haueing entered into serious and due consideration of the weighty and most
important causes, which at this time more then at any other time heretofore,
do press your Majesty, to a much greater expense and charge then your own
treasure alone can at this present support and manietaine; and likewise of the
injuries and indignities which have been lately offered to your Majesty and
your children, under color and du^eing the time of the Treatyes for the
Marriage with Spain, and the restitution of the Palatinate, which in this
Parliament have been clearly discouverd and laid open unto us, and withalll,
what humble advice, with one consent and voice, we have given unto your
Majesty, to dissolve those Treatyes which your Majesty has been graciously
pleased, to our exceeding joy and comfort, fully to yield unto, and accordingly
have made your public declaration for the real and utter dissolution of
them, by means where of your Majesty may be happily engaged in a sudden
war: we in all humbleness most ready and willing to give unto your
Majesty, and the whole world, an ample, testimony of our dutiful affectons,
and sincere intentions to assist you therein, For the maintenance of that war
that may here upon ensue, and more particularly for the defense of this your
Realm of England, the secureing of your Kingdom of Ireland, the assistance of
your Neighbors, the States of the united Provinces, and other your Majesty's
friends and allies, And for the setting forth of your Royal Navy, we have
resolved to give for the present the greatest aid which ever was granted in
Parliament, to be leiued in so short-a time: And therefore we do humbly
beseech your Majesty, etc.

Thus you see in the body of our Law the State of the united Provinces is
specially nominated, and ranged in union with his Majesty's Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, and the gift limited for the defense especially of those
three. Which, though selfconceited eyes ouersee, yet is argues much respect and
love; neither do I believe they have given or received the like
acknowledgement before to or from any other State; nor can we redely find in
History the like interchange of love betwixt forteigne people, recorded.

2. Observe the most excellent Prince of Wales his forwardnes and
extraordinary diligence to accomplish this work; I dare not say, whatsoever I
think, that the whole frame was first of his composure, but I am sure he was a
principal Agent in the happy conclusion.

3. Observe his Majesty how readely and gladly he granted when it came to the
vpshot: so that he seemed to hold off before for politic respects;

First, to beget a feeleing in our friends of their own estate, who did not,
in his Majesty's judgment, seem sensible enough, for a long time, either of
their own danger, or of this his royal favor and benefit.

Secondly, to make his own subjects the more eager and earnest by the delay,
and so give them time to debate the business, to understand the charity and
utility of the work, and to open their purses the wider.

Thirdly to secure the Enemy by this means, till all were ready, that so we
might reflect upon them, by a thin and slight shadow the open and gross
iniuryes they had done us before, under the couerture of treatyes and trust.
Now for the better understanding of his Majesty's mind, in all points
proportionable to this description, I have inserted his privy Counsels letter
to the Lords Lifetenants of Sheeres in England, for the assistinge of the Earls
and Commanders in rayseing men within their several Countyes, and that by his
Majesty's special direction, for the aid of the United Provinces.

AFter our hearty commendations to your good Lordshippes, whereas the States
General of the united Provinces have by their Ambassadors humbly solicited his
Majesty as well to renew the anciant defensive league between his Kingdoms
and their Provinces, as also to permit them for the better confirmation
thereof, to raise some good number of voluntary soldiers within his Dominions,
to be employed in their service in these hazardous times, when the Emperor,
and the Romish Catholic league are preparing, and drawinge down toward
their Countries, diverse great and threatniug Troops to join with those
Armies, that allreadie lie upon their frontiers, ready to take the first
opportunity of advantage against them. And that his Majesty in a constant
pursuit of the good amity and correspondentie with those Provinces, has
treated, and concluded a league with their Ambassadors, and given way and
permission for the raysinge of six thousand voluntary soldiers for their
service and assistance, for their better strength, and defense against those
forces of the Emperor, and Romish Catholic league: Which his Majesty has
the rather assented to, in regard of his own interest, both for the security
of his own Dominions, and the great part his son in Law, his only daughter,
and his grand children have in the preservation of the United Provinces where
they now remain as refugers. And because the time of the year is so far
spent, as it will be requisite to use all possible expedition in the raising
and transportation of these men, We have thought it requisite to give your
Lordshippes this intimation of his Majesty's good pleasure, and assent for the
levyinge of the said voluntaryes, to the end you may not only permit, and
further our very good Lords, the Earls of Oxford, Southampton, and Essex, and
the Lord Willoughby (appointed Colonels) and for that purpose deputed by the
States Ambassadors, and such other Captains, and officiers under them as they
shall substitute, to leavy and take up such voluntary soldiers, as sball be
vvilling to go over in their company; but that withal you afford them your
best direction, assistance, and furtherance therein, and give notice of this
his Majesty's pleasure to the deputy Lieutenantes, Justices of peace, and
other his Majesty's Ministers within the precinct of your Lieutenancy To which
we doubt not, but you will all readily and effectually apply your selves both
in respect of the general cause, and for the ease and benefit the Country
will find in being disburthened of many unnecessary persons that now want
employment, and live lewdly, or unprofitably in the Country. And if any of
those voluntaries shall after they have accepted impresse money and so engaged
themselves into the service, withdraw themselves, or run away from their
Captains, or Conductor, his Majesty's pleasure is, that upon any such
complainte, you yield your best assistance for the apprehendinge and
recoueringe of those fugitives, and them to commit to prison until they submit
themselves, or otherwise punish them, as is usual in such cases. And so we bid
your Lordshippes hartly farewell. 20 of June. 1624.

4. Observe the Peoples willingness generally to offer themselves to this
service, and the expression of extraordinarye joy as soon as they heard the
Drums beat, and that the intent of their intertaniement was published, to
serve the States of the United Provinces against the King of Spain and the
Arch-Duchesse; so that these words were forced to be altered by command, for
present respects of State.

5. Observe the Nobles, and those none of the meanest, striueing for employment
in this war, not for the gains of these poor and (in comparison of them)
petty places, but to honor their Nation, to show the world amongst what people
they were nobles, to defend religion and that State which ioynes with our own
to defend it, to countenance the cause, to deter the enemy, to hold the Common
man upon the right side, to assure the adverse part what aid he is to expect
from us, and to stop the mouth of the clamorous Merchant, who, though he had
just cause to cry, yet cries now in an unseasonable time, and will therefore
learn to give over vain clamoures whilst he beholds the Peers are engaged in
the work which he would hinder.

And here I cannot but present this glass to the v^w of many young Nobles and
Gentiles in these parts of the United Provinces, who whilst their Country is
assaulted by malicious Enemies, and defended by honorable strangers, both of
our and other Nations, sit still themselves and lend no hand to help it, but
hold it rather a great indignity to be a soldier. These must needs be
ignorant of their own honorable roots, which first sprung from Arms and must
be by that most honorable profession mainetained whereof those swords are
witnesses, which none but Gentlemen wear amongst them. And I am persuaded
therefore, this gross and effeminate conceit, is bred amongst them, either by
their too tender Mothers, who had rather see their Country perish, then to
behold their children hazard themselves for the safeguard of it; or from their
Anabaptisticall neighbors who suppose (erroniously) all arms to be
Antichristian; or from the Malignant papist, who though he has the liberty of
his conscience amongst them, yet because he may not have the free and public
exercise of his superstition, wishes the Spanish iron yoke over the neck of
the Belgic lion, and deters his own, and others, from their Countries
service, and hates such to death, as serve to secure his liberty and life.

But to return to our matter, and to manifest our general willingness and
allacritie for the undertaking of there defense; I would neither have the
Common people ignorant, nor yet think us so stupid not to understand the
benefit of this defensive aid sent over to them at this present, which is
greater then at first sight itappeareth to all eyes. For besides that we help
to defend there frontires at our own charge, which all see, we also spend the
means, which we receive out of England, amongst them also, so they have the
use both of our men and monye, which makes tradeing something quicker setting
many trades on work, and filling the public purse something fuller by excise
and other duties, which all observe not. What ready money has been disbursed
in their Country for Hats, Arms, and other necessaries to furnish these
troops is apparent to all, and the laborious Tradesman tastes of the dooble
benefit, and will bless God for it, howesoeuer the ignorant and insoleut will
not acknowledge to have received hereby so much as a single courtesy. For I
hear them object, in scorn, that all this is not given but lent, they must
repay it. True, as they did the money for the Cantionarie towns of Flushing in
Zeland, and the Briell, in Holland, with the Castle of Ramekins in the Iseland
of Waltheren which came to 818000 lb, which first upon suite to his Majesty
they instald for 40000 by the year, and continued the payment thereof for five
years, but after, finding it heavy, they again sought ease of his Majesty,
and graciously obtained a general release and possession of their towns and
Castle for the sum of 200000 paid to his highness, and of 25000, assigned
by his Majesty's bownty toward the reward of the Officers. Which abatement
proceeded neither from our want (for then it had been a most unthankful part
in them, not equally to respect our want in the repayment, as we did their in
the lending) nor out of the excess of their wit (as some would arrogantly
have it) but out of there humble suite, and his Majesty's grations and ready
grant: Who considering what became his honor would give rather then receive,
and would not defraude that trust which was reposed in his predecessor, and so
successively in him, but redeliuered the Keys of their Country into their own
possession again. And this may teach them to see that it is not in the power
of one Stanly or one York, to stain the honor of a Nation; but they may as
safely trust us, as themselves; provided they be sure of their religion whom
they trust. If they be careless in admitting Captains and officers, they may
well suspect such so admittted: but if they know them faithful to God, they
need not doubt their fidelity to them. And it is not only ours, but all other
Nations, yea their own most of all, who are to be suspected and so kept from
Command, if either they be of no religion or popishly affected: If of none,
then they are for any Devil that will tempt them (and Mammon especially is
then the God they worship) if popish, then they are for Antichrist, and so for
the Catholic King, who is his best beloved son, and like to be the heir of
all that he can give him. For he uses his ecclesiastical Keys to no other
end, but to open and shut the heart, and all other houlds, for the
intertainement of the Spanish pomp and pride, and for the enlargement of that
quintessentiall Monarchy, though the spirit of God by the Mouth of Daniell say
the contrary never so peremtorily and plainly.

But some object the Kings bownty in this respect proceeded from the
consideration of his own charge, which he should have been at in keepeing
those places, merely for the proffit of the united Provinces. Perhaps indeed
this was the cause which made him the more willing to part with them, upon
their suite, and his Counsels advice: but this does not lessen his bownty, not
their obligation. For to keep a chargeable gage, for an other man's benefit, so
long as the owner pleases, to restore it safely and better in every refpect
then it was at the first engagement, and that when the owner desires it, and
upon no terms of advantage but upon such as he himself prescribes, witnesses
extraordinary honesty in the lender and deserves extraordinary thankfulness
from the borrower. Indeed the first motion for reddidition of these places
proceeded, perhaps, from some who wished well to the Spaniard, and did not like
the continuance of this their dependancie upon England, who was by these
cautions really and perpetually in point of honor, and proffit, and interest,
engaged for the defense of their State and title equally with themselves: And
this was seconded by a windy humor bred in a few others by prosperity and
peace, which looked not so far as the first mouersayme, but supposeing
themselves able to stand upon their own feet, thought scorn to hold any
longer of others, and began to meditate how to forget the hand that helped them
up, and to requite that courtesy with quarrels: which they could not do
safely (they saw) whilst we had those pawnes in our custody. But for the
carriage of our Queen of blessed memoire deceased, of our present souuereigne,
of our Counsel and State in general, there was no passage either in the first
taking of them on, in the holding, or restroreing of them, but savors of
religion and honor in all apprehensions, and will do so to all generations
hereafter.

Again they object that our present aid lent them is for our own sake; since
our Parliament generally apprehended these Countries to be as the bulwarks or
at least as the Counterscarfe and outworks of our own land: and it was wisely
said of a great Commander in his speech made to the Parliament, Anno 1621.
that if we loose the Counterscarfe though it be beyond the ditch, the whole
fortification is accounted lost. For the Rampie^ serves but for a defense to
make composition, so that if we will be content to loose the counterscarfe, then
we must presently think of nothing but making a fair composition, or such,
at least, as the besieger will afford us. And we willingly ackowledg this to
be a truth, wishing them to do us good for their own sake, as they see us do
them good as they say for our own sake. If we count them our out-workes (as
we do) they ought to count us as the marketplace, or Sanctwary or heart of
the City which those outworkes are appointed to guard. They count themselves
and the world generally and worthily counts them, to be a wise, politic, and
provident people; let them therefore show it in this particular, loueing us and
doing us all the good they can piouslie for religion sake, courteously and
readely for neibourhoods sake, faithful for friendships sake, or at least
politiquely for their own sakes.

Again they object our people are imployde by this means, and so our State
pruned, drayned, and disburthened of many unruly and unnecessary members. This
is very true also; for our nation (as rank soyles yield many weeds, and rank
wits many extrauagancies) bringes forth many people, and withal spirits of
extraordinary temper for the war; which might be attributed to our diet
(since we eat more solid flesh then any other Nation in Europe) but that we
likewise find all that is bred in our Climate (as appears by our Mastiues and
Cocks of the game) are of a more noble and generous strain (as I may say) then
many others. These fiery Spirits are often most unruly, so that their parents
are weary of them, and seeing they will take no course to live otherwise, cloth
them furnish them with money, and expose them to the wars. Many of these have
the wit and grace to come over well pronided, as their parents send them ont:
others will not leave England till their Money be spent, their clothes worn
out, and then ashamed, with the prodigal, to return home for new supplies,
they come over into these parts ragged (as we see) a shame to their parents
and Nation. Others leave their trades, and run from their Masters; and this
is the true canse of these ragged and naked regiments, where you may see good
bodies of Men, very ill apparrelled. And by these ofscoureings, men Gess at the
poverty of our State, forgetting they come, though naked, from the land of
Broad-cloth, and that this raggednes of theirs, in so rich a Country, is one
evident note that they are made and marked out, for the wars. Indeed
therefore we confess these men find employment here by this means and
withal this State finds defense. Besides the stock is our own, wherewithal
they are set to work: for we, with our own monye!, clothe them, furnish and
arm them in all points complete for the field, with this charge, that they
should fight for these Provinces as they would fight for Brittanie. And were it
not in regard of Religion (which we always prize and prefer before all
other respects) and in regard of the safety of both States, which equally
concerns us, we could have the same employment against them which we have
now for them, and that upon fatre better terms. Where then were they (but that
these respects do tie us to them) if our King (which God forbid) should send so
much monye and so many men against them to the Enemy? The most purplind and
partial person may see the issue, and so behold this benefit, in the contrary
danger.

To tempt us with iniuryes therefore, and not to see their own instant
necessity, because the necessity which we politiquely fear and would prevent
stands in their light, is an intolerable oversight unworthy of their
wisdoms.

To presume they may do us hurt without danger, because we will do them none,
but endanger our selves to keep them from hurt (as being most careful of
their welfare with respect to our own assurance and theirs in common) is a
madness beyond all measure. As if I should rob my neighbor and undo him,
because I know him busied in watching my house, to save me and himself from
robbing and vndoeing.

Since now we have sufficiently declared our own kindeness, in wooing the
united Provinces to reciprocal courtesies, and the necessity of our standing
together, except both of us intend to fall; I proceed breefely to persuade
both Nations to take better notice of the Enemies trains and devises invented
to divide us, that so we may unite our selves to each other more closely by
vndissoluable knots of love and amity. And because these troops of English
newly raised may some of them out of ignorance give or take offenses which
might easily be avoided; I (whose care and study it is to do good offices
betwixt them, and to prevent what is possible all shadow of unkindness which may
arise) even in the least circumstance have used that liber^y of speech in the
discourse hitherto unto which I am accustomed and naturally inclined: Which,
though some may mis^^ke who neither know me nor the matter, yet I know such
honest and downeright freedom to be most fit and profitable for the
continueing of friendship and cleereing of the case, which liberty I desire
leave to use in that which follows also; for besides that the strocks of a
friend are pleasant, in being profitable, I understand this business has need
of plain dealeing, under whose severe conduct all affairs prosper, better
then in the perpetual Cockering of foolemakeing and foole-fauoring flattery.

And first for my own Nation, I desire they would not be too jealous,
captious, and curious in taking unkindness where none is offered. Some persons
have the trick to pin their interests and particular spleenes upon the
public sleeue: and so what they have felt or do feel in private, must needs
be a general greeuance: but we must be wise and wary, not to suffer
quarrels which may fall betwixt particulars, to troble or disturb the
general peace; whilst we see those iniuryes are not backed by authority, and
made universal and national.

And if we must not suffer real actions to disturb our affections, much less
should we permit words to do it, especially evil words from such persons as
have not yet learned to speak well.

It is true that Ladies and gentlewoemen passing the streets iu strange habits,
do often penance amongst the ruder sort, (as appeared by that most uncivil and
barbarous demeanoure used lately toward an English Lady in Amsterdam who
desired to see the City, and supposed all gouvernements to be as civil as
Londen) but we must consider the same set of people would wonder as much at a
Parrat or Poppiniay. It is true also that men of all ranks meet often amongst
boys words of reproach; but, besides that we cannot altogether clear our own
in some rude places from that barbarism, what should such words of scorn
spued from such mouths move us? Since indeed it is our glory to be those
English Dogs, that have helped the Shepherds to chase from hence the Spanish
Wolves, who else would have worryed, not only these silly Lambs, but the
harmeles and innocent Sheep, their Fathers. Let not this stir the courage of
a Man to fury, but pity and scorn; as Lions use to walk with contempt
amongst barkeing whelps, whose shrill notes are music, whilst the Puppies
bite not. Assuredly these boys would, and do too often, use their Parents
thus; they know no better; they never learned a lesson of obedience, much less
of gratefullnes, to honor those in duty who defend them in love, and often
favors them as the Pellicane does her young, whom in extremetie, she fosters
and cherishes with her own blood.

It will be imputed a folly to me to touch this, but I have seen some touched
with it. It often falls out that men who affect honor, as it is the souldiars
aim, are more offended with reproaches and scorns then actual iniuryes. And if
it were not so, these spirits would not sell their flesh and blood so cheap,
far under the rate of beef, or mutton, veale, or porke, nor would they
endure heat and cold, and hunger and thirst, when servants (haueing more
wages) will not, but that there is an air of praise and hope which they
(Camelion like) feed upon, and it kills their hearts to hear this blown away
by a stinkeing breath with disgraceful language. It were easy for them by any
honest trade or course of life to live well in their own Countries, for mere
necessity does not bring them over hither, as if we wanted meat and drink
in England, France or Scotland, but either they are brought hither to be
punished for their idleness, and because they would not at home do a little
easy work for great wages, are forced here, as in a house of correction, to
do great work, yea the hardest of all (to overcome many wants, and
difficulties, themselves, and others) for little wages: Or else, being men made
and marked out for the wars, they seek and desire this kind of life, and
would chose it amongst all others as the most honorable, though they had
nothing for their labor, but the opportunity and lawful authority, to
erchange knocks freely. For they deal for honor, as merchants for proffit; and
they stamp in flesh and blood, as the other mint in gold and silver. Now then
the first sort meeteing disgraceful words meets but his desert, it is part of
his punishment to be reproched and reviled: but this latter, who is only
covetous of honor, takes it ill, to have this counterfeit coin of disgrace,
put upon him in stead of current money. But I would not have any of these
latter sort look so low to stoop to such petty praise, nor contrarily once
cast their eye aside to these sons of Belial, children of Bethell, who would
mock Elizeus if he came among them with a bald head or a strange habit, Nay
rather I would have them do all good they can for the general State of these
Countries, with respect of those good people who are mixed among the wicked,
and mourn for the abominations which are done in the Land. Dear Countrymen,
you that be at home in peace, pay your monyes freely for the supportance and
defense of these, pray for them with unfeigned faith; and you, worthyes, that
are here, fight for them with undaunted resolution, and, if need be, dye for
them with comfort and cheerefulnes even as for your own Country; since, as I
have manifested, the war is the same though a little farther removed, and
besides that it is also a religious war, being for religion, if the warriors
themselves have any religion in them.

Again I am to exhort my Countrymen, who are comprehended under the name of
great Britains, to show themselves as strong being now united, as they have
shown the mselues heretofore being divided. Let both the English and Scottish
Nations declare by action that they have not lost their old hearts by taking
upon them a new name; but that they are the sons of those Fathers whose brave
blood, spilt in the wars, has enriched and manured these feilds, with
France, Spain, and Palestine, and are ready to do it again for the
propagation of Christian Religion, and for gaineing free and assured passage to
the glorious Gospel of our Lord lesus Christ.

Lastly I desire and exhort with all earnestnes that they would be careful to
serve the united Provinces faithfully, and not to deceive them in the least
respect: whilst therein they serve or deceive their own Prince and Country,
with whose monyes they are paid, and shall reap praise and honor or shame and
obloqui of their friends at their return home according as they behave
themselves in these employments abroad.

And now haueing done with our own, I am in most humble manner, to present
these petitions following which I have learned from the observation of my
Countrymen to the considerations of my superiors in these parts, in whose power
it is to redress the enormities thereby to declare, that they prize us, as we
do them.

First that they would be graciously pleased, to hear the Old soldi^rs sueing
for better pay, and desireing to be discharged oftheir most chargeable and
unconscionable Sollicitours, who eat them up by lewish usury in an
unreasonable manner, So as I have heard diverse conscionable Commanders say, it
is almost impossible for an Officer to live (though never so meanly and
modestly) upon his means, except he deceived the State or Soldiar; Since most
of his own means is swallowed up by the solicitor. O that it would enter
into the heart of those prudent Lords, to take a course for better payment,
that the Captains might not have just occasion to complain, nor Color to
seek shifts by cursed attestations, there by to deceive the Country of bodies,
and themselves of souls. Then your Companyes would be fuller, and the officer
would serve with better courage, because with better conscience. Yea then, if
deceit should be used or offered, none would pity the guilty delinquent,
though he were made an public example and spectacle of fraud, unworthy his
profession. I say unworthy his profession, for I know, whatsoever othermen
vainly think, that a real lie is more dishonorable (though custom and
company clouds it) then a verbal, which is so heinous to the ear and
reputation of a soldier.

But I hear an objection against this suite, which I dare not mention without
craueing pardon aforehand, and this it is, as they say, God knows the truth of
it; That if Sollicitors were discharged and better payment made, then diverse of
the Natives should loose excellent offices, the General State let go a fair
improuement, and diverse great persons could not put their monyes out to usury
upon such unreasonable conditious. I cannot believe this profitable sin, can
bar the door against just reformation, though the insolency of the
Solicitors would persuade me to believe it; who presumeing, as it seems and as
the success shows, upon supportance, dare affront the greatest Commanders and
use them as servants not like Masters by whom they live. Sometime Solicitors
have been put upon Captains by force, and they authorized to take from the
Captains ordinance the best part of his means though the solicitor never
advanced him a penie of money aforehand, but because he contracted with his
Predecessor; So that if a cunning Companion who has a little spare money can
insinuate himself into the bosom of a needy or negligent Commander, and
supplyeing his preseut wants, fasten a piece of money upon him, and procure from
him an inconsiderate contract, for his life only, let it be never so
unreasonable, yet his successor must continue it, and make it good, nay,
perhaps increase it out of his means; and so successiiuely from generation to
generation, if the wars should continue it would continue like a rentcharge
upon the Captain or campanie; whereby it comes to pass, that though a
Captain, who venters life and all for the State, has but a term of life in
his Captaineship; Yet the solicitor, for layeing out a hundred or two hundred
pownd, has half the Captains means, and a perpetuity in that half, though
he do nothing for the State but help to undo it. Besides though these
persons be taken on, that the soldier may have sound pay, for which the
Captain pays soundly, as I have partly showed, yet their payment is so bad,
that there are few Captains (I might say safely, none) put have just cause to
complain, if their just complaints might be heard and redressed.

But such is the unequal condition of the persons and the odd and
disrespectiue carriage of the time toward them, that the Captain contracting
with the solicitor, is bownd for his part, and the solicitor is his own judge,
and carues himself what amends he list^eth out of the Captains means: but
the solicitor, contracting with the Captain, is notwithstanding loose for his
part, or as good as loose, since he cares notfor keepeing his day, but often
puts the Captain to borrow, and pawn his credit and clothes upon interest for
payment of his company, when notwithstanding he pays use to the solicitor
for aduanceing it aforehand; Nay say the Captain forbeares it a month or two
(as sometime it falls out) yet he pays use for it, and the solicitor will not
abate a stiuer, though the one loses and the other gains by this means, a
dooble use.

There is also a gains made to the solicitor by payment of light money, which
he knows the Captain must be forced to put away, cannot keep to change; with
many other gross and intolerable abuses of which I have heard Captains
complain, and which cry out (for the with-houlding of the labourors due is a
cryeing Iam. 5. 4.
sin) either to the State for redress or to God for judgment. I see what
account David made of his worthies and souldiars, and how precious their blood
was in his fight, when refuseing to drink of the water they fetched for him
with peril of their lines, He powered it out to the Lord and said My God
forbid it me that I shonld do 1. Chro.
this thing; Shall I drink the blood of these men that have 11. 18.
put their lives in ieopardie? for with the ieopardie of their lives they
brought it, therefore he would not drink. I wish that all solicitors and
usurers would consider this story well, and then they wonld not (except they
were right Nabals) make it their daily trade to drink up, nay to be drunk
with the blood of such men, and that whilst they are watching that these may
drink the safer, and fighting for safeguard of that money, whose use eats them
up to the bare bones. But if these jews and bloodsuckers will not consider it,
yet it concerns David and the worthies of this State to look to it better,
and to their care and conscience I commend it. For if this be not reformed, as
it shows inward corruption and putrefaction, ripe for dissolution, so it may,
at one time or other, by one means or other, put the State to straights and
difficultyes, did not the auxiliarie Bands take care for it, to defend it, and
respect it, as their own Country. Which care of theirs appeared the last
year, at the coming out of that Placat, which gave them, generally so much
discontent, and that in the instant when they expected the Enemy. Which had
been a fit time and occasion to tempt them to mutinee, but that faith, h onor,
and religion restrained them; yea such a time; as would have occasioned some
Nations then to cry for gelt and reformation, or also to lay down their
arms. Whereas then, all these troops, both British, and French, did nobly and
loyally resolve, not to dispute the point before the fight, but first to fight,
and so to dispute the point against the Enemy with the edge of their anger and
points of their swords, that they might by their deserts move the States to
repeal their act, and to show they meritted augmentation by way of largess,
rather then abatement or abridgement, by way of defalcation; which they would
intimate by humble petition, without disputation, after the service was done
and the Enemy gone off, and not before. And this resolution they generally
followed, whereby they deserved dne consideration, and I doubt not in time but
they shall find it. They are Tyrants and not Fathers of the Commonwealth, who
take occasion to be evil, from the goodness of their people; so that the better
the subject or inferior is, the worse the superior shows himself to be; and
the more he is content for peace, and quiet, and conscience, to suffer, the
more the other puts upon him and forces him beyond his strength to bear and
suffer. It shall not be so amongst you, (says our savior to his Disciples) I
hope the illustrious Lords are our saviors Disciples also, and I am sure then,
It shall not be so amongst them.

Secondly I beseech the State to consider whether or no it be fit to vindicate
the honor of our king, State and Nation, together with the King and Queen of
Bohemia, from the base aspersions cast upon them, by rumor and lyeing
multitude, in the point of their present maintenance. For I know the Common
people believe, and give it out, for a manifest truth, as men that will believe
no better, how that royal Payer with their Princely children, lie here at the
charge of this State, and that exactions are laid upon the people to
mainetayne them in that humble condition wherein they live, which
(notwithstanding it be far too mean for the dignity of such persons,) yet
in the vulgar eye it seems therefore to be to haughty, because they think it
comes out of their purse, and to proceed from their beggarly benevolence.

This falsehood is bred and nourished by the Spanish faction, who would do
worse then slander them if they could, and do this to make the Country hate
them, and thereby to provoke the people for their sake, to mutinee and rise
against the present government of the illustrious Lords, as if they were the
occasion of this causeles and needles change, by harboring these distressed
Princes in their Dominions.

The knowledge of this was one of the principal motives which caused me first
to put penn to paper in this subject; because I saw the honor of my King,
Country, and of these Princes traduced and tossed up and down by lewd lyeing,
and ignorant tongues. For, in stead of charging this State with their aboade
here (as these fellows feign and give out) they are every way helpefull to
it, spending therein many thousand pownds starling by the year, and causeing
much to be spent, all which comes out of England into these parts. And I
present it to the consideration of my superiors, whether it were fit, for all
their honors, and safetyes, to cry this off, or to make the truth of it some
way publicly known, that the malicious mouths of men may in this respect be
closed, and that the people may know they bear no burden but their own, yea
that we also do help them, out of love, to carry part of that, which belongs
to them wholly to bear, out of duty to God and their Country.

Thirdly I humbly present this motion to the consideration of my superiors,
whether they think it fit or no, for the consolidation of this league, and for
the preservation of perpetual amity betwixt both Nations, to equal us, if not
with their own, at least with the chief of other Nations, who serve them as
we do; since we have been, are, and are like to be, as good studds and
props to this State, as they or any of them have been, are, or can be. Let
not the advantage of language make a stricter band, then that of hearts and
hands. If their tongues go before ours, our hearts and hands go in front with
them, and have ever done so, to do this State service. Neither speak I this to
disparage them or any of them; It is no disparagement for the best of them, to
march with us; Neither speak I this to detract from their deseruings, but by
comparison of theirs to set off our own (which has been nothing inferior to
theirs) and so to beget equal respect for equal merit in all ranckes and
degrees.

Fourthly I present to the wise consideration of my superiors, whether they
think it fit or no, that in both the Indyes and all other places of trade or
fishing, their people be straightly commanded carefully to mainetaine peace;
that they sell not our love for a little lucre, nor invade our simple trust and
innocent security, with fraud or violence, upon base advantages of time, and
odds of number, or the like circumstances of treachery and injury; which, as
they may be shadowed with the cloak of Justice, so they may serve our Enemies,
(who seek to divide us,) as shadows to accuse the united Provinces of
injustice, and thereby to incense our State to sudden rage and sharp revenge
against them as against perfidious Enemies. And I could therefore wish that if
any should dare to disobay the Edicts of the State published for pacification,
they may be persued as public Enemies, who by their practice testify the
treason of their hearts, whilst they endeauoure to give distaste to our State,
thereby to break the love and league betwixt Great Brittanie and the united
Provinces, that so their Trojan Horse or Spanish Iennet may come in at the
breach.

Fifthly I would here speak of honors and rewards to be propounded for the
soldier of all sorts and degrees, but that I am afraid to be laughed at for my
labor, or if not so, yet to be answered with that Common Error which goes
current for an axiom of State, That Commonweales are incapable of this power
to confer honors. I see amongst the Romans, several rewards and honors of
all sorts, distributed freely and constantly to the best deseruers. Thereby to
encourage all of every rank, high and low, the witty and valiant, in their
several kinds, to do their best, and to adventure for the public good.
Titles, honors, lands, immunities, wreathes, chains, ornaments, places in the
theater, with diverse other previledges, and lastly statues and triumphs were
appointed for the well deserving soldier. And it is to be observed, that
whereas the Legionarie bands (which were natives) had silver chains, the
Auxiliarie (which were strangers) had gould chains to encourage them, and to
bind them to the State by benefits, as the others were bownd by natural love
and duty. But it may be objected that these honors conferd by the Roman
Commonwealth were acknowledged by reason of the Monarchy, and did extend as
universally, as the Roman command and power it self, which tutched almost the
worlds circumference: but it is not so with petty Commonweales, whose acts
seem therefore to be private, and to be contained in narrow listes. And this
is true, nor would I therefore desire for the well deserueing soldier any honor
or preuiledge but a public acknowledgment and respect within the United
Provinces or wheresoever they have power or command: this they have power to
confer, as we see the State of Ireland gave the title of King to H. 8. by act
of parliament, who before was written Lord of Ireland only; and what the States
could give would sufficiently content the soldier, desirons of honor, and
bind them the rather to the place and service, whilst they should there have
that due reverence and acknowledgement, which in other places they should not
find but upon remouall loose. And for ought I see the Honors conferd by
absolute Princes, are of force no farther then their own forces carry them and
give them life and anthority; as we see in the Imperial Courts, who will not
be acknowledged for such in great Britain, and surely Sir Robert Dudly, what
State or style so ever he walks under in Florence, must in England, if ever he
return, veil bonnet, and teturne to his English titles.

I say therefore, had a worthy Commander, after long and good service, some
public acknowledgement of his merit; some title, or note of honor, some
preuiledge or extraordinarye respect and allowance (thought it went no farther
then within the limits and command of the united Provinces) yet it would
animate and stir up noble spirits to excellent actions and entreprizes
through emulation. And had a private soldier, after long and good service, the
least acknowledgement of his worth, were it but immunitie from the excise,
increase of means, or any other preuiledge it would encourage a poor man to
serve bravely. But to sell his flesh and blood, for bread and cheese, to spend
his lusty youth even till he ariue at a maimed and sickly old age, for so much
means as will only keep soul and body together; in a miserable manner and
(which is worst of all) if he lives in the wars 20 or 30 years, never to have
hope of due and orderly preferment, but to see every youth dance frog-leape
over his back, this is that which quenches the courage of all honorable
vndertakeing, and is the only cause so little is performed upon the politic
and powerful Enemy.

Lastly I humbly desire all Readers of both nations high and Low, to pardon me
and to accept of my good will which aimed herein to do good. Especially I
seek pardon of the illustrious Lords and Governors of this State who may
think me too peremptory, plain, and punctual, in some pasages of discourse,
and in the propositions I have made. But when they shall understand I have
suffered for their sake from mine own Nation, and have been taken and
challenged as a Man too much their own and partial upon their side for what I
have done, spoken, and written; they will, perhaps the sooner intertaine my
excuse, and the better bear my plainenes and bouldnes. And for those of mine
own Nation who have thought me to vilify our own and to honor this people
too much, I let them know that I have done nothing but what the truth and the
necessity of the case required. For when I meet a discontented Countriman of
mine own, who seeks to ease his priuare spleen, and to revenge his
particular quarrel, by inuectiues against the public State of these
Provinces, then as one that understands how much it concerns all our welfares
(especially for point of Religion) to be well conceited of each other, and to
stand together in firm friendship, jealous that many fractures should make the
joint vnconsolidable, and not knowing with what heart and intent those
objections are made, nor how powerfully that scattered breath may work,
(whilst I see thin vapors, gathering and vniteing by degrees, break out at
last into boisterous storms and blustering winds) I do what I can to oppose
these in the beginning, and that perhaps with a little too much violence,
contending for the honor of these parts.

But again when I meet with an obstinate and malevolent spirit of these
Conntryes, arrogateing all to their own worth, slighting our King and
Kingdom, and seemeing to rely upon other Princes in their opinion more potent:
then indignation lets loose the reins of my affection, and reason accompaines
and seconds them as far as she is able, to let such blind Braggadochies
discern what they are able to do for themselves, what we have done for them,
and how (whatsoever they say and would feign make men bleleeue) they cannot
rely with that assurance upon any popish Nation, as they may upon us, for all
our seemeing ouersenes; Nay that there is no Nation under the sun that can be
so profitable and helpefull to them as that of great Brittanie. Which they may
easily see who observe the situation and shipping of both, and consider that
all France, though far more potent at Land, could not have afforded us equal
assistance to that which these Countries, (then weak in comparison of what
they are) brought us in 88 by Sea. Nor can all France (though they were our
superiors in strength, as yet no trial by battle has given them the
assurance) so supply their wants and second their wars offensive and
defensive by Land and Sea as we can do. Thus incountring with English
adversaries, I show my self a plain dealeing Dutchman; and incountring the
Dutch, I show my self what I am, a true hearted English man; But here where I
speak freely I declare impartially what I have known, or heard upon both
parts; what greeuances ought to be removed, what cautions ought to be observed,
what diligence ought to be used on both sides, to settle and make strong this
old league renewed, in conservation whereof the liberty of both States, yea of
all Christendom, yea of Christianity it self in some sort, consists. The
wrack of Religion is that which is aimed at, is that which I fear; and were it
not for Religion I would study, and should soon find the way, to be a
politician also. Now I have said nothing with a purpose to ouervalue out
present aid (I have spoken as much of theirs) or to vpbraide this State with
ingratitude, or as a man that grutched at what we give and thought it too much
(I wish it much more) or as one that imagined the wisemen of these Lands did
not see all this, and more too, without my light; far be this folly from me:
Nay rather my intention is to let the common man see this, who will not
understand it, or at least acknowledge it; That when he sees the truth, he may
make better account of vsthen he uses to do. For I must tell them for
conclusion, that our Commons and the State generally, for religions sake
principally, is ready to drop their money and their blood freely for this
Nation: only the wisdom of our State holds us back because they see us too
forward, and know well, that what is proffered is contemned, and what is too
common, cloyes. So all the Remoraes and rubs these men find in their affairs
with us is from this ground. Whereas on the contrary they are the Commons of
the united Provinces who slight our people, do us all the wrong at home and
abroad, where they can take any advantage against us, and give us and our
State all the disgusts they receive. This I believe proceeds principally from
that irreligious or superstitious mixture, which is amongst them, who either
corrupt the rest that are truly religious and true patriots, or at least, by
their multitudes, so ouersway the good, that they cannot do, for us and
themselves, as they would. And for this cause. Their State and Statesmen yea
the illustrious Lords themselves are forced by authority and power to
restrain them from evil, and on their behalfes, to do us all the good they
can. So you may observe that with us the general current runns strongly in
favor of these Provinces, particulars only oppose it for polecie or perhaps
some for popery; but in the united Provinces the general current runs
strongly against us, and therefore their State or some particular persons of
it, ashamed of the common folly, indeauor to mend it. I make a question if this
people were in peace as we are, and we in war as they are, whether or no
their Common people would as willingly and readely offer themselves and their
monyes for us, and press the States for permission, as we offer our selves
and our monyes freely for them, and press our superiors by suites, entreaties,
and humble petitions, to give us leave to assist them. I am persuaded, those
that grutch and repine, at the excise which is raised for their own instant
and most necessary defense, would grutch far more to do it for others. But
it has not been long so, their forefathers who with their blood bought their
present libettie, were of an other mind. And those Popelings, Libertines, and
Sectaries amongst them who are now all sick for change, would, if the Lord
should so plague them as to give them their hearts desire (which I constantly
hope, and heartely pray for the sake of the faithful which are amongst them,
that he will not) soon find the difference of government; when in stead of
Fathers, and Brethren, and Sons, and Kinsfolk, and a Prince of their own
election, yea such a Prince, such a General, as never Nation met with a more
moderate, affable, prudent, diligent, watchful, papatient, provident, and in
all respects one more fit for them: in stead of such, I say, they should have
Strangers, and Tyrants set over them, who have shown heretofore, and would show
again, if they had means, that (whatsoever we foolishly persuade our selves
to the contrary) they neither respect Law, nor Promise, nor Oath; nor make
difference of Religion, or Sex, or Person; but seek only satisfaction of
their Libidinous, Ambitious, Cruel, and Covetous desires.

This I thought good briefly to intimate, that, if it be possible, we may
receive reciprocal kindness from this Nation generally; and then they need
not doubt no more then we our selves do, but that, where his Majesty sends
this year six thousand Foot for their aid, the next year (if they should
need, as I hope they shall not, pray they may not) a Royal Army will, in the
name of God and our King, command the insulting and incroching Enemy, to stand
back, and give up, what he has unjustly swallowed, and what he shall never
digest to do him good, but which may prove as fatal to his intended Monarchy,
as that Flesh was to the Eagle, which she snatched from the Altar, to the
firing of her own neast.

And this out of question we with them should effect, without reliance upon
other uncertain Leagues, if we would seriously unite our Forces by Land and by
Sea, and follow that footing which God has lately given this Nation in the
West Indyes. But of this there is little hope whilst those fatal quarrels in
the East Indyes lie festering betwixt us in blood unappeased, and no such real
satisfaction is given, as may witness the impartial Justice and necessity of
the cause if true (which with the circumstances gives great occasion of
suspicion) or testify by execution of the delinquents (if they be found to
cover treachery and murder under the appearance of Justice) that they will not
hazard the losle of his Majesty's protection, and our loves, for the lives of a
few Libertines; because they love us for some thing else besides their own
profit, and will show the world it is not true which their Enemies slanderously
give out, That they know no God but Gain, no Religion but Reason of State, no
Heaven but this present World, and no Friend but themselves. For our parts we
show our selves to be Subjects of such a Sovereign, as loves no man's person so
well to make us love or protect his sin. If they have dealt treacherously, we
disclaim them for our Countrymen, and can be as well content to see them
suffer worthily, as Pirates and other offenders who are put to death as
public Enemies to all Nations. But if ours be Innocent, and this crime be
raised by policy to supplant them from those parts as is suggested, then we
hope and expect a severe example shall be made upon those Devils, who to the end
they may do evil, and satisfy their cruelties (which they exercise ever where
they are Masters) do not forbear even to accuse the Innocent, as Satan did
Just Job. But sparing to censure this on either side, till we see the cause
cleared by severe, strickt, and impartial examination, which we hope for and
expect, we pray God to bless and prosper this League of Love begun, and to
convert or confound all that wish the contrary.

FINIS.

