VOX DEI.

The frontispice explaned.
TRuth-telling Ramsy, Treason does vvithstand,
And for the Kings life liftes his happy hand.
The Duke kills Briberie (bane of Commonweales)
With firebrand Faction, and so truly deals
For King and Kingdom, as a man that knows,
Upon one root, their equal vvelfare grows.
The Prince false Vniversalls does detest,
And, true of faith, is by the true faith blessed.
He for the King the Kingdom and the Kirk,
Like Hercules begins heroic work,
And sets new pillars on the coast of Spain,
To bownd three-bodyed Geryon once again;
Who, with his dooble-headed dog, did draw,
Backward, against divine and humane Law,
Kingdoms and Countries of seduced men,
Into his dark, and Hell-resembling denn.
The King hedged rownd with sweet yet pricking roses.
And Thistles, in security reposes
His bay-crownde head, whilst so incircled He,
Guarded by these, guardes these from tyranny.
Jesus from Jesuits and all spiritual harms,
Defendes his Flock with his all-mightie arms;
Treades sin, and Death, and Satan underfoot,
Whilst God the Father puts his blessing to it.
Then who gives back? who is on our side, who?
Where words and Treatyes fail, resolve to do.
VOX DEI



TO THE READER
IT may be thought ( perhaps) by some, which shall vouchsafe to read this
following discourse, that my general aims in this publication, are, to
exasperate the humor of the time (too tart (as some think)* already) against
the Common Adversary, and withal, to flatter my self into favor, by needles
repetitions of notable bypast actions.

For the first, let such know, that neither my mind, nor my book, look
higher then the middle Region, being both bred, and conversing continually in
the inferior, where, they have no force to raise storms of action, but to
participate in passion, with such gufts as fall from above. I am not so
vaine-gloriously apprehensiue, as to think my self able, to raise the least
dust, with any feet but mine own; or to work^ upon the judgment of any man,
with my weak oratory, to move him to a violent course, beyond his natural
inclination. Yet thus much I say for my self, and my cause, that if I should
avme at what they object, and should accomplish my aims, I did no more, then
the greatest, wisest, devoutest, amongst them, profess to do, and practice
continually, against us, and praise in others, so following their footesteps.
Witness that treatise (amongst diverse the like) which Scioppius, (a famous
Counselor for the house of Austria) has made against the protestants, and
entitled, Classicum Belli sacri* Sieve s^asoria ad Imperatorem de Christiani
Caesaris, erga Principes Ecclesiae rebels offici^, and veris Haereticorum
compescendorum rationibis. Fdito. 1619. A Trumpet of the holy war; wherem by
authority of Scripture, pitifully wrested, and misapplied, by reasons of state,
and policy, violently urged, and wrung to force out blood, he moves, and
excites, nay, as it were, inforceth, the house of Austria in general, and in
particular the Emperor (and so by consequence the King of Spain) to a
merciles massacre, of their subjects, and neigbours, round about, against whom
they may any way pick a quarrel, ^ for point of Religion. And what needs the
blood of Austria be heated to this end?

I am to be blamed (with others) therefore, if my zeal for truth be any whit
colder, then his for falsehood; and I am to be pardoned, and excused, even by
such as are of his opinion, if I pursue as eagerly (as he does) the side, and
cause I affect; and resist unto blood, where he bloodely assaults my innocence,
or the innocent truth in me, and in others. Nay, let this work of his, move
all Counselors, and others, that have place about Princes, and Power with
them, to do their duties in a contrary course, and whet the edge of authority,
with all the arguments of their art, to show it self sharp for Christ, and
his cause, against Antichrist, and his adherents. And let not their goodly
discretion, and moderation, delude the world any longer, with vain
expectations, and promises, as if they were (like Jobs faint freindes) lob 12.
2. the only people, and that all wisdom lived in them, and should dye with
them; least if they dally any longer, the axe be laid to the root of the tree,
Mat. 3. and they for their fruitles fearnes, without sap of sincerity or piety,
(only with a smoke or, shadowing of hypocrisy) be cast into the unquenchable
fire of Gods just judgment. Assuredly, Necessity calls upon us, to do
something in time, for our cause, and our freindes, or to prepare our selves to
suffer all things from our Enemies. Spain can easily charm France, by the
help of the Jesuits, and Pope, to sit still, and give aim, till his foot be
upon the neck of the United Provinces; for it will be made a war of religion,
which France, (as the eldest son of the Roman Church) is by all means to
advance. If then they can keep us back, but a while longer, either by
pretenses, or promises, or gifts, or presents, or pensions, or East-Indian
quarrels, or treatyes, or marriages, or threatenings, or by any other means,
the goal is gotten, and we must be forced to take the law from them, and to
admit, not only. T^lleration, but also Alteration of Religion, and perhaps the
Inquisition also, into our land, in spite of our hearts though we, and our
King with us, say NOE never so loud; there will neither hear us, nor believe
us, nor then admit of our negative voice. And I am persuaded all that are not
of this mind, and so ready to take all occasions, use all means, to prevent
it; are of their mind, and wills take all occasions; and use all means
(though closely, and by degrees) to advance it.

For the second objection, made by such, as think I am out of favor, and
intend hereby to flatter my self into grace again; I let such know, that as I
account the favor of my superiors, to be a great blessing, so (believing I
never lost it, at least by desert) I profess sincerely not to seek it, with
any corrupt or ambitious thought. If what I write offend not, it is the
yttermost extent, yea crown of my happiness here; being for the rest
contented, and holding it a thing indifferent, to live in any air, and to be
buried in any soil; Since I live by faith, and expect the resurrection of the
just. But the truth is, that as those who look on, do often see, what the
Gamesters over-see; And as those who stand in a direct line against the mouth
of the Cannon, cannot discern the danger comeing swifftly upon them, so well
as those that stand a-loofe off, and obliquely: so we that stand removed from
the steeple, hear the noise of the bells distinctly, and where they jangle,
and where they ring round, and where they vary with musical, and delightful
changes; which such as stand under, cannot so perfectly judge.

And we think we saw the danger coming, and were more sensible of it, then
many seemed to be, that stood with in the dint: And now (hoping the greatest
storm is over) we behold the deliverance with more admiration, then many
seem to have done, which stood nearer the danger. And to this end we write,
that you may read, and see, and applaud your own felicity with ours, giving
glory to God, and due honor to the instruments, he has been pleased to use in
this great* and miraculous work of his mercy.

For to this end the Lord does all his works of wonder, accepting well of
their service, who set forth his praise with the best instruments that they
have; denyeing only to be gracious to such, as neglect his works, or pass
them by, without observation, and threatening to punish such severely, who rob
him of his glory, either arrogating it to themselves, or imputing it unworthily
to others.

Herein, therefore, I do but, with Moses, salute God with a song, having past
the red sea, looking back upon it with admiration, and beholding Pharoh Exodus
15.and his Host in it, with pity and astonishment: I do but, with Deborah,
call up Barak, Iud. 5. to the triumph: And, with the Virgins, meet David, 1 Samuel 18. after his victory, with timbells and dances.

This is the true end of writing this treatise, wherein if I err in any point
of Divinity, History, or Policy, either in relation, or application, I refer
my self most humbly to the favorable censure of the Church and State, not being
willing to commit a fault against either, or having done it, to defend it with
obstinacy. Yet before we part, give me leave to say, that whilst I hope we
are past the danger, I would be so understood as a man that partly feared, we
were not. War must be proclaimed with Spain, before we can be fully
resolved; othevwise our offensive wars against the Emperor, Bavaris, or any
other, and our defensive, and divertiue wars by assisting the States
General, will prove undertakings against our selves, and we (running our
selves out of breath) will soon learn to repent our forwardnes, and call for
peace, faster then we have done for war. Our comings in, must be answerable
to our expenses, if we mean to hold out: for though the horse be fat and
strong, yet if we ride him continually without provender, he will wax weak,
and lean, and try under us. To war with the Emperor and, hold peace with
Spain, is to fight with one of our hands, against the United body of the
Catholic league, assisted with both their arms of the East, and West-Indyes,
whose force is sufficient, to buy Briareus, to side with them, against God, and
his truth, and from whence, all the arrows they shoot against Christen^ome,
at this present, are both headed, and feathered; pluck off these, and they hurt
not. And the way to pluck off these, and so to make peace, is to send out our
Navy (as we had wont) to fish for gould in their seas. For our Navy is the
right hand of our State, of whole advantageous use, we deprive our selves,
when we war in a cold and lame manner, only with the left hand by defense,
by divertion, and that by land, where the enemies strength lies. This is, to
fight, and let him choose the weapon, and to spend our blows, where we see
him best armed. It is the Navy that weakens the Enemy, by taking from him, and
spoiling, what he gets to spoil others. It is the Navy, that causes his
West-Indian Fleetes to be wasted home with such a guard, as eat's out the gain
of that voyage; though they return safe, but undoes him, if they miscarry. It
is the Navy that pays the troops by land, and fills the Ercheaquer faster,
then all the customs, and projects, unprofitable peace can invent, though it
would study to exact still from the industrious Merchant, even to his vndoeing.
Witness our former wars in Yreland, where there was no boot for the
soldier, as in other parts may be found, (if at least we serve them, and
theirs, as they did us, and ours, in the Paltz.) but all the Army was to live
(as we say) upon the penny. And yet for all that expense in Yreland, Scotland,
Sweden, Denmark, France, in the Netherlands, and all other parts, where
Antichrist advanced his counterfeit cross, against the cross of Christ, how
rich was the subject? how plentiful all provisions? how quick all trades, and
trading? how well stored was the Ercheaquer with Coin, the mint with Bullion,
the Tower, and all other places with ordinance, ammunition, plate, hangings,
jewels? The expense, and waste, of treasure since, merely upon the old stock,
without any equal, annual, and certain supply, the raising and allaying of
gold and silver, without curing our general want (which Spain withal the
Enemies, and wars our Elizabeth had, could not make her do as her Epitaph
tells you) is a witness of this truth beyond contradiction. If therefore we
have wars with the Emperor, and Bavaria, (hear my folly and pardon it;
wisemen may proffit by the prating of fools) let us have it with Spain; If
we defend the States, and our selves, with the lef hand, let us fight with the
right hand also, and put Spain to his fence; let us use both hands, or
neither; let us (to conclude) fight in good earnest, or lay down the bucklers,
and submit our selves to their mercy, who will, without question, cut our
throats in kindness with the utmost expedition, as they have done our freindes,
upon the same terms.

Consider I beseech thee, advised Reader, how the Navy (which I spoke of) lies
now idle; a great and continual charge to the state, the Mariners, the
Officers, the Seamen of all sorts, waste away, are unprofitable, forget their
professions, when, if these were employed (as I have spoken) they would recover
our reputation, be a security to our selves, a terror to our enemies, make us
again Masters, not only of the narrow seas, but of the Ocean, bear their own
charges, and help to defray others. In which regard (give me leave to proceed
in playing the fool) I suppose if the East-Indian Fleet, and stock, were thus
employed, we would soon find the odds of the adventure, and neither the
state, nor the Merchant, would repent them of the change, although we bought
spice at the second hand, or spent less then we do (as other Countries use,)
or permitted voluntaryes to trade in those seas.

Perhaps the Hollander who finds how hard, or booteles it is to sail against
the sun, sees his own fault, and begins to steer a contrary course, and
though he still hold his ground, and trade in the East, yet finding it a drayne
for the treasure of Christendom, it is probable he will lessen his dealing
there,and seek out Westward for gould and silver, to feed that covetous
Eastern climate, as we may do also, if we be not too wise to learn, and
too proud to follow, when they go before.

But some object, that what we had wont to get alone in the West and
South Sea, the Hollander now meete's withal, and takes up, by fore-stalling
the market; so that there will not be sufficient, to bear the charges of both
Nations. As if the Hollander took all, and no fish past his net: Nay
assuredly, if both of us went out upon this errand, both should have more,
whilst one helped the other. Besides the Hollander is more numerous in
shipping, and those commonly of better sail then ours, and so fit for scouts,
to beat the water; ours, are better built, better manned, better armed, fitter
for fight, and so like to speed better, if there should be fraud in
fellowship.

Thus much I thought good to add, not as a Counselor, but as an
Intelligencer, for my King, and Country; and if any say it suites me not, to
stir up war, being by profession a Peacemaker: I answer, though I fear I
shall have no such force to move that heavy Engine, yet the necessity of the
case makes me attempt it, and put my hand, to a multitude of others, who win
hearts, and hands to this end: And the same Necessity pleades my excuse, whilst
I seem to transgress the laws of my Commission; since there is no other sure
way to make peace, or to save the effusion of Christian blood (so much sought
after, and so sweet in the taste of those wolvish Antichristians) then thus to
take this firebrand, this Mainetainer of quarrels (Gould) out of the hands of
the common Quarreller. If any think otherwise, I fear he shall find himself
deceaved, when it will be a shame for a wiseman to say, N^n putaram.

For my self, let men think of me as they please; It is (...) good in my
opinion, to play the fool (as wisemen say) in print (...) self, since it must
needs be done, as to suffer see many others to do it in my name, or to look
on, and hold my peace till my King, Couutry, and Religion, be betrayed. Now
though it be not in my private power to remedy these evils, yet the world
shall witness for me, I am free from the blood of all men, and no way
accessory, or privy, to those mines which are ready to spring, to the hazard,
not only of our state, but of the liberty of all Christendom besides. From
which conspiracy, they can no way clear themselves, who having place to speak
(be it purdue, Sentinel, or Corpse du guard, high or low) hold their peace
whilst the Enemy approaches. Canes latr^^ pro Dominis suis, and non vis me
latrare pr^ Christo? Mori possum, tacen non possum. Hierom. Ap^l. 3. adversus
Ruffin^^. Dogs bar ke for their Masters, and will not thou have me open my
mouth for Christ? I can dye, I cannot hold my tongue. God has not give us the
spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
Therefore after vox Dei, expect vox Regis, to follow with the utmost speed;
when the King has heard Gods voice ^^^ling, we shall hear the Kings voice
ecchoing. Pray for this hour, and in the mean time, pardon what errors thou
m^^test withal, whether of mine, or the Printers, be it in matter, in words,
or letters, or in points, the greatest I have observed to thy hand, it is like
there may be more, since I could not be near the Press, and the Printer
understands no English, therefore before thou read, be entreated i^ reform
such as thou find in the Catalogue.

VOX DEI THE VOICE OF GOD
ALl the actions, and undertakings of man, are, or should be grounded upon some
warrantable, and solid reason, being censured just, or unjust, according as
they observe, or transgress, that general rule of Justice: wherefore, to
avoid confusion, and that the idle, and industrious, might be distinguished,
the one from the other, and the more wise, and dilligent, discerned from the
less; God has set an order in nature of superior, and inferior, as of day,
and night, head, and members, and of the members amongst themselves. And as in
Nature, one work of hers, exceede's another, though the least be wonderful;
and as the whole work (considered in the harmony) exceede's any part thereof,
Tho: Aq 22. q: 31. A: 3. 2.m
though the part in it self, be never so excellent: so the actions of man,
have their dignityes, and degrees, and the more general they be, the more
noble ever esteemed: Yea, a little benefit done to many, is much more honorable
then a greater to one; Because the worth of an action, is measured by nothing
so much, as by the extent of help, it reaches, to few, or to many, to one, or
to all: so that private studyes, or private employments, (though they content
the mind better, and may in themselves be excellent) cannot be compared, to
such as look abroad to the public, though the one be liberal, (perhaps) and
the other mechanical. Because to this end, was man principal created. First,
for God; Secondly, for all that are Gods; Thirdly, and lastly, for himself: so
he was made for many, and should therefore bend his studyes, and endeavors to
benefit many: In which respect, we see Moses, Ex. 32. 32. Romans 9. 3.
and Saint Paul, wishing their own separation from God, for the uniting of all
to him, and our savior, who has willed us to follow him, as near as we can,
(especially in love) gave his own life a ransom, for the whole world. Yea, in
nature we see any one member, (though never so excellent, and useful) is cut
off, for the safeguard of the whole body, if the body can subsist without it:
He either knowe's not himself, and wherefore he was made, or overvalewe's
himself above his own worth, that will not venture himself for the saving of
many, though their delivery were not so sure as his own loss. Man cannot
dignify himself more, then in such a hazard; since we redeem things by an
equal, or superior value, and to save many is to be worth as many, as we
save.

When therefore we see the Church in danger, we must stand in the gappe, and
step in, for her rescue, against all the world; for it concerne's Gods glory,
and Moses strove with God himself in such a case: fear not thou therefore, to
wrestle with man. When we see the common wealth in danger, we must endeavor
her rescue, with the hazard of our own states, and lives, for it concerne's
the welbeing of many whereof we are parts, and for which we are, what we are.
Of this truth, all wiser, and elder times, have been persuaded, as may
appear, by the many memorable undertakings, and actions of our predecessors,
in all places recorded for the direction, and encouragement of the present, and
future times: especially of that same valiant worthy of Israel, David, as we
hope to show manifestly, in the following discourse, grounded upon these words
of his to his brother Eliab, mentioned 1 Samuel 17. 29. What have I now done? Is
their not a cause? which words contain the conclusion of a dialogue, betwixt
David, and his elect brother; wherein we intend to touch upon these
perticulars, for the clearing of our said discourse, and fitting it to all
apprehensions.

First, we will briefly show who, and what he was,

Secondly, we will declare who, and what the person

Thirdly, we will show the occasion, and time, when,

Fourthly, we will set forth the speech it self, and

First, for the person that used this speech, it was David, in whom consider
three things.

His age.

His Profession, or calling.

His Relation.

His age: he was in the flower of youth, about 23. ever to be stout in
performance. 1 Sa. 16. 11
And this was seen, when Saul afterward, 1 Samuel 17. 39.
put his armor upon him, he was hardly able to bear such a burden.

Secondly, his profession or calling, a shepherd, and therefore peaceable, no
fit man to make a soldier of; we have a Proverb of such tender, and quiet
spirits, [they are fit to keep sheepe] and such was he, not only fit to keep
sheep, (as many are, who keep none) but suited with an office agreeable to his
mild nature, for he was a keeper of sheep: Such was Abel, and therefore a fit
prey for a butcherlike brother: Genesis 4. 3.
Such was Jacob, and his sons: Such were Moses, and Aron; and of good
shepherds, they proved mild, and gracious governors; so that it was said of
them to God by the Psalmist: Ps. 77. 20.
Thou leddest thy people like sheep by the hands of Moses, and Aron. And such
a man was David at this time, a good, and watchful shepherd, and therefore
like to prove a good, and vigilant Prince, but noe great, and valiant soldier.
They that converse with wild, and ravenous beasts, learn somewhat of their
savage natures: For as the body partake's of air, water, and other
nourishments, and is humored, and tempered accordingly: or, as man
communicate's with man, by conversation, and is judged to be like the company
he keeps, so every man pertake's with beasts in their properties, and give's
to themagayne some of his, in excha^ge. The Lion, and Bear, learn some
civility of their keeper, as their keeper, take's some brutish cruelty from
them: The master learnes to be currish of his dog: and the dog learne's
curtesy of his master: Nimrod, and Esau, co^versing amongst dogs, Pol. virg.
de inven. ^e: l. 3. c. 5
became cruel, and bloody Tyrants.

Marius was a brave soldier, but bloody, and cruel, and as an ensign of his
cruelty, he first gave them names of beasts to the Roman Legions: calling one
the Wolf, an other the Minotaure, a third the Horse, a fourth the Boar, a
fifth the Eagle, but none of them all, the Sheep that harmless creature: And
doubtless Actaeon had much of a beast within him, when his hownds puld' him
down: on the other side David converseth with none but innocent, and
harmless sheepe^ who are a prey for every beast, unlike is this man
therefore, to become a soldier.

His relation; A brother: 1. by nature: 2. by subjection God: members of one
householde, of one commonwealth, of one Church; But withal, a younger brother,
by all probability, the weakest of all, I am assured the youngest of eight. An
unfit man therefore, for the present employment. And thus much for the speaker.

The person to whom, he speaks is Eliab, whom likewise His age. 2. His
Profession. 3. His Relation.

His age, the eldest son of Ishai, the eldest amongst eight brethren,
amongst whom David, the youngest was a man grown; needs therefore must the
eldest be of mature years, and of great experience, able to advise, able to
execute; as for his strength of body, his stature promises as much, as his
years, for when Samuel comes (by Gods command) to annoint one of Ishaies
sons King, as soon as he sees Eliab, the admiration of his person (for it
seems he was like Saul, a tall proper man, higher by the head then the common
sort) makes him fasten upon him for King, without doubt, or question, till God
removes his carnal eye, 1 Sa. 16. 7
with admonition: Look not (says God) on his countenance, or on the height of
his stature, because I have resused him: For God sees not as man sees: For
man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart.

His Profession; A soldier he was now, thoug perhaps a shepherd before, for
it is said: 1 Samuel 17. 13. That the three eldest sons of Ishai went, and
followed Saul to the battle: Now as he was of mature age, and of a gooly
presence so, it is like, he was an old soldier, of great experience in the
wars: And that as others esteemed him, such so he knew his own worth, and
value, wherefore like an old, and expert Commander, he takes upon him to
curb in, and restrain, the inquisitiue ignorance, and rash foole-hardynes (as
he thought) of this silly shepherds lad, saying to him (in anger) why came
thou down hither? and with whom have thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? I know the pride, and the malice of thy heart, that thou art come
down to see the battle: As if he should say, what did thou mean David to
press to this place of danger uncalled, from whence the stoutest would gladly
withdraw themselves, if they could with the safety of their honors? do thou
think thy self able, to do more then we can do, who are soldiers by
profession, men of experience, of approved strength, and courage? Thou art a
babe, a suckling, an effeminate boy, a freshwater soldier? Why; what a folly
was it for thee, to leave the care of the sheep, and come hither; to loose
them there, thy self here? This must needs proceed from that ambitious, and
proud heart of thine, which I know puff's thee up, ever since thou were
entertained to be one of Saules Musicians: But thou art much mistaken; it is
far more easy to compose a sonnet, in praise of ye conqueror, or to set a
song in perfect parts to the Harp, then to obtain a victory, or to order an
army: It is far more easy to finger the Harp with nimble, and obedient
fingers, then to handle a spear, the battell-axe, the sword, and those
instruments of death, and war: A consort of musicians suits thee better, then
a Company of Soldiers; and that effeminate face of thine, does better become
the foldes, and the sheepe-coates, or the Court, and the prefence of fair
ladies, then the field of Wolves, of Lions, or of men, more terrible then
these. But thou art desirous of noveltyes, to see, and be seen, and here thou
art come too soon, to buy repentance, at a dear rate. To all this David
mildly, humbly, wisely, and yet stoutly, replye's, What have I now done? Is
their not a cause?

His Relation: a brother, and elder brother, even the David's superior, and
might command him: Genesis 49. 3
[Prior in donis, major in imperio. For not only the first male that opens
the womb, was sanctified to God, as his part, to be a perpetual type, and
figure of Christ our King, and Governor, till he came in the flesh; But also,
amongst all Nations, the rule of a famil, or country, was conferred upon the
eldest: Until there were Kings, they were in stead of such, and when there
were Kings, either they were chosen out of these, or these were their
substitutes, in such familyes, and places, where they resided. Now Ishai being
a very old man, and noted for such in the days of Saul, as we see at the 12.
verse of this Chapter, the care, both of house hold government, and of stock,
must rest upon the eldest son, the heir of all: who, (as a parent) might
challenge rule over his youngest brother, and require a just account of him for
his sheep, which he might well suspect were negligently left in the wilderness,
without a keeper, through the wyldnes, and vanity of his younger brother. And
therefore David does not answer him, as Cain answers God, Gen 4. Am I my
brothers keeper? what have you to do with me, am I your shepherd? as diverse
Yonckers would now answer their elders: But he replye's with a tarte kind of
mildnes, giving (at once) a testimony of the love he beare's his brothers,
person, how much he regard's his admonition, as also making an Apology for him
self, and glauncing at his brothers prejudice, and partiality, who would not
see the apparent cause at this time, enforcing his forwardnes: Therefore he
send's him home to behold the beam in his own eye, saying [What have I now
done? Is their not a cause?] And this shall serve for the persons; come we now
to the occasion of this discourse.

3. The Occasion.

The occasion of this discourse, and argument, held betwixt David, and his
elder brother, was this. The Army of Israel, and the Army of the Philistines,
having lain long in the feilde, and Ishai, having in the Army, three of his
Sons following Saul; the old man longing to hear how they did, and desirous
to send them some fresh victuals to releive them, as also to procure for them
the favor of their Captain, send David to visit them, to redeem their
pledge, and to salute their Captain with a present of ten fresh cheeses, v.
17. 18. He, coming early to the Camp, finde's both the Armies set in array,
ready to join in fight, and withal hears a great shout, such as they use to
give at the first onset. The young man bring hardy (though little) and desirous
to be one in the number that should fight for his Country, and religion, and
ashamed to look on, and give aim, whylst others underwent the hazard, and
heat of the day; leaue's the things which he brought with the wagon-maister,
and made all the hasthe could to reach the army before they reached each
other: Coming thither, he finds things in great distraction, by reason of
Goliath, a mighty Champion of the Philistines, who stood boasting against the
whole army of Israel, challendging and desyring an able and equal Opposite to
be sent out to him. To this Bravado he adds blasphemy against God, and
dishonor and disgrace to the King: He beholde's the pride and insolency of the
heathenish army out of the confidence they had in their unmatchable Champion,
and withal he see's the base fear and cowardice of his own Nation, whose
courage was quenched with the bravery of one man: How then (thinks he) it is
likely that they should stand against many? against all? To behold this, his
heart burns within him; Zeal to God, allegiance to his prince, love, and duty
to his Country, make's him inquisitiue, what this should mean, how it should
happen that so many should be a frayde of one, or that one should dare to
affront so many: Thus at length his private thoughts breake's forth into
words: What (says he, to the standers by who gaped, and gazed upon the Giant
and fled at his words, at his sight, as men frighted and out of their wits)
what shall be done to the man that kills this Philistim, and takes away the
shame from Israel? They answer, to him that kills him, the King will give
great riches: and will give his daughter, yea and make his fathers house free
in Israel Perhaps these promises were the immaginations and pratlings of the
people, the underhand whisperings of policye, to stir up some man's courage to
undertake the combat. For we neither hear these things publicly proclyamed,
nor repeated, and promised, when David came to speak with Saul, and went
about his work with this approbation, nor challenged after, when David had
performed what he undertook, and had slain Goliath. Howsoever, his elder
brother, who obserue's his behavior narrowly, overbeare's his discourse, how
he, like an able Champion, speake's and questions, as one that meant to
undertake the matter; and, either out of contempt of his brothers youth, or out
of envy, least the younger should wyn praise from the elder, or out of love and
care of his younger brother, knowing his forwardnes, but withal his weakness,
and in sufficiencye, for such a business, with such an enemy, whose match the
whole host afforded not, check's him and restrayne's him from this rash
undertaking, by presenting his youth, his trade, his other business, to his
remembrance; why came thou down hither (says he) with whom have thou left
those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy priae and the malice of thy heart
that thou art come down to see the battle. To whom David replied, in serious,
and sad manner, what have I now done? Is there not a cause?

Thus much for the occasion of this discourse.

The fourth thing considerable, is the speech it self, wherein observe.

The manner of delivery.

The matter deliuereed.

For the manner of delivery, David reply'es not positiuely, but by way of
question or expostulation; as men that deal with envious cavillers use to do,
and as our savior dealt with the high Priests, and Scribes, and Elders
continually? for indeed this manner of speech is of more force then a bare
affirmation; I^ argue's a little more life, and spirit, it stirre's the blood of
the speaker, and alter's the sleepy disposition of him that opposes, as water
cast in a man's face rayseth from a swound. If he had said, [brother I hope I
have done nothing but what I ought to do, that which I have a just cause to
do;] Though he had then spoken as much as now he does, in effect, yet his
speech had lost much of the grace, spirit, and vigor it has; As pictures,
though well proportioned, if they want their proper and natural shadowing, and
be not well set off, loose much of their bewty, and delight not a curious
beholder; So words, where they are not expressed with alacrity and fervor of
mind, fall flatt, lie dead, and work not upon the affections. There might
then have been a doubtful disputation of the fact, and cause, and much might
have been alleged too, and fro, whether he had done well, or not, in coming
to the feilde, in leaving his sheep, in questioning about this quarrel, as if
he meant to intrude him self for a party. And with the inequallity of his
strength to hazard the honor of the whole Army: But speaking thus quickly and
resolutely, by way of interrogation, saying; What have I now done is their not
a cause? He by this question putt's all out of question, and driue's his
brother to see, Sect.
and confess that there is a cause. And (me thinke's) I see the blood startle in
his face, and the ruddy youth looks redder then he had wont, that Zeal which
afterward eat up his heart, appears in his countenance, and at length, though
he purposed to keep silence, his tongue brake loose into these or the like
words. O Brother is there not an apparent cause requiring mine, and yours, and
all our attentions, Is it not past denial, past coloring, almost past remeay?
Truly I admire how you, and the rest of these valiant and able men, and professed
soldiers, can so long look on, and hear, and see the name of God blasphemed,
and your King scorned, and your whole Nation challendged, braued, and
dishonored, with patience? I wonder that you, being my elder brother, do not
lead me one by example, and incorage me with applause, in this high honorable,
and holy undertaking, rather then restrain me by your coldness and quench my
Zeal by your unseasonable vpbraydings? I wonder any man should not be ashamed
to reprehende my forwardnes: Nay I wonder all of you are so backward when such
necessity requires the expression of yours best abillityes. It is not
seasonable discretion, but dulnes, and do^tishnes, that pul's us back from
timely action, neither is that temper, which can hear, and see these things,
with silence, the sober virtue of a man, which we term PATIENCE, But the
cowardice or senceles and slothful stupidttie of an Ass; A poison mistaken
for a preservatiue, a vice for a virtue. Israel had wont to have Iosuahs, and
Gedions, and Baruch^s and Iepthae's, and Sampsons, who could sright a whole
host of these vncircumsised Philistims: Israel had a Deborah, who (though a
wooman) had courage enough to daunt a whole, Army of Infidels; O then what a
shame is it, that the King amougest all this multituae, should find never a
man to stand, between him and reproach? to hazard his life for th honor of his
Prince? O, what a shame is it, that amongst all these brethren of one father
of the flesh, one father of the faith, Abraham, there is not one that dare
engage his life for the redeeming of all? O, what a shame is this, that whilst
we call our selves the people of God, and say we alone profess the true
religion, and serve the true God truly; there is not one member in the whole
boay, that dare present it self, to stopp the mouth of this blasphemous and
uncircumcised Philistine, or honor himself, and his family, by his endeavor,
to do i^ though with the loss of his own life?

After such a manner (me thinke's) this worthy seems to expostutate the case
with his brother, and to wring from him, by a kind of loving violence, a
confession of the truth of all this discourse: he see's now the necessitye of
the case, the virtue of his brother, and so David leaue's him to veiwe his
own error, to see his own shame, by a silent reflection.

One valiant man, Sect.
by his example, putts spirit into a thousand (as lamps light each other) and
many Cowards met in a heap, infect the whole crowde, and by their secure and
sensual arguments, begett a senslesnes of honor in the hearts of their next
neighbors. The customary beating of a Lions whelpe make's him as tame, as a
Lamb: and persons, naturally valiant, may be made artificial cowards, by
being brought up under the rodd, and taught to swallow base and gross inuryes
without chewing. Thus the slaves of Sparta, rebelling against their masters,
and being encountered with bastinadoe's in stead of swords, lost that courage
which made them take arms, and like true slaves submitted themselves to their
old bondage. Such minds fear not the crime, but the punishment, and think
that there is nothing dishonorable* but that which disturbe's their private
peace, and that slothful security whereunto they are accustomed from youth; I
cannot but think there were valiant men in this Army: It is a great part of
valor in a Prince to gather an army: Some tyrants dare not trust their own
guard: or suffer an assembly of their own subjects to meet. These are possessed
with such a timorous spirit as the English Poet discribe's; Feare' himself to
be, whom he bringes in, flying away from himself, whilst no man pursuse's
him, and affrayde of the clashing of his own armor: Insomuch, as that which
should keep him from fear, is the cause of his fear: But Saul was so far
from such base pusillanimity of spirit, as he was personally present in this
Camp, and had before given proof of his valor against the Philistims, by
single opposition.

Again, it is probable that Jonathan was in the Camp, with diverse other
Worthies, of whose valor there was no question. I am sure David's three
bretthren were there, and all likely to be valiant men; so that it is
wonderful, that none of these offered themselves to the combat in this
quarrel. But perhaps one discouraged an other, and the backwardnes of some
dishartned others, and some out of unseasonable modesty would not offer
themselves, least they should be thought proud, or ambitious, or the like
(poor spirits that will be frighted from good purposes by the scoffs, jest's,
and reproaches, of sluggards and cowards, who dare do nothing but censure good
men's actions, and call their own baseness and treachery, loyal discretion.) Or,
Tydeus corpore, animo Hercules.
lastly, God took away there hearts, and infused a double spirit into David,
that his power might be seen in weakness, and how he is able to overthrowe the
proudest adversarye, by babes and sucklings; even with weak means, or without
means, or by contrary means.

David therefore, beholding all this with sorrow, and seeing such a general
disposition in the whole army to faint and fly, rather then to fight, or as
beasts are, in droues, driven to be butchered, when being single and out of the
crowde they would break loose, he awaken's the sleepy courage of his brother
and the rest, with this quick expostulation, what have I now done? Is there not
a cause?

From the Manner of speaking we descend to the Matter or subject of David's
speech; which, in few but weightye words, containe's the motive or impulsive
cause of his famous attempt, and atcheiuement following immediately after.

For whilst he says Is their not a cause? he take'es the cause as granted and
evident enough. Let us then labor to find it out; for all actions (and so
this) are warrantable, or wicked, as they have an evident cause to justify or
condemn them.

CAUSES are either ordinary, or extraordinary:

Those which we call ordinary, are all second causes, which are ready at
hand, lying open to the eye of vulgar observation, and proceeding by a legal
and common course of Nature. Extraordinary causes are either wholly hid, or
farther remooved; so that they are not seen at all, or, (at least) not by all.
The highest among'st ordinary causes (for we speak of that sphere wherein
the rule of man is wholly busied, and taken up) is the sovereigne, or supreme
Power, and all other powers subordinate to it. This has convenience and
vtility as the most proper end of it is operation and aim. For though it be
convenient and profitable to have such subordinate power settled, yet it is not
of absolute necessity that we have them.

Extraordinary causes, in this class, or form, have Necessity for their
proper and direct end, and begin only to work when there is defect of
operation in the ordinary causes: as Physic is administered to help decayed
nature, and expel malignant humor. Thus when Saul, the supreamest amongst
ordinary causes in the common wealth of Israel, is slack in his office; God
rayseth up David to quicken his zeal: and when Ely grows old and negligent,
and through indulgence suffers his sons to abuse their office; God rayseth up
Samuel to provoke him to more diligence. And thus, at all times, in defect of
ordinary pastors, God has raised up prophets to teach his people, and to
publish his judgments openly and plainly, It is (as I have before noted)
very-vncertayn whether such promises were ever propounded on no, by the King;
because we never see them repeated, challenged, or performed by Saul to David
after the work wrougt
though with the peril of their own lives.

If any man object (therefore) that the reward propounded by the King ver. 25.
was the principal cause that excited David to undertake this quarrel, I doubt
not to say they are much deceived: For though intisements to virtue, and
indowments for virtue do well; and though men come seldom to the markett,
where nothing but blood, and blows are to be bought, and sold; yet true
fortitude is not mercenary, nor could all those words, make our worthy dip his
finger in blood, by undertaking a single combat, except a greater necessity
call him forth, then praise, or profitt, or pleasure, or preferment. It must
not be an ordinary, but extraordinary cause, therefore, that moue's this
extraordinary person: and what other thing could that be, then the present
danger wherein he beheld the church and state involved, together with the
desperate engagement of the King, and Kingdoms honor. He see's all these in
hazard to receive either a total overthrowe, or (at least) a violent and
vnrecoverable blow, by this Blasphemer: For will it not stagger true believers
when they see the enemy brave God (as it were) to his face, and go away
unpunished? The wicked then encourage themselves in infidelity, and with open
mouth deride, and discreditt the former miracles of God so much spoken of. For
if God does not every day create new worlds, or confound old enemies, or
produce new miracles, man will not believe that ever he made the world, or
confounded the rebellious race of idolatrbus Giants, or ever did a miracle, or
perhaps scarce think there is a God to do such things; At least, that he is
not the true God, except he marches away with the conqueror. For prosperity
and external glory so bewicheth, and dazeleth the eyes and judgments of
mortal men, as they cannot suspect gilded falsehood, nor embrace ragged truth.
And therefore Rabshakeh, coming against Jerusalem, by the command of
Sanacherib King of Ashur, elevated with his former victories, crye's out with
an open and jmpudent mouth, and demands of the Israelites, wherein they trust
and put confidence that they do not presently render themselves to the mercy
of his Master? where (says he) is the God of Hamah? and of Arpad? where is the
God of Sepharuaim? or how have they delivered Samaria out of my hands? who is
he among all the Gods of these lands that has delivered their Country out of
my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hands? The text says
the Blasphemer received no answer, till God stopped his mouth with a miracle:
For all then, and there, were cold, benumde, and silent, as persons decayed in
spirit, and fitted for that defection and foreign Captivity, and subjection,
which not long after followed.

But our Champions heart burne's more hott in this place, with zeal and
indignation to see and hear the boasting, and blaspheming enemy, rail against
the God of Israel, of whose love and power, David had large experience, and
whose name, (by way of thankfulness) he had extraordinary cause to defend from
dishonor whilst he had power, make's him begin the onsett (as it were) to this
conquest, by conquering his private fears, his brothers frowns, and the
cavelling exceptions of all other envious beholders, with this bold and brave
demand, what have I now done? Is there not a cause? And thus much of the cause
or matter here mentioned to show, that it was a cause of necessity which
compeld' his undertaking for Is there not a cause? having reference to nothing
else then to the public peril and common calamity of the church and state
threatened by this idolatrous Champion. Which is a cause more then sufficient,
to compel him that is a true member of the mystical body of Christ, to show
his Spiritual life by struggling for the general liberty. The conclusions
therefore from hence deduced, are these following.

CONCLUSION 1.
First, there must be an apparent cause of necessity, to justify every
extraordinary action or undertaking, performed by a private person.
APriuate Person is he that has noe direct or public calling to the action
he vndertake's: In which sense a public person in one kind, may be a private
person in an other respect. Aron is a public person to sacrifice, but not to
rule, and Vzziah is a public person to govern, but not to sacrifice. A
magistrate is a public person, but not for all actions: for if he take upon
him to administer the Sacraments, he therein becomes a private person. Nay when
he does any act of Justice without a Law, he then laye's by the prerogative,
and dignity of a public person, and acts the part of a private man. Because
the law is the instrument, and sword of the public magistrate, without which
to strike is to Tyrannize, and without which, to converse in any puplique
business, is to become private. Thus we see Mayors, and other subordinate
officers, who are shadows and types of the supreme, goeing abroad without
their Swords and Maces (the ensigns of their offices) become private (for the
present time) till they assume those types of their authority again, which
serve as public and notable instruments commanding all men to take notice of
them, and to obey them as public executors of the laws. So the King says
most excellently, in the beginning of his speech made to the Parliament, the
26. of March, 1621. that the end why Kings are appointed of God, is, to put the
laws of the state in execution. These are the executors of the law, which is
the will of the state, whereof they are heads; and when they do their own
wills against, and not with the will of the state (that is the law) then they
become private persons in those perticulars, because they cease to be executors
of the law, as Kings ought to be. Kings (as his matie, says most
excellently) are married to the people by laws, the capital breach of law only
is adultery in this case admitting a divorce; as we see those members are cut
off from the Kings spouse the Comonwealth, which by rebellion and treason,
prove themselves to be members and children of an adulterous generation
bastards and no sons legitimate,


Now every man whither private or public, is a member of the Commonwealth,
wherein he liue's, and so has noe power of his own body, to dispose of it
this or that way, especially to hazard it in a single Duel, or the like,
without license. And the more high excellent, and emnient the person is, the
less absolute liberty has he in disposing himself, and the more interest
has the Comon-wealth in him. Because we see every member claymes more
interest in the head, heart, liver, lungs, (those principal parts) then in the
rest: for if any of these be missing dissolution followe's to the whole body,
if any be defective a general decay and consumption ensue's; but if the body
loose, a toe, or a finger, or a foot, or a hand, or an eye, or a tongue, the
loss is not so great, the danger not so desperate. Now then, for any man to
hazard his person in a single Duel, without manifest necessity, is to commit
violence to the Comon-wealth, and to rend a limb from the fame. I call it
necessity, when he is assaulted, or when he beholds the Church, ot State
assaulted, all which, he is bound to defend by the law of nature. Nam ex sole
defensione oportet bellum justificare naturaliter. And, defensio priuata est
juris naturalis: multo magis publica. So we may defend the law and religion,
wherein all men have equal interest, against all invasion of power or policy;
and all actions done in the behalf of these, are actions of defense, and
justifiable by the law of nature, otherwise not.

Cain is the first Duellist we find in ye world, Genes. 4.
he kill's his brother when he should have been his brothers keeper. Noe cause
of necessity prouok's him on, but malice and envy; So that when God come's to
examine, arraigne, and condemn him for the murder, though he can churlishly
say to God. Am I my brothers keeper? yet cannot he say with our innocent
combatant, what have I now done? Is their not a cause?

Simeon and Levy (brethren in evil) make a kind of party against Hamor and
Shechem, and second each other, both in the plott and practice: but being
questioned by their father for this villainy, though they allege a kind of
seeming reason, and say, should he abuse our sister as a whore? Genes. 34.
yet that very reason argue's their action to proceed from pride, malice, and
revenge, and not from reason or religion, or any other cause of necessity; for
reason, and religion, and necessity would rather have required their liue's.
that they might by marriage have made amend's for their sin and violence
offered to the virgin, all possibility whereof, was now taken away, by this
rash act of the young men: Who therefore could not justly say to their angry
father in their own defense, what have we now done? was there not a cause?

^^ab kills Abner, and Amasa, both after a base and bloody manner, David
behold's both with grief, but dares not punish either of them, the Text adds
the cause, he was but new settled, 2 Samuel 3. 39.
and the sons of Zeruiah were to strong for him. Envy, and malice, were the
impulsive causes of Ioabs treachery, so that when he fli'es to the horns of
the Altar, as challenging the privilege of Sanctuary, and is by Solomon
command, according to David's former charge, drawn from thence by violence and
slain, that blood might have blood, he cannot say in his own defense, as
David here does; what have I now done? Is their not a cause?

To come to other actions, done by private persons, to private and indirect
ends, howsoever the public good were pretended.
KOrah, Dathan, and Abiram, conspire against Moses, and Aron, and whatsoever
show they make to reduce things to good order in the State, and Church, yet it
is manifest that pride, ambition, and disobedience were the bellows which
kindled that fire in their hearts. For the Church and Comon-wealth were governed
by Gods law and direction, and noomutation like to ensue, except it were
wrought by themselves, and therefore because it was not the true fire of zeal,
but of faction, which stirred that combustion, God consumed them with the fire
of his wrath, and the earth opened her mouth, Number. 16.
and swallowed them up.

Saul makes a rash vow (as Ieptah did before) pretending zeal in doing it,
and such zeal in executing the transgressors thereof, that his own son must
dye (a son that deserved so well of the father, so well of the Comon-wealth,
having that day with his armor-bearer chased the Philistims, and obtained the
victory) only because he tasted a little honey; It was no zeal, but
superstition, that made the vow, there was noe necessity to keep it, but a
necessity compelled Jonathan, by eating, to refresh himself, having over
spent his spirits before in the battle. The maker of the vow was blame worthy,
the breaker blameles; superstition, made it, necessity brake it: The maker,
so his own laws be observed, care's not for Gods; conscience must bynd
other men to him, but noe conscience can bynd him to God; For (we see) he that
is so careful here to kill all, as he bind's the people by a vow to do it,
a while after can spare Agag and the best things, notwithstanding the
commandment of God, and think's he sins not in transgressing Gods will,
wilfully, and presumptiouslie, though he condemn's his son to death for
violating his unjust will, ignorantly.

Haman (the favorite of Ahazhuerus) because Mordocay will not bow the knee, 2 Samuel 14
when that bubble passes by, waxes angry, and think's himself wronged and
dishonored; All the reverence which his flatterers, followers, and the whole
state and court gives him, does not so much please him, as this single
neglect of one man vexes him. For Pride, like, Covetousness and lust, and all
other vices, has nothing, except it has all. Therefore for Mordocaies sake,
he will be revenged of the whole nation, but pretend's public good, Ester.
4. ^5
it is not (says he) for the Kings proffit to suffer them.

Herod is pleased in seeing the daughter of Herodias dance, and therefore John
Baptist's head must pay for the music. Neither could the innocence of the man
save his life, but Herod's byrth-day, most become the day of his death.

The Church mournes when Tyrants are borne, and the Godly fast, and pray, and
weep, when the wicked feast, and play, and revell. Herod has sworn and
therefore religiously will keep his vow, John Baptist must dye. O
superstitious hypocrite, noe necessity caused the to vow, nor is their any to
make thee keep it; To do good at all times necessity comaunds us, to do
mischeife at any time, noe necessity compell's us. In this thou art religious,
but to keep Herodias they brother Phillips wife, that never troubles thy
conscience; Hypocrite strain out guats, and swallow camells. So Lewis the
eleueneh of France, would not swear by the Cross of Saim Loro of Angiers, but
any other oath he would take, and having broken them, kiss the leaden God,
which he wore in his cap, and all was well, his conscience was quiet; Assuredly
(what pretense soever men make) he that liue's in any open sin, without
remorse, and repentance, has noe religion in him: Superstition may posesse
him, and guild him without, true wisdom and devotion cannot secure him within.

Demetrius the Silver-smith pretends religion to stop the doctrine of Saint
Paul: Yet covetousness, and his private proffit was the end of his vproare, and
for that cause, he gather's together a factious troop of persons, interressed
in the same craft, and comodity, Act. 19. 24. 28.
with a greedy acclamation saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

Now all these might and did pretend causes to extenuate the haynousnes of
their facts, nay perhaps to justify them altogether (for there is noe act but
has his cause, and be it never so foul, put's on a fair vyzour) but none of
these can clear themselves to have any other impulsive cause, then the
corruption, and praevarication of their ownevile natures. They cannot say that
either necessity to prevent some imniment danger, or to procure some certain
or probable good, excited them to work, neither can they justify themselves
with such an expostulation as our Duellist here does, saying, what have we
now done? Is their not a cause?

They must therefore confess their actions to be grounded upon ambition,
pride, vayne-glory, malice, envye, or some other oblique, and crooked cause,
and so to be sinful, and censurable, together with all such, as shall
hereafter resemble them.

CONCLUSION 2.
A Second Conclusion from hence deduced is, that necessity supplie's the place
of an ordinary calling and warrants the undertaking of any action for the
avoiding of a certain mischeife, either to the state where we live, or the
true religion which we profess.
We see in nature, that when the eye waxes blind, the hand, grope's, the
foot beat's for way, and the ear, by listening, seeke's to guide the body
right, and to supply the place of an eye; So the eye (where men are deaf,
and dumb borne) apprehend's by signs, and sends back her own conceptions, by
a visible kind of language. One member supplie's the place of an other in
service of the whole body; neither does the head (where reason reside's) find
fault with the comunitie of parts, and exchange of their portions. The mouth
in case of necessity, think's noe scorn to become a draught and purging place
to the stomach by vomit: neither does the stomach (in case of necessity)
refuse meat that is sent up by glisters. Nature makes use of any part in any
office, for preservation of the whole man from ruin. In the reasonable
faculties of the soul, the jmagmation stand's in stead of memory, by
begetting new Ideas in brains that be inclyned to be ouer-hott, and dry, and
the memory supplie's the defect of judgment, by following former presidents,
where the brain inclyne's to overmuch moisture; and all parts bringing
intelligenc to the reasonable soul (the Governesse of all) she reject's none
before examination, nor censure's any for doing the office which belong's to an
other, whilst the other is defective, and this does not neglect it is proper
function. So that the soul having need of all, maks use of all for the common
benefit: In-soemuch as if the foot by tripping giue's her warning of that
which the eye should have seen, she does not therefore neglect to look out,
because the intelligence come's from a blind guide, but therefore she looke's
out, to see if the foot say true or not, and so let us the eye see it is own
fault in the diligence of the foot. The Apostle uses this argument to
persuade the Corinthians to unity, 1 Cor. 12. 21. 22. 23 24.
and shewe's that there is a fellow-vse or need, that one member has of
anotther, and that likewise their ought to be a fellow care one for an other,
1. Cor. 12. 25.
and also a fellow feeling or compassion of common afflictions, one with an
other. And since every member partak's with the head and whole body, 1 Cor. 12.
26.
in pain or pleasure, in houor or dishonor, therefore it concern's every
member, to look to the preservation both of themselves in particular, and of
others in general. Because noe member can say they are absolute in themselves,
and have noe needs of another. The eye does not see for it self alone, but for
the foot, and whole body. It concerne's the Eye therefore to watch, that if
the ear (by accident) should be negligent or let slip a remarkable
observation, which concerns necessarily the whole body, that the eye might be
in stead of an ear, and give notice to the soul by some visible motion. And
thus we see the eye steadfastly fastened upon the speaker, or any other object,
keeps the imagination from wandering, and makes the ear more attentive to the
voice, and apprehensiue of the meaning. And so, whilst the eye takes a napp,
or in the dark, when it cannot see, it concerns the ear towatch for it
self, for the eye, and for the whole body: for though it be true that the eye
cannot hear, nor the ear see, yet there is some such affinity betwixt all
these members in their several operations, as inables the one to supply the
defects of an other, Nature has ordinarily made the tongue to speak to the
ear; but God extra ordinarily did speak by the tongue to the eye, Act. 2. 3.
and knits all in a perfect and happy society? As we see in the elements
though nothing be more opposed then the fire and water, yet they are mixed in
the air which is hott and moist; the fire is hott and dry, and the air is
hott and moist: Now though the air and fire be diverse, yea mere contraries,
as the one is dry, and the other moist, yet they are easily married together as
they are both hott; So the water is cold and moist, and the earth cold and
dry; as the one is moist, and the other dry, they have need of each other, and
yet they fall out and fight; but as they are both cold, they easily agree and
are compounded in one body. And thus it is in the members of the humane body,
composed of these elements, and thus is it in the Church and Comon-wealth,
which is a mystical and politic body composed of these men; Now therefore,
having thus beheld the comunity of the parts even in nature, let us look into
a few examples, following this reason or law of nature, and there see how
actions, (otherwise questionable) are warranted, and justified by necessity,
when they respect the public.

The King of Sodom rebels against Chedorlaomer King of Elam; Genesis 14. 4.
It is unlawful to rebel, unlawful to assist rebels, yet Lot takes his
part, and is taken prisoner; Abraham thinks it noe injustice to join in
confederacy with this rebelling King, but that it is lawful to make an
invasiue war to rescue his brother Lot. The reason is, nature bynds him to
it, and if he should neglect his duty in this case he were worse then an
infidel. Nay religion bynds him to it, and a righteous family calls for help.
Herein Abraham though he assailes, does but defend, according to the law of
nature; for if they had not first invaded the Church, and taken Lot, Abraham
had sat still, but now his assault is taken as a defense, for otherwise the
Church, and faith of the church, could not be defended.

The Church is in distress, and in hazard to receive a blow by this means:
He is noe living part of the Church, that suffers any part to fall, whilst
his hand can uphold it. I had rather pull the house with Sampson over my head,
then grynde in a mill, like an idolatrous and blind beast, all my life, to the
rejoicing of uncircumcised Philistims. Surely Sampsons death, Iud. 16. 30. 2
King. 25 Number. 31. 6.
was more honorable the^ Zedechias life, yet both lost their eyes; when
religion is at the stake, the Priest who (is a man of peace) may excite to the
war; nay must blow the trumpet, and must sound the Alarm: And then doubtless
Solomon, the peaceable builder of the Temple, may draw his sword, for the
gloss, or brightness of that sword of justice is not stained, nor the edge
bated, with any other spott or stroke, then the touch of innocent blood. But
that (like as Aqua fortis eats into steel, or as the blood of Goats softens
Diamonds) does indeed soften the metal, and so turns the edge of
authority, that it cuts not at all, or only cuts the abuser and perverter of
it. This we see in Abraham who after this very war (and only then) is
blessed by Melchisedesk, the King, and Preift of peace. Yea Melchisedeck
accepts the tithe of the spoils, and by his acceptance, confirme's us in the
lawfulnes of the like acquisition; for had the goods been ill gotten (as they
must needs be were the war unlawful) that King of justice would not have
pertaken, nor received any portion of it for himself, or for God: but now his
acceptance approues the action, and warrants our imitation; so that, if any
man question the fact, shall behold Abraham stands forth. Like David in this
place, and says, what have I now done? Is their not a cause?

Moses, beholding with sorrow the bondage of his Countrymen, and how basely the
Egyptians insulted over them, provoked by the necessity of the case, offered
himself to be their deliverer, and in revenge of a wronged Isralite, slew an
oppressing Egyptian: but they (notwithstanding Gods work for their weal) were
loath to be admonished of any error, and therefore, where he labored to unite
them in love, they requite him with accusation, and cast in his teeth what he
had done for their good, with the hazard of his own life. This make's him
slay, but they smart for it forty years after.

Phineas in case of necessity, though a Priest, a man of peace, when he beholds
manners corrupted, religion profaned, Justice contemned, steps up and arms
himself with the weapens of war, and executes judgment upon two impudent
offenders, having the necessity of the case sor his calling, and the
approbation of God after the fact, to encourage our zeal in the like. The
noblenes of blood should be noe warrant to protect notorions sinners from shame
and punishment, Number. 25. 7.
if like Phineas our hearts were inflamed with the love of God and his truth.

Deborah a woman, modest, virtuous, in the time of necessity becomes a Judge,
becomes a Captain. At other times to do thus, had neither been the part of a
modest, nor virtuous wooman; now not to do it, when necessity calls her out,
were to become as beastly and slavish, as those be, who should censure or
condemn her for doing it. Iud. 4. 4. 9


Sheba, flying into Abel, Ioab beseigeth him therein; The City being brought
to extremity, 2 Samuel 20. 13. 15.
noe way likely to avoid ruin, a woman steps up among the Captayns, and
Counselors, and by her wisdom, in case of necessity, finds a means to
satiffie Ioab, and to secure the City.

In case of necessity, Azariah withstand's the King, saying, It pertains not
to thee Vzziah, to burn in cense unto the Lord, but to the Priests the sons
of Aaron that are consecrated for to offer incense: Go forth of the sanctuary:
for thou have transgressed, 2 Chr. 26. 18.
and thou shall have noe honor of the Lord God. Had not the Priest been stout
in this case he had been worthy of that leprosy, which the Prince was plagued
withal, for being too stout. It was here found true which Solomon says,
Better is a poor and a wise child, Eccl. 4. 13
then an old and foolish King, which will noe more be admonished.

The Jews under Ahazhuerus are in great danger of a general massacre by the
practice of an ambitious, and irreligious favorite; Mordocay sends word to
Esther, who is safe her self, and secure in the arms of the King, that she
would remember her inocent Contrymen, and bestirre her self in the time of
this extreme necessity; she resolue's presently to do her best in this
buisines, and layidg a side all respect of the Ceremony of the Court, the
Majesty of the King, Est. 4. 14. 15. 16.
the terror of a contrary law, she goe's on with this resolution, If I perish,
I perish.

Let these examples that follow be of credit with the Reader according to the
credit of those Apocriphall books from whence they are taken: Yet this will
follow that those who penned the books were of this judgment, and the times
wherein these books were penned, approved, and praised these actions, and so
would have done the like, if in these days they had lived and met the like
occasion as was then offered them. And to this end did they write* and propound
these examples to our imitation; nor can we choose but reverence their
antiquity, though we do not Canonize their verity.

Judith another woman in case of necessity for preservation of her Country, and
Religion, having before given testimony of her Chastity, Modesty, Charity,
Contentment, in a retired course of life, as if now she had laid by or forgot
all these, and become upon a suddayne wanton, and loose, and merciles, and
monstrous, vndertaks a work which makes men tremble. Whilst they think upon
it, and shows how strong God is in weak instruments, when he begins to work.

Good old Tobit in case of necessity buryes his brethren, though with the
hazard of his own life and estate; he is banished for this, but the same God
that set's him to work, raises him friends at Court to help and restore him.
Archiacharus beg's his goods, which were confiscated, and his life, which was
forfeited, for this pious offense, and rectore's them unto him. Yet being
restored, he does not therefore cease doing good in time of necessity, for
fear of the penalty threatened, and formerly inflicted; nor can his mocking
neighbors fright him from his duty, but he reiterate's the same charitable, and
holy transgression again, and again, whilst if any man repr^hends him for
it, he can say with David: What have I now done? Is their not a cause?

In necessity, rather then chastity shall be condemned by injustice, because she
would not be deflowred by lust, God stirs up the spirit of young Daniell,
(without an ordinary calling) to condemn them that were ordinary Judges, and
to clear the innocent from imminent danger. For wheresoever I have an occasion
offered me by God, to do good, I have a calling and command, from him to do
it.

In necessity, Mathias withstand's such as sacrifice contrary to the law, and
whilst the usurping King commands the doing of it, he kill's the person that
presumes to do it: And for this is parralelde with zealous Phineas, whose like
act of necessary (yet extraordinary) justice, without an ordinary calling or
warrant, on the behalf of God, and the truth, was so far from finne and
shame as it was counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for
evermore; and is styled by the Psalmist, according as the septuagint expounded
it, a prayer of peace, a sweet smelling sacrifice of atonement, which caused
the consuming pestilence to cease.

To speak of Prophets both ordinary, and extraordinary, after all these, who
have done the like in their kind, as Jeremiah, Micheas, Esaias, Daniell, Amos,
with otthers; were but to prove what nothing but tyannous custom dare's, and
nothing but invicible ignorance, or villainous Atheism will deny, Objection
or call into doubt. But if any shall say, these are no presidents to follow
because they were extraordinary: I answer, Answer.
therefore they are to be followed, because they are extraordinary: For their
examples fit extraordinary times, and occasions best. And yet what action is
done, but a man might say as much of it, if that were enough to make it lie
dead, and vseles. But who can know, whether an other man has the same
extraordinary mover or not, where the same cause present's it self? verily
none, but the person himself, who has the testimony of his own conscience to
acquitt, or condemn him; other men, judging by the naked fact, or badd
success, may misjudge, and condemn a work for wicked, which proceede's
(perhap's) from the good spirit of God. And this must neede's be true, except
we thought the spirit of God, that spoke by the Prophets, speake's not now to
Gods people in the Church; but that (Oh blasphemy) God were now grown old and
become blind, or deaf, or dumb, or forgott himself, and his poor afflicted
flock. Briefly, whilst some will not believe God when hespeakes, and works by
extraordinary means, and others will not believe him except he so speake's,
and worke's, we are come to that pass that we see not our tokens: neither
will we hear others admonishing us, nor do what we ought without
admonition, nor suffer any man to speak, or do worthily without an unworthy
censure.

To conclude this point, though the actions of all these men before recited,
might be called in question (as many of them were) by a cavilling and envious
enemy, and some of them challendged of partiality, others of singularity, of
popularity, presumption, pride, disobedience, irregularity, treachery, or the
like. So that none should escape uncontrolled; yet, they all pass current in
the Church under the general warrant of Necessity, and may all stand up with
these words of David in this place, what have we now done? Is their not a
cause? Such a cause there was, as if Abraham had not fought, he had been
registered for lack of good nature, for lack of courage, for lack of zeal, in
his friends case, in the states, in Gods. And as this Father of the faithful,
so should all that succeed him, as well in religion, as greatness, and goodness
of mind, have undergone censure in their perticulars for omission, as now they
have by their worthes attained, the favor of God and men.

For in the case of necessity, God himself dispenses with his written law;
Because the law of Nature, which he has written in every man's heart, G^. 38.
26. Exodus 17. 20. 21. Iud. 3. 15.
subjects him thereunto. So that it excuses, or (at least) extenuateth (in some
sort) the incest of Thamar, the disobedience of the Midwiues, the cruelty of
Ehud, and Iael, 1 Sa. 19. 2. Pro. 6. 30. Tho: Aqu: 22. q. 62. st. 5. 4.
the falsehood of Jonathan, bewraying the Council of his Father, his King:
insomuch as Solomon says, men despise not a thief that steals for necessity:
Yea, in case of necessity it shall be lawful to break the Sabbath, and to
eat the shew-breud, to dispose of the holy vessels; to omit circumcision; For
a woman to circumcise, and all this without blame; whilst all of them have this
Buckler of David's, to defend themselves from obloquie, What have I now done? Is
their not a cause? Vbi vrget necessitas, excusabilis est dispensatio: vbi
vtilitas provocat, laudablis est; vtilitas, (inquam) communis, non propria.

Neither is this a Paradoxe in divinity, nor yet a thing practiced only
amongst the Jews, but a law universal, both of nature, and nations. So that
wheresoever we shall find man, we shall find the footstepps of this
practice; And the more noble the nation is, the more frequent the examples. The
Grecians, and Romans, shall suffice, and some few amongst them.

Codrus, King of Athens understanding by the oracle, the benefit his Kingdom
should receive by his loss, and the loss it should have by his life,
disguised himself, and provoked an enemy with hard words, and then exposed
himself (voluntarily) to his enraged, and sudden revenge; that so, by his
singular danger, and death, he might procure the general good of all.

Mutius Scevola, for his country, in time of necessity, attempts the death of
Porsenna, a public enemy, and missing to perform what he would, he becomes
more famous, whilst he burns his mistaking hand, in his enemies fire, to let
them see, that as they punished him for attempting, he willingly punished
himself for missing; with this resolution he conquer's the enraged King, who
leaves the seige, more afraid of the virtue of Scevola, then of all Rome
beside. Indeed this was a profe'st enemy but are men the less dangerous
enemies, for being hidd, close, and unknown, or because they profess the
contrary, and only by practice declare their evil intents; I trow not.

Scipio, a modest and humble man (who fled preferment in time of peace, when
the most unworthy hunted after it, with money and means) sought the helm in a
storm, when all fled out of a ship-wrak't estate, which was ready to sink,
and ventred his own life for the saving of many.

Pompey, who wrung from envy the surname of Great, being to pass out of Cicile
by sea to releive Rome with corn, in a time of extreme famine, the wynds
rising, the sea raging, and the mariners fearing to weigh up their ankors, in
such a stresse, he presses them forward with this resolute incoragement, It is
necessary that I go, but not necessary that I live.

Horatius Cocles, maintained a Bridge against the enemy, till part of it was
broken down behind him, and then looking back, and seeing his Country to be
freed, by his personal danger: He leapes into the water with these words in
his mouth, Seneca: Epist. 120. veniat si quis vult, sic euntem sequi.
Let him come after me, whosoever will follow me, so goeing before, and
leading the way: I will travel no further in this infinite discourse; our own
age wants not presidents of those who have interposed their lives in case of
necessity, for the rescue of the late Queen deceased, of the state and church
the^ Sect.
perplexed: of our King, and the church of Scotland in times past, and can it
be less honorable to do as much for the King, state, or church, at this
present? Necessitas non subijci tur legi. The: Aqui 1. 12. q. ^^. ar. 6.
Necessitas dat legem non ipsa accepit. Se neca.
The Proverb says, Necessity has noe law; the meaning is, that necessity is a
law, above all laws: And I call it Necessity, when the King who is the head,
or the state which is the body, or Religion, which is the soul, is in question
to receive prejudice. These live together, these dye together; to be engaged,
for these is to be happy, to dye for these, is to be safe; Therefore I conclude
that in this case, necessity supplies the place of an ordinary calling.

If any man desires further satisfaction, and thinks these examples of antic
liberty, and virtue, too far out of fashion, to be revined in these days,
degenerating from true nobility, and declining headlong toward security, let
him in the troubles of France, hear the Lord de la Nove in this point, who
speak's, like a noble man indeed, freely, and plainly.

And because (says he) at this apprehension of the present evil, some hold
it may be, that the King enclosed will give a commandment to his subjects, not
to aid his estate now perishing; shall this defaulte be an excuse for the
subject? we owe love, obeisance, subjection, and fidelity to our King, who not
withstanding may dye: but we owe so much to our country, as cannot dye.

When Lodovic-Sforce began to aspire to the soveragnity of Millan, Com: l: y.
0. 2.
he found the Duchess her wisdom and courage to be the only bar in his
way, as for the Duke himself, out of his simplicity, credulity, or obstinacy,
he became an intelligencer against himself revealing his wives counsels, and
purposes, to Lodovic his subtle enemy, and the secret vndermyner of his
estate. By which means, he ruined himself and his posterity, and advanced
Lodovic-Sforce his defignes, more surely, and speedely, then Lodovic-Sforce
himself, or the ablest, and most malicious traitor, could have done. Say now
therefore, the Duches her self, or any other of the chief persons with, or
without her, had opposed Lodovic on the Dukes behalf, or opposed the Duke
himself, standing against himself obstinatly, and ignorantly, for
Lodovic-Sforce, should these persons, so doing their duties, be counted (for
this) traitors? I trow not. Nay, I am persuaded if they should not thus do,
they were rather so to be accounted traitors. I doubt not the Duke himself
once delivered from his own folly, and freed from the fraud, and flattery of
Lodovic Sforce, would have willingly acknowledged, and bountifully rewarded the
benefit: Though now, whilst these evil spirits possessed him; like a man that
were bewitched to ruin, he was like enough to praise falsehood, and flattery,
and to punish faith, and fidelity, styling treason obedience and duty.

There is a question whether such did well or not, Commine ^. 6. 6, 7.
as kept Lewis the 11 from the window in his sickness. Their disobedience arose
from love; but this jmagination, which loved well that flattery he had been
used unto, supposed this duty of their's a capital crime, and therefore
desiring to have his will, though it were to hurt himself, and to uphold his
authority, though with the decay of his health, and life, (in the issue) he
banished them the court, to teach others a blind obedience, and that Kings
ought to be obayed, though it be to the ruin of themselves, and the state.

Saul perhaps would have blamed his Armor-bearer, if he had not sufferd him to
have killed himself: But thus to do, had been a holy, and acceptable
disobedience, whilst he might have been a mean to save his soul. And surely
Lewis the 11, and Saul, were madd, and possessed with evil spirits, whilst they
were in these humors, so also are all such, who will be offended with those
that inform them, of troth's, that they cast not away themselves, and
Kingdoms, but will not be angry with such as flatter them falsely, but rather
reward them for helping forward, and hastening the ruin of themselves and
states.

All those edicts whereby Bullinbrooke qualifyed, and stayed the peoples duty,
from stirring for Ric^^rd the second, and whereby he strengthened himself, for
the deposing of that King, came out in the Kings own name. But what do you
think the King would have blamed them (though for the present perhaps he would,
especially whilst he was in Bullinbrooke power) if the nobility, and commons,
had joined for his rescue, or any man excited them to that end? Would he (being
free) have called such traitors? I trow not; but rather known, and esteemd
them his truest subjects.

When Augustus feasted Antony, and Lepidus in his Galley, the Captain of the
Galley came to him, and whispering in his ear, told him now he could make
him master of the world, by cutting the cable and falling into the sea whilst
those two competitors were in his power. Thou should have done this (quoth
Augustus) without my privity; now to do it would not become. Some services are
only acceptable when they are acted; they are first to be done, and then are
we to ask leave for doing of them, when the apparent necessity may plead
our pardon. Henry the eight, concluded peace with France, upon these
conditions, that the King of France, should pay him a certain sum of money,
upon payment whereof, he should restore Bolloigne to the French, and in the
mean time, all things were to stand, as then they stood without alteration.
Presently after Chatilion, Captain of Mountpeaisier, begun to raise a
Bastilion, which might annoy and endaunger Bolloigne; this being observed by
the Lord Gray, (then Governor of Bolloigne) who saw the intent of the enemy,
how upon advantage of the commissioners ^versight, in composing the articles of
agreement, great disadvantage might befall the Kings town, and a ready way be
made for the enemy to enter by fraud without money, which he could not
otherwise enter by force, without payment of a great sum agreed on: He with
his troops fell upon the enemies works, and razed it to the ground, and this
was accounted good service, being once done, though against the articles;
because necessity urged it, to repair an oversight, when if he had stayed for
commission, or sought one to warrant his work, he might have been prevented,
in the work, and that would never have been granted by public warrant which
he sought, and so on all sides, he should have been blamed. I know some write
that he had warrant underhand brought him by word of mouth, by Sir Tho:
Palmer, let this be granted, yet by the King (as King) that is, with his
counsels consent, and by public instrument, he was not only, not warranted,
to do it, but prohibited from doing it; which yet, being done, was accounted
the best piece of service that ever he did.

Hear the Lord de la N^ve, to this purpose in an other passage*

Solon said, that in a division a good citizen ought not to stand still, but to
take the better part, in respect of his Band to the Commonwealth. But say
(says he) our Country were not divided but overthrown: Say it were not in
peril only to be, but almost altogether lost. Should we in the midst of so
great disorders, think it wisdom, and allegiance, and piety, to sit with our
arms crosse-folded, till our throats be cut, our laws, religion, and state,
altered, when reason bids us throw them abroad, and bestirre us nimbly for the
suddayne safegaurd, and rescue of all? shall I meet with Incendiaries, who see
to set the Country one fire, and not stopp them, but stay for a commision?
shall the Father of a Family be seen madly to (...) his own house over his
ears, and kill himself, whilst the wife children, and servants obediently
look on, and weep, but dare not offer to hinder it? shall it be sin in them
to stay him from such a foul fact, to hollde his hands? to desire him to be
better advised to cast on water? I think none will be so mad as once to
affirm it.

Then doubtless, our combatant David, may kill Goliath, an enemy of God and the
state, though Saul send's not for him, and might after the fact justify
himself with this speech of his to his brother: What have I now done? Is their
not a cause?

CONCLUSION 3.
A third Conclusion from hence deduced, is, that negligence, in a case of
Necessity: that is, where the safety of our Prince, or our Country, or our
Religion, is in danger, argue's the negligent, of cowardice, luke-warmenes,
slavery, or treachery.
AS before we have seen the care, on member has of an other in mutual love
(a kind of commutatiue justice) so we may behold how all the members apply
themselves, especially for the safeguard of the most principal members.
Insomuch at if the head, or heart be aimed at, the hand enterposeth it self to
defend these parts, and rather receiue's the wound it self, then suffers the
blow to touch them. In extrema necessitate, magis licet de serere filios quam
parents, quos nullo modo deserere licet propter be neficia: Th Aqua: 22. q.
31. A. 34. m.
The reason is, because the conservation of the whole body consists in the
vital, noble, and principal parts; so that if through the eyes defect, any
mischaunce happen's to it self, or to any part of the body, especially to the
head, or to the heart, it shall not be blamed alone, but the ear, and every
member, shall partake both of the shame and detryment. Because it is judged not
a particular, but a general neglect; since, if all had not been equally
negligent, the vigillancy of some one, had given warning to the rest, and so
the danger had been avoided.

Bodies pollitique; are best seen in bodies natural; and what is here
orderly, cannot be there absurd. Cicero is a member, a servaunt; a child, of
the Commonwealth; yet is he truly what he is, called the father, of the
Commonwealth. The eldest of a family is by nature in place of a King to the
rest: Yet in case of necessity, in age, or sickness, or the like infirmity, the
youngest may both govern, and provide for the elder; as young Storcks feeding
the old, and as gracious children novrishing; and informing their decrepid,
and ignorant parents. In defect of Kings, Priests have governed, and in case of
necessity Vzziah being removed for leprosy, Jonathan his son reigns in his
stead. Yea, at such extraordinary times, Women have stepped to the helm, so
careful is nature, so careful is policy, so careful is grace, for the
preservation of the whole, that they reject not the help of any, nor trusts
and hazards the securing of all, upon one, though that one seem never so
dilligent or able. Which laudable custom to prevent general inconvenience,
arising from particular neglect of some special duty, whereby the public may
be endangered, they say the Cranes use, by natural instinct. For
notwithstanding they have one, of their own Company that keepe's watch, whilst
all the rest sleep, yet, that they may not seem securely to hazard all upon
the diligence and trust of one, all that sleep stand upon one leg, and hold
a stone in the other foot, whose weight may keep them waking, at least, make
them perticulerly watchful, and wary, against all fears and dangers, whch
may suddenly invade them in general. So in Armies the Per-due giue's notice
to the Sentinel, the Sentinel to the Corporal, the Corporal to the
Captain, ank court of guarde. Who being too weak to resist the danger,
giue's alarm to the whole body. Now if any surprise be made, the fault is
imputed as well to the General, who perhaps notwithstanding ordered and
commanded all things well on his part, as to the sleeping Sentinel whose
personal neglect lost the liue's, and honors of so many. And therefore it
concerne's all to be watchful, and to do their best, for the public
service, where the loss, and danger, or benefit, and honor, befall's to all
alike. This is insinuated in the partition of the prey, betwixt the soldier
that fought, Number. 31. 27.
and the rest of Israel that stayde at home; where though the greatest share
befell the soldier, who endured the heat, and hazard of the day, yet all who
stayde at home, had their parts, and shares also in the prize or booty, and none
were excluded; that all might be admonished thereby, how they had share, and
common interest in the gain or loss, honor, or dishonor, of each other.
Ruben^ and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses, were seated upon the near
side of Iordane toward the wilderness, by the way of indulgence; yet they were
enjoined to pass over armed to help their brethren, in the conquest of their
portions, and not to return till they were in posession, and the church settled
in peace. For it is a shame for one member to look on (as senlelesse) whilst
the rest are in such jeopardy.

And therefore, Iud. 5. 15. 16. 23.
in that song which Deborah and Barach sung after the victory, we hear of
great thoughts of heart for the devisions of Ruben; and we hear this curse
pronounced against pollitique (or rather negligent) Meroz, who stood Neuter
whilst religion was in question, Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord)
curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord against
the mighty. Does God then stand in need of help? does the Almighty stand in
need of help against the mighty? noe surely; it were madness to think so. But
because God has appointed means for the effecting of his work here below,
therefore such as are faithful, offer themselves to his work, knowing it is
his will they should do so, and it is their honor, so to be employed in this
service, where a crown of glory is laid up for the workman. None then will
stand Neuter in this case, who are persuaded of the truth of Gods promises.
Such only, who seem indifferent, or wholly withdraw themselves, who doubt, and
waver, in their faith, or like fools have said in their hearts their is noe
God. For this cause the Edomits are called cruel, and cursed by God, because
they stood on the otherside aloof off, looking on in the day, Obad. 1^
that strangers carried away the substance of their younger brother Jacob. And
Gideon after his victory over Zeba, and Zalmunnua, raced Succoth, and Penvell,
which refused to victual his army in their passage over, or to assist him in
those wars, and taught the inhabitants of those cittyes, by briars, and
thorns, a sensible kind of instruction, what it is to become Neuters, when
the welfare of the Church, and state, is in question, and how worthily, whilst
they will take part with neither side, they become a prey to both sides.

It is a shame whilst Heathens, and Idolaters bind themselves in strict
leagues, that Abraham, and Lot, should not help each other: or that whilst
Oreb, and Zeb, Zebah, and Zalmunnah join in confederacy, Succoth, and Penvell
should not releive Gideon. Much more shame is it, that whilst Turks, and
Heathens, and Idolatrous Papists; stand together in one, and have their
Catholic leauges, to extirpate us, and the truth we posesse, which is, and
has been a maine, prime, and principal point, in all their articles,
treatyes, and transactions, concluded betwixt them, from the days of Charles
the Fifth, to this present, such as profess the true faith, should for
pollitique and worldly respects, or perhaps without respect of policy, or
profit, abandon their distressed neighbors and brethren. Whatsoever such say
in pretense of their backwardnes, the true cause is either personal cowardice,
because they dare not provoke a false enemy, nor trust a true God, or
lukewarmenes in religion, because they are indifferent which side prevayle's,
so their bodies, and temporal estates be safe; or slavery, whilst they jmagine
their is no other honor then to enjoy the vain, and beastly pleasures of this
life for a season, though upon the basest conditions that can be; ^^ treachery,
whilst, either for gold, or some other corrupt bayte, which they have
swallowed, the safety of Prince, of state, of religion, is cast behind their
backs, and they desire change, as vermin that have eaten rats-bane, do fresh
water, which they drink till they bur'st with drinking.

Thus cunning practicioners have learned their art of the Devil, and do so
posesse, and bewitch the hearts, and ears of Princes, as often the better the
cause is, the worse it is like to speed. For they are able to cast aspercions
upon innocence her self, and to palliate the fowlest cause, with fair and
honest pretenses. So that men knew not well what part to take, whilst it is
hard to distinguish right, and wrong, a sunder.

If the cause be just (as they usually oppose such causes) then they perplex it
with other knots, and questions of doubt. If it be unjust (as they commonly
take part with error) then they line, and interlay it with a mixture, and
flourish of right, that so the appearance of truth may beguile the eyes of the
unwary. When such traitors as these beginn to work, they love like spydars, to
make the whole webb out of their own bosoms, Neb. 6. 6.
and when they entend most mischeife, pretend, all for the public good, and
lay treason to the charge of all honest men, whom either they see able, or
willing, to stand in their way. Yea, with great care, they advise Princes, and
Princes too often follow their advise, to avoyde that Council for wicked,
which may seen to discover the least part of their wickedness. When Haman
entende's to work his master to destroy the Jews, Hest. 3. 8.
that (amongst them) Mordocay might perish, he pretends the Kings profit to be
the ground of his Council, It is not for the Kings profit (says he) to
suffer them. Notwithstanding we must not be discouraged with these encounters,
but prepare our selves to meet them with greater resolution. If Sanballat and
Tobiah conspire together to hinder the repayring of Jerusalem, they pretend
the Kings prerogative (...) call all those rebels which stand for religi^^*
This does not discourage Nehemiah, Neh. 2. 19*
but (...) him to greater vigilance, Neh. 4.
and more (...), in the work. So that the people become ^ouldiars, and
artificers at once, holding a sw^^de in one hand, and a tool in the other. For
^y such men, and after such a manner, must the temple of God be built, and the
temple of ^ntichrist pulde down; namely by those that are courageous and
diligent. And though Sanballat proceede's by plots, and practices to hinder the
work and to raise up false Prophets (like the Jesuits in all Christendom, and
the Arminians in the united Provinces) to discourage the Prince, and people,
and to distract, and divide them, yet resolute Nehemiah resists this
temptation, Neh^m. ^
and breake's forth into these honorable and holy terms: Should such a man as
I am flee? who is being as I am (that is, a Captain and Commander) that would
go into the temple to live? Yea, though the enemy has pensioners, and
intelligencers, amongst the Princes of Judah (for this is no new Italian,
Spanish, or Iesuitiall, devise) yet, will Nehemiah be constant to the truth,
true to the state. For villaynes only, and cowardes, will be frighted from
their faith, with the bellowing of Roman Bulls. Surely, as daily wars make
the soldier expert, and as the faithful are bettered by affliction, so it
awaken's a wise and diligent man to know, that there are many spies, watching
his words, and many enemies hunting to find advantages against his actions:
And as thus it is, in the microcosme of private estates, so it is, in the
megacosme of public wealths also. There is nothing more secure's an estate,
then to have an enemy, and not^ing more corrupt's a state, then security and
peace, which softneth, and make's effeminate the heart of men, with immoderate
pleasure: So that, as a tree laden with fruit, ready to drop into the mouth of
him that shak^s it, or as full ears of wheat, jnviting the shearer to ^^tt
them down, the door stands open (like a light housewifes house to every
ruffian, without resistance) to him that dare's attempt to enter like a
conqueror, nay, w^orelike, and with importunity, it presents it self to
subjection, with all the opportunity, and advantage, that may woo any lustful
enemy to attempt.

So God says of Nineveh, Nuham. 3 12. 13.
All thy strong cittyes shall be like figtrees with the first ripe figgs, for
if they be shaken they fall into the mouth of the eater: Behold thy people
within the, are women, the gates of thy land shall be opened to thy enemies,
and the fire shall devour thy bars. And such a state was Laish, secure, made
drunk with peace and plenty, having no business, that is, by way of war, with
any man, but by way of trading and merchandise perhaps with many, and therefore
in danger to be indamaged by every man. It is far otherwise with him that is
incircled with enemies, for he prouides for wars, least he should become a
scorn to his enemies. Neh. 2. 17
Ye see (says Nehemiah) the misery we are in, how Jerusalem lies waste, and
the gates thereof are burnt with syer, come let us build the walls of
Jerusalem, that we be noe more a reproach. It is well Jerusalem is in misery,
for by this means Nehemiah is induced to build: By this means the Israelites
provide to withstad an invasion; by this means the church and state is
preserved from being a reproach to the enemies of God. God therefore, where he
intends to preserve a state and Church, permits foreign offenses to unite the
native members, and stirrs up enemies, to exercise them, and awaken them, least
the weaker trusting too much, to the fained fidelity and freindship of the
stronger, should be unawares soddaineiy surprised, and devoured. And though the
time of peace, be a pleasant time to flesh and blood, the time that we pray
for, as being a type, and shadow of our eternal Sabbath, yet such a time is
not free from Idolatry, and other inconveniences, though Solomon himself were
then the ruler. Winter is not so pleasant as Summer, but more wholesome, it has
not so much fruits; neither has it so many weeds: We see the fire never
flames higher, then when the wind labors to blow it out: And because God
loves a cheer full giver, and a fervent and sincere doer, hateing a doughbaked
professor, therefore, sometimes he suffer's Satan to raise up storms of
persecution, temptation, and opposition, thereby to kindle the zeal, and
courage of his servants. Insomuch as nothing can anger the man of God more, 2
Kin. 13. 18.19.
then to behold Ioash the King whom he intended to encourage in Gods cause, so
cold, in the expression of hate to the enemies of God, whilst being willed by
the Prophet to strike the ground, he smites it but thrice, and then staye's his
hand. Thou should have smiten five or six times (says the Prophet) so thou
should have smiten Aram till thou had consumed it, where now thou shall
smite Aram but thrice. So^ much does lukewarmenes disadvantage it self, when
it will not zealously pursue an occasion and opportunity offered by God, for
the rooting up of his enemies, the enlarging of his Church, and procuring
personal honor to those that are the Actors in so holy a work.

CONCLUSION 4.
A fourth Conclusion from hence deduced is, that to punish such as are forward
in case of necessity to do service to the King, State, and Church is in
justice. To censure and reprehend such, proceeds either out of ignorance, or
flattery, or envy; not to reward such, is improvidence.
ALl this will necessarily follow, upon the precedent discourse; for if that be
true which has him said before, that the law of nature (which is the law of
God and men) imposes this duty upon all men, to offer themselves to the
service of the King, State, and Church, where necessity compells, though noe
other person or power, calls us out, and if the act of David be therefore
justifiable, because he has this cause for his buckler against the challeng of
his enraged brother, then were it great in justice to punish David for this,
since he does but his duty, and were rather puuishable if he did it not. Saul
may as well malice him after the victory, because the people applaud his
conquests with songs of triumph, as punish him now for presenting himself to
the combat, and showing his good will, and ready mind to do good. But such
pride and injustice posesseth the hearts of men, as they can find noe readier
way, to pay benefits then by injuryes; so that whilst David is preparing to
fight for his brother, against the Giant, who quarrels with all Israel, his
ungrateful brother is quarrelling with him, as if he intended to punish him
for fighting. And this is David's lot after, and always; for whilst he is
taking care, and framing his fingers to please the furious and posessed King,
the King is studying how to do him a mischeife, and with a devilish intent
makes his fingers the instruments of his injustice, casting a javelin at him,
with hope to nail him to the wall. O Justice art thou blind, as foolish men
have feigned thee? or is injustice like thee, in being blind, and so mistaken
for thee? for surely this is the Common misery of all the servants of God, to
have their words, their actions, their intentions misconstrued, and to be
pursued with hate, by those especially, whom (above all others) they take
care, and study to pursue with all offices of love, and allegiance.

Secondly, to reprehend such proceeds out of ignorance, flattery, or envy, for
was it not great ignorance, and a grand folly, in the brother of David, to
chide him for doing that, which it concerned every good subject to do? that
is, to look into the state of the Army, and to enquire the cause of that
general fear, with intent to do his best to prevent it? This is most clear.
Yet folly is such another Lapwing, as it discover's its own nest with crying,
and screeking at all that come's near it. Therefore Syracides says, when a
man of understanding bears a wise word, Ca. 21. 26*
he will comend it, and increase it, but if an ignorant man hear it he will
disallowe it, and cast it behind his back.

But perhap's not ignorance, but flattery is the find-fault in this place, for
oftentimes such actions (like some meat) though never so well cooked,
seasoned, and served in, relish not right in every pallat. Now the ear tries
words, Job. 34. 3.
as the mouth meats, and meat is rejected, not ever for its own fault, but
sometimes through the vitiousnes of the taste, sometimes for lack of stomach,
whilst we are overcloyed, and surfeited, and some time we are led even in
this sensible things by example, so that froggs and mushrumpes being in
fashion, are preferred before the best and wholesomest meats. And thus it is both
in words, and actions where sometime, men dislike for lack of judgment,
sometime out of confusion or fastidiousnes, and sometime for company or fashion
sake. There are also a kind of creatures that take liberty to censure all
things but themselves, and think it a diminution of their glory, not to be the
first that find fault, or the only, and singular persons (perhaps) that do
so. Nothing must pass current but under their privilege, and commonly they
will be contrary to all others, and to reason and religion too, they were
(else) unworthy to be leaders, or to be the brethren of the invisible order of
the Rosacruants. These are (too often) of eminent place, and may be sharp,
quick, and curiously inquisitiue, in obsolete, obscure, and needles trifles,
but never serious in fundamental, and necessary points. There is a certain
subtility (says Siracides) that is fine, Eccles. 1^. 22. 24.
but is unrighteous; and there is that wresteth the open and manifest law: yet
their is that is wise, and judges righteously.

To these word-watchers, there adhaere a number of Sicophants, who either to
seem wise, will say as they say, and sooth up their errors, or at least to
preserve themselves, in favor will not say otherwise, whatsoever they think.
Thus it might be here (though I affirm it not to be so) but suppose it
probable, whilst I consider the weakness, and proclivity of frail man, to take
part with strong iniquity of the present time, against single, and simple,
Truth and virtue, I say, it might be, that Eliab in this reproof, seconded
some other great Commander: who thinking it unfit (as the counselors of
Hezechias did afterward, 2 King. 18. 26.) that the present state of things,
and the cowardice of the greatest Isralites should be blown about through the
crowde, for fear of discouraging all (as wickedness, (like age,) is loath to
look in a glass, for fear of beholding it is own wrinckles, and deformityes)
or judging it unfit that unexperienced youth, should be busy in debating, or
inquiring after matters of state, or affairs of war; or that a shepherds
lad, should step beyond the reach of his Sheep-hooke, and out of the sent, or
smellof his Tarr-boxe, thought to quench this fiery spark by a timely
reproof. But this water make's it burn feyrcer, and flame brighter, for
hypocricy may, but sincerity cannot, be thus diverted from a direct course;
since constancy, and perseverance alone, is that which discovoreth an
artificial, feigned, and forced appearance, from a true natural, Seneca Epist.
220.
and proper existence. Nemo potest diu personam far fictam, cito in naturam
suam recidunt, quibus veritas non est. As clothes dyed with blockwood will
loose their color, when such as be well woaded, will continue without stayning.

But perhaps neither ignorance, nor assentation, but envye moved Eliab to
reprove David in this, being loath that his younger brother should be his elder
in honor; for he sees this action would every way tend to his praise: If he
failed, yet to offer himself was honorable: if he fell, yet to dye so, was
better then to live otherwise: if he came of upon safe, and upon equal
terms, it was admirable: if he conquered (as that could not be jmagined) the
honor that he should reap thereby, (besides the reward) was inestimable:
whilst he should remain vnparraleld. These seeds of envye are sometimes
sown, even betwixt brothers, whilst they cannot endure to look upon the
brightness of each other. Cayne envyes Abell because God loves him: The sons
of Jacob hate Joseph, because their father affects him, and in token of
affection gives him a party coulored coat. Ge. 37. 34 Act^. 7. 9. Iud. 8. 1.
2. 3.
The Ephramits are angry with Gedeon, because he had beaten their enemies (the
Midianites) without their assistance: The reason of this, I think, is either
because vice hates virtue in whatsoever subject he meets her: or because the
praise of one man, seems to be a secret check, and reproof to an other. For
this cause cowardes cannot abide another man should be courageous; nor prophame
persons, that others should be religious: and such dislike the best action that
is done, and say it ought not to be done, because they dare not do it, and
therefore it is faulty and punishable, because they did it not. I fear that
Eliab whilst he challenges his brother of this crime, saying, I know thy
pride and malice of thy heart etc. May be justly taxed of malice and envye
himself: as Aristippus told Diogenes, thou reprehendest me of pride for
wearing my apparel neat and hanasome, but I see thy pride in thy slouenly
attire, and in that thy affected beastlines, and may easily spy it, through
the holes of that rent and torn mantle of thine.

Not to reward such is improvidence; Legibus proposita (says Cicero) sunt
supplicia viris, praemia virtutibus. Actions are either such as ought to be
punished, or rewarded, (for to be pardoned is a kind of punishment) and the
laws respect both. Now if this action of David's be not to be punished, because
he does therein nothing, but what proceeds from a superaboundant measure of
love and duty to God, and to his King and Country, then ought he to be rewarded
For as the royal scepter belongs to Ahasuerus to stretch out in mercy toward
Esther, and the sword to strike Haman in justice; so also does it belong to
the King, to watch, and read, and receive information of Mordocay his good
service, and to remember, that though it were registered, it was not rewarded.
As it were injustice for this to punish Mordocay, so is it improvidence, not
to reward him; for whilst we neglect such as benefit, or endeavor to benefit
the Church and Commonwealth, we show our selves unthankful to God, who
rayseth up the instrument, and unthankful to man, who was made the
instrument And so to be most unworthy of that benefit* For he that is the
means of saving the Princes life, deserves all that the Prince can do for
him; but he that preserves the life of the state, or indevours to do it,
preserves both the Princes life, and his honor also, and more then that, all
that his life and honor depends on, which is the preservation of his peoples
liberty. This David here does, and therefore merit's whatsoever is propounded,
though reason of state (that mystery of iniquity) delayde him in all these
points, and deludes his expectation, as it uses to delay, and delude the
expectation of the best deservers.

Saul yet (if we may build upon the private discourse of the private
soldiers) propounds a reward to any that performs this service, viz; Great
riches: for he that should do such an act as this, might want wealth but was
stored with native worth, and nobility enough. For either titular Nobility was
then noe reward, or else Fortitude was then the only Nobility.

Secondly, his daughter to wife: for he could not place her better, she should
receive the addition of honor by this marriage, rather then part with any.
Noble blood not then ran in ignoble veins.

Thirdly, make his fathers house free in Israel: for he well deserved it, that
by this act should make all Israel free. So a Mouse may deserve liberty of a
Lion, and a subject more then a sovereign can give. And this is the reason
(perhaps) that he went, and others too often, go unrewarded, except it be with
injuryes and reproaches: because devilish policy says men may supererrogate, or
deserve too much, when by a virtuous action he seems to lessen his ^uperior.

But this is a blind and beastly Paradoxe to quench the spirit of the best
deserver: for as a soldier cannot lessen his General by any extraordinary
undertaking and action, but must needs rather heighthen him, since all is
derived from him, and directed to him, and digested, and concocted by him: so
neither can a subject detract from his superior by doing honorably; since he is
both the center, and circumference of the Commonwealth, and (in the general)
pertakes of every particular man's felicity, and grows greater by their
greatness, as the body by the increase of the members, whilst they partake of
his beatitude as members of the souls infusion. Yet this piece of policy was
as old as Achitophell, and it seems then held to be an Aphorism of state: For
Ioab was acquainted with it, when he lay before Rabbah, 2 Samuel 12* 27.
and therefore desired David to come up, and take the city in, that he might
also take the honor of it, to himself, and so free Ioab from the envy, and
jealousy, which attends great persons, grown so, by great actions, as dark
shadows attend the beautifullest bodies in brightest sunshine.

APPLICATION.
Now follows the Application of all we have said.
ANd now may it be lawful for me, without suspicion of flattery, to touch upon
some particulars of this age, and in our own state, by way of Application.

I must confess, I may miss many good deservers, whose names ought to be
found with thankful remembrance here, but are refered to books of more
leaves, and of longer life.

Here only I intend to point at such, who are notable, and remarkable with us,
for some special services, as Saul was for stature amongst the Israelites, or
as little David was in the overthrow of great Goliath.

I will begin with that Honorable WORTHY whose happy hands were made (by Gods
mercy) the instruments to preserve his Majestyes life, in that (almost)
incredible conspiracy of the Gowryes. The continued liberty and freedom of
this faithfulness since, in speaking forbidden truth, without fear, or
flattery, when none other either would, or durst, is a witness, and evidence,
of the truth of that service, beyond the power of Envy, Suspicion, or
Incredulity, once to calumniate, or discredit. O may he ever continue such
still, to the assurance of his Princes safety, and his Countries prosperity;
and never may a faithful and valiant hand, meet with an envious tongue to
detract from it, or be united to a false and flattering tongue to disgrace, and
dishonor it, with lying, and soothing contradictions.

Let none think themselves neglected that (from hence) passing over so many
years with silence, I skip to him, who was a long time held to be the child of
Fortune only, but now is found to be the favorite of virtue also. Whilst he
shot up suddenly, who did not take him for a gourd, and expect his more
sudden withering again with wishes? But now who does not look upon him, as
upon an Oak, or Cedar sound at the heart, like to last long, and be profitable
for the upholding of the Church, and State, upon whose branches birds may
build with safety, and under whose shadow, all distressed creatures may find
shelter against the fury of violent storms? It was therefore, well said of
one, by Prophetical rapture (to pass by whatsoever else, was evil said) that
the first honors he had, were freely given, this last faithfully earned; the
success shewe's the truth, though then it seemed no other, but a strain of
poetical fury,

How many curses did fill his sails goeing toward Spain? insomuch that had
he not been imbarqued in one bottom with his Highness, for whose prosperity
all those cursers (and many others prayed) his vessel must needs have sunk,
with the weight of those woes. But now how many blessings and prayers attend
his prosperity, from the same hearts, and mouths, since his returning, when
they find, he has shown himself more faithful to God, to the King, Prince,
and his Country, then the first Scene of that Act, and our following fears,
could either assure us, or suffer us to jmagine?

When we first heard them set out (for see them we could not, and it was
happy we did not) our hearts were filled with astonishment, doubt, despair;
we gave them for lost, and our selves with them, and with them and us, our
laws, libertyes, land, and (what was dearest) our religion. Is there
redemption from hell, thought we? yes, he came from thence a conqueror, who
assures us, that no hell upon earth, can hold Gods elect, who are the true
members of that triumphant head.

Now that we may be more sensible of our danger then, and so of our
deliverance now, making good use of both; of the first to humble us, and to
make us wise for the time to come, to prevent the like (if it be possible) by
repentance, and watchfulnes; of the other, to move us to thankfulness, both to
God, as to a most gracious father, and protector of his Church, turning all
things, (yea the worst) to the best, for his servants; and to those instruments
whom it pleased his divine majesty to use in this errand, for the happy
accomplishment of this work; it were convenient we should cast back our eyes,
to times past, and consider how it stood with us, and all the reformed Churches
in general, when his Highness, with the Duke of Buckingham, set out about
this business by his Majestyes commandment, and what opinion we, and all
others of the best affected (both strangers, and natives) had, of that jorney,
and of the persons that undertook it.

All Germany was then in combustion, as if it had been a general fire,
prepared, and kindled at the Roman Catholic cost, for the true professors,
who were to become Apostates, or Martyrs.

The Palatinate lay prostituted, under the beastly and brutish command, of
three insulting Enemies, who satisfied, or at least, served, their insatiable
lust by turns, upon the fattest, and fairest parts of it, as the So^omits
would have used the Angels, Genesis 19. 5.
or as the men of Gibeah, Iud 19. 27*
did use the Levits wife.

The Hanse Towns trembled like a quarry in the foot, and began to treat of
their coming in.

The United Provinces, saw the whole bent of the war upon them, and that they
were by us deserted, and by the enemy swallowed in expectation.

The Protestants in France, put their confidence in flight, as their last
refuge, which they were ready to take, had God left them a place in the world,
whether they might have fled, with safety, in that universal Deluge.

The Papists in England, and Yreland, began to take posession of the Chair,
and Pulpit, and durst be so bold as to share out our honors, and punishments,
to design some of their own to the helm, and all of us, to the bar, and to
the block, to the tree^, and to the stake. Thus stood the world, or worse.

For the persons, and men's opinions of them, and the actions under their
hands; First for the Duke they took him to be unsettled in religion, but wholly
devoted to the service wherein he was employed. A young man, unfit for lack of
experience, to manage great affairs, or to encounter single the Grandees of
Spanye, and Rome, with the Jesuits at their elbowes.

And, though they conceived him to be best affected, yet even that best of his,
administered occasion of suspicion, what then should they think of other
Ministers, who had no means to build up their ambitious fortunes, but by this
fatal overture? Great Counsels pass through the hands of many Agents; and
though we had been resolved of the ability of this one, as we were of his
ingenuity, yet the mixture of others, more reserved, and corrupted, might taint
him, or turn the work intended to our ruin. We saw his power with his
Majesty, and the Prince, we knew who was his wife, who was his mother; and all
we could then see of him made us suspect, and tremble the more, the more we
saw it.

Secondly for the Prince, we looked upon him as upon a most obedient child to
a father who knew how to command with love, and to lead gently, where he could
not drive conveniently. We saw him of a sweet nature, and for that the
easier to be abused and wrought upon by art, as his royal father, of far
more experience, had been. We saw him such as we could have wished, in all
respects, but in this MATCH: but there we wondered, the whole world could not
afford him a bewty, whereupon to fix his affection, but that one, whom none
of his truest hearted servants could affect, as knowing it both, in being
Spanish, and Romish, to be fatal to him, to the State, and Church. Could there
come therefore such a cross to us, as this was like to prove, that Death
should rob us of our first hope, and a worse enemy then Death of the second?
Even such an enemy as professedly sought the subversion of Church and State;
such an enemy as expressed love to the brother, only by seking the utmost of
hate, and malice, to his best-beloved, and only sister; such an enemy as was
not satisfied with the spoil of the body, fortune, and State, except also, it
could accomplish the destruction of the soul: which, with a vain glorious
zeal, it ambitiously hunted after. I say, could there come such a cross? I
should have said, could there come such a curse to our Land? His Highness,
being the hope of our land for the future, when he went forth, the whole
continent seemed soule-les; recovering the swound, we sought him whom our
hearts loved, and found him not; we were beaten for seeking him, and might not
complain. He seemed to turn his back upon us, as if he had desired a new
love, contemning our desires, tears, prayers. Our hearts were filled with
jealousy and indignation, even to that height, that we were tempted by
fraylety, and fury to reject him, that had wholly cast us of. But love and duty
would none of these breaches; his love, our duties awaked, and wept, and were
soon reconciled. He returned alone, and showed by his single returning alone,
that he loved us, and found none abroad so loving him as we did. We welcomed
his return with the joyful shout that attends a Prince from the mouths of
his faithfullest servants; and this was still the foot of our song of
thanksgiving, God be praised that he is come home ALONE.

Doubtless had he not come home alone, he should have had but half this hearty
welcome; the curtesy, and custom of the land must needs have divided it
betwixt the Partners; nay, I am verily persuaded, they would not then have had
the half, to devide betwixt them.

Thirdly for his Majesty, we beheld him with that awefull respect, as men that
hung upon his lips, and counted his words oracles. When we read his writings,
they spoke nothing but what might secure our fears, inform our ignorance,
resolve our doubts for point of Religion* We wished Rome might once be so
happy, as to have such a learned, and judicious Pope; then we doubted not but
he would cast the triple crown of Antichrist, at the feet of Christ; and
renouncing his usurpations, be a leader of others to reformation* sc^^^ing any
longer to be a base spiritual ^ander, for the house of Austria in general,
and of Spain in particular. But when we beh^ld for all these hopes,
strengthened with serious and solemn promises often iterated, for procureing
free passage to the Gospel, and the advancement of the true ^ reformed
religion grounded thereupon, that notwithstanding a retreat was made, both out
of Bohemia, and the Palatinate, which gave way, and room for superstition, and
Idolatry to enter, and reign; that his Majestyes children were abandoned, and
such friends as stuck to them dishartened; that it was disclaymed to be a war
of religion on our side, when the adverse parties professed it for such, by their
league, as if they gloryed in falsehood, though we seemed to be ashamed or
weary of the protection and defense of truth, notwithstanding it were an office
appertaining to our style; that the enemy made his Majestyes authority the
Usher, to give easy entrance, and the Bridge to give ready passage to all his
purposes of conquest; that at home the laws were silent, and such silenced, as
spoke with their warrant against Traitors, that by this means swarms of
locusts flew over, and bred in every hole, and under every hedge, and bush, nay
durst nestle in the heart of the City, that this match was so sought after,
that the votes, and weal of the people, Nobles, Clergy, Counsels, Commons,
old* young, all for^, all sides were slighted, and neglected, that under this
veil, all the projects of advantage, for the enemy of our state, and religion,
went current, and that all intelligence from friends, allies, and our o^^e
choice Ministers, employed at home, and abroad were returned without credit,
that nature, and honor, and grace seemed all, to be wilfully blind in
pursuing this way of perdition. Then what shall I say? we doubted, nay out of
doubt we were next door to despair. This only held us up, that we had large
experience of Gods mercy, and knew his Majestyes wisdom so great, as we
could not think he intended his, and our own, total, and final, destruction
in this match, when we could see nothing else in it, to move him to pursue it
so earnestly. We also had heard how his Majesty professed to make it his Master
piece; and therefore we armed our selves, with expectation of a happy issue at
the conclusion, and held out this bucklar of humane faith, against all fears,
and dangers, which showed themselves most openly, mark the end, for there is
some good beyond our sight, in his Majestyes Eagle-eye. We knew his Majesty
knew better then we, whom he had to deal withal; and that, slighting all
other Counsel, it would fall heavily upon his honor, herein to be misled or
abused; since he stood alone, except the assistance of such hollow trunkes, as
he chose and used to speak through. Therefore we cast about what the
advantage of this match was like to be, and what his Majestyes aims were, what
was the dowry propounded, whose price and value should recompense all these
hazards.

For money, it could not be any sum; for Spain was not able to give so much,
as could counterpoise the peril* Bewty and blood should find themselves
debtors, meeting such a exchange in a man a husband, as all the proud, and high
house of Austria, could not equal by a woman, a wife.

Strength by alliance could not be the aim, since we intend no conquests, but
should meet with an Ally that would use our assistance to that end, for the
accomplishment of his universal Empire, to our own loss, and ruin. Besides
what need we the strength of others, especially of such as can afford none by
reason of their infinite, and distracted employments, when we hold it a sin
to use our own, except it be in guarding their coasts, to our cost and
prejudice.

For the restoring of the Palatinate, that was too poor a conceit, for our
hopes to stoop to: since when the treaty was far advanced, at least on our
side, (as his Majesty believed, and taught us to believe) the quarrel was not
then begun with the Emperor, much less prosecuted, as afterward, with the
Spanish force, and fury; and so that could not be in our eye, as an object to
satisfy our thirst for this match, and for the portion expected by it. And we
had hope that this treaty would have stayed, and turned the tide, and torrent,
of those violent proceedings, which fell out in the interim, and countermaunded
Spinola, (thereby to indeare our alliance, and to manifest how serviceable, and
profitable it would be to us), rather then by such a treacherous progress, to
steal upon our security, and credulity, and by open force, to our temporal,
and their eternal, dishonor, to take enough from the sister, to make a
convenient portion for the brothers bride. What heart that has a drop of
British blood in it, could hear with patience, much less bear these
injuryes, and still court the Spanish Braues, with the style of Magnifico, and
think a Dowry (so taken) a fit present, and portion for our Prince to receive?

Some therefore (who could not swallow these choke-peares) jmagined her Dowry
should be one of the Indyes, or both. Others more probably thought that the
King of Spain, weary of his Low Country wars (where like an vnthrist he
playde away all his estate at hazard) and seeing no way to come of with his
honor, and to relinquish so bad and chargeable a quarrel, where he drowned
his Indyes as in a bottomless Gulf; He (I say) had, by the sublime wit of
Gondamore, or by the inspiration of our King through Gondamore, consented to
send the Arch-Dutches Isabella to a Monastery, to be mother of the few maids
there, and to estate the Prince with Insanta Maria, in those Provinces, causing
the States General to wind up all ends in this bottom, and to consent to
hold of his Highness in chief, as those Provinces did of France, before
Charles the Fifth got them released; and so all controversyes should be
compounded, all Christian states secured in peace, and his ambitious, and
blood-thirsty sword sheathed, or the point of it turned from Christendom
toward the Turk* Also we thought herewith, that his Majesty had the promise,
and assurance of a free and general Council; and that in the mean time he
had conditioned, and articled for liberty of conscience, in all the Dominions
of Spain, without which he would not, by any means, afford it at home. Then
(thought we) when a Parliament is called, and the match propounded, opposition
arising, these conditions, never before dreampt of (by the vulgar) being
published, and confirmed, both consent and applause will follow, with
admiration of his wisdom, that brought all these ends about, and tide in a
true lovers knot, deserving indeed for this, to be preferred before Solomon:
because Solomon by an idolatrous marriage rent his Kingdom, ruined his house,
and introduced idolatry intermixing it with true worship: but he by the like
had united his Kingdoms, settled his house, enlarged his Empire, cast out
idolatry, and so spread the gospel, that true worship was welcomed beyond the
pillars of Hercules, or wheresoever [ Plus Vltra] is written, with a Spanish
pen^ill.

Thus we thought, and lower then thus, we could not, we would not, descend;
and these thoughts and hopes, charmed our tongues, hearts, and hands, making
us, as it is said of Abraham, to hope beyond, and above hope.

But when we saw the Prince pass privately out of the land, so meanly
attended, and far otherwise then became (as we thought) the state and
Majesty of our Nation; especially to a place and people that stood upon form
and outside only, and bombafted their reputations with the wind of complement,
and a garb, or facing of majesticall gravity; when we saw silence proclamied,
and none permitted to speak for the securing of their own laws, libertyes,
or religion; yea the Counsel it self, shut up in blind obedience, and as
little acquainted with these privy proceedings, as the Commons; the pulpit also
limited, and taught in what language to speak, both to God in prayer, and
thanksgiving for the Prince, and people, and from God to the Prince and people
in exhortation, instruction, and information; when we all seemed no other,
then beasts in a market to be bought, and sold, and must not be acquainted
with the price, and condition of our own captivity, nor know to what butcher
we should be delivered; when we saw the great intertainement his Highness
found, (at least) in print; though, I praise God for it, as we thought, so it
fell out for truth, that the Penman, had more of the Painter, and Poet, in
him, then of the History o grapher, and knew better what should have been
done, then what was.

When we saw the Chapel building here, for Baal, and the Priests, and
Jesuits filling every corner of the streets; whilst they were pulling down
the Churches of God in the Palatinate, and whilst his Highness Chaplaynes were
enjoined silence in Spain, when we saw every pocket stuffed with popish
pamphlets, and that the door began to wax narrow, at which the Protestants
sent out, and let in, their labors for the press, when we saw a gag for the
Gospel (like a Giant) might walk abroad with liberty in the sunneshine, when
a Protestant Pismire, might scarce creep in a dark corner, without question:
when we saw a clogd dispensation begged, A clogd dispensatio^, so called
cheefely, because it is a perpetual clog to the conscience of the receiver,
thoug an Antichristian Ape may wear it with ease for fashion sabe.
or dearly bought, at the hands of Antichrist, for the best of us, and
dispensations freely given by us, to vnclog the worst of his: when we saw
articles solemnly agreede on, for the freedom of superstition, and idolatry,
without so much as a thought, or touch, for the advantage of truth, and that
in the presence of God, who abhorred such sacrifice, and vows: when we heard,
and read, the title, and style, of Holiness conferd upon Antichrist, and more
strong, and powerful reasons given to move the King and Clergy of Spain, to
consent that the match might proceed with the utmost speed, because it tend
altogether to the advancement of the Roman-Catholique cause; what should we
think (poor ignorant souls) what could we jmagine? but that we were almost
miserable people, hated of those we loved most, and cast away, by those we
trusted most? yea, we thought that God had determined to scourge us for our
pride, and ingratitude; and to this end had taken wisdom from the wise, and
caused that they should have eyes and not see, ears and not hear, hearts and
not understand, but that the Lord intended to bow down all our backs; because
we relied too much upon man, and gave not the glory to God, as we ought. Thus
were we in a kind of Hell upon earth, full of anxiety, perplexity, and fear;
nothing but sighing, weeping, hanging down the head, as persons confounded,
and drowned in despair.

But lo, on a sudden the sun arose, and with it our comfort: Heaviness may
endure for a night, but wye comes in the morneing. His Highness returns
ALONE, o words of comfort! Psa. 30. 5.
as choosing rather to dye a Virgin, and live an Angel, then to be married by
Antichrist; and now God begins the first work, and gives the Omen, the onset
to the rest that follows, beating down the Black-fryars, whilst the Chair
was usurped by a bold, and famous factor for Antichrist, surrounded with a
rabbement of his superstitious, and forward followers, who would needs have
the VAN, or right hand file, in his restitution, and with a VENGANCE, they had
it.

After this a Parliament is summoned, wherein the King ingenuosly* confesses
the injuryes received, where he least suspected them, and where he deserved
most gratitude; and here he vnmasketh all the mysteryes, hid before in the
clouds of concealeme^t, dealing faithfully with his people, as a Prince that
had found, and expected, to find faith in them again toward him, and his. He
restores unto them their wonted lawful libertyes, and freedom of speech;
knowing that where there is not liberty, there can be no fidelity, and where
there is sreedome of the tongue, there can be no danger of the heart, or hand.
And here begins that first Act which changes the black and tragical Scenes
into triumphant furniture, promising a more happy, and harmonious close, and
conclusion, by Gods omnipotent arm (miraculously turning the hearts of
Princes, as the ruiers of water) then we could otherwise ever have hoped for,
had not these narrow straights, and difficultyes proceeded. For hereby
Popish-Spanish, policy, which is nothing but Hypocrisy, are stripped stark
naked, the faithful, and unfaithful servant distinguished, the truth
revealed, we forewarned, and so I hope armed; our King and Princes honor
engaged, for us to fetch off, with loyal and zealous services, and Gods mercy,
both in discovering, and preventing, these traynes, and traps of perfidious
Enemies, magnifyed. He that sits in heaven, langhes them to scorn.

That this may appear more to the life, let us see the Heroic Persons, acting
their own parts, severally, and jointly.

And first for the Duke: He in Spain discharges the trust reposed in him by
the King, attending faithfully upon the Prince, and using all endeavor to
search out, unlock, and discover, the secrets of the Spanish Cabinet. Coming
home, he uses his best art, and credit with his Majesty, to resolve him of the
Spanish fraud, and falsehood, and of the loyalty and fidelity of his own
flock. He take's care to let the world see he had learned to abhor the
idolatryes of Rome, and to love the true Church better, by beholding the
follyes, and fylthines of that ga^^^ strumpet, the great Bawd of Babylon. He
presents plainly to the Parliament, the hard passages his Highness had past
in Geryons den, whereinto he was drawn backward. How he was set by policy,
upon the rack of love, to torture him from his religion, or (at least) to
betray him by his own, and cause him to deny his master, and maker, with his
mouth! In detestation of which foul fact, his Majesty says most excellently,
and like himself, That he who dissembles with God, i^ not to be trusted with
men. Take truth from the mouth of a Prince toward his people, and faith from
his heart toward God, and you dismantle him, disrobe him, of all his regal
honors, and ornaments, and make him a beast like Nabuchodonozor, Dan. 4. 27*
28. 29. 30
and of the jmage of God, cause him to carry the jmage, and stamp of Satan.

He presents also that foul plot, and conspiracy of theirs, to demand such
conditions of his Majesty, as they intended should not advance the marriage,
but, as they hoped, would stir up a rebellion, and then they kindly
proffessed, to send home his Highness with an Army, to massacre his own
innocent lambs. O perfidious people, whom do you tempt? think you a breast
harboring any such base and bloody thought, can be hatched any where but in
Spain, or be of any blood, but the ancient Moria^, Austrian, or Ottoman? The
Irish wolves may be (perhaps) thus savage, but our very Mastiues are more
civil, sociable, and humane, as for our people, especially our Princes, they
are of too noble, and generous a strain, to have such an inhumane conceit
come near them. Incest only, breede's this barbarous blood, and Idolatry only
infuseth such spirits. Go exercise this cursed course, according to your old
custom, amongst the Indians, and teach the Caniballs that Europe has a
people who call themselves Christians, and the chief Catholics (forsooth)
amongst these, do worship the Devil, more cunningly, and devoutly, then those
that make profession of it, and think scorn not to exceed any point, or part
of barbarism, which those reasonable beasts can practice against Nature,
though it be in eating up their Parents, or betraying their friends to death,
with whose lives, and honors, they are trusted. O England! behold in what a
danger thou were at this instant, and beware how thou wittingly suffer thy
self to fall into the like again; behold the heart of Spain, and Rome,
toward thee, and forget it not, behold what blood is bred there in the breasts
of such as go over, tainted, and corrupted before, when they dare venture to
poison the pure fountain of sovereignity, and to tempt our Prince, (as the
Serpent did Adam) to loose his Paradise, Genesis 3. Mat. 4.
for a Pomegranate* or, as Satan did our savio^r, to worship him, for the
Kingdoms of the world, which he saw but in shadow (being all but shadows) as
the Pope can give Kingdoms, and as the King of Spain, is the Catholic, and
universal King in conceit.

Could these men think him so stupid (although they thought us so,) that he
would flee from the arms of his own, whose faith, and obedience, he had long
known, and flee into the arms of strangers, from whose imbracings, never any
escaped with life, and limb, and who were never true to any man, but for their
own ends, that they might deceive the second time for their greater advantage,
and but once for all? Did they think his Highness could be secure with them,
and not with his own flesh, and blood? that he could choose but see, it he
returned under the protection of their standards, how he came like a prisoner
(as Charles of Burgundy carried jews the 11. before liege: or as Edward the 4.
brought Henry the 6. into the field) to conquer for their possession, and his
own captivity? merely to make these Kingdoms, Spanish Provinces, and his
royal father, and himself, their vassalls?

And could they dream that the subjects of England, and Scotland, were no
better taught, by the preaching of the Gospel for 60. years continuance, then
(at the first dash) to rush into rebellion, as if they had been fed (like
swine) out of the legend, and taught disloyalty by the Loyalists, like mad
dogs, to byte their Master? O no, the Lord be praised, they see, and the
success shows the difference, betwixt our Princes, and people, trained up in
the truth of Christ, and theirs ^usled up in the faults, follyes, and
falsehoods of their idolatrous and Antichristi^^ predecessors. Go forward
therefore ( great Duke) thus to speak, and deal plainly, and truly, like a
true and noble Englishman, and God will bless thee, and establish thy house
for ever; thy Enemies shall see it, and gnash their teeth, and whilst they
seek thy head for their advantage, find a heart in thy bosom under thy
Princes buckler, and with the peoples assistance, able to guarde thine own
head, and strike off the proudest of their heads, that dares demand, or
attempt thine. Was truth yet ever called treason before? or was there ever any
Nation so insolent, as to demand the head of any noble member of our
Parliament, because he faithfully used the lawful liberty of his place, and
discharged the trust reposed in him by the Prince, and State, whom he was
bound to serve, as being borne theirs by nature, and made theirs, by election,
honor, and bounty? Do the Spanjards think so basely of the British, as we
must not cast up their corrupted, and poisoned sweet meats, whereof we have
surfetted? and because they have some of our Offall for their servants, and
pensioners, therefore do they think we all ought to be so? Do they think
we ought, (like Idiots) to forget our religion, for their supersticion? and
the allegiance due to our own natural Prince, to advance the ambitious
progress of their Catholic Kingdom? were they once so flesht with one head,
as they now long for more, and think all bound to satisfy their longing? or
are the brains of a wiseman, the only sauce for a Spanish Ambassadors table? I
have read, that the parts of man's body, are nourished by the like parts; And
it may be the Catholic consumption of wit, must be recovered with this
Catholicon.

The wolf would with the shepherd make no peace,
Till he hung up his dog, then wars should cease.
Phillip of Macedon, dealt with Athens thus:
Phillip of Spain, intendes no worse to us.
But I hope we are better taught, then thus to reward our faithful freindes
with ungrateful disloyaltyes. No* no, go forward ( great Duke) and prosper,
whilst thou do nothing but what may justify thee, and what thou may
justify before all the world, by the example of that worthy, David, and with
his words saying, what have I now done? is their not a cause?

Thus having vsshered his Highness* into our discourse by this honorable
servant of his, the Duke of Buckingham, we will proceed in the second place
to show those graces, and favoures, which have, and do flow, from the Prince
toward us, since his returning, contrary to the wishes, and endeavors, of our
Enemies, and our own fears.

How art thou to be extolled O excellent Prince! who being singly, (as it were)
sent out to encounter the greatest states^men in the world, that believe they
have fraud enough (which they call wit) to undermine all the states of
Christendom; and being besides disadvantaged by sustaining the place, opinion,
person, and (perhaps) the affection of a Lover, having also some corrupters of
thy own bosom friends, have notwithstanding stood firm to God, to thy self,
and to us? Is it not a great and dangerous temptation, (o all ye that know
what temptation is, what it is to be siffed, what it is to resist) that young
men meet in the world, upon their first ignorant entrance? How many of these
miscarry at home? how few return vnmaymed from foreign parts? I appeal for
witness, to the ill times, ill men, and ill manners. But for a Prince that is
young, to be exposed to trial, upon such hard and unequal terms, and to
come off safe, and to conquer, is (as I think) a task no less admirable then
that of Hercules, if that were as true, as this is. A young man with small
experience, against the aged, and experienced; A David against Goliath, and an
Army of Philistims; One (as it were) alone, or which is worse with a Company
divided, against many united in one; A Prince, the gainefullest object of
fraud, against private persons, the subjects of falsehood, and such as
profess the art to deceive Princes; A most affectionate lover of the body of
Her, whose bewty was laid but as a bait in his way, whereby the Fisherman of
Hell, and Purgatory angled for the destruction of his soul, against his own
flesh and blood, and the passions of love with all other advantages which
cunning, and practiced seducers could take, and use for their own ends, and
purposes; for him, I say, so encountered, and surrounded, to break loose, and
to conquer, is a work of such wonder, and so above humane conceit, that God
alone shall reap the glory of it, being far beyond the power of man to do*
or almost to believe, now it is done. The principal instrument that God was
pleased to use in this great work was his Highness own wife heart guided by
Grace, and summoning up all those helps, which that Grace had formerly
instilled into him, by hearing, and reading the word of God, his fathers
writings, and observing the variable passages of the times, besides the
special provision of all kind of arguments, and armor of proof, for the
mind, but laid in before, by his royal father. I intend not to detract from
other helps, that he found by the daily mementoes of the Duke, and other
faithful Attendants, who stood Sentinel continually for his safeguard; but
this I say, the chief was his own, and locked up in his own bosom; and this
God gave him immediately, because God would have the immediate praise come unto
him. For if we consider the whole course of the Story, and see the issue, how,
contrary to all expectation, it has been convayed, and carried, and at what a
contrary quarter, it is now arrived from the point of the Compass, by which it
set out, all men must needs see the naked, and blessed, arm of God, and
ascribe the whole glory to him, for bringing our Prince home, and that so
soon, and that upon such terms, hereby also we may plainly discern that
many of those actions of his in Spain, and of his Majestyes in England, at
which our fears were frighted, and took the Alarm, were only false-fires,
raised to bring him off with safety, whom they had too suddenly engaged, upon
presumption of the Spanish faith, which is too universal to be trusted. And
now he is come home, see how he carries himself, as one truly taught of God,
and jmitating our savior. For since his return he has done the greatest
work of wisdom, and goodness, within man's power to accomplish, reconciling us
to his fathers favor, who before seemed to be half abandoned to his fury, in
that we might not be acquainted with his will, nor trusted with his Counsels.
He has also broken down the partition wall betwixt the English, and Scottish
Nations, and has made us one people in affection to the King, for civil, as
to God, for religions respects. Yea, now religion is secured, and those
jealousyes taken away; what Englishman does not embrace a Scottishman as his
brother, when they have all one God their father, and all one Church their
Mother? There is no band, like that of religion, which ties us one to an
other, under one King to Christ, and (in Christ) ties us all to God.

He has also renewed the fellowship, and communion, betwixt the King his
father, and us his poor subjects, in the high Court of Parliament, where he
sits daily to hear suits, and petitions, to mediate betwixt the King, and
people, to direct, animate, and encourage the true, faithful, and honorable
Patriots, to suppress the petulancy, and rectify the exorbitancy, of any
Prevaricator, that durst appear in that presence, Job. 1.
like an other Satan amongst the children of God, to suggest evil, to seduce
from good, to cast in demurres, occasions of delay, or scruples, and questions,
occasions of division, as I thank God, there are none that will or dare. What
benefit can be like this? what thanks, and praise, can be sufficient to extol
it? Is not this a temporal salvation? Is not he a temporal savior, a true
Iosuah, that does thus? Yes, yes, the Lord is pleased to call Kings Gods, and
himself a King; to borrowe of Masters, Fathers, and temporal deliverers, the
propriety of words, and phrases, to fit our capacity, and to shadow out his
works of wonder; It is no robbery therefore, to assume some of those flowers,
to adorn, and enrich the actions of such persons, as he has before adorned,
and enriched with inward grace* to imitate him in the discharge of their
duties, and the high places he has called them to, and thereby to set them off,
and shadow them more illustriously, to the life, by comparison. Not as if there
were any degree of comparison betwixt God, and man, the infinite, and finite,
his work being for soul, and body, man's, for the body only; his, for ever,
man's, for a time; his, absolutely, and of himself, man's, in, and by him; but
that there is comparison betwixt the laudable, and Heroic actions, and
undertakings of men amongst themselves, some approaching nearer, then other, to
the greatest, though all, (yea, the nearest) stand aloof off, at a distance
unmeasurable by any rule, but the infinite mercy of God in the alsufficient
merrits of Christ. Psalm. 45. This Psalm is composed of Solomon, a type of
Christ, and may be applied to algodly princes, who are the deputyes of Christ,
and jmages of God.
Gird thy sword therefore upon thy thigh, o thou most mighty Prince, with thy
glory, and thy Majesty, and in thy Majesty ride prosperously because of truth,
and meekenes, and righteousness (the armor, the ornament of Kings, and Princes)
and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Thine arrows are sharp
in the heart of the Kings enemies, whereby the people fall under thee. Thy
throne (o Prince!) is for ever and ever; the scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
scepter. Thou love righteousness, and h^test wickedness: therefore God thy God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And if any
frontles Enemy dare be so impudent, as to take exception at thy by past
actions, and at that present change which they find, and feel in thy
prosperous proceedings, thou have ( o most excellent Prince!) a shield in the
Armory of David to defend thy self, thy honor, and reputation, whilst thou
may justly say, with him, What have I now done? Is their not a cause?

I should now conclude this gracious, and glorious act, with presenting his
Majestyes person, and performances to the eye of observation. But Kings (like
the sun) must not be gazed upon with open eyes. It shall be sufficient to touch
upon some perticulars, where I may walk safely (as I hope) without exception.

His Majestyes entrance into England, was as showers of rain into a fleece of
wool; so falling gently, received as gently. The inauguration promised a happy
progress. It could not be discerned whither he entered by succession, or
election; the peoples desires so concurred with his right, as that he took
possession by both. And it seems had not God, and Nature, designed him to the
chair, by a fair and lyneall pedigree, he might have been ours by choice, if
among foreigne Kings, we had chose. His government since, has been only
unhappy in this, that he has over-loved peace, which is the happiness of all
states, but has been our affliction. It may be, because God himself will
have no peace with the wicked, Es. 48. 22.
much less permit his servants to have it. God, and Baal, cannot dwell
together. Or it may be, because we crossed the will of God, with humane wisdom,
and would needs have peace, when he called us to war. Or it may be, that we
sought for that happiness here, which is reserved for the saints here-after:
to live in peace within the militant Church, as the saints do in the
triumphant. These, some, or all of them, may be a cause why that blessing of
peace, is turned to a curse, to weaken us, which makes others stronger; to
impoverish us, which makes others richer; to devid us, which unites others: for
woes, wants, and wars, abound by this means; because we have not first made
our peace with God, but rather with the Enemies of his truth, and honor.

And to justify my conjecture, this last act declares it clearly. For whereas
it has been pursued with all the heat of affection, managed with all the
wisdom of flesh and blood, secrecy used in the conveyance, and the whole
mystery, wrought by the hands of most artificial, and able instruments, and
seconded with all the advantages, both sides could wish: Yet, God has broken
the threefold cord a sunder, and turned all things to a clean contrary
course, as he did when out of darkness, he brought light, and out of the rock,
water. This is the Lords doing, and it is merveylous in our eyes.

What injuryes, and wrongs, his Majesty has received in his children, state,
subjects, substance, and honor, by this means, the world know^s but too well;
and God surely would have the enemy to do it, and his Majesty to suffer it,
that being now exasperated, he might revenge Gods cause, with his own, and for
it, reap honor to God, and to himself. The more sincerely his Majesty has
dealt, the more falsely they; to let him see, though there be faith to be kept
with Heretics, yet there is none to be given to them, nor expected from them.
Princes are to use plainness, and perspicuity, with their subjects, policy, and
reservednes, with strangers: Christ spoke to the Jews in parables, but to his
own, it was given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God.

And now, as if all before had not been enough to provoke a peaceable Prince
to a just war, behold what God has permitted these fire brands, and
boutefewes of Christendom to attempt, by accusing the Prince, the Duke, and
whole state of Treason, Was there ever such a practice jmagined? of what do
they presume that dare be thus bold, impudent, impious? Is it of their own
power? Noe assuredly, for they are in ours, whilst they do it. Is it of their
party here able to back them, and bear them out? of our patience to suffer
them whatsoever they do? or proclivenes to credit them whatsoever they say? I
know not whether they build upon these, or other grounds, of this I am sure
the plot equals, or exceede's the Gunpowder treason; because, although, that
aimed at the lives of all, yet it did not touch their honors; this ayme's at
life, and honor of the best, yea, of all, to set father, against the son* the
sovereigne against his subjects, one hand against another. And to what end?
that they in the mean time may distract affavres, hinder resolutions, withdraw
hearts, and hands, from succouring the Kings children, and friends, ready to
perish by their Tyrannyes; that they may arm their own pernicious faction,
with pretense to be a guarde for the Kings person, and so, since they cannot
raise a rebellion, and devide the Prince, and people, that their Armies may
enter to stickle betwixt them (as they indeavored in Spain) now they would
devide the father, and the son, and cleave this knot by a wedge of the same
wood, I mean by the Hispaniolized, and Romanized, natures in England. Since
this, (by Gods grace) has failed, I know not to what they can proceed except
it be to accuse the King himself, which they will not fail to do, if it may
fit their turn, unless his Majesty do justice upon them, and make an
honorable president for all posterity, that Ambassadors presume not to do,
what their Masters dare not, and for which, even Kings themselves being in
foreigne Provinces, were liable to accounte. We read how zealous David was in
redeeming the honor of his own Ambassadors, 2 Sa. 10. 4*
because they were innocent, and revenging these indignityes offered to them
unworthily: Had they merrited evil, he would never have protected them, but
doing their duties, his honor was engaged in them, and for them. And if he did
thus for a few of his servants, what would he have done for all his servants,
yea, for all his subjects, 2 Samuel 24* 17.
for whose safety he offers his life? Nay what would he have done for them, and
for his son, his only son, with them? Even the same (I hope) that his most
excellent Majesty will do for his servants, his subjects, his son.

Now therefore, to close this wandering discourse, (mighty Sovereigne) since by
thy servant, by thy son, by thy self, mouth to mouth, thou have revealed thy
fore-past actions, and passions, and present intents toward us, and we (with
all the world) are witnesses of thy integrity; draw thy sword, and cut assunder
this Gordions knot, which all thy wisdom cannot vnty. And as that painter by
casting his pensile (in a rage) from him, made (by chance) such a foam for a
mad Dog, as he could not otherwise light upon by art, and industry: so God may
bless thy hand, that going boldly on, whilst he call's thee, and leade's
thee, and following him in simplicity, and truth, without reliance, trust, or
dependancy, upon the security of thy own head, or arm, thou may happily
ariue, at that period, thou would be at, and force that restitution, and
peace, which thou can neither beg, nor buy.

There is nothing to fear but the Jesuits hand, let thy hand therefore fright
them, and their adhaerents far from thee, out of thy Dominions. He that
stands upon simple defense, stands but half armed, nor altogether so; but he
that stands to offend, does ( by that posture) stand ready for all assayes,
both guarding himself, and putting him to his guard, who (like Ishmael) has
his hand against every man. Behold how thou art incircled with myriads of
subjects, and millions of Saints, and Angels; God sends these to defend thee,
and secure thy doubts. Look upon the Prince, thy blessed Son, the Queen of
Bohemis, thy distressed Daughter, see how fruitful she is. And those children
of hers, jointly, are like olive branches round about thy table, a hedge of
quickset round about thy walks, a wall of flesh and blood, and bones, round
about thy life; and each of them severally is an armor, a guard, of thine. Who
dares touch thee, that considers who is thy successor? and who dare touch him,
that considers her that follows? and thus successively, if malice be infinite,
thy security is noe less.

Thus they being thy guard, thou must needs be theirs; they preserving thy
life next under God (for believe it, O King! it had been, and were now, worse
with thee else, then with Henry 4. of Fance) thou must needs preserve their
estates, with thy uttermost power; and so protecting each other
interchangeably, God that has graciously raised you for them, and them for
you, will protect you all, with his omnipotent arm. And if any cavilling
Enemy, that dares not touch your person, shall dare yet to attempt your honor,
and fame, for falling from Spain, and sailing a new course, you have that
buckler of David's to hold out against them, in defense of your self, and your
honor, What have I now done? Is their not a cause?

Thus I have brought the Prince, and Duke of Buckingham from Spain, 1 Samuel 1^*
like Jonathan, and his Armor bearer, from chasing the Philistims, in their
garrison upon the rock. They called Jonathan, and his Armor-bearer, up the
cliffe in contempt, else they would not have gone; so does Spain call these
with mockings, injuryes, scorns, accusations, challenges, and infinite other
intolerable affronts. A scend then, and conquer, God will deliver them into
your hand.

And thus have I brought his Majesty (like David) from the overthrow of Goliath,
with the songs of the virgins, the acclamation, and applause of Nobles,
Commons, Clergy, Scholars, Citizens, Souldiars. God make thee strong, and
cause thee to remember how thou have slain a Lion, and a Bear, and a Giant;
and what are the rest of the vncircuncised rout, more then these?

To conclude therefore, O ye worthyes of Scotland! to you we will raise
trophies for saving our sovereigne: To thee Buckingham, for serving thy King,
thy Prince, and Country, faithfully, in a false, and crooked generation: To
thee, O Prince! for thy obedience to God, and thy Father, with love to thy
loyal loyers: To thee, O King! for hearing our petitions, and not despising
thy poor peoples desires, in seeking redemption of Gods honor, and thine: And
to thee, O God! for raising up these instruments of our temporal salvation,
and for saving these, and all of us, eternally by the blood of thy Son.

2 Samuel 23. 15. 16. 17. And David longed, and said, ^ that one would give me
drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate. And the
three mighty men brake though the host of the Philistines* and drew water out
of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to
David: nevertheless he would not drink thereof, but powered it out unto the
Lord: And he said, But it far from me ( o Lord!) that I should do this: Is
not this the blood of the men, that we^^ in jeopardy of their lives? therefore
he would not drink* These things did these three mighty men.
FINIS.
Where faults appear in Letters, To the Reader.
Points, or Words, The Printers ignorance excuse affords: And where the Matter
or the Form does hault, The Author may hope pardon for his fault, Since as the
One, knows of the tongue no part* The other, knows as little of the heart.

PAge 1, Errors in the Preface.
line 25, read rationibus. Edito. page 2, line 19, read s^arnes, page 3, line
2, read they page ib. line 3, read our page ib. line 6, read will page 4,
line 14, read Timbrels page ib. line 24, read otherwise page ib. line 30,
read expenses, pa. ib. line 33, read tire ib. read Emperor, and hold page
5, line 16, read wafted page ib. lines 19, and 31, read Exchequer page 7,
line 25, read join page 8, line 16, read wilt.

PAge 2. Errors in the Book.
line 6. read principally p. 3. l. 2. r. part, p. ib. l. 13. r. eldest p. 4.
l. vlt. r. the p. 6. l. 9. r. him such, so p. ib. l. 32. r. the p. 8. l. 10. r.
brothers person, how p. ib. l. 28. r. sent p. 9. l. 1. r. being p. ib. l. 20.
r. is it p. 10. l. 8. r. his p. 12. l. 12. r. on p. ib. l. 18. r. your p. ib.
l. 29. r. amongst p. 13. l. 9. r. expostulate p. ib. l. 24. r. injuries p. 17.
l. 15. r. idollatrous p. 18. l. 20. r. undertaking. For, these words, Is there
not a cause, have p. 20. l. 13. r. high, excellent, and eminent p. ib. l. 26.
r. same. p. ib. l. 28. r. or p. 21. l. 4. r. the p. 24. l. 4. r. thee p. ib. l.
8. r. thy p. ib. l. 9. r. Hypocrites p. ib. l. 12. r. Lou p. 25. 26. r. for the
way, p. 26. l. 3. r. imagination p. 29. l. 20. 21 r. fact, Behold, Abraham
stands forth, like p. ib. l. vlt. r. fly, p. 31 l. 11. r. laying p. 32. l. 10.
r. restores p. 33. l. 10. 11. r. tyrannous p. 36. l. 13. r. the Shipwrackt p.
37. l. 16. r. seruilitie, p. 38. l. 21. r. his p. 39. l. 15. r. Bulling br^okes
p. ib. l. 28. r. become me* p. 41. l. 32. r. one p. 43. l. 19. r. and p. 44. l.
vlt. r. Such only, seem p. 45 l. 24. r. profess, p. 46. l. 21. r. know p. 47.
l. 5. r. seem p. ib. l. 32 r. Who is he being p. 48. l. 29. r. thee, p. 52.
l. 17. r. these p. 54. l. vlt. r. profane p. 55. l. 6. r. and the malice p. 56.
l. 25. r. Noble blood ran not then in Ignoble veins. p. ib. l. vlt. r. says a
man p. 57 l. 2. r. Superior. p. 62. l. 19. r. vseing p. 65. l. 26. r. an
exchange p. 67. l. 29. r. and tide them fast in p. 69. l. 27. r. most p. ib. l.
30. r. tended p. ib. l. vlt. r. a most p. 70. l. 15. r. but joy p. ib. l. 23 r.
rabblement p. 71. l. 12. r. preceded. p. ib. l. 13. r. is p. 72. l. 22. r.
proffered p. 73. l. 5. r. that do worship p. ib. l. 13. r. were p. 77 l. 21. r.
laid in before, p. 83. l. 13. r. Natives p. ib. l. 24. r. those p. vlt. l. 23.
r. thorough p. ib. l. 27. r. Be.


