TWO FAMOVS SEA FIGHTS. Lately made, Betwixt the Fleetes of the King of
Spain, and the Fleetes of the Hollanders,

The one, in the West-Indyes: The other, The Eight of this present Month of
February, betwixt Callis and Gravelin.

In the former, the Hollander suffered. In the latter, the Spaniard lost.

Two Relations not unfit for these Times, to animate Noble Spirits to attempt
and accomplish brave Actions.

LONDON, Printed for NATH: BVTTER and NIC: BOVRNE, with Privilege. 1639.

A TRVE RELATION of the voyage of the Galleons and of the two Battles they
had with the Hollanders above Pan de Canana^nas, this year in September, 1638.
DOn Carlos de Ybarra with the Navy of Guarde of the Indies which he
governs, set forth from Cadiz the 29 of April this year 1638. with fewer
Seamen and men of War then he had done formerly, having remained in Spain
with seven Galleons to carry his Majesty's Plate in them, and the Plate of
particular men.

He arrived at Cartagena the 12 of June, and the 21 of the same, he set forth
toward Puerto Velo, where he arrived the 29 of the foresaid month.

On the 15 of July he set forth from that Port with the said Plate. He
arrived at Cartagena on the first of August, amidst calmes and contrary winds.

There opening his Commission he found a direction, which his Majesty had sent
unto him from Spain, together with a Letter under his Royal hand, dated the
28 of May of the said year, and Signed by Don Fernando Ruiz de Contreras, in
which he advertised him; That there were set forth from Holland ten tall
Ships, with direction, that they should leave in Brasill, men and Munition, and
pass to the coasts of Terra Firma and Havana, to meet with this Navy, and
that there would be joined with the said Navy of the Hollanders 14 Ships,
which were already upon those coasts of Terra Firma and Havana, and these
forces being so much superior to those, which the said Don Carlos went
withal, his Majesty charged him deeply, that he should have a care to dispose
the matter so, that the Enemy might not meet him, and that if he did, he might
find that resistance and valor, which might be expected: And that considering
the small Forces, which Don Carlos had on his side, he had ordained, that
four Vessels should be made ready to come to his aid; also charging him, to
apply convenient means to free this Treasure from the Enemy, and that he
should be careful in like manner, concerning that which came from New Spain,
taking care of both businesses according to the hope conceived of his prudence
and valor; and that he should consider, how fit it was, he should return
into Spain this year, in regard of the necessity there was of this Treasure.

Don Carlos having seen both the Direction and Letter, commanded all the
places of the Soldiers throughout the Army to be settled so far as might be,
for he wanted many men, and to prepare the seven Galleons the best he might,
giving necessary directions for battle, assigning withal the standing which
each one was to hold.

He departed from Cartagena on the 7 of August, toward the Port of Havana (a
resolution few would have undertaken) holding it for certain, that he was to
meet with the enemy, who was so strong. It was only the zeal, with which he
serves his Majesty, and the avoiding of winterings, as he has done these
years past, in which he has governed this Navy.

On the 23 of August, he arrived at the Cape de Corrientos, where he found
Letters of the Governor of Havana, written eleven days before, in which he
affirmed, that there were not above seven or eight Ships, which sailed in that
coast, upon the 26 of August, he arrived at Pan de Cana^nas, which is twelve
Leagues from Havana; and on the 30 of the said Month, riding above the said
Pan de Cana^nas, by reason the weather was contrary to the going to Havana*
There were discovered that evening seaventeene sails, which went toward the
Land, and the day following being the 31 of the foresaid month, there was
discovered in the morning the Navy of the Enemy, which made toward this of
ours. Then Don Carlos set up the Royal standard, and discharged a piece, which
was a signal of Battle, that every one might take his place; and that the
Pinasse De la Margarita, might do the same, which had met him at the Cape de
Corrientos; and with top sail, and foresayle, and with sail of boltsprite
extended at length, he went toward the Enemy, who disposed his Navy in form
following.

The Admiral, and three others of the greatest Ships, amongst which one great
one bore a streamer came upon our Admiral. The Vice Admiral, and other two
Ships came against the Vice Admiral of our Navy, and the other Ships against
the rest of our Galleons. The enemies Admiral lay aboard ours, putting his
boltsprite through the foremast, she had many men hidden aloft, a thing which
has not been seen in a Holland Ship, she lay aboard of us two hours having
taken the wind, with resolution to put forth men into our Ship. She had three
tyres of Artillery, two principal, and those of the fore-castle, which in all
were 54 Pieces. The weight of the Bullets was fifty, and 25, and 20 pounds:
this is notorious by many bullets of these kinds, shot by the Enemy, which are
now heaped together in this our Admiral. She gave three shots with her
Artillery, and many with her Muskets; and in the interim the other three Ships,
which came with her, stood discharging their Artillery from their sides, and
poope at our Admiral. Don Carlos had then given order, that no Musket, nor
Artillery should be discharged, till he should give notice. He gave notice,
when the Enemies Admiral came to board him; the Artillery was discharged
thrice, and many times the Musketeers, which was disposed in good order. The
enemy received so much hurt hereby, that cutting of ropes and other
preparations he disaboorded us, and fled, and Don Carlos pursued him, so far
as was sufficient, that this might be understood. The enemy set our Admiral on
fire five times, and still it was quenched; she received a great number of
shot both below, and above, six and twenty persons were slain, and fifty
hurt, and amongst the rest Don Carlos himself, who going about to take a ball
of Wildfire, which they had cast secretly at his feet, it broke and wounded
him in the face, arm, and thigh, and yet for all this, he left not his place,
giving necessary directions for that which was in hand, the wounds not being of
such confideration, as to make him forbear standing on his feet. Amongst those
that were wounded, and slain, there were persons of much esteem. The Captain
of the Sea, and War, and the Gentlemen passengers, and comerades of Don
Carlos deserved much that day, for the valor which they showed. The
Viceadmirall of this our Armada was boorded with the Viceadmirall of the enemy,
fighting with her, and other two ships, and in freeing her self from her, the
Viceadmirall of the Enemy came to our Admiral on the lee-side, and gave her a
great shot which was answered with another. The Viceadmirall of this our Navy,
lost the sail of her bolt sprite, and the yard of her foremast, and had a
fire kindled in her, which was hard to quench; In all Don Pedro de Vsua showed
well his valor, who was wounded. From the Galleon in which was Sancho de
Vrdanivia, who without direction put 2 streamers on his top, whereby he gave
occasion to the enemy to shoot at her with greater care, they took away the
boltsprit at one shot. The other Galleons of this our Armada stood fighting
with those of the enemy with such valor, as may be conceived of such Captains,
as those were, which commanded them.

This fight continued more then eight hours, and in the evening the navy of
the enemy united it self, the Admiral taking down the Standard, and
discharging a Piece, and having stood cross to our Armada above the wind more
then an hour, they took resolution to fly, spreading all their sails, and
we followed them; not being able to go to la Havana because the wind was
contrary, we went making several bounds, now this, now that way from Pan de
Cana^nas to Las Mesas de Muriel, until the third of September, when the enemy
was discovered in the morning, and came in the same order with 13 ships to
fight again with this our Armada, which defended it self with the same
resolution, as before, the Admiral of the enemy came to encounter with this
our Armada; she had no men above covered over, but they were apparelled in
white canvas, she gave two shots of Artillery, and was answered with other
two, and we followed her, until we were forced to turn to seek out Sancho de
Vrdanivia, who had stayed longer behind then all the rest, whereby the greater
number of the enemies ships passing by him, they stood shooting at him, so that
this our Admiral was forced to come up to him, and the other ships of the
enemy stood discharging at ours, and ours at theirs without boording any.

There was wounded in this encounter Don Pablos. de Contreras, who was Captain
of one of the seven Galleons; and Captain Facinto Melendos, who was Commander
of another, and he sent me word, that in this Ship there were slain, and
wounded more than thirty. This encounter continued more than eight hours;
there were in this our Admiral 26. persons wounded, and slain; and amongst
them some of special note. Coming to speak with Sancho de Vrdanivia, he
said, that his Galleon had a great leake, and his mastes were torn with shot,
and that he was unfurnished. Don Carlos took presently into his Galleon the
plate which he carried of his Majesty's, and of other particular men, and sent
him men, from his Admiral, and gave direction to the Marquese de Carderonsa,
and to the Admirals Lieutenant Ivan de Campos, that each of them should send
him men out of their ships; and presently the day following in the morning,
Sancho de Vrdanivia sent a note to Don Carlos, signifying unto him, that his
masts and yards were torn with shot, and that by no means he could sail,
and that in the first and second time of his fight, there were slain and
wounded more than thirty persons; and that we were over against the Port de
Canannas; and that his Pilot told him, that he could put him in there, it
being a ship of small burden, and would save the artillery, chests of Indico,
and other things which he carried. Presently there was a piece of Ordinance
discharged, and a Flagge of Counsel set up, whereupon all assembled, and
hearing the Pilot speak, they agreed that he should go to the Port, and
there should save all that he could. And Sancho de Vrdanivia being departed to
perform that which was determined; the Admirals Lieutenant Ivan de Campos,
Don Gaspar de Garaca Captain of sea and war of this our Admiral, and others
of the Assembly, said, that it was convenient, that this Armada should go to
Nova Espania, and the case seeming so far different from that which Don
Carlos was charged withal, which was to go to the Havana; opposing this
conceit, they answered all with outcries, that he should not take upon his
shoulders so heavy a burden; yielding reasons as afterward shall be said, so
much in favor of his Majesty, and of the good of the Commence. Don Carlos
took resolution to go forth of the Admiral, and take with him the whole
Assembly into the Galleon of Don Pablos de Contreras, where was, and came
embarked Don Ivan de Caravajal, of the Royal Counsel of his Majesty for the
Indies, and General Visitor of the Audiences of Linia, and of Las Charcas, and
having heard the one and the other, his vote expressed in writing was, that it
was very convenient for the service of his Majesty to go to Nova Espania;
because thereby they should secure his Plate, and the Plate of private persons;
that the wind was contrary for Havana, and fair for Noua Espania; that the
change of the Moon would be within three days, and that those seasons of
September had been always evil upon those Costs; that any of the six Galleons
which remained, separating herself, the enemy would take her, that our forces
were small, those of the enemy grew greater, seeing besides those, which they
had in their Navy, with which they had given battle twice, they expected
four ships more, which went to join with them, and that they were to consider
the want of the ship of Sancho de Vrdanivia: and the rest of the Captains, who
were present, declared, that they had spent half their bullets and powder,
with which they departed from Spain; and that they conceived that the Enemy
would return once, yea many times to fight with our said Armada; and that in
fighting two or three times, there would be left neither bullets for the
artillery, nor powder; a damage so well known, and unremediable: and that
there might be feared some bad success to all this Armada, or to a part of
it; and that their wintering would be certain in Havana, because they were to
enter into it late, and could not depart, by reason they were to repair the
ships, which for the most part had been ill handled; and that the enemy,
would not depart from the mouth of the Port, till the winter were far gone
on; and that it was convenient to make this Winter in Nova Espania, where all
was secured, and the Fleet of Nova Espania, was thought for certain not to have
departed, because it was conceived that his Majesty had sent thither the same
direction, which he had done to Don Carlos; and that there the ships might be
repaired, and furnished with provision, powder, and bullets. Many other reasons
were alleged, which although they seemed very strong, and convenient to Don
Carlos, and Don Pedro, de Vsna, nevertheless they were of opinion they should
incite the enemy on the way to Havana. Yet Don Pedro de Vsna being come to his
ship, and having seen the four ships, which were joined to the enemy, and
other three, which appeared from the top, and went in like manner to join
themselves with the said Navy, which consisted in all of twenty four ships;
he sent a message by Don Diego de Gues Captain of sea and war, and of the
Vice Admiral, unto Don Carlos, telling him, that accidents did change the
condition of businesses, and seeing the forces of the enemy were so great, and
ours so small, it seemed good to him to follow the common advise of all; and
Don Carlos agreed thereunto, and gave necessary directions for each one to hold
their course for Nova Espania, the Galleon of Sancho de Vrdanivia remaining in
the said Port de Canannas in the sight of this our Armado, unseene by the Navy
of the enemy, which remained as it seemed to all with much hurt and loss of
men. And the next day being the fifth of this present month in the evening,
the enemies Navy appeared, consisting of 24. ships, and stood in the wind of
this our Armado, and that night the lanternes had lights set up in them in our
Admiral, and Vice Admiral, that the enemy, if he desired to return to
fight, with this our Armado, might know where we were; and the next day
following in the morning they appeared not, nor were they seen any more. Our
voyage was secure, and on Friday, being the four and twentieth of September,
we arrived at the Port of Saint Ivan de Lua, where we found the Fleet of Nova
Espania, her General Don Martin de Vrbea, with general content one of another
for having performed so great a service for his Majesty; for both the Armado
and and Fleet were joined together, and the Plate also of both Kingdoms,
belonging to his Majesty, and particular men; the enemy likewise sent away with
loss. From this place we endeavor to depart the soonest we may, making
ready the ships, as well those of the Fleet, as the Galleons. His Majesty is
informed of all by two advertisments duplicated; to the end he may order and
command what shall please him; for from this time unto the setting forth of
this Armado, there will be space to answer to these two advertisements, and in
case no other direction come, Don Carlos will go on in the pursuit of his
voyage, with the Armado and Fleet for Spain.

With License in Sevil by Nicolas Rodriguez, in the street of Genua, this year
1638.
An Abstract of the Spanish Relation, wherein their own loss is specified;
and the Dutch but pointed at in general.
The Spanish Infantry, which were slain amounted to 34. The Infantry hurt to
77. The Seamen slain to 18. The Seamen hurt to 34. The Passengers slain to
13. The passengers wounded to 17.
A sharp add bloody Sea Fight, betwixt the Hollanders and Dunkerkers: Feb. 8.
18. 1639.
SIR,
The 18. of this month, half an hour after Sun rising, the Fleet of the King
of Spain; consisting of 10. great ships of war, 4. great Fregats, 5. great
ships of burden, and one Pinace, laden with Soldiers, came out of the Channel
of the Fort of Mardike into the Sea, with intention to set upon and fight with
our Fleet, consisting of 10. great Vessels and two Fregats. At 9. a clock in
the morning we began the fight, mixing ourselves with the enemy, who with
diverse of their ships came upon us. The fight having dured till 3. of clock
and half in the afternoon the Enemy betook himself to flight returning
under the said Fort, except 7. of the said great ships furnished for war,
which were constrained to run themselves a ground, to shun sinking. Our leakes
were so great, that we were continually employed in pumping and stopping them:
whereupon six of them came of again, but the Vice Admiral of Dunkerk sorer
battered than the rest, stuck fast still, the enemy setting her on fire, for
fear we should gain her ordinance and furniture, she being a new ship and
never at sea before. We became masters of two ships like the Vice Admiral,
which were not of those 7. and were furnished each with two hundred and thirty
or forty men, 16. pieces of brass canon, and forty of iron. And because our
ships were much battered, and mine especially, being all rent and torn, and
having 70 of her men slain or wounded, we were feign to return home to mend
our ships and make them fit to return again with the first. I may not forget
to tell you that among the Soldiers which the enemy had aboard, were the best
old Wallon Regiments, consisting of 2000. men in 20. Companies, appointed to
be landed at the Groyne. This is what I can say of this particular being now
sailing homewards.

FINIS.

