DVELLO or Single Combat: From Antiquity derived into this Kingdom of
England, with several kinds, and ceremonious forms thereof from good
authority described.

(...)

LONDON, Printed by G. E. for I. Helm, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstans Churchyard, in Fleet-streete. 1610.

V. CLARISSIMO D. EDWARDO CARRELL ab Harting EQVITI AVRATO DICAT MONVMENTVM ET
PIGNVS AMORIS.

J. S.

TO THE READER. EYPHEIN.
REader, I open not a Fence-schoole, nor shall you here learn the skill of an
encounter, or aduantagiously in the lists to trauerse your ground. Historical
tradition of use, and succinct description of ceremony, are my ends; both
deduced from the Ancients, Heraclides Ponticus.
but without proselenique affectation. My aims shall take him for an advocate,
which long since affirmed the full pleasing Sirens to be but allegories of
antique Records: indeed I think his speech was beyond his proof, but the God
of Poets could not without (...), by (...), express the best of his Phaeaces.
Echeneus in Odyss. (...).
And I dare av^w it, he which distasts true primordiall deduction, falls often
into that covert dotage of, Errabo potius, quam perductet quispiam. Plaut. in
Mo^icll.
Ancient writ is the leader in what passages I have drawn; all being but as
an Epoch, from whence the single and simple motions of our Triplicity-Lord
Mars are (ommitting their effests and temperea influences) with their
differences calculated. Censure as Terent. in P^^r.
you please; but howsoever, like old Demipho's Lawyers, so (at worst (...)
doubt not) will my Readers. With this comfort I regard all thumb-turning, and
fear not the truly judicious. Best of the supreme aspects, bestow their rays
on you. From the I. Temple, this x. of December. CIODCIX.

CAPITVLORVM ELENCHVS.
1. The name and notation of the Duello. cap. 1. 2. Of Extraiudiciall Duells.
That for contracting the adventure of a greater war into a less number, it
has been by the Aunciens used, and by the Judicious without controversy
allowed. cap. 2. 3. For proof of Manhood also, in diverse forms, and upon
several occasions, use of it is found both in the monuments of inmost
antiquity, as also in the later ages, and always for this purpose, as
dedicated to Honor, and by the Princes authority. cap. 3. 4. A light touch of
single Combats extraiudiciall upon quarrels, according to some that
authentiquely treat of them, and especially of English and French Custom. cap.
4. 5. First authors of the Judicial Duel: where admitted: the Church of Romes
inhibitions against it. cap. 5. 6. Whence England received it: if from the
Normans? cap. 6. 7. The division of the Duel judicial, as of judgments: the
form of the Criminal Duel, by the common law, till the sists entered. cap. 7.
8. What Weapons or armor is to be used by like testimony only: the Success
of the Combat and thereon Judgment. cap. 8. 9. A collection of diverse
examples out of the English histories of combats touching defense of imposed
crimes: with some particulers of their reported forms and events. chap. 9. 10.
Who are the Judges, and have jurisdiction of the combat. cap. 10. 11. The
form of obtaining, clear proceeding, and performing the Combat by authority
of the law of arms in the Court of Chiualry, and that in England. cap. 11. 12.
Private wrongs determined by the Duel: and they either touching arms and
gentry, or right of land-inheritance. cap. 12. 13 Combat upon Right of
inheritance in land possessions how granted, prepared, determined: with
judgment on them, and a recapitulating conclusion. cap. 13.
The name and notation of the DVELLO. CHAP. 1.
THe name (for the true notation of the subject is in no treatise to be
neglected, but the very auspicy of letter-labour, by logic doctrine, is
thence to be taken.) of the Duello or Duellum is after some quasi duorum
bellum, while others judge that this deriuation stands rather conceited upon
the affinity of similary sound in pronunciation, then true criticisme.
Authentic writers of the Latin have Duellum unlimited in number, and of
equal large signification Horat. epist. lib. 1. ep. 2. Liu. lib. 1.
with Bellum; Graecia Barbariae lento collisa Duello; has Horace: and likewise
in Liuy. puro, pioque Duello quaerendas res censeo, says one of the Senators
upon his advise to Ancus Martius. Perduellis also in old Ennius, keeps like
rank with Hostis, Perduellum, duellum and bellum, being upon learned Varro's
testimony, and in Plautus but synonomyes Varro de ling. lat. lib. 6. Plaut. in
Amphitryone. Fest. in verb. Duellum. Du. apud antiquos saepius in B. transiit.
quod vide apud P. Merula^ ad lib. 1. annal. Ennii.
as Duellona and Bellona. To al these agreeeth Festus, deriuing it, quod duabus
partibus de victoria contendentibus dimicatur, referring it to the contrary
terms of a general quarrel, not to that single opposition, which the French
call Combat seul a seul, the old Saxons Kamp-fight, our English single-fight,
fully and significantly expressed in the Greek (...), under breath of one word.

But, as many well imposed names, feel the diverse effects of time and customs
syllabique alteration, from the first nature of their genuine root, in so much
that great Plato durst only find fault with, not correct the crept-in errors
of that nature Plat. in Cratylo.
in his time; so questionless whole applications of names to their now reputed
subjects, have been often times very disorderly made, yet too currantly
admitted by the quiet approbation of posterity. And Etymologists, aiming at the
conjoined nature of the word and thing signified, as commonly miss, as hit
their mark. Justinians Instit. tit. de leg. sect. siquide^ in nomine.
rule (upon the mistaken name of a legatary) being but in one word altered,
shall free me from further inquisition of needless respect to bare names.
Nomina significandarum Hominum in ipso textu.
rerum gratia, repertasunt, quae si alio quolibet modo intelligantur, nihil
interest says the Emperor. Truth and the application of this word Duellum to
single fight, have had both one father (especially in this Kingdom where time
both establishes and abrogateth.) It were therefore injury in me to offer
cause of breach to their sister-hood, or to bastard the one, times hoary age
being contrary to, and far from all just imputation of natural weakness.

The Duello then (you may use at your pleasure any of the other names) is the
bodily opposition of two combatants, both aiming at victorious success. Other
and diverse are the definitions of it among Ciuilians, which for the most part
call it, not Pugna duorum, but duarum partium citra formam belli dimicantium,
as upon the example of the Horatij and Curiatij, in the Roman history, which
exceeded unity on both sides Doctor Beuther Beuther. disp. de duel. concl. 1
concludes. His definition is the last (as I take it) yet not so perfect as
new. It were audacious to examine it, much more to affirm any other in all
numbers absolute. Only thus much; I see not why two or three on a side are not
by power of a like continued addition, as nearly equal to Xerxes Myriads as a
million, the least of numbers being Euclidis definitio numeri 7. Elem. def. 2.
as well contained under that (...), as the greatest. But in these legal
matters touched with such or other logique niceties, the law thus excuses, Omnis
definitio in iure civilly periculosa est: F. de reg* iur l. 202.
parum est enim vt non subuerti posset. Those two parts, genus and differe^tia
specifica, cannot be always, and seldom are according to Aristotelique
learning in definitions of law subjects. To conclude this, accept the names
notation as your fantasy persuades, or true signification, as your judgment
directs, although (I confess) you may possibly find me erring in one; which
if you correct, you may chance as soon to err as another, but to your
correction with respect I submit me.

Of extraiudiciall Duells. That for contracting the adventure of a greater
war into a less number it has been by the Ancients used, and by the
judicious without controversy allowed. Chap. 2.
TO diminish imminent danger of a greater bloodshed, Antiquity oftimes made
choice of the Duello, most commonly, as we describe it, twixt two combatants:
(although sometimes into a greater number, yet rarely has this contraction
been made.) In the Trojan war Homer testifies of Diomedes and Aeneas, Paris
and Menelaus, Iliad. y. (...). and (...).
Hector and Ajax, as assaying by single combat to decide the bloody
controversies of two the most famous people of the Gentiles. Hillus leader of
the Athenian, and Echenus of the Arcadian forces by personal conflict strive
in Herodotus to transact In Calliope.
their controversy of priority in the army, as also to determine the right of
the Herculean stock in their fathers possessions. The Romans wageing war with
the Albans referred all to the Dionys. Halicar li. 3. antiq. Romans Liu. lib. 1.
success of the Curiatii and Horatii, who determined it by victory achieved
by the Horatii. Of like nature (the hidden secret of Gods particular (...)*
Reg. cap. 17.
providence exempted) was that of little David and great Goliath in holy writ
reported; as also of the British Arthur and Flollo tribune of the Emperor Leo
in Gaul, after Geffrey of Monmouth his relation. Galfred. Monumeth. lib* 7*
cap. 3.
Nor different was the offer of Jews the first Christian King of the Frankes
to Alaricus Prince of the Westgothes, nobilissimo pari fortunam (as Aemilius P.
A^milius lib. 1. in Clodoueo.
writes) vtriusque gentis decretum ir^. And in the latter memory of our
ancestors, a general sedition twixt* the French and Italian conjoined
Guicciard. lib. (...). hist. Ital.
armies was epitomized into a select number (as Guicciardine reports) of
thirteen soldiers of each nation. George Castriot, alias Seanderbeg overcame
Hist. Scanderbeg lib. 5.
Feribassa in like fight. Of these and like examples in foreign stories is
frequent mention; nor in the English are they wanting. Danish irruptions and
the bad aspects of Mars, having drencht the common mother earth with her sons
blood streams, under the reign of Edmund a Saxon Henric. Huntingd. lib. 6.
hist. edit. Germ. fol. 36^. Camd^n. in Dobunis
Monarch, misso in compendium (so worthy Camden expresses it) bello vtriusque
gentis fata Edmundo Anglorum and Canuto Danorum regibus commissa fuerunt, qui
singulari certamine de summa imperij in hac insula, (that is the Eight in
Glostershire) depugnarunt. Agreeing hereunto was that one and last condition of
the three, which the Duke of Guil. Malmes* lib 3. de gestis reg. Ang^iae. ^ol*
56.
Normandy before his conquest offered to King Harold, vt scilicet spectante
exercitu gladio rem ventilarent. So was it offered between John of England;
and Jews of France, that by a Annal. Hibern. ^uperrime edit. sol 797
single Champion on both parts, their controuerted right to certain Forts
should be brought to decision. Neither did Richard of that name the Rot.
Parlam. 7. Rich 2.
second, hence degenerate, in challenging the French Charles the sixth, upon
that royal quarrel of best title to the Fleurs de lis. The justice of Combats
in this kind (so the whole wars be Fris. de rep lib. 1. c* 26. Ayala lib.
(...). cap. 3. Bodin de reb. cap. 4. lib 7. Al^er. Gentil. de iure belli. lib.
1 c 3.
just) is approved by judicious writers, Frisius, Ayala, Gentilis, Bodin and
others. Noninterest enim (says Bodin) quo numero aduer^us hosts decernatur;
learned Alciat making no doubt, but that Princes, of whose
kingdome-controuersies no earthly Magistrate has jurisdiction, may upon force
of their private credit with Bellona, discuss what-soeuer Alciat* de sing.
certam. lib. cap. 3.
their public wrongs. Cum enim (says he) bellum non nisi maxima calamitate
humani generis inuehatur, quid iustius excogitari potest, quam vt, tanta noxa
de medio sublata, hi potissimum soli armis decernant ad quos ea res pertinet,
victoremque res sequatur? Indictum istud de Siciliae regno duellum and before
refert, and in eo notatu dignissima Paris de Puteo lib. 3. cap. 2.
where he vouches the appointed lists at Bourdeaux, twixt Charles of Aniou,
and Peter of Arragon, for trial of right to the Crown of Sicily, which was
allowed by Pope Martin and the whole college of Cardinals, whereunto he
adds a second, of two brethren of Hungary. Haec est necessitas B^ld. 5 consil.
49^.
quae bellum iustificat (says a great Ciuilian) cum ad bellum extremo loco
confugitur. Antiquity has allowed it, Reason confirmed it, therefore so I
leave it.

For proof of Manhood also in diverse forms, and upon several occasions use of
it is found both in the monuments of inmost Antiquity, as also in the later
ages; and always for this purpose as dedicated to HONOR; and by the Princes
authority. Cap. 3
TO omit those servile Gladiatores of Rome (in Dio lib. 54. C. de glad* toll l
vnica. Cruenta spectacula in otio civilly ^t domestica quiet non placent
quapropter omnino gladiatores esse prohibemus. and vid. Othon. Frisingen. lib.
4. cap 3. De his siquide^ plura velis, adi Natalem Comitem. lib. 5. Mytholog.
cap. 1* and seq.
whose saleable blood the Amphitheaters sa^dy floor, so often washed it self as
Lady money requested, until Augustus restrained this public spectacle to
'twise only in a year, and Constantine utterly abrogated the use of them.)
The old Grecians had their Olympian games instituted by Hercules, celebrated
every forth year; their Pythian from Apollo, in which the Gods themselves*
are said to have judged it honor to have received the chaplet of Baies; their
Nemean dedicated to Archemorus; their Isthmian established by Theseus; in all
which although there were five sorts of trial of actiuity (which they called
Pentathlon, in Odyss. (...).
Latin Quinquertiu^, yet the chief and most respected was (...), i. either
hand fight Plutarch. sympos. lib. 2. cap. 4. and 5.
or wrestling, both, for use and antiquity, to have pre-eminence of the other
three, as upon that Achrostich of Homer* and other such passages of his,
Plutarch long since specially observed. What regard to these two sorts (which
not amiss may be styled single combats) the Ancicients had Ulysses his
entertainment at Alcinous his palace described in the Odysses, and his victory
Odyss. th. Iliad. ph.
with others at Patroclus his funeral toward the end of the Iliads give
testimony sufficient, although no more could be gotten. But as Achilles did
there at his friends exequies, so did Aeneas at that honored day of these
anniuersary rites performed to his enterred father, to this purpose making his
edict -- qui viribus audax A^ncid. lib. 5.
Seu crudo fidit pugnam committere cestu Cuncti ad sint meritaeque expectent
praemia palmae.

The learned Poet doubtless alluding to the custom used after Grecian
victories in that quaternity of games, which was (as Pausanias Pausan. in
Arcadicis.
witnesses) that besides their deserved garlands Victores in vno quouis
certamine Hi^ronici, in omnibus Pe^^bodi appellabantur. Fest. et Bern^art. ad
lib. 6. Thebaid. Orat. pro Flac^o.
of Olive, Bays, Parsley, Pine, or such like, the Victors did continually
carry a Palme-branch in one of their hands; which being achieved by
superiority in all four, is by Cicero affirmed, apud Graecos prope maius and
gloriosius, quam Romae triumphasse. Which by Statius in his preface to the
Combat twixt Capaneus and Alcidamas is thus proportionatly affirmed.

Nunc opus est animis infestos tollere cestus Stat. Theb. 6.

Comminus haec bellis and ferro proxim^ virtus.
Thus is it most apparent that the chiefest honor among the Ancient (both
Troyan and Greeks) consisted in the deserved crowns of those Duello
victories, nor found they better form of honoring the memory of the supposed
ayery ghostes of their dead-sleeping friends or ancestors, Liu. dec. 3. lib.
5.
then such kind of parentation. The Punike Custom agreed with it, as in the
last honor of betrayed Gracchus ordered by Hanibal^, is registered. Idem. dec.
3. l. 8. ast^pu^ant^r quae apud Tacitu^. l. 2. annal. and Su^^oniu^ in Claud.
c. 1. Militaria ista certamina ^un^br^s dicu^tur decursiones. gallic^ Ioustes.
Hadrian. Iunius in Nomen* clat.
The Romans failed not in like duty and practice: A whole place of Liuy
transcribed shows it, and thus shows it self. Scipto Carthaginem ad vota
soluenda dijs munusque gladiatorium, quod mortis causa patris patruique parauer
at edendum redijt: Gladiatorum spectaculum fuit, non ex eo genere hominum, ex
quo lanistis comparare mos est, seruorum delectu ac libertorum qui venalem
sanguinem habent; voluntaria omnis and gratuita opera pugnantium fuit; nam alij
missi ab regulis sunt ad specimen insitae genti virtutis ostenden^u^, alii ipsi
professi se pugnaturos in gratia^ Ducis; alios aemulatio and certame^ vt
prouocarent, prouocatique haud abnuerent, traxit. Add to this but Vlpians
judgment in ff ad leg. Aquil. l. 7. qua action huic persimi^e apud Atticos
babes lege^ in Platone. lib. 7. de l^gib. Con^o^s item. l. 2. ff. de
aleatoribus arg. Pancirol. l. 2. rer. nou rep. tit. 20.
law, and what the old state of Rome allowed will be manifest. Si quis (says
he) in colluctatione, vel in pancratio, velpugiles, dum inter se exercentur,
alius aliu^ occiderit siquidem in publico certamine cessat Aquilia: quia
gloriae causa and virtutis, non iniuri^ gratia videtur damnu^ datu^: thus much
for y^ more antique ages. Middle times afford the like Pancirollus after
Nicetas affirms that Manuell Commenus Emperor of Constantinople (his
government was about the time of our Stephen and Henry the 2.) instituted
Torneaments, which the Italians call Giostre, and the French Ioustre, that is
military exercises in single opposition, for exploration of valor and
ostentation of Martial virtue. Which so far often times proceeded,

-- Vt vltima diuideret mors,
Non aliam ob causam, nisi quod Virtus in vtroque
Summa fuit -- as of Hector
and Achilles, Horace speaks. But long before Horat. lib. 1. sat. 7.
Verstegan. Cap. 4. Munster. in Cosmograph. lib. 3. Bocer. de bello lib. 2. cap.
4.
Manuells time Henry of Germany surnamed the Fouler (as my authors tell me) was
in his own territories author hereof, annexing certain laws, among which one
was thus, That he, which was not of a generous stock, deque sua nobilitate
quatuor auorum natalibus docere non poterit, should by no means be admitted
as a party in these Launce-controuersies. The common use of this kind is
easily known by the Lateran inhibition in a Council held under Pope Alexander
the third (in our Henry the seconds time) thus expressing it self. Felicis
memoriae Innocentii and Decret. lib. 5. tit. 13. and in Rogeri Houede^
Annalibus. in Hen. 2. fol. 333.
Eugenii predecessorum nostrorum vestigiis inhaerentes, detestabiles illas
Nundinas vel ferias quas vulgo Torneamenta vocant, in quibus milites ex
conducto conuenire solent, and ad ostentationem virium suarum and audaciae
temere congredi, vnde mortes hominum and animarum pericula saepe proueniunt,
fieri prohibemus, etc.

But this notwithstanding, when Clement the Fifth understood that the
holy-land-voyage ordained in the council of Vienna was much hindered by the
provoked Iustes and Torneaments of Extrau. de Torneamentis* c. vnic. Tempore
Ed. 1.
the Crosse-knightes Torneamenta ipsa and hastiludia sieve Iuxtas in Regnis,
Franciae, Angliae and Almanniae and aliis nonnullis prouinciis in quibus ea
consueuere freque^tius exerceri specialiter interdixit, binding the offenders
under anathematizing constraint: into which punishment because diverse Martialls
had nevertheless incurred, at the instance of Phillip King of France and
Navarre, Pope John the. 22. alias (if you reckon Pope Ioane) the 23. Celments
successor made (as his extrauagants testify) for this purpose general
absolution.

Particularly for this Kingdom, you may remember the Rotundae Ta bulae Arthuri
m^minit Monum^^hensis* l. 7. cap. 4. in ea magnificentiam and comitatum regium
addidit. Ordinis etiam sed male Mir aeus. lib 2 orig. equest. cap. 4.
Round table (as it is reputed) of the thrice famous Arthur kept at Winchester,
but withal remember that, thereof, nihil est (says Judicious In Belgist
Athenoeus. li. 4 dipnosoph. c. 13
Camden) quod dica^, nisirecentioris esse aetatis, vt intuenti facile appareat,
Superioribus enim seculis, cum virtutis bellicae exercendae gratia militares
decursiones (Torneamenta vocant) freque^ter haberentur, huiusmodi mensis (such
tables also were used among the old Knights of Gaul as Athenaeus there cited
reports) vsi erant, ne quod discrimen inter nobiles ex ambitione existeret.
These kind of Honorary Combats by Richard Ceur de Lion were confined within the
lists of five places in the Kingdom, you shall see his patent of it to Hubert
then Archbishop of Canterbury; sciatis nos Concessisse quod Ex libro rub^o
scaccarij. Rich. 1.
Torneamenta sint in Anglia in quinque placeis, inter Sarum and Wilton, Inter
Warwike and Kelingworth, inter Stamford, and Walingford, inter Brakeley and
Mixeber inter Bly, and Tikehill, ita quod pax terrae meae non infringetur. Et
comes qui ibi torniari voluerit dabit nobis. 20. marcas, and Baro 10. Marcas,
and miles, qui terram habuerit, 4. marcas and qui non haebuerit 2. marcas.
Nullus autem extraneus ibi attorneabit; vnde vobis mandamus quod ad diem
Torneame^ti habeatis ibi, 2. Clericos and 2. milites vestros, ad capiendum
sacramentum de Comite and Barone quod vobis de predicta pecunia ante
Torneamentu^ satisfacient, and quod nullum Torneare permittant antequa^ super
hoc satisfecerit; et inbreuiari faciant quantum and a quibus receperint. Et*
10. marcas pro cartaad opus nostru^ capiatis vnde Comes Sarum, et Comes de
Clara, and Comes de Warrena plegii sunt. Test meipso apud villam episcopi 22.
die Augusti. The Earl of Gloucester under Henry the 3. confidens (says an old
Monk) de co^cessione 31. Hen 3. ex Math. Paris. page 981.
a D. R. obtenta, et voce praeconia ex part eius proclamata, die qua Gulielmum
fratrem suu^ baltheo cinxit militari cepit vnum torneamentum, apud Northamtona^
feriendum, vt ibidem memoratus Willielmus cum suis contyronibus militiae
peritiam and addisceret, and experiretur. But of this license, for fear of
inconvenience that might ensue through the boiling choler of such hot bloods,
Repeal was made with intermination, ne transgressorum 34. Hen. 3. ex eodem.
page 1123.
haeredes de paterna gauderent haereditate: the like to what was here first
licenced, was in his time granted, and at Rochester performed twixt English and
strangers, in quo contriti sunt turpiter alienigenae, says Matthew Paris, that
writes it. Roger of Mortimer founded at Kelingworth, Ludum 7. Ed. 1. Thom. de
VValsingh. page 49. ^d^. nouissima.
(The words of Thomas of Walsingham) militarem, quem vocant Rotundam tabulam,
of an hundred Knights and as many Ladies, whither for Martial exercise was
very great conflux out of diverse countries. Some difference was between common
Torneaments and this ceremony of the Round Table, which was in use of ancient
time before this of the Lord Mortimer, and that among the Princes of the Norman
blood. The two Chronologers Matthew Paris and of Westminster, remember that
about xxxv. of Hen. 111. diverse Knights appointed their Ioustes at Walden
Flor. hist. lib 2. p. 250. edit. ve^^ri.
in Essex, and they both call them by the name of the Round Table. But more
especially one of Math. Parisiens. p. 1147. edit. prima.
them thus. Constituerunt vnanimiter, non vt in have iludio, illo quod
co^muniter and vulgariter Torneamentu^ dicitur, sed potius in illo ludo
militari qui Me^sa Rotunda dicitur, vires suas attemptare^t, where he inserts
the unfortunate Combat of two worthy Knights Heruald of Muntenny, and Roger of
Lemburne, who meeting at the full carriere, Lemburnes lance ( cuius mucro
(says he) prout deberet non erat hebetatus) so pierst Herualds beauer, that as
soon death pierst his heart: these few examples taken out of many more, show
the use of these honorable Iustes among the Ancients of this Kingdom, but so
restrained as the Princes power in licencing or prohibiting (which is proved by
diverse records also, transcripts whereof I have seen, in the hands of the right
worshipful and learned Knight, Sir Robert Cotton of Conington, with punishment
adioined sub forisfactura omnium quae regi forisfacere poterit) always as
supreme judge of Chiualry claimed and kept prerogative.

A light touch of single Combat extraiudiciall up pon quarrels according to
some that authentiquely treat of them and especially of English and French
Custom. Cap. 4.
Unto these extraiudiciall duells hitherto spoken off (the one being under the
general name of public good for the Church or Commonwealth, the other under
that which is for exercise of Virtue which consists in action) may be added
that of free provocation or challenge without the Princes or Magistrates
authority, proceeding from supposition of dishonor received Galfred* Chaucer.
in equi^e suo.
from the party challenged. For Truth, Honor, freedom, and Courtesy being as
incidents to perfect Chiualry upon the Lie given, Fame impeached, Body wronged,
or Courtesy taxed ( qu'on a diffame and Ma^uoisin. ^nle Combat, etc. P. (...).
C. 3. Bodin* de rep. lib. 4. cap. 7.
dishonore l'honneur des dames as one says) a custom has bin among the
French, English, Burguignons, Italians, Almans, and the Northern people (which
as Ptolomey notes are always inclined to liberty) to seek revenge of their
wrongs on the body of their accuser, and that by private combat, seul a seul,
without judicial lists appointed the^. S. Jews first prohibited it in France,
and diverse times diverse of his successors in the same point of policy succeeded
him; but both S. Jews and the rest were constrained (for the most part) to
yield to the rescissory petitions of their subjects, who complained that the
restraint of open Combats occasioned multitudes of hidden murders. Nay Francis
of that name the first, is said to have openly denied at his council table,
virum bonum esse qui mendacium Bodin* ibid.
oblatum armis non reiiceret; striking with those words (indeed) at Charles the
fifth, who had then lately pocketed up a wrong of that nature received from
himself; which, if you may credit Bodin, became as clear law among the
soldiers and Gentlemen of his country. But upon a combatt between Iarnach and
Chastegneray, two Dern. troubles in Hen. 2. ann. 1547.
French gallants, wherein Death was Vmpire by expiring the best spirit of the
one, the quarrel being only for the Lie given; Henry the second Constitutio
ista exarata est en l'bist* de la paix. lib. 5. per M. P. Victore^. fol 328.
by express edict inhibited the Duello for future times. Such after edicts are
testimony sufficient, how frequent need has been of them; And accordingly
Henry of Navarre now King there, some five years since, published the like,
and again very lately seconded himself by another constitution Nouissima
vero iam Anglic^ nuperrime edita, in cuius artic xiii ista paena.
made in June last, whereby all such provocation (without special leave from
the Princes person, his Constable and Marshall, or Lords lieutenants of the
Provinces) is forbidden; under pain to the offender of being deprived from
ever being able to make his part good by arms with any man, as likewise from
obtaining any satisfaction or amends for whatsoever injury he shall pretend to
have received.

For our own Country, let this one example be observed. Sir Nicholas de
Segraue, a Baron in Edward the firsts time, challenged one Sir John de
Crumbwell, and because the Kings prohibition restrained the combat here in
England, dared him into France, therein (as the Record mentions) subiecting,
as much as in him lay, the Realm of England to the Realm of France. Segraue
was hereupon stayed in his passage at Dover, committed to the Castle, and
afterward in the Kingsbench confessed his fault, and submitted himself to the
King, de alto and basso. Whereupon Placit. de Term. Pasch. 33. Ed. 1.
thus speaks the Judgment, and super hoc D. R. volens habere auisamentum
Comitum, Baronum, Magnatum, and aliorum de consilio suo, iniunxit ijsdem in
homagio, and fidelitate, and ligentia, quibus ei tenentur, quod ipsi fideliter
considerent qualis paena pro tali facto fuerit infligenda; qui omnes habito
super hoc consilio dicunt, quod huiusmodi factum meretur poenam amissionis
vitae. What they thus adjudged upon his desert, was (if I mistake not) grounded
more on their own exasperated conceit, then any English custom.

How this Extraiudiciall Combat is lawful or contrary (I mean by the law of
arms and the Imperialls, although the divine law and *christianity Lactant.
lib. de ira dei.
teach otherwise) thus I read. Licite proceditur si iniuria lacessitus in
eiusmodi sit territorio vbi decus et honorem suum open iudiciali non possit
tueri (vt si copia Iudicis non fuerit.) Illicite, si iudicis and iniuriantis
Arg. l. 9. ff. de manumiss, vindict.
copiam habere possit. After diverse glosses and commenters upon several laws
of the Pandects and Code (since honor is not less, nay more then life to be
respected) my Triumvirate of writers of this subject, Alciat and the very late
Bocer, and Alciat* de sing. cert. cap. 3. Bocer. lib. 2. cap. 8. Beuth.
conclus. 76.
Beuther, all great Lawyers, expressly affirm as much in constant conclusion,
which shall conclude also these tripartite extraiudiciall forms; the fourth
for defense of possessions from injury and rapine, failing in sufficient
sollemnity for desert of bearing a part in this division.

First Authors of the Judicial Duel: where admitted. The Church of Romes
inhibition against it. Cap. 5.
NExt follow the Judicial sort, which are by some legal or ordinary
proceeding managed, and are part of the number of the ancient Trialls, which
were either Canonicae or Vulgares. The Canonicae were such as relied upon
Churchdoctrine, and religion; as especially Oath and receiving the Eucharist,
both which in England among the Saxons were in ure. The Vulgares (called Leges
Canuti. can. 5.
exploratoriae purgationes, or probae, were the ancient Ordells thus divided:
Fiery, Watery, and of Camp-fight, which is the Duello. The two first omitted,
(as also the trial of Witches, by casting them bound into the water, or
valuing their weight never above a certain Poize and such like) the last only
is the present subject.

In those times, which the Philologers call Mythique, there is among Poets
somewhat not altogether unlike this kind of trial of doubtful right, (if
you will admit that there is any preheminent right among equally respected
wooers.) He that could shoot best in Ulysses bow, was for delay by Penelope
her self judged as the worthiest of Penelope. Oenomaus his proclamation
Lucian. in Charidemo*
of his chariot-courses to make trial who should enjoy Hippodamia (which
Pelops through perfidious Myrtilus at length won) savors something of respect
to Bellona's judgment, for although in the swiftness of their coursers, the
victory consisted, yet seeing bello armantur equi, bellumque armenta minantur,
and great Achilles Virgil. Aeneid.
had his education under a Centaure, this is a part as well of Mars his
discipline, as close handy strokes.

In the time historique, when the great Iusting at Carthage in Spain was
appointed by Scipio, in houor of his Father and Uncle, two noble Spaniards
Corbis and Orsua (Cozen-germans) striving for the title of superiority in a
city there called Ibis, non Liu. Ab (...). C. lib. 28.
alium Deorum (says my author) hominumue quam Martem se iudicem habituros esse
professi sunt: although Scipio labored much for quiet transaction of the
controversy. Both having entered the lists, mayor (says Liuy) vsu armorum and
astu facile stolidas vires minoris superauit. But it were too Arcadian-like, to
fetch hence, or out of these times the infancy or beginnings of the
Duello-triall by course judicial.

The Northern inhabitance (as* before is noted) have especially of old time
made use of this form of searching out the hidden truth. The Russians,
Hungarians, Almans, Norma^s, English and others. But the most common judgment
of writers, and clearly the truest, deriues the fountain thereof from the
Ancient Lumbards, (called by reason of their long Beards Longobardi) a people,
that (out of those Northern parts of Europe which under the general name of
Scandia, contain Norway, Swethland, Danemarke and other regions by North high
Germany) ouer-ran some of the chief countries of this fourth part of the
world, and indeed at the first, when they sought those new habitations, tried
their title of safe passage through some parts of Germany by single fight,
twixt one of Paul. VVarnfred. de gest. Longobard. lib. 1. cap. 12.
their own Camp, and (as Paul warnfred reports) another of their enemies.
They were a nation like enough to be Fathers of such a child, Tacit. de morib.
Germanorum.
which is alone testified in that of Tacitus, writing of the largeness of some
of their neighbors states. Contra Longobardos paucitas nobilitat: (so neat
Lipsius reads it) quod plurimis ac valentissimis nationibus cincti non per
obsequium, sed praeliis and periclitando tuti sunt* Nay the same author has in
express terms, that which directly tastes of this trying Monomachy among some
of the adjoining people of that climate. Eius gentis (says he) Tacitus ibid.
cum qua bellum est, captiuum quoquo modo interceptum, cum electo popularium
suorum patriis quenque armis committunt, victoria huius vel illius pro
praeiudicio accipitur. But for the matter-selfe without Carol. sigon. hist. de
regno Italiae. lib. 2.
longer circumstances, Longobardorum (so says my Italian historiographer)
antiqua est consuetudo, vt crimina vel maxima singulari praelio purgarentur,
quae, post a per leges translata per multa tempora obseruata est. In so much
that, by special constitution of Fronto (alias Frotho) King of the Danes, all
Saxo Grammatic. hist. Daniae. ib. 5. and. 10.
controversies took this for their touchstone, until such time as King Poppo
a Christian, (thinking wronged Vulcan to be a better judge then wrounging Mars)
by new iuduction of the Fiery Ordell, made thereof abrogation. After the
Gothique Martin. del. Rio d^sq. Magi. lib. 4. q. 4. sec. 2
irruptions into the Empire, and the Lumbards power and customs enlarged, the
rest (not without the allowance of one of the Pope John's) of Germany, France,
and Spain, not in Criminal only but also in Civil causes have admittance of
it; Bodin. de repub lib 4. cap. 7. ex* l^gibus ^^^go. bard,
and howsoever Rhotaris, a Lumbard King, once prohibited it, yet he was
constrained afterward to restore it. But for the most part the Church of Rome
has impugned it with her authority. Pope Nicholas the first forbad the Emperor
Lothar to try his wives suspected chastity by the appointed Cause. 2. quest. 5
c. 22. monomachiam and Decret ti^ de. vulgari purgatione. Council. Trident sess.
9. can. 19. ps. 2.
combat of two elected dhampions, cum hoc (so he wrote) and h^iusmodi sectantes
Deum solum modo tentare videantur, so did Celestine the third and other Bishops
of that Sea, last of all thus thunders the council of Trent. Imperator, Reges,
Duces Principes, Marchiones, Comites, and quocunque alio nomine, Domini
temporales, qui locum ad Monomachiam in terris suis inter Christianos
concesserint, eo ipso sint excommunicati: ac jurisdiction and dominio
ciuitatis, castri, aut loci in quo, vel apud quem duellum fieri permise rint
quod ab eclesia obtine^t, priuati intelligantur, and* si feudalia sint,
directis Dominis statim acquira^tur. Qui vero pugnam commisserint and qui eorum
patrini vo*cantur, exco^municationis and omnium bonorum suoru^ proscriptionis
and perpetuae infamiae paenam incurrant, and vt homicidae iuxta sacros canones
puniri debent, and si in ipso conflictu decesserint, perpetuo careant
ecclesiastica sepultura. Illi etiam, qui consilium in causa Duelli, tam in iure
quam facto dederint, aut alia quacunque ratione, ad id quenqua^ suaserint, nec
non spectatores excommunicationis ac perpetuo maledictionis vinculo teneantur.
Non obstante quocunque priuilegio, seu praua consuetudine etiam immemorabili.
To those which were the obseruant sons of the Roman Church, this and the
other decrees extend their inhibitions; But the English customs never
permitted themselves to be subjected to such Clergy-canons; always (under
parliament correction) retaining, as what-so-euer V. Smith. lib 2 de ^^p
Anglorum. cap. 7.
they have by long use or allowance approved, so this of the Duel; which how
it first came into this Kingdom stands next to be inquired.

Whence England received it? if from the Normans? Chap. 6.
I Think it not easy to prove this custom in England before the Norman
conquest; yet it appears y^ the ancient Germa^s (who were the fathers of the
English) made some use of it, and Verstegan (in his Verstegan page 64. and 300.
chapter of the old manner of living of the Saxons) out of good authority,
numbers his Kampfight, (whence comes our English names of Kemp, and Campion,
for a Combat-fighter) among the four Ordells, which then purged or condemned
as mute judges. Ad de hereunto the judgment of Guil le Rouille Alenconiensis
in praefat* a le graund Cust. du Normandy.
William Rouille d' Alenson, in his Preface to the old graund Custumier du
Normandy; making the Norman customs (among which the Duel is one) to owe
their original to England, rather then the English to Normandy. His words,
because they Atqui, lector, adeas, fi de his consulas, Rogerum de Houeden in 2.
part. annal^um fol. 346. and seq. G. insuper Camdenu^ and Lambardum in explic
verb. and nouissi ne quae sunt ab honoratissimo and J. C. tissimo V. D. Ed.
Coke Eq. aurato and priuatorum iudicioru^ praeto^^ summo ad ter^ium l^bru^
responsorum edita, and maxim quae ab i^sde e ^eru^sio Tilburiensi
tr^^scr^bu^^ur.
touch the generality of our common laws, shall not be left without a room
here; At huiusce Normannicae consuetudinis (speaking of the whole Custumary)
latorem sieve ^atorem S. Edwardum Angliae regem testatur vulgaris illa Cronica,
quae Cronica Cronicorum intitulatur: vbi de Gulielmo Bastardo Normannorum Duce,
alias Anglorum rege, loquitur dicens, quod, cum praedictus S. Edwardus ex se
liberos heredes nullos haberet, Guilielmum regni heredem instituit, qui,
deuicto and mortuo Haroldo regni vsurpatore, hac condition regno libere
potitus est, vt scilicet leges prius a praefato Edwardo latas seruaret; qui
quidem Edwardus leges etiam Normannis dederat, etiam cum Normannia diu fuisset
enutritus. But all this persuades not such Antiquity of the English Duel. The
old Saxon laws of Alfred, Edward, Athelstane, Edmund, Edgar, or others of
those times, are silent of any such matter; Nor, as I remember, have the
Monkish stories of that age any authority for proof of it. Only in William of
Malmesbury relation is made of a combat fought and a champion slain (upon
proof of Malmesbur. de gest. reg. li, 2 cap, 12.
the by-insimulation-wronged chastity of Gunhilda daughter to Hardknot and wife
to Henry the third of Germany) but this was out of the English territory;
wherefore, although the one part was English, nothing to our purpose is hence
gathered. Leg. Guil. Coq. apud Lamb. fol. 125.
But in the laws of William the first, it is decreed, that if a Frenchman
appeal an Englishman of perjury, murder, theft, mans-slaughter or robbery,
Anglus se defendat per quod melius voluerit, aut iudicio ferri, Ferri nimirum
igniti, cuius formam explicatissime babes in Antiq. Eccles. Brit. and in Lamb.
expli. verb.
aut Duello. It rests therefore, that we admit that the Normans, alias North
man's (being by their first offspring from the Norwegian coast, where this
custom as before is showed, had his breeding) were the first authors of it in
this their conquered kingdom.

The division of the Duel judicial as of judgments; the form out of the
Common law till the lists intred (with authority and examples) of the Criminal
Duel. Chap. 7.
GEnerally it being thus from the ancients brought into England, what follows
of it also shall be within England chiefly confined. As Cicer in orat. pro
Cecinna.
the division of judgments is bipartite, consisting either in punishment of
misdeedes committed against the body of the state, or determination of
controversies touching only particular persons, which in fewest words is
expressed by Public and Private, Criminal and Civil; so (if the Trial may
be denominated from the judgment,) the same distinction may be admitted in
the Duel, to be either Criminal or Civil: Criminal being waged for
purgation of an imputed Crime, Civil when for deciding of controversy
touching private wrongs or interests.

Particularly for the first, the offenses (which are comprehended under the
name of felony, which is Capital) of Treason (when appeals of Treason were
admitted) Murder Robery, or such like, have from ancient time in Appeals been
tryable at the Defendants pleasure by the Duel.

Accusato (says Ranulph of Glanuill Chief Glanuil. lib. ^4. cap. 1.
Justice under Henry the 2) per omnia in curia legitime negante, tunc per
Duellum solet placitum terminari; and Henry of Bracton; habebit electionem,
Br^ct. lib. 3. tr^ct. de coron^. cap. 21.
vtrum se ponere velit super patriam, vel non, vel defendendi se per corpus
suum; to which Britton, and Britton. cap. de appeals.
the course of the common laws accord. When the Defendant has made choice of
this purgation or trial, presently (according to those Ancients) so that
exception intercede not, surety is given on both parts; on the Defendants for
performing his defense by his body, on the Appellants for deraigning the
battle; where-vppon day is given by the Court for provision of their martial
accout rements, and arraying themselves in convenient arms (the Defendant
continually remaining in safe custody;) At the day prefixed, both parties
prepared and appearing in Court, the Apellant recites his appeal, and the
Defendant his former defense, verbatim, as at the first. Then the one takes the
other by the hand, and the defendant with an oath thus prepares his stomach to
the field.

This hear you whom I hold by the hand, which say you are called by the
Christian name of John that I P^ter such a year, such a day and place, (as is
expressed in the Appeal) did not feloniously cause, nor compass the death (if
the appeal be of murder) of Thomas your father (brother, or etc.) nor did to
this felony assent as you have before supposed, so GOD shall me help and the
Saints. To which the Appellant replies.

This hear you whom I hold by the hand, which say you are called by the
Christian name of Peter that you are forsworn, and therefore for sworn,
because such a year, such a day, and in such a place, you did felloniously
with malice prepensed, with such a kind of weapon give a deadly wound in such
a place of the body of Thomas my father, whereby he dyed within one hour
after* as I have before said against you, so help me God and the Saints.

These oaths in effect are composed of the somewhat different forms in
Bracton and Britton; but as agreeing to both; only thus much is the diversity.
Bracton adds at the close of the first, Nec tu hoc vidisti, and to answer it
the appellant thus encounters him, and ego vidi, which Britton has not. The
reason seems, because that after Hen. the 3. his time, wherein Bracton wrote
the Statute of Westmin. the 1. in taking away West. 1. cap. 41.
that particle of Champions oaths in trial of private rightes, was (as I
think) by equity extended unto appeals also, as ensuing presidents offer
persuasion.

In this form (by my former authority) their mutual oaths taken, the
defendant is committed to the custody of two Knights, or men of meaner
fashion, secund^m quod appellatus nobilis fuerit persona vel ignobilis, who
must conduct him unto the listes, (appointed and ordered by the Marshall at
commandment of the Judges,) so likewise is the appellant ordered, and both
restrained from speech with any, except their Knights, and the Justices, who
before the battle receive several oaths of them in this form. This Hear
you Justices that I Peter have neither eaten, nor drank, nor any other thing
done or caused for me to be done whence GODS law might be depressed and the
Devils advanced so help me GOD. Et issint (says John Britton) soit fait En
toutes les battles de felony. Immediately follows the Kings proclamation,
that no man be so hardy or bold (other then the Combatants) whatsoever he see
or hear, asto move, or speak loud whereby any disturbance may happen to the
battle, under pain of a year and a days imprisonment.

Thus stand the Combatans ready in the listes as they are by those ancient
Writers marshalled. But before their battle (to avoid error in the proceeding,
because some differences appear,) an example or two of later times in Our
Common law Annalls is to be observed.

One Adam under Ed. 3. brought an appeal Hill. 17. Ed. 3. ^ol 2. and lib. ass
pl. 1.
for the death of his father against one* John who waged battle in this form.
With his left hand he took Adam by the right, and laying his own right hand
on a book, swore the oath before rehearsed, which e conuerso was seconded by
the Appellant: the first concluding, and this I will defend against you by my
body as this Court shall award. The other: And this I shall deraisne upon you by
my body according as this Court shall award. Two main-pernours, body for body,
were taken for the Appellants performance on the 3. day following; the
Defendant committed to the Marshall with charge to have him ready armed on the
same day also, the costs of all imposed on the parties. All this was at the
first appearance and pleading, and differs from Bracton, especially in that
point as also the next following.

In Henry the fourth: in an appeal of Robbery the Defendant pleads not guilty,
and this was M. 9. Hen. 4. sol. 4. and Sta^ford. lib. 3. cap. 14.
ready to defend by his body, the Appellant accepts it, and upon this he was
commanded by the Court to take the left hand of the Defendant in his own
right hand, and took the oath with conclusion of As GOD me help, and his
Saints of Paradise; his adversary in like form swore the contrary. The
Appellant found two pledges for the battle, the time appointed and place in
Tuthill fields, The defendant committed to the Marshals custody; Charge given
to the Apellant that the night before the battellday he should repair to the
Marshall to be arrayed, so that he might be in the field by the sun rising
of the same day; to both, to be then ready to perform their deuoires.

Here is another d^fference in Consuetudines Norm, cap. 68. id ipsum quod
superi^res illi ^t anti quiores, habe^t.
priority of taking the oath by the Apellant, but the substance of all agree,
and offer of reconciliation of such differences without diversities were loss
of labor. Hitherto not passing the limits of common-law-writ touching the
Courts ordering the preamble to this Criminal Combat. The Combatants are in
the lists, we will now take view of their armor and weapons, while they
resting prolong their own quiet, and anon observe somewhat their performance.

What Weapons or Armor is to be used (by like testimony only;) the success
of the Combat, and thervppon judgment. Cap. 8
IF you inquire what weapons and armor is fittest generally for Combatants
use, among Marc de la Ber. part. 1. c^p. 20. and 21. Alciat. de sing. certa^
cap. 39. Brit. cap. 23.
others most especially the great Lawyer Alciat and a very late Writer of
France Messiere Marc de la Beraudiere disputing it may resolve you. I search
not, what indefinitly ought to be, but what with us in England. They are to
fight, says Britton, their heads uncovered, hands and feet naked, with two
bastons tipped wi^h horn of one length, and every of them a quadranguler shield
without other weapon, ^ont null ne puisse auter greiuer. Of their bare
hand-fight it might be doubted upon an old president under Edward P. 1^ Ed. 2.
Coron 385. Vide infra, cap. 13.
the second, where the Defendant cast his glove into the Court upon the
challenge, and upon good cause of exception, the Judge bids the Apellant Then
refuse the glove. Where he seems in that admittance to allow it as for a
Combatants wearing: but, haec soluat Apollo Of basto^s and sheilds, that is,
Fustes and scuta* ye old law of Alciat cap. 39.
the Lumbards gave first use, and the expres words of the Norma^ Custumary are,
qu' ils ne puuent auoir a^tre instrument agreiuer l'ung l'autre fors l'escu and
le baston. Upon which words, in respect of their identity with the English
usage the ordinary Cust. Norm. cap. 68. and l'ordinaire gloss sur c^o.
gloss is worthy of observation* thus it speaks. Ce text ne parle, ne s^entend
quant a le declaracion des armeures, si non au regard des non nobles. Et si on
demandoit purquoy la text ne desclaire la maniere come les Nobles doiuent estre
armees, l'en purroit respondre que le text ne l'en parle point, pur ce qu' il
est tout notoire quelles armeures ils douient auoir pour soy combatre. My other
English Authors have no such difference, nor this neither, which the Customs
have inserted, that both, doit auoix les cheueu^x rougnes par dess^s les
oreilles, unless that where it is said Uide. 1. Hen. (...) fol. 7 ^t 9 Hen. 4.
fol. 4. b. and cap. vltimum in^erius.
in some years que le test doit estrerase, there be so much signified. The
judgment on their superiority is that if the defendant make his part good
until the stars appear in heaven, or (as the Norman Customs has it)
until the time of their appearance known by the suns absence, the Apellant
shall be deemed as vanquished, as a false accuser punished, and the Defendant
acquirted. But if this Defendant yield or be overcome, Vltima supplicio
pun^etur (says Bracton) cum paena graui vel grauiori secundum Bract. lib. 3.
tr. de cqrona cap. 21.
criminis qualitatem, cum exheredatione haeredum suorum, and omnium bonorum
amissione, If ^layne, yet the formality of the common law proceeding, adiudges
him to capital punishment, that thereby his posterity may suffer the grievous
concomitancy of his deserved infamy, and the accuser eit de nous (says one in
person Britt. fol. 43. Victum non occidat Victor sed regium potius expectet
iudicium* Prisot. 37. Hen. 6. fol. 20* b.
of the King) graund guerdon.

Rare are the examples of battles waged upon Criminalls in the A^^alls of the
English laws, and (if I forget not) the least plural number doubled,
comprehends as many as are therein reported with ensuing 8 Ed. 3* Itin. North.
tit. Judgment. 225. and 19. Hen. 6. fol. 47. 7. Ed. 3 fol. 310. 25. Ed. 3. fol.
42.
performance. What histories or other notes afford of that nature is fittest by
itself to be collected.

A collection of diverse examples out of the English Histories of Combats upon
imposed Crimes, with some particulers of their forms and events. Chap. 9.
Under William Rous, one William de Hou or Owe Malmesh. lib. 4 de gest. reg.
and Flor. VVigornien. page 465.
accused of treason to the King, challenged his accuser to the battle, and dum
segniter se expurgat, (says Malmesbury) caecatus and extesticulatus est.

Edgar son to Malcolme of Scotland, was accused Georg Buchana^. Rer. Scotic.
lib. 7. reg. 87.
by one Orgar an Englishman, that he privily boasted himself and his allies,
to be the only true heirs of the Crown; by Champion on Edgars part it was
tried in the lists, and the false accuser foiled.

Henry of Essex, Standard Bearer to Henry the Flores hist. lib. 2. page 46.
Matthew. Paris in Hen. 2. pa. 133
second, in his Welsh expedition, was accused by Robert de Monte-forti, that he
forsook his colors in the field. The Combat was their chosen judge, the
victory fell to Mountfort, qua de causa (says Matthew Paris) Henricus notam
infamiae simul and exheredationis iacturam incurrens indulgentia pij Regis apud
Radingum (where the lists were) habitum monachalem suscepit.

That of John de Viscont, and Thomas de la March, Apud Stouaeu^ in Annal. sub
Ed. 3. fol. 392.
in respect it was by consent to try the truth of a case emergent out of the
kingdom, neither of them being subjects here, cannot be material for this
purpose.

John of Ansley Knight, appealed Thomas Catrington Th. de VVal^^ngham in Ris.
2. page 237 ^dit. German.
Esquire of Treason, viz. that he for a great sum of money yielded up the
Castle of S. Saviors in the Isle of Constantine in France to the French, when
as he might well have defended it, having sufficient of all provision, in qua
causa cum eodem armigero armorum lege obtulit se pugnaturum. The matter was
upon diverse doubts and obstacles delaied in Edw. the third his life time, and
proceeded as little until 3. Rich. the 2. when, Coactis iuridi^is (so Thomas
of Walsingham tells me) et senioribus militibus regionis, definitum est pro
causa extrinseca, sicut pro presenti causa quae non infra regni limits orta
est, and pro possessione rerum transmarinarum been licere quenqua^ Duello
confligere, si Constabulario and Marescallo regni perantea fuisset notificata,
et in eorum presentia duellum acceptatu^. Day was appointed, and the place at
Westminster. An exceeding conflux of people was from all parts of the kingdom.
Rege cu^ proceribus and regni co^munitate ingressis provt moris est (says my
author) miles intrat armatus* insidens dextrarium decentissime phaleratum. Nam
appellator debet ingredi primo locum, defensoris praestolaturus aduentum.
Alittle time after, the defendant is thus demanded. Thomas of Catrington
defendant, appear to defend thy cause, for which Sir John of Ansley Knight and
appellant has publicly and in writing appealed thee. and thus thrice by an
Herehault. At the third proclamation, the Esquire appears mounted on a steed
stratum regulariter stramentis praeferentibus arma dicti Thomae, who, when he
approached the lists, dismounted himself, ne iuxta consuetudines praelij
Constabularius vendicaret equum si limits fuisset ingressus, sed nil sibi
valet astutia sua, nam equus iuxta list as discurrens aliquoties totum caput et
pectus iniecit vltra limits. Ob quam causam Constabularius Thomas de Woodstock
equum vendicauit, iurans se velle caput eius habere. viz. quantum inter listas
de equo visum fuit, vnde adiudicatus est ei equus. The Esquire entering the
lists on foot, the constable and Marshall produce a certain Indenture made
before them, by consent of the parties, containing the articles of the
accusation, which were there publicly read. Catrington began to offer
exception at some of them, thereby thinking to have somewhat extenuated the
blottes laid on him. But the Duke of Lancaster seeing him in delays, with an
oath openly menaced him, that unless according to the Duello-lawes he would
admit all in the indenture, which was drawn by his assent, as free from
being taxt for insufficiency of form, he should be presently drawn and
hanged as a traitor. Whereupon the Squire ceased from his exceptions, and
intended only the Combat. Sir John Ansley, provt moris est, (says Walsingham)
and after him this Catrington, took oath of the truth of his cause, that he
was free from all use of Art Magique, that he did not carry with him any
herb, stone, or other kind of experiment of Witchcra^t, as hoping thereby
for victory. The Combat it self follows between them. First Lances, then
Swords, afterward Fauchions are their weapons. The Squire had still the worst,
even until Ansley, although with some hazard and doubt, (as you may see in the
Author) got the adjudged victory.

Some five years after, upon judgment of the Annal. Stouaei, fol. 477.
Parliament then holden, a Combat was fought between one Mortileto de Vilenos
a Nauarrois appellant, and an English Esquire called John Walsh defendant: the
accusation was of treason, but the truth was, that the chief motive of
Mortileto's quarrel (as himself afterward overcome confessed) was a former
discovered close combat between his wife and the Squire. But long since Mars
himself was in that fault. Ob quam causam (says Walsingham) idem Nauarrus
Walsingham. 7. Rich. 2. fest. Martini. fol. 311. Edit. Camdeni.
regali iudicio (qui ad spectaculum duelli cum principibus regni sui
consederat) tractus and suspensus est. Although the Queen and diverse others
very earnestly entreated his pardon.

The appointed lists for the determination of that great quarrel twixt Henry
Duke of Hereford Jd^m. ann. 23* Rich. 2. fol. 356
and Thomas Mowbray of Norfolk, upon imputation of some reproachful terms
used against the King by Mowbray, is (because of the great consequent of
Crowne-conuersion thence following) in every man's mouth famous. Yet in respect
of the particulers thereof, well (as all things else) compiled by the author of
the life and reign of 1. Heyward* in vita Henrici quarti. page 45.
Henry the fourth, it deserves there the reading, whither I refer you.

John Vpton under Henry the sixth, appealed John 8. Hen. 6. Annal. Stouaei fol.
609.
Down, that he with his accomplices had imagined the Kings death on the day of
Coronation; Richard Duke of York, upon absence of John Duke of Bedford Regent
of France, for this purpose constituted high Constable of England. The battle
twixt them was fought in Smithfield, where, when they had long fought, the King
(says John Stow) took up the matter, and forgave both parties.

John David falsely appealed his master William Idem page 635 ann* 25. Hen. 6
Catur an armorer in Fleete-streete, of Treason, the battle waged, the place
appointed in Smithfield. Catur was so merry with his friends before the Combat,
that, when he had most cause of circumspect observation, an Icarian shadow so
darkened his eyesight, and weakened his forces, that he was vnluckely there by
his most offending servant overcome and slain.

Out of these examples may be gathered some particulers of our
Duello-ceremonies not to be neglected. But, because a difference appears
twixt the jurisdiction here discovered, and that in the former examples
collected from our lawannalls and old writers, separate disquisition shall
endeavor reconciliation.

Who are the Judges, and have Jurisdiction of the Combat. Chap. 10.
BRacton and Britton, in their inserted treatises of the Combat, speak only
of the Kings Justices; which you must in criminal causes understand of the
Kings Bench* with them agrees Glanuill, in these words. Ex quo fuerit duellum
vadiatum, Glanuil. lib. 14 cap. 1.
non alio modo nisi de licentia domini Regis, vel eius Iusticiarioru^, de
caetero possunt sibi ad invicem reconciliari, speaking expressly of an appeal
of Treason. But in a Term book of Henry the sixth, two learned Lawyers
affirm, that the Judges before M. 37. Hen. 6. fol. 3. and ^0.
whom the Combat is determinable, are the Constable and Marshall of England,
which are to order it by the law of arms; concording are the historical
presidents next before recited. Yet upon observation of all this seeming
contrary testimony, the Truth will be thus apparent. That when the Appeal is
upon matter disgraceful, or dishonorable to nobility, or the accusation in
such form of terms and place, as cannot be sufficient ground of an Appeal by
Common Law course, as when the matter (I speak especially of Criminalls or
armory) is not emergent within the Realm, then if the Combat be challenged,
the Natural Judges are those two Noble Officers, the high Constable and
Marshall of England, to whom belong from Antiquity a Court called le Court de
Chiualry, ad lites honorartas (as a late writer Mill. de nobilit. politic. page
154.
says) discutiendas, iusque suum cuique famae vel dignitatis tribuendum. For
this I have Judge Prisots words. For calling another false, etc. No appeal
(says he) lies in our law, and by consequence no such defense, viz. by proof
on body may be, for such matter belongs to the Constable and Marshall, and
they shall determine this by the law Civil: Whereunto Nedham replies, that
it is le ley del terre, and le ley nostre seignior le roy. This is infalliby
confirmed by the act of 13. Richard the second, touching the Constables power.
Al Constable appertient d'auer conusance des contracts touchants faits d'armes
and du guerre horse de Realm. Et ainsi des chooses queux touchent arms ou
guerre deins le royalme, queux ne poyent estre Stat. 13. Rich. 2. cap. 2. vide
insuper stat. 1. Hen. 4. cap. 14. 30. Hen. 6. fol. 5. 6. Hen. 8. Kel. 171.
termines ne discusses per le commen ley, oue auters vsages and Customs a
ycelles mattiers appertenants, queux auters Constables Deuant ore ont duement
and resonablemant uses en leur temps adioustant a icel que chescun pleintife
declara pleniment sa matter en son petition auant que soit enuoy pur ascun home
a responder a icell.

Thus, upon due conference of the former examples with these opinions, and
statute laws, together with some later credit-deseruing authority Lambard. in
(...) and Fernoeus in lib. de nobilitatis gloria page 312. cum. 5. Mar. ^it*
Battle. 15.
of W. Lambards Archion (yet unprinted) and other tradition of proof, our old
Customs, and new, and both with, historical relation, may be easily made to
symbolize.

Touching the Antiquity and name of the high Constable and Marshall (which in
the proposed subject is to be inquired after, seeing that by some kind of
good authority I find, that all trials in their court, except discussion ex
bono and aequo, were by the Vide vero Th. Walsingham. p. 357. and 1. Heyward
in vit^ Henrici. 4 page 92. ar^ic. 26. ne^non Fernaeum lib. de nobil. gloria
page 315.
Duel; as in the Articles objected against Richard the 2. at his deposition is
expressed) I confess I have not read any thing more ancient then the
Continuance of Florence of Worcester his Chronicle, which in the reign
Continuat. ad Flore^nt. Wigorniensis. ann 4. Steph. page 532
of King Stephen thus reports. Regij Constabulatus honorem Miloni Glocestrensi
(who was Earl of Hereford, created by Maude the Empress) suo hosti ablatum
Guilielmo filio Walteri de bello Campo Wigorniensi Vicecomiti dedit. But, upon
that credit which a good Lambard. in (...). De familijs quae honoratissimo
insignes fueru^t isto titulo* seu officio consulas G. Camden in Commit. Essexiae
and Heresordiae, ac etiam in prouinci^ Monumethensi, addas and 6. Hen. 8. K^l.
fol. 171. and Mill. de nob. pol. page 151.
Antiquary of right claims to himself, I am persuaded that some officer of
the Constables nature, in respect that Battle entered with the Normans, as
aunciently also administered this Justice, as it may (says my Author) well
appear, not only by some records of history, but also by a special president
that I have seen, concerning the whole order of proceeding in that behalf
before him.

Of his name (to leave the several forms of deriuation by diverse authors,
which you have both collected and censured by Julius Pacius in his notes Pacius
in notis ad curopal. ad page 62. ver. (...).
upon Curopalata,) the judgment of Johannes Goropius Becanus and Richard
Verstegan having therein diverse followers is thus; That Cyning being contracted
in King, and Stable or Staple signifying a prop or stay, the whole word
Constable is as much Versteg. page 324. Lips. Epist. cent. 3. epist. 43. and
Paul. Me^ula in cosmog. part. 2 lib 3 cap. 15. Uide Paulum Diaconum. li. 2. cap
9. de gist. Longobardori^ et ad cum anno. tationes nouisimas Anonymi,
Curopalat* cum annot 1 Pacij. ad page 52. ver. (...),
as Columen Regis, or one that he especially depends upon in the managing of
his most weighty affairs. The name of Marshall or Marescall is agreed to
descend from two Teutonique words, (which was the same with the old French)
Mare which signified as much as our general name of horse, and Scalck, that in
the old German and Gothique tongue signified a servant; As one out of Simeons
song in the hands of that great linguist Joseph Scaliger has, after others
affirmation of as much, lately observed Fra leitais scalk theinana 1. Now
let thou thy servant depart; (although Pacius turns schalk (...) or
peritus.) so that Mareschall with us and the French is in notation but Smith in
Dutch and English, Marphais among the old Lumbards, Protostrator in the
Eastern Empire, expressed (if you will in Latin) Equorum Versteg. page* 324,
Curator, whereby (as Verstegan notes (we may perceive how names grown to
high dignity have sometimes taken their original from inferior vocations.

The form of obtaining, clear proceeding, and performing the Combat, by the
ancient law of arms in the English Court of Chiualry. Cap. 11.
ALthough not with best-seeming method, yet with most compendious (for
narrowest order in comprehension,) thus far is discovered what in brief
terms is thus connexed. That, of Judicial Combats Criminal, some are for
trial of a particular objected misdeed, against which the Common law by
ordinary course proceeds; and of these the justices of the Kings bench have
Caeterum actis Parliamentariis de 35. H 8. de crimine laesae maiestatis trans
mare co^misso cognoscunt Iudices a Rege delegati etc.
the disposition, as is declared; others for purgation of offense against
military honor, and transmarine treasons (remedylesse by the old Custom of
England,) which the high Court of Chiualry is to marshall by the law of arms.
The manner of this, both in proceeding and execution, is much different from
the other, therefore of it by it self briefly thus.

A Chartel containing the accusation is exhibited to the judges of Chiualry for
demand of the Combat (if the Apellant make choice of a Martial trial;) the
demand is comprehended in the conclusion; That he is ready to maintain the
same by his body. Truth of the Chartell, and freedom of the Apellant from all
purpose of malicious wrong, is by his oath confirmed. The combat upon due
consideration of circumstances granted, denunciation of challenge, containing
the whole chartell, by officers of arms (which was wont to be by some private
persons) is sent to the accused. If upon the pro cesse he be returned not
found, then the chal lenge is published in his territories by the person (as
religiously to be observed) of an Herehault; Hereof at his peril he takes
notice, and upon default, Beuther. concl^ 56. Mutio Iustinopolitano del Duello.
lib. 1. ca. 16
after six months (which is the time of instance for the appellants
proceeding^) is adjudged guilty. But if upon receipt of the chartell of
challenge he appear not, the Judge may brand him with a note of dishonor
hereby purchased, of which (but only by undergoing a new challenge as actor)
he can never be cleansed; or may, under pain of taking it for a confession,
denounce Ex iusta causa. per Campionem se tu^tur Reus. Alciat cap. 36. Beuth.
conc. 40
a new time of defense, or further upon loss of his coat armor compel him.
If he appear and make his defense, but on the Duel day (his adversary being
there present till sunneset, and proclamations of demand made at noone and
night which is peremptory and final) without just cause hide his head, it is
sufficient conviction, and without all hope of restitution is his honor
attainted; whereupon (says Alciat) some appellants carry the pictures of such
dastards about them with exprobration, or their coate-armour reuersed, or
ignominiously fastened under their horses tail or with such like disgrace. If
he stand to his defense at the appointed time and place, (which by an old
constitution of Frederick are Alciat. cap. 6. Beuther. concl. 56. atque haec
vetus Angloru^ Consuetudo quam babes in lib. impress. de honor and armis. lib.
4. cap. 8.
at the defendants election, but rather indeed at the Courts appointment) to
be prefixed within forty days, both parties ought to appear in the field
within the listes; which are quadrangular with gates at each end (chosen in
some spacious plain,) adjoining whereunto is pitched a seemly pauilion
(says Fern) of Gules, as a judgment seat of the Constable and Marshall; at
their feet a competent number of experienced Knights with a King of arms and
a Doctor or two of the civil laws, all for assistance in advise to the Court.

The Appellant and his procurator first come to the gate on the right end of
the listes, banded with his Esquiers clothed in his coullors, and arrayed with
his arms waiting on him. The Constable and Marshall demand by voice of
Herehault what he is, and why he comes so arrayed? Upon his answer, and
discovery of his face by removing the visor of his head-peece, he is admitted,
and by a Knight, with an Herhault of the Province, conducted into the listes,
and placed before the judgment seat on the right hand, in like sort and
converted sollemnity is the Defendant placed with his face opposite to his
adversary Gloss ordinaire sur les customs, cap. 68. did. 4.
on the left side. The gloss upon the Norman customs say que la cause est
pour ce que le dextre party est pluis digne and le sinistre moins digne.
Search is made by the Knights both of equality of their weapons (which are
also at the Defendants election so that he confine his choice within Ancient,
Usual, and Military, although Omnium more receptum est (says Alciat) nobili
et generoso viro Alciat. cap. 39. and 40. Uide superius. cap. 8.
magis conuenire, vt eques and quidem loricatus congrediatur quam mercenariorum
peditum more prodeat, cum equestris militia nostris moribus dignior sit and in
nobilium vsu frequentior. Solent autem (si aliter conuentum non sit) in campum
omnia geminata arma prouocati defer, vt eorum quae ipsi in procinctu
elegerint paria aduersarijs per magistros seu aduocatos dari possint*) as also
whether they have any inchauntments, or magique assistance for the victory.

Upon sound of a Trumpet the Apellant and Defendant are severally demanded;
who in person present, the Register to their procurators, after recital of the
process; Vous Parains saches rien dire en empeachment del combat? The
Procurators affirming that they admit all, it is demanded of the Appellant
if he persist in his first purpose, and likewise of the Defendant; both
affirming, the Apellant kneeling lays his right hand on the Evangelists, and
with his left takes the Defendant by the right.

Then the Register. I. R. Apellant, what say thou to S. T. Defendant?

Here-vpon the Apellant briefly rehearses his chartell of defiance to the
Defendant with a concluding oath for the truth of his quarrel, to which the
Defendant e conuerso reciting his defense, with denial and oath respectively
applied, gives answer, the beginning of both forms being thus.

Hear you this my Lords, all true Knights and Fern. lib. de gloria nobilit.
page 327.
Gentlemen bearers of arms, and thou S. T. Defendant, etc. The conclusion; And
that my quarrel (or defense) is true, neither have (...) done any thing
whereby the Law of God and of Knighthood might be depressed, and the Law of
Satan enhaunsed, so help me God.

All this finished, the parties are set a part and prepare themselves to the
battle, an Here hault pronouncing soiet labattaile grauntus and victory a
ceux que droit, with proclamation, that none be so hardy, as by motion,
speech, or crying out to discomfite the Combatants or disturb the Combat; then
immediately an Officer at Arms proclaims, Approuer, gardes vostre challenge,
and vous defendour, gardes vostre defense. Upon the sound of the alarm the
battle begins.

The time or instance (as the Iustinianists call it) of the Combat is an
artificial day from sunrising (when the listes are to be entered) unto
sunne-set, and licet aliqui (says my Author) vsque Alciat. cap. 41. de sing.
certam* Smith* de repub. Ang^or. lib. 3. cap. 3.
ad stellarum apparitionem permanendum existiment, tamen receptior est
sententia vt simpliciter occasus expectetur. If the Apellant overcome not the
Defendant within that time, the Defendant is deemed guiltless of the
imputation. But ben protebbe ( Mutio Iustinopolitano tells Mutio.
Iustinopolitano. lib. 2. cap. 12.
me) la patente del campo esser stata ispedita con tal forma, che per la
partersi del sole la bataglia non si dourebbe partire, o il seguente giorno si
dourebbe renouare.

He to whom either upon default, (which preiudices the approuer also) or
performed Combat, the victory is adjudged, shall after request of his
procurator to the Constable and Marshall be publicly declared Victor.

But by the way observe that it suffices not that a superiority appear only
in their manhoods, Duelli enim is est (my Author so says) finis vt alter vel
pereat, vel dedititium se fateatur. Beuther. concl. 65. Alciat. cap. 42.
Ante id factum, licet alter videatur superior, tamen propter bellorum casus,
quibus quandoque propiores victis sunt victores, non dicitur alter superatus;
so that either Death or Disdict, as they call it, which is yielding or
confession of his guilt, must be the final issue whereon perfect Victory can
be Fern. lib. de gl. nobil. page 334.
allowed. Then shall the Victor with an honorable attendance of Knights and
men of arms mounted, enter the field and thrice march round the listes, and
shall take with him the whole process of the chartel, defense, issue and
judgment, sealed with the Court seal in perpetual testimony Beuth. conclus.
65. arg. L. F. C. de calu^niis* et C. de accusat. L. F.
of his performance and maintained honor. Morte non secuta, (says Beuther)
aut disdicta non extorta, iudex pugnae contra prouocantem pronunciabit eum
scilicet capituum esse prouocati, eo modo quo prouocans deuictus fuisset aut
confessus prouocantis victoris captiuus. Of him that yields, permissum est
victori (I have ^lciat. cap. 43.
good authority for it) arma, vexilla, ephippia, equos, armillas, sibi habere.

But howsoever Time and the Imperials have hereof judged, not only
Christianity now excludes the Laws of captivity, but also Reasons of Chiualry
which you have in Mar^ de Beraudire. part. 1. cap. 24.
la Beraudiere Lord of Mauuoisin, who agrees notwithstanding that the arms of
the yielding Combatant are due as yielded with his body, and s'il est tue son
enemy le peut despouiller et les doit emporter come estant les vrais marquis de
sa victoire and n'en doit estre empesche. So much for the general form of the
obtaining, clear proceeding, and performing of the Combat, by the law of arms.

Private wrongs determined by the Duel, and they either touching Arms and
Gentry or Right of Land-inheritance. Cap. 12.
Our division has his other part of trials of private rights and interests,
which are either touching Gentry and bearing of coat armor and such like or
concerning right of demesnes and inheritance.

The first of these are upon controversies of such nature as were between the
Lord Gray of Ruthen and Sir Edward Hastings under Hen. the Mill de pol. nob.
page 153.
third, for the coat of the family of the Hastings: between the Lords Louel
and Morley, for the bearing of the Burnells: Richard Scroope, and Robert
Grauenor under Richard the second. Examples of such titles to ensigns of
Nobility tried by proof on body are that of Sir John Chandos an Bosewell in
lib. heraldic. sol. 79
English Knight, and the Lord del Cleremount a Frenchman for bearing the image
of our Lady, with her child standing in the Sun, which by right of arms
after the battle of Poitiers is reported to be won by the English manhood;
and that of Hugh Vaughan Gentleman-usher to Henry the seventh and Sir James
Parker slain at VIII. Hen VII. Stouaeus. page 795.
the first encounter in their combat at Richmond before the King. As these
causes and the like, which concern the differences arising twixt Gentlemen for
their bearing, are determinable in the court of Chiualry, so the Duel on them
waged is before the same judges, in such sort as is before showed, (with
respective sentence) to be managed and performed.

The respect, which antiquity in this Kingdom gave to the trial of right of
enheritance by bodily opposition, may be gathered from that old Tenure by which
the manner of Scriuelby in Lincolnshire was long since (and for ought I know)
is yet holden: viz. by graund serieanty, that at the inauguration of Englands
Kings, the Lord of this manor for the time being, or some other in his name,
if Inquis. 23. Ed. 3. Camden in Coritanis, and in Cornauijs. page 406. and 438.
himself be unable, Veniet been armatus pro guerra super vno bono dextrario in
presentia D. Regis die Coronationis suae and proclamari faciet^si aliquis
dicere voluerit, quod dictus D. R. non habet ius ad regnu^suum et coronam suam,
promptus erit and paratus ad defendendum ius Regis and regni sui, and
dignitatis Coronae suae, per Corpus suum versus ipsum and alios quoscunque,
which about Edward the third his time was a service Anni. 1. Rich. 2 in rot*
pat. edit. in Cromptono de jurisdiction Cur. fol. 85.
of the Freuils, but at Richard the second his coronation, upon claim made to
the high Steward, and title of descent by marriage showed, was allowed to the
Dimocks which now hold it.

This institution offering (at least for fashion) to military judgment, the
defense of the supreme right to the English Diadem, has been in more earnest
observed in debates of private interests, the ancient custom of England
always allowing that as well for possession of enheritance (in the actions
which the Lawiers call Droit p^tent, droit d'auouson, Quo iure, Rationabilibus
diuisis, and such like, which aim at the mere right of the thing demanded) as
for defense of life or honor, (...), liberty should H^siod. in (...).
be given to the defendant of provocation from Jupiter and Mercury, (provided
he omit the sharp) to the God of arms. The order whereof, and particular
performance, we next enquire after.

Combats upon right of enheritance in land-possessions, how granted, prepared,
and determined: with judgment on them. Chap. 13.
THe antientest Combat offered in such civil causes, that I have read of, was
in Richard Ceur de Lions time, to one William Basset, upon demand by one Emme
de P. of a Knights fee in Corfeton in Mich. 6. Rich. 1. rot. 3. ap west.
Wiltshire, where Willielmus dicit quod sunt de vno stipite and ideo non debet
inde probari. Where note that the demaundant in her Count, after disclosing her
right, kept that order which you have in Glanuill, and hoc prompta sum probare
per hunc hominem Glanvil. lib. 2. cap. 3.
meum liberu^ I. S. and si quid de eo male contigerit per illu^, vel per illu^
tertium, and quot voluerit (says he) West. 1. cap. 40.
ita poterit nominare, sed vnus tantu^ vadtabit duellu^, qui hoc vidit, vel
audiuit, which was by act of parliament afterward altered, vel per alia veiba
sic, and hoc paratus sum probare per hunc liberum hominem meu^ I. S. cui pater
suus iniunxit in extremis agens, in fide qua filius tenetur patri, quod si
aliquando loquela^ de terra illa audiret, hoc diracionaret sicut id quod pater
suus vidit and audiuit. Thus it seems in those days it was the course for the
demandant, to offer his proof in his Count at the Bar by the body of his
freeman, but so that it rested always in election of the tenant (so the
Lawiers call the defendant in such case) to join issue upon the offer, or cast
all upon the Kings graund assise; as the same author more largely declares. But
the form since those times (and that most frequent in the Law^annalls) has
been to omit the offer of the battle in the Count, in lieu whereof a
general clause of tendering suit and proof, is the common inserted
conclusion; hereupon the Tenant (with formal defense of his right premitted)
answers: and this right he is ready to prove by the body either of himself or
his freeman there present, with such ensuing words, as after Glanduills
description, the demaundant concluded his Count with. If exception hinder not,
the demandant replies (with allowance of emparlance to prepare his champion)
recounting his first declared right, that he is ready to prove the same by
his own or the body of his freeman there present, with particular names, and
formality of pleading pursued. Upon demand by the Court each of the Champions
deliver in their glove (which they before hold in their right hands, as they
are led by the Parties serieants) as tokens of mutual challenge Annal. Stouaei
page 1133.
(yet it is reported, that in Paramours case under the late Queen Elizabeth,
the champion of Haec omnia colligas licet ex annal. iuris Anglic. 4. Ed. 3.
fol. 41. 29. Ed. 3. fol. 12. 30. Ed. 3. fol. 20. 1. Hen. 6. fol. 6. 13. Eliz.
Die fol. 301. and ex annalibus Iohannis Stouaei page ^133.
the defendant only threw down his glove, which his adversary in acceptance of
the challenge took up and brought before him into the lists.) The Court
further demands of the demaundants champion, Will you upon this right
adventure your body? he affirming: his adversaries glove (so I understand it)
is delivered to him, and respectively in like sort the other is ordered; with a
commandment for re-deliuery of the gloves. At the same time, or (if the Court
think fit, at some other day given) the champion of the tenant is commanded
to come over the bar into the Court, bare-head, ungirt, vncloakt and
bare-foote, and commanded to kneel down on the left side; the other champion
likewise in every respect, and kneeles on the right side; the court demands of
the Serieants if they know any thing why these champions are not fit for the
combat? Which admitted, the gloves are redeliuered to them, within every finger
a penny (which they were commanded by Justice Thorp to offer en l'honneur des
cinque plates que dieu suffer.) Nothing being moved touching misioyning the
issue, or mispleading, judgment is given with Cest Court agard que la battle
soit, such a day next coming, with place convenient appointed. The Champions
were wont to be sent to several churches, there to inuoake the aid of some
Saints to the assistance of their victory, with charge also, that they be not
suffered in the mean time, to have any speech together before the lists
entered. The Champions find pledges for their performances; the parties take
charge to have them prepared fit for the combat against the day appointed. Lists
are made in some spacious plain, some twenty paces square, with a tribunal
for the Judges adjoining; into which at the prefixed time after the court set,
and by proclamation first the demandant, and then his champion demanded, the
champion enters the lists clothed at his discretion, but bare-legged from the
knee downward, bare-headed, and bare-armes to the elbow, lead by a Knight
carrying a baston gules of an ell length, a yeoman carrying his target of
double leather and, after three respectfull and solemn congies to the
Justices, is placed on the right side of the court, in like manner his
adversary, in all equallity of form, placed on the left side. The self same
ceremonies of proclamation and oath, as in a criminal Duel before the
Justices above recited, here used, nothing remains but the next succeeding
hand-strokes. I observe to you by the way, that in an old manuscript of P. 6.
Ed. 2* in a writ of right between Thomas of Ailesthorp against the Abbot of
Fountaignes, the Champion was brought to the bar in the before declared order,
and also descheuile oue un pair des gaunts plies en son maine dextre. Touching
his being deschiuele remember what the Norman customs have Chartam istam ann.
42. Hen. 3. confectam in ter collectanea sua trascriptam ostendit mihi Nicolaus
Charles Lancastrensis faecia^is quem studia mea been merentem libenter
agnoscunt.
before also discovered, to which, add the testimony of an old deed made in
the time of Henry the third, whereby one Henry de Ferneberg, dictus marescallus
did bind himself to the Abbot of Glastenbury, to be his champion at all
times for the manors of Pucklechurch, Kranemer, Blackfort and Winsscomb and
other possessions against the Bishop, Deane, and chaper of Bath and Wells and
against any chosen champions by them, pro triginta marcis sterlingorum whereof
the Abbot was to pay him ten marks at the time of waging the battle, and
in-tonsione mea (says the deed in the first person) 5. marcas.

Upon determination of this combat, as in the other of appeals, final and
peremptory judgment is to be given, ( quae enim (says Glanuill) per Glanuil.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
duellum fuerint terminata perpetuam habent firmitatem:) and the vanquished
without death to be iudicially noted with perpetual infamy.

Examples of battles fought, and judgments given on the victory are very rare
or rather are 4. Ed. 3. fol. 41.
not in our published yeare-bookes, only about or two is adventured in Ed. the
3. his time, in a writ of right between Peuerell and Sherley. In the late
Elizabeth's time composition prevented the intended concourse. But in an ancient
written parchment report of the later years of Ed. the 1. I have seen in a
droit patent by John de Croke, Richard de Gurney, and Godefrid de Bello-mont,
for the manor of Greton in Suffolk, against the Abbot of S. Edmundsbury
before Simon of Rochester and his Associats Justices in eire there at To^hull,
that the Abbot offered battle for his defense by his Champion Robert de
Mutford, the demaundant joining with him by the body of Robert fitz-William le
Bret: Quo die venerunt parts serut entes armati, and fuit Duellum inter eos
armatum, and percussum, and seruiens praedicti Abbatis conuictus fuit and
interfectus; and there-vppon a final judgment was given for the Demandants
recovery.

With short recapitulation thus I conclude; that, from antiquity Combats of all
sorts have proceeded; that from the Lumbards and Northern people, whose
posterity filled this Kingdoms co^tine^t, the judicial sort were hither first
derived; that ye causes were either criminal or civil, and both of different
natures, and belonging to different jurisdictions, and so by several forms of
Combat have bin of right triable; which forms in general view are here
described. Of particular exceptions to the Appellants, or saving defaults in
the one, or to the Champions or cause-selfe in the other, or any of them, the
treatise is too particularly disposed for the design of this collection; which
aims wholly at the general nature, and form, and antiquity of the Duello
performed, omitting to those which have largely discoursed it al interposed
obstacles and nicetyes of inquisition?

-- Pax vna triumphis Sil. Italicus. lib. 11.
Innumeris potior. --

FINIS.

